                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        INTERNATIONAL TRADE AND CHILD LABOR:
                              CROSS-COUNTRY EVIDENCE

                                            Eric V. Edmonds
                                             Nina Pavcnik

                                         Working Paper 10317
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w10317


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      February 2004




We would like to thank Patty Anderson, Doug Irwin, Steve Redding and Dartmouth Junior Lunch participants
for helpful comments. We appreciate the exceptional research assistance of Evgeniya Petrova and Savina
Rizova. Pavcnik acknowledges the support of the Rockefeller Center for Public Policy and National Science
Foundation. Correspondence to Edmonds or Pavcnik at 6106 Rockefeller Hall. Dartmouth College. Hanover,
NH 03755 USA. Email: eric.edmonds@dartmouth.edu, nina.pavcnik@dartmouth.edu. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2004 by Eric V. Edmonds and Nina Pavcnik. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
International Trade and Child Labor: Cross-Country Evidence
Eric V. Edmonds and Nina Pavcnik
NBER Working Paper No. 10317
February 2004
JEL No. F15, F14

                                             ABSTRACT

We explore the relationship between greater exposure to trade (as measured by openness) and child

labor in a cross country setting. Our methodology accounts for the fact that trade flows are

endogenous to child labor (and labor standards more generally) by examining the relationship

between child labor and variation in trade based on geography. We find that countries that trade

more have less child labor. At the cross-country means, the data suggest an openness elasticity of

child labor of -0.7. For low-income countries, the elasticity of child labor with respect to trade with

high income countries is -0.9. However, these relationships appear to be largely attributable to the

positive association between trade and income. When we control for the endogeneity of trade and

for cross-country income differences, the openness elasticity of child labor at cross-country means

is much smaller (-0.1) and statistically insignificant. We consistently find a negative but statistically

insignificant association between openness and child labor conditional on cross-country income

differences when we split the sample into different country groups, consider only trade between high

and low income countries, or focus on exports of unskilled-labor intensive products from low

income countries. Thus, the cross-country data do not substantiate assertions that trade per se plays

a significant role in perpetuating the high levels of child labor that pervade low-income countries.

Eric V. Edmonds                                         Nina Pavcnik
Department of Economics                                 Department of Economics
Dartmouth College                                       Dartmouth College
6106 Rockefeller Hall                                   6106 Rockefeller Hall
Hanover, NH 03755                                       Hanover, NH 03755
and NBER                                                and NBER
eric.edmonds@dartmouth.edu                              nina.pavcnik@dartmouth.edu
1. Introduction
       Recent estimates suggest that approximately 211 million children under 15 are working

worldwide (ILO 2002). Because of their economic circumstances, these children are forced to

give up the future benefits of leisure, education, and in some instances health in their youth in

order to provide the immediate gains associated with their labor. The role international trade

plays in this pervasive child labor has recently drawn substantial political attention. Activists

have been quick to blame child labor on the effects of trade on local labor markets and have

suggested trade sanctions as tools to coerce policy changes aimed at mitigating child labor.

Others have argued that by improving incomes, trade reduces child labor. This study examines

the cross-country data to see whether the data provide any support for either of these hypotheses

about the relationship between trade and child labor.

       The interaction of trade and child labor has received considerable theoretical attention

(surveyed in section 2 of this study), but empirical evidence on the topic is scarce (Brown,

Deardorff, and Stern 2002 is a survey). The main identification problem that limits the empirical

evidence is the endogeneity of trade: the resource endowments and policies which determine

trade flows also influence child labor supply and are difficult to fully control for in an empirical

setting. For example, the idea that the availability of child labor and (more generally) labor

standards determine trade flows appears in studies by Maskus (1997), Martin and Maskus

(1998), Brown (2001), Brown, Deardroff, and Stern (1996), Busse (2002), and Rodrik (1996).

Thus, the ideal setting in which to consider how trade affects child labor is one where an

exogenous policy experiment induces variation in trade, and children are asymmetrically affected

within a country by the policy experiment (perhaps because of community differences in

resources endowments). Edmonds and Pavcnik (2003a) is one such study, but data limitations




                                                  1
preclude such analysis for a large set of countries.1 Therefore, general evidence on the

relationship between trade and child labor that explicitly considers the joint determination of the

two is missing in the existing literature.

        This paper examines the link between trade and child labor in a cross-country framework

that addresses the problem that trade flows can be endogenous to child labor. Previous cross-

country studies document a negative association between openness and child labor (Shelburne

(2001) and Cigno, Rosatti, and Guarcello (2002)). While the studies interpret this evidence as a

causal link from trade to child labor, Busse (2002) considers the effect of child labor on trade and

finds that higher child labor is associated with higher exports of unskilled-labor intensive goods.

These studies do not attempt to address the endogeneity of openness, and a priori it is not

transparent how endogeneity affects inference. For example, reverse causality (trade occurs

because of high levels of child labor) would introduce a positive correlation between trade and

child labor (i.e. the estimates would be biased upwards). However, latent factors associated with

both openness and child labor may also be an important source of bias. For example, wealthier

countries trade more and have less child labor independent of trade. Bias of this form would

introduce a negative correlation between trade and child labor (i.e. the coefficients would be

biased downwards). The contribution of the present study is to address the endogeneity problem

as in the literature on trade and income by Frankel and Romer (1999) and examine the

relationship between child labor and variation in trade based on a country's geography.2 The

main identification assumption in this approach is that trade which is driven by geography does

not affect child labor except in its impact on total trade flows.



1
  Edmonds and Pavcnik (2003a) employ detailed household level data spanning a period of liberalization of
Vietnamese rice markets and find that the liberalization was associated with declines in child labor
2
  See Frankel and Rose (2003) for a similar analysis on the effect of trade on the environment.


                                                        2
       Our second contribution is the examination of various channels through which trade

might affect child labor. Trade theory provides two main channels through which trade

expansion affects child labor. First, if trade raises income, it might in turn be associated with

declines in child labor. The link between trade and income is well established in a cross-country

setting (Frankel and Romer (1999), Irwin and Tervio (2002)), and there are both theoretical

reasons (e.g. Basu and Van 1998) and empirical evidence (Edmonds 2004) that suggest that child

labor declines with improvements in income. Second, trade alters the relative return to unskilled

and therefore child labor. Anti-globalization advocates appear to be most concerned that trade-

induced increases in product demand will affect higher levels of child labor. Unlike the existing

cross-country evidence on child labor and openness, we consider both whether there is an

association between trade and child labor, and whether there appears to be a channel for this

relationship other than improvements in income. Since the theoretical discussion in section 2

suggests that the effects of trade on child labor will be heterogeneous across countries, we

examine the relationship between trade and child labor in developing countries and allow the

relationship to vary with country attributes. We also examine aspects of openness such as

overall trade, trade with richer (OECD) countries, and exports of unskilled-labor intensive goods.

       The data suggest that child labor is lower on average in countries that trade more even

after controlling for the endogeneity of trade. This is true in low income countries, when one

considers only trade between low and high income countries, and when one focuses on exports

of what are generally viewed as child labor intensive goods from low income countries.

However, this relationship appears to be driven mostly by the relationship between trade and

income. When one controls for differences in income across countries and addresses the

endogeneity of trade, the data suggest a negative association between trade and child labor that is




                                                  3
small and statistically insignificant. These results are robust over a large set of specification

checks. The implications of these results are discussed in the conclusion of the paper.

       The paper proceeds as follows. In section 2 we review the theory models of trade and

child labor. In section 3 we outline the empirical framework and describe the data. In section 4

we present the results. Section 5 concludes.

2. Theory Discussion

       The theory work on child labor and trade is relatively abundant. In this paper, we only

provide an overview of the mechanisms suggested by these models and then examine the cross-

country data for evidence on the relative importance of these mechanisms. We group the

mechanisms through which trade affects child labor into three categories: effects of income

changes, effects of changes in the relative return to child labor (through shifts in product

demand), and interaction effects of local endowments or government policy.

       There is a separate literature which debates the effects of trade on aggregate income (see

Frankel and Romer 1999, Irwin and Tervio (2002) for a discussion). From this literature, there

appears to be a general view that higher levels of trade are associated with greater income, and

that while these gains are not necessarily uniformly distributed, benefits from trade do not accrue

to the wealthy alone (Dollar and Kraay (2002)). Increases in income (modeled as a rise in adult

wages) affect child labor depending on how child labor enters parental preferences and on the

significance of liquidity constraints. In the Basu and Van (1998) framework, child labor is a bad

in parental preferences, and parents send children to work only when forced to do so by poverty.

Thus, when household income from adult wages surpasses some threshold, families withdraw the

children from the labor market. In an adaptation of the Ben-Porath model (1967), Baland and

Robinson (2000) show that even when child labor is not a bad in parental preferences, increases




                                                  4
in income can lower child labor by overcoming liquidity constraints if the market returns to not

working are greater in present discounted value terms than the return to working (this result is

not sensitive to the absence of child labor in the utility function, Brommier and Dubious 2004).3

Thus, increases in income can reduce child labor supply by overcoming liquidity constraints or

because of preferences.

        Many academic discussions of trade's impact on child labor emphasize trade's effect on

household incomes (adult wages) and therefore child labor supply. For example, Brown (2000)

and Dixit (2000) adapt the Basu and Van setup to argue that the effect of trade on child labor

depends on the slope of the labor demand curve, trade's impact on labor demand, and the

elasticity of substitution between child and adult labor. In their frameworks, when the economy

is fully integrated in the world market, wages are completely determined by international product

prices (i.e. the labor demand curve is perfectly elastic). Thus, by increasing the price of a

product exported by developing countries, trade liberalization or increased access to global

market can reduce the incidence of child labor.

        However, models based implicitly on the more general Ben-Porath type model of child

labor supply place greater emphasis on how trade alters the relative return to child labor through

shifts in labor demand. For example, Maskus (1997) models an economy producing an export

(adult labor intensive) and import-competing (capital intensive) good. The export sector

subcontracts inputs from the informal sector, which employs children. The demand for child

labor is thus determined by the product demand for the exported good. Child labor supply is

assumed to be a positive function of child wages and a negative function of adult wages. Maskus

shows that everything else equal, the expansion of the export sector following trade liberalization


3
 Baland and Robinson and Brommier and Dubios also focus on constraints on intergenerational bequests which we
do not discuss, because we do not see an obvious mechanisms through which trade affects bequests.


                                                      5
increases the demand for child labor and equilibrium child wages. However, the expansion of

the export sector also increases adult wages via Stolper Samuelson effects and thus reduces the

supply of child labor given child wages. If child labor supply is highly elastic with respect to

adult wage, trade might reduce the equilibrium child labor.4

         Ranjan (2001) emphasizes that credit constraints also influence whether the effects on

child labor of additional income are greater than any upward shift in labor demand that

accompanies a growth of trade. He models an economy that produces a high-skill and low-skill

intensive good and is endowed relatively well with unskilled labor. Child labor is an imperfect

substitute for unskilled adult labor. Household welfare depends on current household

consumption and on the discounted future welfare of children. The model implicitly assumes

that the present discounted return to education exceeds the present value of the return to child

labor. In each period, a parent decides whether to send a child to school or to work. Ranjan

shows that opening up to trade has two implications for the incidence of child labor in an

unskilled labor abundant country in a simple Hecksher-Ohlin framework. Trade liberalization

increases the wages of unskilled workers and reduces the returns to educated workers, thus

making it more likely for parents to send children to work.5 This is the demand effect of trade

liberalization that the critics of globalization focus on. However, at the same time, households

endowed with unskilled labor also become better off and thus less credit constrained (making it

less likely for parents to send children to work). The overall effect depends on which of the two

channels dominates.



4
  In addition, the firm might adjust its adult to child labor ratio depending on the substitutability of child and adult
labor in production.
5
   It is not obvious that trade liberalization in low-income countries will lower the relative return to education. For
low income countries, growth in trade may lead to greater household specialization (as Edmonds and Pavcnik 2003b
find). This in turn may increase the relative return to education if the returns to education are increasing in
specialization (as they likely are).


                                                           6
         Within these models the effects of growth in trade on child labor will be heterogeneous

depending on a country's factor endowments. In particular, one would expect to observe

relatively smaller decreases (greater increases) in child labor associated with trade in countries

that are relatively less abundant in skilled labor or capital. The literature on international labor

standards emphasizes that the country's institutional environment might also be important. If

countries differ in the extent of child labor regulation, countries that lack child labor regulation

will specialize in industries that use child labor relatively more intensively following trade

liberalization. This increases the demand for child labor in such economies. If one assumes that

child labor is a bad in preferences, poorer countries are less likely to have child labor regulation

and thus more likely to observe increases in child labor with trade. One would thus expect child

labor to potentially decrease by less (increase by more) in relatively poor countries than in more

developed economies.6

         The review of theory work suggests that the overall effect of trade on child labor depends

on how trade affects income, how income affects child labor, how trade affects the relative return

to child labor, and how child labor responds to changes in its relative return. If trade increases

income and child labor declines with increasing income, then a growth in trade should put

downward pressure on child labor. However, trade likely also increases the relative demand for

unskilled labor in developing countries and thereby puts upward pressure on child labor.7 In our

empirical work, we thus first examine the relationship between trade and child labor, we then




6
  Similar mechanism also underlies the theory analysis of implications of trade sanction for child labor in Jaferey and
Lahiri (2002).
7
  This discussion has focused on the direct effects of trade. If there is a connection between trade and inequality,
there may also be an indirect effect of trade on child labor through inequality. In a framework such as Rogers and
Swinnerton (2001), the product demand effects discussed in the text would be augmented or attenuated (depending
on the country's productivity) by trade's impact on inequality.


                                                          7
consider the relative importance of changes in product demand, then allow the relationships to

differ across countries based on a country’s factor endowments and labor standards.

3. Methodology

3.1 Data and Empirical Framework

         Our empirical work is aimed at understanding whether the cross-country evidence

suggests a link between trade and child labor and whether there is any evidence that increases in

product demand accompanying a growth in trade exert upward pressure on child labor.

         Our data is described in detail in the data appendix. We focus our analysis on data from

1995 for the 113 countries where we have complete data (listed in the data appendix).8 Table 1

presents descriptive statistics. As a measure of child labor, we use the percent of a country's

population ages 10-14 that is economically active according to ILO (2000) definitions in 1995.

These participation rates are computed by the ILO based on household survey data with

adjustments made to make the data comparable across countries and to reflect that not all

countries have survey data from 1995. In theory, there is panel data on child labor in this cross-

country database that has been used in previous work (Cigno, Rosati, and Guarcello (2002),

Deheija and Gatti (2002)). Because of the infrequency of nationally representative household

surveys in most low-income countries, we elect not to use the panel element of the data as

variation in child labor through time more likely reflects ILO adjustments rather than

independent observations on child labor in a given country over time. Exposure to trade is

measured by openness, defined as the ratio of exports and imports to GDP (expressed in




8
  We have child labor and openness information for 152 countries. We have GDP for 138 countries. Of these 138,
we are missing bilateral trade flow data for 25 countries. We have checked the robustness of our main findings to
the choice of year for all years in which all of this information is available (1970, 1980, 1990). Our findings are not
sensitive to the choice of year.


                                                           8
percentage terms) and comes from the World Development Indicators. GDP is from Penn World

Tables 6.1 and is in purchasing power parity terms (deflated with the chain index).

       We begin our analysis by considering the association between the volume of trade

(openness) and child labor without attempting to separate the effects of income from other

factors. Figure 1 presents the raw data. Hong Kong and Singapore are clear outliers for

openness, so they are not pictured in the graph (they both report no child labor). Their exclusion

will be a robustness check in our empirical work. Three characteristics stand out in the data.

First, there is significant variation in both openness and child labor that we will be able to exploit

in our empirical analysis. Second, more open economies have less child labor. This is true in

the entire dataset and in each quartile of the openness distribution. Third, at any given level of

openness, there is considerable heterogeneity in child labor. In fact, the openness variable can

only explain 4 percent of the total cross-country variation in child labor. Thus, while the raw

data suggest scope for a link between child labor and openness, trade's overall significance as a

determinant of child labor is likely minor.

       In our regression work, we rely on a linear form for the data presented in figure 1. That

is, for country i, the percent of the 10-14 population that is economically active (cli) will be

regressed on a constant and the country's openness:

              cli = β o + β1opennessi + ε i                                                  (1)

where β1 has the interpretation of being the average change in the child labor participation rate

associated with an increase in the ratio of total trade to GDP. β1 cannot be interpreted as the

causal effect of trade on child labor because of the endogeneity of openness.

       One possible reason for the link between trade and child labor apparent in Figure 1 is that

there is a strong association between trade and income as documented by many sources including



                                                  9
Frankel and Romer (1999). This could lead to an association between trade and child labor,

because there is an incredibly strong cross-country relationship between child labor and GDP.

This is evident in Figure 2 which plots child labor participation rates against our measure of GDP

per capita (on a log scale). In 1995, a third order polynomial in log GDP per capita can explain

75 percent of the cross-country variation in child labor. Average child labor participation rates

drop below 10 percent for countries with a GDP per capita above $3600 in PPP terms

(Indonesia) and are below 5 percent in countries with a GDP per capita above $6,000 in PPP

terms (Venezuela). Thus, there is ample scope for the relationship between trade and child labor

in Figure 1 to be driven by the association between trade and GDP.

       To explore this directly in the empirical work, we control for the log of GDP per capita

(GDPPC). We wish to fully control for the relationship between GDP and child labor, so we

adopt a partially linear framework for the log of GDP per capita. That is, we modify (1) as:

                cli = β o + β1opennessi + f (GDPPCi ) + ε i                                   (2)

where f(GDPPCi) is a third order polynomial of the log GDP per capita. In this specification, β1

has the interpretation of being the average change in the child labor participation rate associated

with an increase in the ratio of total trade to GDP after controlling for any effect of trade on

income. In terms of the theory models of the previous section, then, β1 captures any effect on

child labor of changes in its relative return owing to shifts in product demand. The change in β1

in equation (2) relative to its value in equation (1) gives us a measure of how much of the

association between trade and child labor in equation (1) is driven by the association between

trade and income.




                                                  10
            Finally, we allow the relationship between trade and child labor to vary based on some of

the country characteristics that have been emphasized in the theory literature. Let, A denote a

given country attribute. We modify (2) as follows:

            cli = β 0 + β1opennessi + β 2 Ai + β 3opennessi * Ai + f (GDPPCi ) + ε i                 (3)

In this specification, β1 is now interpreted as the change in child labor participation rates when

trade relative to GDP increases by 1 percentage point when a given attribute is 0, and β1 + β 3 Ai

is how child labor participation rates change with a 1 percentage point increase in trade relative

to GDP for a country with attribute of A. We consider country attributes such as average years

of schooling in the population, capital per worker, and whether the country is a signatory on

child labor conventions.

3.2 Description of Instruments

            We address the endogeneity of openness in equations (1)-(3) by instrumenting for

openness with openness based on geography as in Frankel and Romer (1999).9 We construct a

measure of trade based on geography using information on bilateral trade flows from the World

Trade Analyzer and bilateral geographic characteristics from Rose (2003). We mimic Frankel

and Rose (2002, 2003) in the construction of the measure of trade based on geography. That is,

we regress a measure of the log bilateral openness between country i and j (defined as

     Trij        exp ortsij + importsij
             ≡                            ) on the log of distance between the two countries, the log of
    NGDPi               NGDPi

country j’s population, the log of the product of the areas of the two countries, and indicators for




9
  An alternative to IV would be to just look at the relationship between openness based on geography and child
labor. This reduced form captures the exact source of variation in trade that we are using for identification. We
elect to follow convention and focus on IV results rather than the reduced forms. In practice, this decision is not
substantive to our findings.


                                                          11
whether the two countries share a common language, border, and landlocked status.10 This

yields the following regression equation:11

         ln(Trij NGDPi ) = .45− .95ln distanceij + .96 ln pop j + .47 commlangij + .61 borderij
                               (.40)    (.04)             (.02)           (.08)                (.20)

                             − .20 ln( areai * area j ) − .43 landlocked ij .
                                (.01)                      (.07)



Openness based on geography for country i is then created by exponentiating the predicted

values for bilateral openness from the above equation and summing the predicted values for

country i across its trading partners. The correlation between the constructed openness based on

geography and the actual openness is .65. Our assumption is that geography based trade has no

relationship to child labor except through its effect on total trade flows. This assumption might

be potentially violated if a country's geography independently impacts child labor. In our

empirical work, we address this potential concern by extensive robustness analysis.

         We also evaluate the robustness of our results when we consider the endogeneity of GDP.

The importance of including a non-linear form for GDPPC in (2) adds the additional

complications associated with instrumental variables in non-linear models. We mimic Dubin

and McFadden (1984) in our approach to IV in a non-linear setting. That is, we attain predicted

values for GDPPC by regressing it on a vector of instruments for income and any other controls

included in (2). We then estimate (2) using two-stage least squares where openness and the

nonlinear terms in GDPPC are instrumented by our trade instrument and predicted GDPPC, its

square, and its cube. For instruments for income, we use lagged (15 year) income and lagged (15

year) investment.12 The idea is that lagged income and investment will be correlated with

income today, but not child labor today given that there is little opportunity for children to have

accumulated work experience. Latent economic factors correlated with both child labor and
10
   NGDP is nominal GDP which is used in the present case, because trade flows are also nominal.
11
   Robust standard errors are reported in parenthesis. This regression is based on 5720 observations. R2 is .31.
12
   We use information on GDP per capita and investment share of GDP from Penn World Tables 6.1.


                                                         12
income today will also likely be correlated with lagged income. Thus, we view the identification

assumptions for these income instruments as strong, but perhaps tenable in some specifications

discussed below. It is obviously extremely difficult to find persuasive instruments for income in

cross-country regression (Rose 2003 gives up), we mostly view this as a robustness check to our

findings on trade and child labor.

4. Empirical Findings

4.1 Basic Results

       In the cross-country data, there is a significant, negative correlation between child labor

and openness that is substantially attenuated in magnitude by the endogeneity of trade and

largely attributable to the association between trade and income. These findings are evident in

Table 2. Table 2 contains the results of estimating (1) and (2) on the full sample of countries,

and the next section focuses on low income countries. The first column in Table 2 presents OLS

estimates of the association between trade and child labor (equation 1) without controlling for

income or the endogeneity of trade. A 10 percentage point increase in openness is associated

with a 0.67 percentage point reduction in child labor or, at the cross-country averages, an

openness elasticity of child labor of -0.38. As discussed in the introduction, endogeneity

between child labor and trade plagues the interpretation of results in column 1, and the direction

of the bias could be positive or negative. Column 2 contains two stage least squares results

where openness is instrumented with constructed trade based on geography as described in the

previous section (column 3 contains the first stage results). Once we account for endogeneity,

the coefficient on openness becomes more negative. A 10 percentage point increase in openness

is associated with 1.2 percentage point decline in child labor. At cross-country means, the

openness elasticity of child labor nearly doubles to -0.68 when we rely on trade based on




                                                13
geography. Thus, the cross-country data suggest child labor is lower on average in countries that

trade more.

        Since equation (1) does not control for income, the negative association between trade

and child labor may be driven by the well established positive association between trade and

income. Yet, anti-globalization advocates appear to be most concerned with changes in the

demand for child labor associated with trade-induced increase in product demand. Our main

interest is thus in whether there appears to be a channel other than improvements in income

through which trade is associated with child labor. As a result, we focus our analysis on the

relationship between trade and child labor conditional on income as in equation (2). Column 4

of table 2 presents IV estimates of the relationship between openness and child labor once one

controls for variation in income across countries with the polynomial in PPP GDP per capita.

After controlling for income, any remaining association between child labor and openness may

be attributable to product demand effects as discussed in section 2. However, conditional on

income, we find no statistically significant association between trade and child labor and the

magnitude of the coefficient is very small. At the cross-country means, the implied openness

elasticity of child labor in column 4 is -0.11. In sum, we find very little evidence that conditional

on income greater openness is associated with child labor.13

        We next perform several robustness checks. First, we are concerned about how the

endogeneity of income affects our inference. If there is mismeasurement of income and an

underlying association between true income and openness, then the coefficient on openness may

still reflect the relationship between trade and true (unobserved) income. We address the

potential endogeneity of income by following the IV procedure described in section 3.2, using 15


13
 Our results are not driven by the focus on data from 1995. Estimates of equations (1) and (2) for all additional
years (i.e. 1970, 1980, 1990) for which we have the required data yield same conclusions as those in columns 1-4.


                                                        14
year lags in income and investment as instruments. While it is obviously extremely difficult to

find plausible instruments for income in cross-country regression, we view this regression as a

robustness check to our findings. After instrumenting for income, the coefficient on openness

decreases in magnitude further and continues to be statistically insignificant (column 5).

        Second, we are concerned that the coefficient on openness could be biased if the

instrument based on geography is correlated with unobserved country characteristics that affect

child labor independently. First, Rodriguez and Rodrik (2000) suggest that country’s geographic

characteristics could affect country outcomes such as child labor by being correlated with the

quality of institutions or public health (due to exposure to various diseases).14 In column 6, we

add a country’s latitude and measure of political freedom as controls.15 Second, countries differ

in their compliance with child labor laws. Moreover, various regions of the world vary

drastically in the incidence of child labor and these regions also differ in other unobserved

characteristics that are potentially correlated with geography. In column 7, we thus additionally

control for whether a country signed the ILO child labor conventions 138 on the minimum age of

employment and the location of the country by inclusion of indicators for whether a country is

located in East Asia, South Asia, Sub-Saharan Africa, Latin America and the Caribbean, Middle

East and North Africa. Finally, in column 8 and 9, we additionally include the share of the

population that is rural (a proxy for the extent of agriculture) and the share of mining in GDP

since agriculture and natural resource endowments could be correlated with geography and

independently affect child labor through the country’s industry mix.16 However, as the estimates

of the coefficient on openness in columns 5-9 suggest, none of these additional controls alter our

14
   Acemoglu, Johnson and Robinson (2002), Hall and Jones (1999), and Easterly and Levine (2003) suggest the link
between a country’s latitude and the quality of institutions and exposure to diseases.
15
   We use Freedom House measure of political freedom from Dollar and Kraay (2003). Greater index value is
associated with less political freedom.
16
   Percent rural population is from WDI and mining information is from Aiyar and Feyrer (2003).


                                                       15
baseline finding of a very small and statistically insignificant negative association between child

labor and greater openness. In the column 9 specification, the implied openness elasticity of

child labor at cross-country means is -0.10.17 In sum, the cross-country data do not reject the

hypothesis that openness to international trade has no effect on child labor on average other than

through trade's impact on income.

4.2 Results for non-OECD countries

         75 percent of the cross-country variation in child labor can be explained by cross-country

variation in income. Only 7 countries with a PPP GDP per capita above 8,000 report any child

labor, and the highest incidence among these is Argentina where 4.5 percent of children are

working. It is difficult to argue that trade could affect child labor in Germany with GDP per

capita of 21,000 in PPP terms in 1995, whereas such an argument is more plausible in a country

such as Uganda, with GDP per capita of about 900 in PPP terms in 1995. Our insignificant

coefficient on openness in previous section might thus simply reflect that we are averaging

countries where there is no scope for trade to impact child labor with countries where there is a

possible role. We thus estimate equation (2) for the set of non-OECD countries. Table 3

presents these results.

         Several interesting findings emerge from Table 3. First, without controlling for income,

the negative association between child labor and trade implied by the IV estimate is

approximately the same among non-OECD countries as was observed in the full sample of

countries (compare column 1 of Table 3 with column 2 of Table 2). Second, conditional on

income, the magnitude of the IV coefficient in column 2 of Table 3 is greater in absolute value

than the corresponding coefficients in the overall sample (table 2, column 4). This is consistent

17
 Our results in table 2 are also robust to dropping outliers with no child labor and extremely high openness (i.e.
Hong Kong and Singapore). These results are available from authors upon request.



                                                         16
with the assertion that trade is associated with lower levels of child labor in poorer countries and

that the inclusion of OECD countries attenuated our results above. However, the results in

column 2 are not robust to accounting for endogeneity of income (column 3) or to the addition of

controls such as country characteristics such as latitude and political freedom (column 4), ILO

convention indicator and regional indicators (column 5), the share of rural population (column

6), and the share of mining in GDP (column 7). The coefficients on openness in columns (3)-(7)

diminish in magnitude relative to column (2) and become statistically insignificant. In sum, the

data consistently suggest that the association between child labor and openness is negative in

non-OECD countries, but the estimated coefficients are small enough and standard errors are

large enough that the data do no reject the hypothesis that there is no link between openness and

child labor in non-OECD countries in most specifications after we control for cross-country

income differences.

        We might find no association between trade and child labor conditional on income,

because the measure of openness captures a developing country’s trade with both OECD and

non-OECD members. However, trade between OECD and non-OECD countries might

potentially be a more likely source of higher demand for child labor in non-OECD countries. In

table 4 we thus repeat the analysis of the relationship between openness and child labor from

table 3, but focus solely on trade with OECD countries as a measure of openness.18 When we do

not control for income (column 1), increased openness to trade with OECD countries is

associated with large declines in child labor. For a non-OECD country, a 10 percentage point

increase in openness to trade with an OECD country is associated with a 3.8 percentage point

decline in child labor. At the sample means for non-OECD country and their openness to trade


18
 We also adjust the constructed openness accordingly so that trade based on geography only contains trade with
OECD partners. The information on trade with OECD countries is based on data from World Trade Analyzer.


                                                       17
with OECD countries (the mean child labor participation rate is 16 percent and the mean

openness to trade with OECD countries is 39 percent), this implies an openness elasticity of child

labor of -0.9. Interestingly, once we control for income in all other columns of Table 4, we

continue to find a small, negative association between trade and child labor that is not

statistically significant. Thus, while trade between OECD and non-OECD countries seems to be

associated with much lower child labor in the non-OECD countries, this lower child labor

appears to stem entirely from the higher levels of income for non-OECD countries associated

with this trade.

            Another potential explanation for no association between openness and child labor

conditional on income is that our measure of openness encompasses trade in all goods, yet, child

labor is likely associated mostly with exports of unskilled-labor intensive goods from developing

countries. Lack of industry-specific measures of child labor across countries precludes the

analysis of child labor and trade on industry-level across countries. We instead examine the

potential association between exports of unskilled-labor intensive goods from low income

countries and child labor. We focus on exports from BEA manufacturing industry categories

that involve agricultural and food products (BEA codes 1-4), Apparel and Textiles (BEA 5),

Leather and Leather Products (BEA 6), and Other Manufacturing (BEA 34).19 Note that the

category other manufacturing consists of products such as jewelry, basket and wickerwork,

sporting goods, and toys whose production is often the focus of anti child-labor activists. We

express the unskilled-labor intensive exports as a share of GDP.

            In table 5, we repeat the analysis of the relationship between openness and child labor in

non-OECD countries from table 3, but focus solely on exports of unskilled-labor intensive goods



19
     The source of this data is World Trade Analyzer.


                                                        18
as a share of GDP as a measure of openness (we call it export-openness).20 When we do not

control for income (column 1), increased exports of unskilled-labor intensive products are

associated with declines in child labor, but the coefficient has large standard errors and is not

statistically significant.21 For a non-OECD country, a 10 percentage point increase in export

openness is associated with a 19.7 percentage point decline in child labor, but the confidence

interval for this estimate ranges between -43 to 4. At the sample means for non-OECD country

and their export openness (the mean child labor participation rate is 16 percent and the mean

export openness is 7 percent), the coefficient implies an openness elasticity of child labor of -0.8.

This is similar to openness elasticity unconditional on income we found in table 4. Interestingly,

once we control for income in column 2, the magnitude of the coefficient on export openness

declines by over a half, but become statistically significant. At the sample means for non-OECD

country and their export openness, this implies an (export) openness elasticity of child labor of

-0.4 conditional on income (roughly four times what was observed for aggregate openness in the

full sample, Table 2 Column 4). In all other columns of Table 5 that condition on income, we

find negative association between trade and child labor that is not statistically significant. In

sum, while opponents of globalization suggest that exports of unskilled-labor intensive goods

from low income countries are associated with increased child labor, the evidence in table 5 does

not find any significant support for that claim.

4.3 Accounting for differences in country characteristics




20
   We also adjust the constructed openness accordingly so that trade based on geography only focuses on unskilled-
labor intensive exports. The information on bilateral trade in unskilled-labor intensive exports is based on data from
World Trade Analyzer. This information and the information on total exports of labor-intensive goods were missing
for Gabon.
21
   Note that the coefficient magnitudes in this table cannot be compared directly to previous tables, because the scale
of the export openness is different than that of openness in previous tables (see table 1).


                                                          19
        Another potential explanation for why we find no association between trade and child

labor conditional on income is that so far we have not allowed the relationship to vary with

country characteristics. We do so in table 6, that reports estimates of equation (3).

        First, as discussed in section 2, Ranjan (2001) suggests that child labor should decline by

more (increase by less) in countries with greater abundance of skilled workers as openness

increases. Similar logic could be applied across countries that differ in their relative capital

abundance. In column 1 of table 6, we estimate (3) including a country’s skill endowment as

measured by the average years of schooling in total population and its interaction with

openness.22 In column 2 of table 6, we include the log of the country’s capital per worker and its

interaction with openness.23 While the results in column 1 suggest that we observe less child

labor in countries with greater average year of schooling, we continue to find no significant

association between openness and child labor, and the coefficient on the interaction of openness

and this measure of skill is statistically insignificant. Similarly, the results in column 2 suggest

that countries that have more capital per worker have less child labor, but the link between

openness and child labor is statistically insignificant (as is the interaction of openness with

capital abundance).

        Second, some have suggested that openness could increase child labor in countries that

lack or do not comply with labor market standards because greater openness would increase the

demand for child labor by expansion of child-labor intensive industries. Since poorer economies

are less likely to observe labor market standards, we would thus expect greater declines in child

labor in countries that are better off. This is not borne out in the data. In column 3, we interact


22
   The measure of average schooling years is from Barro and Lee (1996). We have also employed the share of total
population with complete secondary education based on Barro and Lee (1996) as an alternative measure of a
country’s skill abundance and obtained similar conclusions.
23
   We use capital per worker from 1980 from Easterly and Levine (2001).


                                                       20
openness with log income. The data do not reject the hypothesis that the effect of openness on

child labor does not vary across countries that differ in income although the point estimate in

column 3 suggests that poor countries experience large declines in child labor with openness. In

column 4, we measure child labor standards more directly by an indicator for whether the

country signed ILO child labor convention 138. We find no statistically differential impact of

openness on child labor in countries that ratified the convention. In sum, conditional on a

country’s income, the data cannot reject the hypothesis that there is no association between child

labor and openness in a cross-country framework even when one allows the relationship to vary

with country endowments and child labor standards.

4.4 Child Labor and Trade Policy

       There are two main problems with examining the link between openness and child labor.

The first problem is the endogeneity of openness. To address this problem, our analysis above

instruments for openness with trade based on geography under the assumption that trade based

on geography has no effect on child labor except in how it impacts total trade. A second

shortcoming of looking at openness is that openness is not itself a policy variable. In this

section, we examine the link between child labor and one available policy variable: average

import duties. However, recall that a primary goal of this study is to consider the correlations

between trade and child labor across a large range of countries. Data on import duties is only

available for a nonrandom subset of countries used in this paper (72 out of 113 in 1995). Thus,

selection into the sample becomes a potential concern. Nevertheless, the advantage of using

trade policy measures over trade based on geography is that trade policies are variables that

policy makes can actually affect (see Rodriquez and Rodrik (2000)).




                                                21
            As a robustness check on our finding of little link between trade and child labor outside

of the declines in child labor associated with rising incomes, we explore the relationship between

a country’s average import duty and child labor in table 7.24 Column 1 is based on cross-

sectional regression of child labor on import duties and the third order polynomial in log GDP

per capita. The data do not reject the hypothesis that there is no association between child labor

and import duties. We are concerned that that average tariff rates proxy for other aspects of

government policy that independently affect child labor. Hence, we use the panel nature of our

data to control for time-invariant country characteristics and also include year indicators. In

particular, we regress child labor on import duties, the third order polynomial in log GDP per

capita, year indicators, and country fixed effects. The results from this specification are in

column 2. Recall from our data section, that we are concerned that changes in child labor

through time reflect ILO imputations rather than actual changes. Thus, it is not obvious that this

column 2 specification is preferred to that of column 1. However, the results reported in column

2 do not reject the hypothesis that there is no significant relationship between changes in import

duties and changes in child labor on average. From this additional analysis, we infer that there is

little evidence that the use of openness rather than trade policy variables drives our finding of

little connection between trade and child labor across countries other than through the effects of

trade on income.

5. Conclusions

            In this paper we explore the link between greater openness and child labor across

countries by directly addressing the endogeneity of trade and child labor. The cross-country data

suggest that there is a negative association between child labor and openness. After correcting

for endogeneity, a 10 percent increase in openness is associated with a 7 percent decline in child
24
     The information on import duties is from World Development Indicators.


                                                         22
labor at the data means. For non-OECD countries, trade with OECD countries is especially

beneficial in terms of child labor. For the average non-OECD country, a 10 percent increase in

the ratio of trade with OECD countries to GDP is associated with a 9 percent decline in child

labor. However, this decline in child labor with openness appears to stem entirely from the

association between trade and income. Once we control for income differences across countries,

we find little evidence of any association between trade and child labor.

        The study also focuses on the mechanisms other than income through which trade might

affect child labor that are often the focus of the anti-globalization movement. We find no

evidence that supports the view that when a country's trade expands, product demand changes

instigated by trade are associated with increases in child labor. This is true generally and when

we focus solely on developing countries and their trade with the developed world. Moreover, the

data do not support the idea that heterogeneity across countries in their skill endowments, capital

to labor ratios, or signing of anti-child labor agreements interacts with trade to affect child labor.

Overall, then, the cross-country data appear in line with the within-country evidence by

Edmonds and Pavcnik (2003a), who found very little support of the importance of the

substitution effects in inducing more child labor in agriculture in Vietnam following rice market

liberalization.

        It is important to be careful in how we interpret these findings. First, our results do not

concern the question of whether the presence of child labor in a country leads to higher levels of

trade to exploit this abundance of child laborers. Rather, our findings suggest that on average

countries that trade more because of their geographic location have higher levels of income

which in turn mitigates child labor. Second, the absence of evidence of an effect of trade on

child labor on average does not imply that there are not circumstances or some types of trade that




                                                  23
stimulate child labor. Identifying these atypical circumstances seems an important avenue for

future research.


Data Appendix

Child Labor: Percent of the 10-14 age group active in the labor force. Labor force comprises all
people who meet the International Labour Organization’s definition of the economically active
population. The concept of "economically active population" is defined as "all persons of either
sex who furnish the supply of labour for the production of economic goods and services as
defined by the United Nations systems of national accounts and balances during a specified time-
reference period. According to these systems the production of economic goods and services
includes all production and processing of primary products whether for the market, for barter, or
for own consumption, the production of all other goods and services for the market and, in the
case of households which produce such goods and services for the market, the corresponding
production for own consumption" (ILO 2000 p1). This definition includes wage workers,
employers, own-account workers, members of producer cooperatives, unpaid family workers,
apprentices, members of the armed forces, and the unemployed.

Openness: Sum of Exports and Imports as a share of GDP (Source: WDI).

GDPPC: Real GDP per capita (chained), PPP terms (Source: Penn World Tables 6.1).

Rural: Rural population as a percent of total population (Source: WDI).

Mining: Share of Mining and Quarrying in GDP in 1980 (Source: Aiyar and Feyrer (2003)).

Schooling: Average Years of Schooling in Total Population in 1990 (Source: Barro and Lee
(1996)).

K/L: Capital per worker in 1980 (Source: Easterly and Levine (2001)).

Import duty: Import Duties as a share of imports (Source: WDI).

Bilateral trade (Tr): bilateral exports and imports in thousands current US$ (Source: World
Trade Analyzer, Center for International Data at UC Davis).

Nominal GDP (NGDP): nominal GDP in thousands current US$ (Source: WDI).

Latitude: A country’s distance from equator (Source: Frankel and Rose (2002)).

Freedom: Freedom House measure of political freedom (Source: Dollar and Kraay (2003)).
Greater index value is associated with less political freedom.

ILO Convention 138: A country is a signatory of ILO convention 138 (Source: ILO web site).



                                               24
Geographical variables: bilateral distance, landlocked status, indicators for common border,
common language from Rose (2003). Data on population and internal area from WDI and Penn
World Tables 6.1.

Countries in the dataset:
The 113 countries below have available data on GDP per capita, nominal GDP, openness, child
labor, and bilateral trade data: Albania (ALB), Algeria (DZA), Argentina (ARG), Australia
(AUS), Austria (AUT), Bangladesh (BGD), Barbados(BRB), Belize (BLZ), Benin (BEN),
Bolivia (BOL), Brazil (BRA), Bulgaria (BGR), Burkina Faso (BFA), Burundi (BDI), Cambodia
(KHM), Cameroon (CMR), Canada (CAN), Chad (TCD), Chile (CHL), China (CHN), Colombia
(COL), Comoros (COM), Congo Dem. Rep. of (Zaire), (ZAR), Congo Rep. of (COG), Costa
Rica (CRI), Cotre d'Ivorie (CIV), Cyprus (CYP), Denmark (DNK), Dominican Rep. (DOM),
Ecuador (ECU), Egypt (EGY), El Salvador (SLV), Equatorial Guinea (GNQ), Ethiopia (ETH),
Fiji (FJI), Finland (FIN), France (FRA), Gabon (GAB), Gambia (GMB), Germany (DEU),
Ghana (GHA), Greece (GRC), Guatemala (GTM), Guinea (GIN), Guyana (GUY), Haiti (HTI),
Honduras (HND), Hong Kong (HKG), Hungary (HUN), Iceland (ISL), India (IND), Indonesia
(IDN), Iran (IRN), Ireland (IRL), Israel (ISR), Italy (ITA), Jamaica (JAM), Japan (JPN), Jordan
(JOR), Kenya (KEN), Korea South, (KOR), Lebanon (LBN), Madagascar (MDG), Malawi
(MWI), Malaysia (MYS), Mali (MLI), Malta (MLT), Mauritania (MRT), Mauritius (MUS),
Mexico (MEX), Morocco (MAR), Mozambique (MOZ), Nepal (NPL), Netherlands (NLD), New
Zealand (NZL), Nicaragua (NIC), Niger (NER), Nigeria (NGA), Norway (NOR), Pakistan
(PAK), Panama (PAN), Papua N.Guinea (PNG), Paraguay (PRY), Peru (PER), Philippines
(PHL), Poland (POL), Portugal (PRT), Romania (ROM), Rwanda (RWA), Senegal (SEN), Sierra
Leone (SLE), Singapore (SGP), South Africa (ZAF), Spain (ESP), Sri Lanka (LKA), Sweden
(SWE), Switzerland (CHE), Syria (SYR), Tanzania (TZA), Thailand (THA), Togo (TGO),
Trinidad&Tobago (TTO), Tunisia (TUN), Turkey (TUR), Uganda (UGA), United Kingdom
(GBR), United States (USA), Uruguay (URY), Venezuela (VEN), Vietnam (VNM), Yemen
Republic of, (YEM), Zambia (ZMB), Zimbabwe (ZWE).




                                              25
References

Acemoglu, D., S. Johnson, and J. Robinson (2002). “The Colonial Origins of Comparative
    Development: An Empirical Analysis,” American Economic Review 91, 1369-1401.

Aiyar, S. and J. Feyrer (2003). "A Contribution to the Empirics of Total Factor Productivity",
     Dartmouth College manuscript.

Baland, J. M. and J. Robinson (2000). “Is Child Labor Inefficient,” Journal of Political Economy
     108, 663-79.

Barro, R. J.W. Lee (1996). “International Measures of Schooling Years and Schooling Quality,”
       American Economic Review 86, 218-223.

Basu, K. and P. H. Van (1998). “The Economics of Child Labor,” American Economic Review,
     88, 412-427.

Ben-Porath, Y. (1967). "The Production of Human Capital and the Life Cycle of Earnings,"
      Journal of Political Economy, 75(4), 352-65.

Bommier, A. and P. Dubois (2004). “Rotten Parents and Child Labor,” Journal of Political
     Economy forthcoming.

Brown, D. K. (2000). "A Transactions Cost Politics Analysis of International Child Labor
    Standards," in Alan V. Deardorff, and Robert M. Stern, eds., Social Dimensions of U.S.
    Trade Policies. Ann Arbor: U Michigan Press.
Brown, D. (2001). Labor Standards: Where Do They Belong on the International Trade
    Agenda? Journal of Economic Perspectives, vol. 15, no. 3, Summer 2001, pp. 89-112
Brown, D., Deardorff, A, and R. Stern (1996). “International Labor Standards and Trade: A
    Theoretical Analysis”, in Jagdish Bhagwati, and Robert Hudec, eds., Fair trade and
    harmonization: Prerequisites for free trade?. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Brown, D. K. ,Deardorff, and R. Stern. (2002). “Child Labor: Theory, Evidence, and Policy,”
    Research Seminar in International Economics Discussion Paper # 474, University of
    Michigan.

Busse, M. (2002). “Do Labor Standards Affect Comparative Advantage in Developing
     Countries?” World Development 30, 1921-32.

Cigno, A, and F. Rosati, and L. Guarcello (2002). “Does Globalization Increase Child Labor?”
     World Development 30, 1579-1589.

Deheija, R. and R. Gatti (2002). “Child Labor: The Role of Income Variability and Access to
       Credit Across Countries,” NBER Working Paper 9018.




                                               26
Dixit, A. (2000). Comment on "A Transactions Cost Politics Analysis of International Child
      Labor Standards," in Alan V. Deardorff, and Robert M. Stern, eds., Social Dimensions of
      U.S. Trade Policies. Ann Arbor: U Michigan Press.

Dollar, D. and A. Kraay (2002). “Growth is Good for the Poor,” Journal of Economic Growth 7,
     195-225.

Dollar, D. and A. Kraay (2003). “Institutions, Trade, and Growth,” Journal of Monetary
     Economics 50, 133-162.

Dubin, J. and D. McFadden (1984). "An Econometric Analysis of Residential Electric
    Appliance Holdings and Consumption," Econometrica 52, 345-362.

Easterly, W. and R. Levine (2001). "It's Not Factor Accumulation: Stylized Facts and Growth
     Models," World Bank Economic Review 15 , 177-219.

Easterly, W. and R. Levine (2003). ”Tropics, Germs, and Crops: How Endowments Influence
     Economic Development,” Journal of Monetary Economics 50, 3-40.

Edmonds, E. (2004). “Does child labor decline with improving economic status?” Journal of
    Human Resources, forthcoming.

Edmonds, E. and N. Pavcnik (2003a). “The Effect of Trade Liberalization on Child Labor,”
    Dartmouth College Manuscript.

Edmonds, E. and N. Pavcnik (2003b). "Trade Liberalization and the Allocation of Labor
    between Households and Markets in a Poor Country," Dartmouth College Manuscript.

Frankel, J. A. and D. Romer (1999). "Does Trade Cause Growth?", American Economic Review
     89, 279-399.

Frankel, J. A. and A. Rose (2002). “An Estimate of the Effect of Common Currencies on Trade
     and Income,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 117, 437-466.

Frankel, J.A. and A. Rose (2003). “Is Trade Good or Bad for the Environment? Sorting out the
     Causality,” The Review of Economics and Statistics forthcoming.

Hall, R. and C. Jones (1999). “Why Do Some Countries Produce So Much More Output per
      Worker than Others?” Quarterly Journal of Economics 114, 83-116.

International Labour Organization (2000). Sources and Methods: Labor Statistics, Volume 10:
      Estimates and Projections of the Economically Active Population. ILO: Geneva.

International Labour Organization (2002). Every Child Counts: New Global Estimates on Child
      Labour. ILO: Geneva.




                                              27
Irwin, D. and M. Tervio (2002). “Does Trade Raise Income? Evidence from the Twentieth
     Century,” Journal of International Economics 58, 1-18.

Jafarey, S. and S. Lahiri (2002). “Will Trade Sanctions Reduce Child Labor? The Role of
      Credit Markets,” Journal of Development Economics, 68(1), 137-156.

Maskus, K. (1997). "Core Labor Standards: Trade Impacts and Implications for International
    Trade Policy, " World Bank International Trade Division Mimeo.

Martin, W. and K. Maskus (2001). "Core Labor Standards and Competitiveness: Implications
     for Global Trade Policy," Review of International Economics 9, 317-328.

Ranjan, P. (2001). "Credit constraints and the phenomenon of child labor," Journal of
     Development Economics 64, 81-102.

Rodriguez, F. and D. Rodrik (2000). “Trade Policy and Economic Growth: A Skeptic’s Guide to
     Cross- National Evidence, Harvard University mimeo.

Rodrik, D. (1996). "Labor Standards and International Trade: Do They Matter and What do We
     Do About Them?" in R.Z. Lawrence, D. Rodrik, and J. Whalley, Emerging Agenda for
     Global Trade: High Stakes for Developing Countries, Policy Essay No. 20. Washington,
     DC: Overseas Development Council.

Rogers, C. and K. Swinnerton (2001). "Inequality, Productivity, and Child Labor: Theory and
    Evidence," Georgetown University Manuscript.

Rose, A. (2003). “Does WTO Really Increase Trade?” American Economic Review
     forthcoming.

Shelbourne, R. (2001). “An explanation of the international variation in the prevalence of child
     labour,” World Economy 24, 359-378.




                                               28
                               Figure 1: Child Labor and Trade 1995
 % of Population 10-14 that is Economically Active
                                                     10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 55 60                           MLI
                                                                                                           BFA
                                                                                                          BDI
                                                                                                       UGANER NPL
                                                                                                        ETH
                                                                                                       RWA            KEN
                                                                                                                 TZA
                                                                                                                TCDCOM
                                                                                                                                     GMB
                   Child Labor




                                                                                                                MDG
                                                                                                            GINMOZ MWI                           GNQ
                                                                                                                       SEN
                                                                                                      BGD ZAR            ZWE
                                                                                                              BEN TGO
                                                                                                            CMR
                                                                                                          HTI               NGACOG
                                                                                                                         KHM      MRT
                                                                                                                   YEMCIV
                                                                                                         PAK                 GABPNG
                                                                                                  BRA      GTM     DOM ZMB   THA
                                                                                                     IND SLE BOL SLV
                                                                                                                GHA          NIC
                                                                                                           TUR
                                                                                                            CHN
                                                                                                             EGY
                                                                                                               IDN         VNMHND
                                                                                                                          PHL
                                                                                                                            PRY
                                                                                                        COL MEX   MARSYR
                                                                                                   ARG IRN ECU PAN       CRI
                                                     5




                                                                                                                                                         MYS
                                                                                                       PER
                                                                                                         URYALB
                                                                                                             VENDZA PRT LKA BLZ MUS   JOR IRL
                                                                                                  JPN
                                                                                                    USA AUS  ITA
                                                                                                           GRC
                                                                                                           FRA
                                                                                                            ZAF
                                                                                                            ESP
                                                                                                             POL
                                                                                                             DEU  ROM
                                                                                                                GBR
                                                                                                                 NZL
                                                                                                                 CHL
                                                                                                                  KOR
                                                                                                                   CHE
                                                                                                                   FIN
                                                                                                                    DNK
                                                                                                                    ISLHUN
                                                                                                                     NORISR
                                                                                                                        AUT
                                                                                                                        LBN BGR
                                                                                                                      CAN
                                                                                                                       SWE    TTO
                                                                                                                              TUN  JAM
                                                                                                                               CYPNLD
                                                                                                                                   FJI
                                                                                                                                    BRB                    MLTGUY
                                                     0




                                                                                        0         25        50     75     100     125      150    175    200      225
                                                                                                                  Openness: (Ex+Im)/GDP
                                                                                        Source: World Development Indicators (2003) and ILO (2000)

                                                                                              Note: Singapore and Hong Kong excluded from the picture.

Figure 2: Child Labor and Income 1995
 % of Population 10-14 that is Economically Active
                                                     10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 55 60




                                                                                                             MLI
                                                                                                               BFA
                                                                                                            BDI
                                                                                                             UGA NPL
                                                                                                             NER
                                                                                                        ETH RWA KEN
                                                                                                       TZA     TCD       COM
                                                                                                                  GMB
                   Child Labor




                                                                                                             MDG
                                                                                                           MWI
                                                                                                               MOZ GNQ        GIN
                                                                                                                    SEN
                                                                                            ZAR                      BGD      ZWE
                                                                                                              TGOBEN
                                                                                                               NGA KHMCOG
                                                                                                                       HTI
                                                                                                                       CMR
                                                                                                                   MRT
                                                                                                               YEM      CIV       PNG
                                                                                                                         PAK                   GAB
                                                                                                             ZMB
                                                                                                               SLE                  GTM
                                                                                                                                   DOMSLV     THA
                                                                                                                                             BRA
                                                                                                                   GHA IND NICBOL
                                                                                                                              CHN EGY       TUR
                                                                                                                      VNMHND PHL  IDN
                                                                                                                                         PRY MEX
                                                                                                                                  MAR
                                                                                                                                   ECU   COL
                                                                                                                                    SYRIRN
                                                                                                                                        CRI        ARG
                                                     5




                                                                                                                                      PERPAN
                                                                                                                                LKA DZA     BLZ MYS
                                                                                                                                                 URYMUS
                                                                                                                                                      PRT
                                                                                                                                ALB  JOR
                                                                                                                               GUY JAM ROM
                                                                                                                                        FJI
                                                                                                                                         LBN
                                                                                                                                         TUN VEN
                                                                                                                                             BGR
                                                                                                                                              POL
                                                                                                                                              ZAFHUN GRC
                                                                                                                                                CHL
                                                                                                                                                TTO   MLT
                                                                                                                                                      BRB
                                                                                                                                                       KOR
                                                                                                                                                        ESP
                                                                                                                                                         NZL
                                                                                                                                                         CYP
                                                                                                                                                         ISR
                                                                                                                                                          IRLITA
                                                                                                                                                            FIN
                                                                                                                                                            GBR
                                                                                                                                                              FRA
                                                                                                                                                              AUT
                                                                                                                                                              DEU
                                                                                                                                                              ISL
                                                                                                                                                              NLD
                                                                                                                                                              SWE
                                                                                                                                                               AUS
                                                                                                                                                                JPN
                                                                                                                                                                CANSGP
                                                                                                                                                                 DNK
                                                                                                                                                                 CHEUSA
                                                                                                                                                                  NOR
                                                                                                                                                                  HKG
                                                     0




                                                                                        321      500         1000 1500     2500         5000     10000    20000
                                                                                                  Real GDP Per Capita in 1995 USD, PPP - Chain Index
                                                                                        Source: Penn World Tables 6.1 and ILO (2000)




                                                                                                                                    29
                                                Table 1: Summary Statistics

Variable                                                                       N      Mean         S.D.    Min       Max

Child Labor                                                                 113   13.12   15.33                0     54.53
Openness                                                                    113   74.17   48.04           16.78    339.99
GDP per capita (GDPPC)                                                      113 7663.89 7717.68             321     28253
Ln(GDPPP)                                                                   113    8.38    1.14            5.77     10.25
Share of Mining in GDP (Mining)                                              92     .06     .08                0       .40
Share of Rural Population (Rural)                                           112   47.47   24.22                0     94.34
Capital per Worker (1980)                                                   108    9.02    1.58            5.72      11.36
Average Schooling Years (1990)                                               94    5.69    2.74              .82     11.74
Import Duty                                                                  72    8.59    7.77              .00     29.47
South Asia                                                                  113     .04     .21                0         1
East Asia                                                                   113     .11     .31                0         1
Subsaharan Africa                                                           113     .29     .46                0         1
Latin America and the Carribean                                             113     .21     .41                0         1
Middle East and North Africa                                                113     .09     .29                0         1
OECD Member                                                                 113     .20     .40                0         1
Latitude                                                                    113   16.30   24.20             -41         65
ILO Convention 138                                                          111     .27     .45                0         1
Freedom                                                                     112    1.79     .71                1         3

Non-OECD countries
Child Labor                                                                   90      16.24       15.67       0     54.53
Openness                                                                      90      77.51       51.79   17.21    339.99
Openness with OECD countries                                                  90      38.75       28.17    6.07    138.81
(Unskilled Labor Intensive Exports)/NGDP                                      89       7.00        8.53    0.07     51.52
See data appendix for definitions. Some observations have missing values for various variables.
                                                             Table 2: Child Labor and Openness


                             (1)            (2)             (3)            (4)            (5)            (6)             (7)            (8)            (9)
Dependent Variable:          CL             CL              Openness       CL             CL             CL              CL             CL             CL

Openness                     -0.067         -0.12                          -0.02          -0.001         -0.014          -0.025         -0.018         -0.018
                             [0.020]**      [0.041]**                      [0.014]        [0.015]        [0.019]         [0.021]        [0.024]        [0.020]
Constructed Openness                                        2.516
                                                            [0.427]**
Latitude                                                                                                 -0.049          0.031          0.028          0.025
                                                                                                         [0.027]*        [0.032]        [0.033]        [0.032]
Freedom                                                                                                  -0.007          0.207          1.102          1.023
                                                                                                         [1.679]         [2.065]        [2.053]        [2.268]
ILO Convention 138                                                                                                       -0.597         -0.889         -1.409
                                                                                                                         [1.537]        [1.493]        [1.604]
Rural                                                                                                                                   0.134          0.099
                                                                                                                                        [0.054]**      [0.056]*
Mining                                                                                                                                                 -12.869
                                                                                                                                                       [7.965]
Income polynomial            no             no              no             yes            yes            yes             yes            yes            yes
Regional indicators          no             no              no             no             no             no              yes            yes            yes
IV for Openness              No             Yes             First Stage    Yes            Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes            Yes
IV for Income                No             No              No             No             Yes            No              No             No             No
Observations                 113            113             113            113            105            112             111            110            90
R-squared                    0.04           0.02            0.46           0.76           0.74           0.76            0.81           0.82           0.81
Robust standard errors in brackets. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%. Income polynomial is a third order polynomial in log PPP GDP per capita. The
instrument for openness is the constructed index of trade based on geography (see section 3.2 of text). The IV procedure used in column 5 is to regress income on
lagged income and investment, and constructed trade to obtain predicted income. The predicted income, its square, its cube, and constructed trade based on geography
are used as instruments for openness, income, income squared, and income cubed.
                                  Table 3: Child Labor and Openness in Non-OECD Countries

                              (1)               (2)             (3)             (4)             (5)             (6)         (7)

Openness                      -0.132            -0.107          -0.008          -0.054          -0.057          -0.046      -0.05
                              [0.041]**         [0.055]*        [0.155]         [0.053]         [0.045]         [0.052]     [0.049]
Latitude                                                                        -0.075          0.056           0.057       0.03
                                                                                [0.039]*        [0.061]         [0.059]     [0.066]
Freedom                                                                         0.238           0.042           0.559       0.035
                                                                                [1.629]         [2.114]         [2.112]     [2.583]
ILO Convention 138                                                                              -0.548          -0.57       -1.014
                                                                                                [1.983]         [1.935]     [2.180]
Rural                                                                                                           0.169       0.154
                                                                                                                [0.064]**   [0.079]*
Mining                                                                                                                      -10.389
                                                                                                                            [10.512]

Income polynomial             no                yes             yes             yes             yes             yes         yes
Regional indicators           no                no              no              no              yes             yes         yes
IV for Openness               Yes               Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes         Yes
IV for Income                 No                No              Yes             No              No              No          No
Observations                  90                90              83              89              88              87          67
R-squared                     0.07              0.71            0.7             0.73            0.78            0.8         0.78
Robust standard errors in brackets. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%. See table 2 for additional explanation.
                       Table 4: Child Labor and Trade with OECD countries: Non-OECD sample

                              (1)           (2)             (3)             (4)              (5)             (6)            (7)

Openness                      -0.377    -0.084              -0.124          -0.034           -0.063          -0.077         -0.091
                              [0.126]** [0.078]             [0.146]         [0.070]          [0.077]         [0.104]        [0.125]
Latitude                                                                    -0.068           0.071           0.077          0.059
                                                                            [0.041]*         [0.067]         [0.066]        [0.073]
Freedom                                                                     -0.138           -0.05           0.501          0.008
                                                                            [1.731]          [2.119]         [2.095]        [2.639]
ILO Convention 138                                                                           -0.627          -0.565         -0.903
                                                                                             [2.003]         [1.945]        [2.207]
Rural                                                                                                        0.173          0.156
                                                                                                             [0.067]**      [0.094]
Mining                                                                                                                      -8.741
                                                                                                                            [12.044]

Income polynomial             no            yes             yes             yes              yes             yes            yes
Regional indicators           no            no              no              no               yes             yes            yes
IV for Openness               Yes           Yes             Yes             Yes              Yes             Yes            Yes
IV for Income                 No            No              Yes             No               No              No             No
Observations                  90            90              83              89               88              87             67
R-squared                     0.04          0.73            0.73            0.73             0.78            0.8            0.78
Robust standard errors in brackets. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%.   See table 2 for additional explanation.
                        Table 5: Child Labor and Child-Labor Intensive Exports: Non-OECD sample

                                   (1)           (2)            (3)             (4)            (5)             (6)             (7)

CL-Intesive Exports/NGDP -1.972                  -0.877         -0.544          -1.819         -1.719          -1.515          -2.288
                         [1.204]                 [0.400]**      [0.442]         [1.402]        [1.074]         [1.175]         [2.605]
Latitude                                                                        -0.014         0.217           0.179           0.154
                                                                                [0.090]        [0.166]         [0.154]         [0.236]
Freedom                                                                         -0.065         0.388           -0.231          -0.186
                                                                                [2.493]        [2.889]         [2.654]         [3.769]
ILO Convention 138                                                                             -0.916          -0.564          0.159
                                                                                               [3.575]         [3.103]         [4.574]
Rural                                                                                                          0.18            0.17
                                                                                                               [0.113]         [0.159]
Mining                                                                                                                         -28.125
                                                                                                                               [33.336]

Income polynomial                  no            yes            yes             yes            yes             yes             yes
Regional indicators                no            no             no              no             yes             yes             yes
IV for Openness                    Yes           Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes             Yes             Yes
IV for Income                      No            No             Yes             No             No              No              No
Observations                       89            89             82              88             87              86              67
R-squared                                        0.6            0.7             0.18           0.38            0.5
Robust standard errors in brackets. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%. There is one less observation than in table 3 because
information on unskilled-labor intensive exports was missing for Gabon. See table 2 for additional explanation. Note that the coefficient
magnitudes in this table cannot be compared directly to previous tables, because the scale of the CL-Intensive Exports/NGDP is different than
that of openness in previous tables (see table 1).
                   Table 6: Child Labor, Openness, and Country Endowments

                                         (1)               (2)              (3)               (4)

Openness                                 -0.13             -0.664           -1.287            -0.053
                                         [0.141]           [0.776]          [1.959]           [0.038]
Openness*Years of schooling              0.013
                                         [0.017]
Years of schooling                       -2.809
                                         [1.217]**
Openness*ln(K/L)                                           0.063
                                                           [0.078]
ln(K/L)                                                    -8.215
                                                           [3.320]**
Openness*ln(GDPPC)                                                          0.128
                                                                            [0.196]
Openness*ILO Conv. 138                                                                        0.078
                                                                                              [0.047]
ILO Convention 138                                                                            -6.567
                                                                                              [4.345]

Income Polynomial                        Yes               Yes              Yes               Yes
IV for Openness and interactions         Yes               Yes              Yes               Yes
Observations                             94                108              113               111
R-squared                                0.81              0.79             0.61              0.76
Robust standard errors in brackets. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%. See Table 2 for additional
explanation.
            Table 7: Child Labor and Import Duties

                                       (1)               (2)

Import Duty                            -0.111            0.015
                                       [0.133]           [0.048]

Income Polynomial                      yes               yes
Country Fixed Effects                  n.a.              yes
Year Effects                           n.a.              yes
Data                                   1995              Panel
Observations                           72                235
R-squared                              0.73              0.99
Robust standard errors in brackets. Standard errors are clustered by
country in column 2. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%.
