NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

HOUSEHOLD VS. PERSONAL ACCOUNTS
OF THE U.S. LABOR MARKET, 1965-2000
Casey B. Mulligan
Yona Rubinstein
Working Paper 10320
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10320
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2004

We appreciate the comments of George Akerlof, Gary Becker, Claudia Goldin, Bob Michael, Robert Pollak,
seminar participants at the University of Chicago, and the financial support of the University of Chicago’s
Alfred P. Sloan Center for the Study of Working Families. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2004 by Casey B. Mulligan and Yona Rubinstein. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.

Household vs. Personal Accounts of the U.S. Labor Market, 1965-2000
Casey B. Mulligan and Yona Rubinstein
NBER Working Paper No. 10320
February 2004
JEL No. J22, J12
ABSTRACT
The empirical labor supply literature includes some simple aggregate studies, and some individuallevel studies explicitly accounting for heterogeneity and the discrete choice, but sometimes leaving
open the ultimately aggregate questions that motivated the study. As a middle ground, we construct
household-based measures of labor supply by within-household aggregating answers to the usual
weeks and hours worked questionnaire items. Household (H) measures are substantially different
than the more familiar person (P) measures: H employment rates are relatively higher, with little
trend, and relatively little fluctuations. From the H point of view, essentially all aggregate hours
trends and fluctuations can be attributed to changes on the "intensive" margin and not the
"extensive" margin – a characterization that is opposite of that derived from P measures. The crossH distribution of hours is richer, and less spiked, than the cross-P distribution. Labor supply is more
wage elastic from an H point of view.
Casey B Mulligan
University of Chicago
Department of Economics
1126 East 59th Street, #506
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
c-mulligan@uchicago.edu
Yona Rubinstein
Tel Aviv University
yonar@post.tau.ac.il

Table of Contents
I. Aggregate H Employment Rates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
House Structures in Our Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Household and Person Measures Compared . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Who Lives in a Prime-Aged NonEmployed Household? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Person-Based Statistical Models of the Household Employment Rate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

3
3
5
7
9

II. Aggregate MH Employment and Hours . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
III. Cross-sectional Hours Distributions in the MH accounts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
IV. Conclusion: A Little Aggregation Goes a Long Way . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
V. References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20

While labor supply is often modeled as a family decision (e.g., Becker 1965, Ashenfelter and
Heckman 1974, Smith 1977, Becker 1985, Costa and Kahn 2000), and so many indicators of economic
activity are measured at the family level, both microeconomic and macroeconomic labor supply continue
to be measured at the person level. For example, the unemployment rate is the fraction of persons who
are not employed during the week, the year, or some other time interval, and are actively seeking work
(or on layoff) during that interval. It is the fraction of persons working, not the fraction of families
working, that is one of the primary indicators used by the National Bureau of Economic Research to
declare a recession. Another example: the gender wage gap is calculated as the average wage of working
female persons relative to the average wage of working male persons, rather than the wage of a wife
relative to that of her husband.
These standard personal labor market indicators are incomplete and potentially misleading
because they do not put labor market activity in a family context. First of all, the majority of workingaged adults live with a spouse and apparently share their income. Family structures have changed
substantially over time, and differ substantially across races. Important examples include the marked
decline in marriage rates among working-aged adults (although those rates are still above 50%), and the
rapid growth in dual-earner couples.1 Second, family situations may have a big impact on the labor
market.2 It has been argued in the literature (eg., Sweet 1973, pp. 67-8, or Bowen and Finegan 1969, pp.
96f), and is a part of common knowledge, that the presence and age of children affects married female
labor supply. More recently, Johnson and Skinner (1986) argue that an important fraction of increased

1

These trends have been documented in various publications. See for example, Waite’s
(1995, Figure 1) PAA Presidential Address and Hayghe (1990, Chart 1) for some documentation of
U.S. marriage and dual-earner trends, respectively.
2

It has also been argued (eg., Winkler 1998) that family, social, and financial implications of
female earnings are best seen in a family context. For example, she (pp. 42-3) suggests that a variety
of expenditure decisions might be made differently when the wife earns more than her husband.
Perhaps the family expenditure literature surveyed by Lundberg and Pollak (1996) is consistent with
this view. On the other hand, Tenn (2001) suggests than husbands dominate family migration
decisions as much in 1990 as they did decades earlier.

Household Accounts - 2
female labor supply and the increase in dual-earner couples is a consequence of increased divorce rates.
Daniel (1993) and others have even argued that marriage increases a man’s wage. The purpose of our
paper is to help complete the usual set of labor market indicators by constructing household (H) labor
supply accounts, comparing them with the well-known personal (P) accounts, and considering some of
the implications of those differences.
In theory, H accounts of the labor market could be very similar to, or very different from, P
accounts. We find some of each, namely:
•

the employment rate is higher in the H account than in the P account

•

H nonemployment is age-related, and few H nonemployed are actively seeking work

•

the H employment rate trends slightly down, while the P employment rate trends up

•

neither the level, trend, nor changes in the H employment rate can be predicted from the
P employment rate and its changes

•

the H employment rate is well modeled by gender-partitioned P employment rates, if the
model presumes very little sorting (as opposed to positive or negative sorting) of spouses
on hours

•

husband-wife hours correlations are much weaker than other husband-wife correlations
(eg., age, years of school, race, religion, etc.)

•

when aggregate hours are decomposed into the H employment rate and hours per
employed household, the latter accounts for essentially all of the trend and fluctuations.

•

labor supply is more wage elastic in the H accounts than in the P accounts

•

the gender wage gap closes substantially more in the H accounts than in the P accounts

•

P and H accounts of labor supply are more different than are P and H accounts of
earnings3

Some of these findings, such as the first, were to be expected given that households are
aggregates of persons. Indeed, in theory, the entire H accounts might be constructed from P accounts
although, without seeing the H accounts, it is impossible to predict exactly which theory should be used
for the construction. For example, should we expect positive, negative, or zero “sorting” of household
members on hours? Our H accounts show that the H employment rate, and the cross-H distribution of
hours, is similar to what we would find if households were formed by randomly pairing a man with a
3

P and H distributions of earnings have been compared by Mincer (1974), Smith (1979),
Cancian, Danzinger, and Gottschalk (1993) and Blackburn and Bloom (1995).

Household Accounts - 3
woman, and holding both person’s hours fixed at what they are in the observed pairings.
The easy availability of micro-data and computing power during the last three decades, plus the
development of important microeconometric techniques, has led to a proliferation of individual-level
studies of labor supply, as well as other behaviors. Our paper is part of a more recent trend toward
considering more aggregate measures of behavior, even when less aggregate measures are available,
when the aggregate measures correspond more closely with the key concepts in the economic models.
For example, public finance economists now study “taxable income” and its relation with the tax law,
rather than decomposing it into its many distinct behaviors (tax cheating, labor supply on various
margins, occupational choice, demand for fringes, etc.) because taxable income is a key concept in the
theory and the various sub-behaviors are of interest mainly through their contribution to taxable income.4
We argue that individual-level analyses of labor supply may be too disaggregated because individuals
are sharing substantial resources, and personal characteristics with their family members, so that
individual behavioral changes may be misleading unless they are observed in the family context.
The H-P account differences can have important implications for calculating the cost of business
cycles, understanding female labor supply, and modeling co-movements of aggregate wages and hours.
For example, fluctuations in work time and their cross-sectional incidence are part of the cost of business
cycles, and the H accounts give a different picture of that incidence than do the P accounts. Labor supply
is more wage elastic in the H accounts than in the P accounts. Our Sections I-III therefore calculate the
H-P differences, and Section IV offers some interpretations of them, drawing heavily on the important
theoretical results of Ashenfelter, Becker, Heckman, and others.
I. Aggregate H Employment Rates
I.A House Structures in Our Data
To begin the analysis we adopt the CPS definition of household people living and eating
together.5 Figure 1’s dashed line shows that most prime-aged adults (aged 25-54) are married and living
4

Namely, taxable income is one of the main variables in the government budget constraint.
See Slemrod (1998) for a survey of studies of taxable income.
5

“A household consists of all the persons who occupy a house, an apartment, or other group
of rooms, or a room, which constitutes a housing unit. A group of rooms or a single room is regarded
as a housing unit when it is occupied as separate living quarters; that is, when the occupants do not
live and eat with any other person in the structure, and when there is direct access from the outside or
through a common hall. The count of households excludes persons living in group quarters, such as

Household Accounts - 4
with a spouse aged 16-65, even though that fraction has declined over time. The level and trend of this
series may be relevant for studying the labor market, because it suggests that a significant fraction of the
working-aged population shares resources with other working-aged people, or can share them.

Figure 1 Household Structures for Persons aged 25-54 (CPS)

Significant resource sharing may occur perhaps not only among husbands and wives, but also
among other adults living together. Figure 1’s solid line shows that almost 90% of adults aged 25-54 live
with another adult aged 16-65, although the other adult is sometimes not a spouse or family member.6
Perhaps Figure 1 reveals only the obvious – that few working-aged adults live alone – but this obvious
rooming houses, military barracks, and institutions. Inmates of institutions (mental hospitals, rest
homes, correctional institutions, etc.) are not included in the survey” (Census Bureau,
http://www.bls.census.gov/cps/ads/1995/sglosary.htm).
6

See also Juhn, Murphy, and Topel (1991, Table 7). A “family” is a group of two or more
persons related by marriage, birth or adoption (Census Bureau,
http://www.bls.census.gov/cps/ads/1995/sglosary.htm). For example, a husband and wife living with
their son and his wife would be considered two families in one household.

Household Accounts - 5
fact is the starting point of our argument, and its departure from much of the literature, that labor market
activity looks much different from the household perspective.
II.B. Household and Person Measures Compared
Let the H employment rate for year t be the fraction of persons aged 25-54 living in households
with at least one of its members aged 16-65 employed during year t, and the P employment rate the
fraction of persons aged 25-54 who were themselves employed. Figure 2 displays the 1967-97 H and
P employment rates as solid and dash-dot lines, respectively. We see that the H and P employment rates
have fluctuations that are qualitatively similar, but the P rates have larger fluctuations and a different
trend.

Figure 2 H and P employment rates (ages 25-54, including unmarried
persons; CPS)
As we show below, it is analytically convenient to look at husbands and wives only. Let the MH
employment rate for year t be the fraction of married couples, with husband aged 25-54, who supply
positive hours during year t. The MH rate differs from the H rate because: (a) it is calculated in a sample

Household Accounts - 6
of married households only, and (b) the labor supply of adults other than head or wife is not included in
the calculation. Whether the MH rate is weighted by households or persons is irrelevant because,
according to the CPS definitions, there is exactly one husband for every wife and vice versa. Of course,
limiting the analysis to husbands and wives has the potential disadvantage that husbands and wives are
not representative of the entire sample of men and women. The purpose of Figure 3 is to study how
restrictive a labor supply data set with only husbands and wives might be. Figure 3 graphs the MH and
H employment rates. The two employment rates have similar level, trend, and changes.

Figure 3 H and MH employment rates (CPS)

Household Accounts - 7
Figure 4 graphs P employment rates calculated separately for husbands and wives (since only
married people are sampled, we reference the series as “MP”). We see how the husband rate is trending
down, the wife rate up, and, since the wife trend is stronger, the MP rate for husbands and wives pooled
trends up. Concurrently with these various trends, the MH employment rate trends slightly down (see
also the additional detail in Figure 3). Also notice that the P and MP employment rates and their changes
are fairly similar whether all adults aged 25-54 are included as in Figure 2, or whether the sample is
restricted to husbands and wives as in Figure 4.

Figure 4 MH vs. MP employment rates (CPS)

The P employment rates fluctuate more than the H employment rates. Perhaps this suggests that
the business cycle is more of a person phenomenon than a household phenomenon, or that there is an
“added-worker effect.” We consider this possibility below, and compare our calculations to those in the
added-worker literature, but first we report more on the characteristics of nonemployed households.
I.C. Who Lives in a Prime-Aged NonEmployed Household?
Figure 3 shows how, in the prime-aged population, the household supplying zero labor during

Household Accounts - 8
a calendar year is a rarity. We believe that a sizeable majority of the few nonemployed households are
retired or have permanently left the labor force because of an age-related disability. Figure 5 shows how
most (65%) of the nonemployed households we observe in the PSID 1968-93 have head aged 40+, and
how the household’s rate transition out of nonemployment is quite low among the relatively old
households. In other words, a lot of prime-aged household nonemployment is age-related and permanent
labor force exit.7

Figure 5 Transitions of Married PSID Households Not Employed at (Age-1), by Age
The CPS has larger samples in any given year, permitting a more detailed decomposition of
nonemployed households, but it is harder to analyze transitions over time. We use the CPS Annual
Demographic Surveys 1996-2001 to create a matched sample of prime-aged husband-wife pairs
supplying zero labor in a calendar year 1995-2000. First of all, we find the MH nonemployment rate in

7

Another simple calculation illustrates this point: the nonemployment rate of households with
husband aged 25-40 is 0.7%, significantly less than the nonemployment rate of households with
husband aged 41-54.

Household Accounts - 9
the CPS to be essentially the same as in the PSID: 98%.8 Most (57%) of the men cite illness or disability
as their reason for not working during a calendar year. This reason is cited more for men aged 40+
(61%) than for men aged less than 40 (44%).9 Most of the women (61%) cite homemaking as their
reason for not working, although illness/disability is an important reason for women aged 40+ (33% of
those aged 40+). “Retirement” is the second most common reason (15%) for men, and third most
common (11%) for women. Only 8% of men and 2% of women in these households report inability to
find work as their reason for not working during the calendar year. Only 8% of these households, and
therefore only one-tenth of one percent of all married households, supplied zero labor because both
husband and wife reported inability to find work.
We also notice that 86% of nonemployed households have positive income during the year of
nonemployment, and this income includes retirement income only for a very small minority. The median
(mean) annual income of married households supplying zero labor during the calendar year is $13000
($19900). Husbands are high school dropouts in most of the nonemployed households, so it is interesting
to compare these nonemployed family incomes to the median (average) family income of $35000
($42000) for married households headed by employed high school dropout men.
The fact that MH nonemployment is closely associated with age and disability suggests that even
the nonemployed households have a work history. This is a very different characterization from that of
the P accounts, where it appears that many of the prime-aged nonemployed (which are typically women)
are not employed for their lifetime.10
I.D Person-Based Statistical Models of the Household Employment Rate
We might expect that the MH employment rate could be approximated as a function of these two
MP employment rates, but which function? In order to explore this question, consider the following
identity, where we denote household, personal, husband, and wife employment rates as EMH, EP, EM, and
8

88% of households are not employed at the time of the interview, which is in March of the
year following the year of nonemployment.
9

Since public and private disability benefits often depend on work history, the nonwork
option may not become attractive for many disabled until age 40 or so. These benefits have also been
most generous in the last decade or two, so our 1995-2000 CPS calculations are probably not
representative of the corresponding calculations (yet to be made) for the 1970's (we thank Mark
Duggan for these points).
10

Heckman and Willis (1979) present some evidence on this point, although Mincer and Ofek
(1979) take the contrary view that a lot of nonemployment by women is temporary.

Household Accounts - 10
EF, respectively:
MH

Et

' Et

M

F

M

F

M

M

% Et & Et Et & (1 & Et ) Et δt

where δt is the gap between the female year t employment rate among wives with working husbands and
that among wives with nonworking husbands.11 This identity relates MH employment rates to MP
employment rates, and becomes a model of the H account EMH if we specify a model for δt. One
prototypical H account model is “random” sorting of men and women – that is, δt = 0. A second model
is perfect positive sorting – that is, δt = EtF/EtM.12 Without seeing the H accounts, a third and perhaps
most plausible personal model of household employment would suppose that sorting on hours is the
same as sorting on other personal characteristics. For example, δt is 0.34 in our sample if we take the
personal characteristic to be “Having a college diploma.”13 Figure 6 displays measured EMH (solid line)
together with the EMH predicted by these three models.

11

δt is therefore the coefficient from the date t cross-family regression of wife employment on
husband employment. Our identity could equivalently written in terms of husband-wife correlations,
or husband wife-covariances, rather than the regression coefficient δ (δ is just the correlation
times

F

F

M

M

(1 & E t ) E t
(1 & E t ) E t

). We find δ to be a convenient means of thinking about husband-wife sorting,

because it is most easily compared across characteristics – even when some of those characteristics
are discrete (eg., employment) and others are continuous (eg., wages). Remember that, with discrete
variables, sorting can be perfect (eg., all working women have husbands working) but correlations of
the discrete variables imperfect.
The formula is derived from the assumption that EtF # EtM. If EtF > EtM, then the appropriate
formula for perfect positive sorting uses δt = (1-EtF)/(1-EtM).
12

13

In words, the female college degree rate is 34 percentage points higher among women
whose husbands have college degrees than among with whose husbands do not have the degree.

Household Accounts - 11

Figure 6 P-based Models of the MH Employment Rate (CPS)

Husbands and wives sort pretty strongly on so many characteristics – including age, schooling,
race, wages, and age. Hence, it is notable that the random sorting model of family employment (the long
dashed line in Figure 6) predicts actual family employment (the solid line) as well or better as the
imperfect positive sorting model we calibrated from measured sorting on college graduation (δt = 0.34,
dash-dot line). Or, to put it another way, δt = 0.15 fits the measured MH employment rate very well,
which means that sorting on employment is much weaker than sorting on college graduation. This
finding is not surprising from the point of view of household economics since there are at least three sets
of economic influences relevant for a person’s labor supply in such models, and all of them suggesting
that husband-wife employment or hours correlations should be no more than correlations for other
characteristics. First are the personal determinants of a person’s labor supply – such as age, schooling,
proximity to the job market, etc. If personal characteristics were the whole story, then employment or
hours would be correlated like other characteristics. But a second economic influence is that the hours
of one spouse to has a negative “income” effect on the hours of the other spouse (under the usual

Household Accounts - 12
assumption than nonwork time is a “normal good”), which by itself would lead to a negative husbandwife work hours correlation. Third, the second effect may be reinforced in many contexts where male
and female nonwork time are substitutable. Hence, employment and hours correlations are predicted to
be less than correlations of other characteristics. We return to husband-wife correlations in the hours
section of our paper, and in our section on applications of the H accounts of the labor market.
II. Aggregate MH Employment and Hours
Aggregate hours are the same in the H and P accounts, and the same in the MH and MP accounts,
but their decomposition into “employment” and “hours per employed” are different. Coleman’s (1984)
calculations for the P accounts are well cited. In his words, “in the annual data, hours vary significantly
less than the number of employees.” (p. 13, italics added). Coleman’s statement can be seen in the CPS,
as displayed in our Figures 7a and 7b (axes are scaled in proportion with the levels, so that a fluctuation
of an inch in the figure is roughly the same proportional fluctuation for either series), although less
dramatically than in his results since we use a household survey rather than an establishment survey.
Still, our figures make it clear that all of the trend, and more than half of the fluctuations, in aggregate
hours can be accounted for by hours per employed in the P and MP accounts.14

14

Although it has fewer observations, we use the PSID for hours-employment calculations
because the PSID questionnaire is designed to calculate hours worked in the year prior to the
interview (whereas the CPS asks only about usual weekly hours and weeks paid in the prior year).
Employment rates shown in Figures 7 and 8 (PSID) are therefore slightly different from those shown
in Figures 2-4, 6 (CPS).

Household Accounts - 13

Figure 7a Emp. Rates and Hours/Employed: P-Accounts (CPS)

Household Accounts - 14

Figure 7b Emp. Rates and Hours/Employed: MP-Accounts (CPS)

The picture is very different in the H accounts. Figures 8a and 8b show how essentially none of
the fluctuations in aggregate hours can be accounted for by the aggregate H or MH employment rates.
In other words, a lot of the hours fluctuations can be attributed to couples shifting to and from the
“traditional” and “dual-earner” categories – women supplying or not supplying hours in households
where the man works. From a H point of view, most labor supply changes are in the number of hours
supplied by the household, and very few are changes in whether or not the household supplies any hours
at all.

Household Accounts - 15

Figure 8a Emp. Rates and Hours/Employed: H-Accounts (CPS)

Figure 8b Emp. Rates and Hours/Employed: MH-Accounts (CPS)

Household Accounts - 16

III. Cross-sectional Hours Distributions in the MH accounts
Figure 9 has three panels, each with a histogram for a cross-section of hours measures. The first
is husband’s hours, the second wife’s hours, and the third household hours. The first two show the
familiar result that annual hours spike at 2000.15 We also see the familiar result of a spike at zero, mainly
for women. But the MH accounts give a very different picture (notice that the scale on the third panel
is 5 times smaller than the scale on the other two panels). There are spikes at 0, 2000, and 4000, but they
are less pronounced. The distribution of hours between 2000 and 4000 is fairly uniform.
Can the MH histogram be modeled from the MP histograms? Two prototypical models to
consider are perfect positive sorting of spouses on hours, and random sorting on hours. In the first
model, average hours for the pth centile of the husband distribution is summed with average hours for
the pth centile of the wife distribution in order to calculate average hours for the pth centile of the MH
distribution. In order to compute a histogram for the random model, we randomly pick a man from the
husbands, and woman from the wives, and create a “family” observation by adding their hours. These
histograms for these two models are graphed in the first two panels of Figure 10. The last panel graphs
the histogram for actual families. We see that the histogram from the data is almost identical to that from
the random model. One exception is the frequency of zero, a difference which we have already shown
in our comparison of MH and MP employment rates (compare the solid and long dashed lines in Figure
6). A smaller exception is the higher frequency of observed families supplying 4000 hours.

IV. Conclusion: A Little Aggregation Goes a Long Way
Our paper seeks a middle ground between two empirical approaches to studying labor supply.
The first is a macro approach, or a traditional labor economics approach, which considers large
aggregates of, say, women by city (e.g., Mincer 1962), or even all persons in the entire country (Lucas
and Rapping 1969, Prescott 2002), and thereby misses some of the important differences across persons
in tastes, etc., that may be correlated with wages, income, and other variables of interest. The second
approach is from modern labor economics (Heckman 1993, Blundell and MaCurdy 1999), using micro
data (without aggregating), explicitly accounting for heterogeneity and the discrete choice that seems
15

In our data, there are nearby spikes at 1920, 1960, 2040, and 2080, which are not
discernable in the figure.

Figure 9: MP and MH Annual Hours Histograms

Figure 10. Simulated and Measured MH Hours Histograms

fig10.max

Household Accounts - 17
important from the microeconomic perspective, but often leaving open some of the ultimately aggregate
questions that motivate labor supply study. Our proposal is to aggregate just a little: namely to average
the behavior within the household. Aggregating by household has some theoretical justification, because
household members are obviously sharing resources. Yet, it still permits analysis of a lot of the
heterogeneity (namely, the cross-household heterogeneity) that has been justly emphasized in modern
labor economics.
Calculating the H and P accounts is a step in this direction, and the main purpose of our paper.
We use this concluding section to offer three illustrations of how the accounts can influence modeling
the labor market. As our first illustration, we begin with Heckman’s (1993, p. 116) emphasis on the
important role of the “participation-hours dichotomy” in the legacy of labor supply research. In
particular, it is said that hours choices are more amenable to neoclassical marginal calculations, but
explain only a minority of aggregate trends and fluctuations. But our Figures 7 and 8 show that, from
the household point of view, essentially all trends and fluctuations are on the intensive margin. If we
view the primary household labor supply decision to be the number of hours supplied by the household,
and the identity of the person or persons supplying the hours as secondary, then we can indeed model
most trends and fluctuations using neoclassical marginal calculations.
Mulligan’s (2001) study suggests one practical consequence of our view. Namely, while personbased analyses of employment like Ben-Porath’s (1973, p. 702) predict that personal employment rates
must in theory increase with wage rates, a household analysis can predict that personal employment rates
decline with wages.16 Consider, for example, a decline in wages for all blacks. This has income and
substitution effects in opposite directions, but Ben-Porath’s analysis predicts that, holding constant the
other determinants of labor supply such as tastes and nonlabor income, the black personal employment
rate must decline because there is no income effect on persons not working. If households are typically
segregated by race, a household analysis predicts that the black household employment rate must decline
even though the income and substitution effects are in opposite directions, because the income effect
does not apply to the unemployed households. But the personal employment rate might increase, and
thereby contradict Ben-Porath’s prediction, because the nonworking persons are typically living with
working persons, and thereby feel some effect of the wage decline. For example, it might be that black
wage reductions lead some black men to exit employment and some black women to begin employment
with, from a chauvinistic personal point of view, the latter response deriving from the adverse income
16

Of course, a logic like Ben-Porath’s implies that household employment rates must increase
with wages.

Household Accounts - 18
effect of the wage reduction on black households. To put it another way, because so many adults live
with another adult, and household decisions are interrelated, the comparative static analyzed by Ben
Porath is of limited applicability because he assumes that the personal distribution of nonlabor income
– where nonlabor income includes by definition money transfers from other household members – is held
fixed in response to a wage change. The more interesting case from the household point of view has the
personal distribution of nonlabor income responding to wage changes with, for example, workers
transferring less to nonworkers in response to a wage reduction.17
Another practical consequence of modeling labor supply on the intensive margin by households,
rather than on the extensive margin by individuals, may be a different wage elasticity of labor aggregate
supply. Consider, for example, a pooled cross-section (1996-2001) regression of log family hours
worked on log average family hourly earnings (namely family earnings divided by family hours),
instrumenting log hourly earnings with family productivity characteristics.18 Table 1 displays the
estimated (uncompensated) wage elasticity in the first column: 0.267 (OLS s.e.= 0.005). Compare 0.267
with the wage elasticities estimated from individual level data, namely from a regression of log individual
hours worked on log individual hourly earnings, instrumenting with individual productivity
characteristics. The estimated wage elasticities are 0.182 for husbands, and 0.087 for wives (see
specifications (4) and (6) which, unlike specifications (1)-(3), necessarily exclude zero-hours
individuals). For the purposes of building models of labor market aggregates, it may well be better to
use the elasticities generated by the H accounts than by the P accounts.

17

This is essentially a cross-person version of Heckman’s (1978, p. 205) cross-time-period
(ie, life cycle) discussion of female labor force participation.
18

A “family characteristic” is the average of the husband’s characteristic with the wife’s.
Characteristics measured are years of schooling, experience, experience squared, race, region of
residence, and city size (the last two are necessarily identical for husband and wife).

Household Accounts - 19

Table 1: The Uncompensated Wage Elasticity of Labor Supply
(pooled CPS cross-sections 1996-2001)
husband+wife annual hours, log

individual annual hours, log
husband

regressor
log family
hourly wage

(1)

(2)

0.267
(0.005)

0.155
(0.005)

(3)

-0.038
(0.008)

log wife wage

0.315
(0.008)

observations

(5)

(6)

0.184
(0.005)

log husband
wage

dual earner
dummy

(4)

wife
(7)
-0.008
(0.011)

0.182
(0.004)
0.087
(0.010)

0.805
(0.018)
97,507

97,507

97,507

94,718

94,718

77,997

77,997

Notes: (1) standard errors in parenthesis. All regressions include year dummies.
(2) Husband hourly wages, wife hourly wages, and dual earner dummy are all predicted based on
husband and wife school years completed, experience, experience squared, race and region of
residence. Family wage is the average of the predicted wages for each spouse.
(3) Sample is 1996-2001 CPS husbands and wives from couples where both spouses are present
and aged 25-54, at least one spouse has earnings, and both spouses report demographic
characteristics.

We do not intend to say that 0.267 is the best conceivable wage elasticity estimate, because there
are many possible improvements on Table 1, such as using panel data, better instruments, better hours
measures, etc. Our point is that, among the many specification choices, an important one is whether to
aggregate individuals into households. Aggregating seems to increase the wage elasticity estimate from
roughly 0.15 to 0.27. Is this from aggregating (within family) wages on the RHS? or from aggregating
hours on the LHS? It comes from the aggregation of family hours, in particular the relation between
family wages and the propensity for dual earnership. We see this in specification (2) where we control
for dual earnership – so that the elasticity of 0.267 can be understood as an 0.155 hours effect conditional
on dual earnership plus an effect of family wage on the propensity for dual earnership.19 In other words,

19

As we see from the table, dual earnership is associated with 0.805 log points more hours. A
probit of dual earnership on log family wage and dummies for number of children shows that one log

Household Accounts - 20
family labor supply is an aggregate of two distinct behaviors, each getting roughly equal weight, so it
may be beneficial to study the aggregate directly rather than first decomposing the distinct behaviors for
separate study (and later reaggregating the results in order to predict aggregates).
The nature of the prime-aged employment “decision” is also different from the household point
of view. Heckman (1993), and many of those in the literature he surveys, characterize this decision
discretely, in terms of a person’s working or not working. But disability, and permanent labor force exit
after a history of work, seem to be the important factors for the majority of those very few households
not supplying any labor to the market. Rather than being a discrete decision, this may be a continuous
decision in terms of the fraction of lifetime to be employed, or perhaps not a labor supply decision at
all.20 To the extent that the middle case is the relevant one, the H accounts thereby revive Mincer’s
(1962) view – a view thought to be discredited by analysis of the personal accounts by Heckman and
Willis (1979) and others21 – that employment (namely, H employment) can be usefully modeled as a
continuous decision in terms of the fraction of lifetime to be employed. A little aggregation goes a long
way.

V. References
Ashenfelter, Orley and James Heckman. “The Estimation of Income and Substitution Effects in a Model
of Family Labor Supply.” Econometrica. 42(1), January 1974: 73-86.
Becker, Gary S. “A Theory of the Allocation of Time.” Economic Journal. 75(299), September 1965:
493-508.
Becker, Gary S. “Human Capital, Effort, and the Sexual Division of Labor.” Journal of Labor

point higher family wage is associated with 0.163 more probability of dual earnnership. 0.805 times
0.163 is 0.131, which is about the difference between the coefficients in specifications (1) and (2).
To see the limited effect of aggregating the LHS, consider specification (3) which enters
husband and wife wages separately.
20

21

ie, becoming disabled may just be bad luck.

Heckman and Willis (1979) estimate that a significant fraction of married women do not
work during their married life, while we estimate that “virtually all” married households supply a
significant number of hours to the labor market during their married life.

Household Accounts - 21
Economics. 3(1), Part 2, January 1985: S33-S58.
Ben-Porath, Yoram. “Labor-Force Participation Rates and the Supply of Labor.” Journal of Political
Economy. 81(3), May-June 1973: 697-704.
Blackburn, McKinley L. and David E. Bloom. “Changes in the Structure of Family Income Inequality
in the United States and Other Industrial Nations during the 1980s.” in Solomon W. Polachek,
ed. Research in Labor Economics. 14 (1995): 141-70.
Blundell, Richard W and MaCurdy, T.E. “Labor Supply: A Review of Alternative Approaches.” in
Orley Ashenfelter and David Card, eds., Handbook of Labor Economics. Volume 3A.. New
York: Elsevier Science, 1999: 1559-1695.
Bowen, William G. and T. Aldrich Finegan. The Economics of Labor Force Participation. Princeton,
NJ: Princeton University Press, 1969.
Cancian, Maria, Sheldon Danzinger, and Peter Gottschalk. “Working Wives and Family Income
Inequality among Married Couples.” in Sheldon Danzinger and Peter Gottschalk, eds. Uneven
Tides: Rising Inequality in America. New York: Russell Sage Foundation, 1993: 195-222.
Coleman, Thomas Sedgwick. “Essays on Aggregate Labor Market Business Cycle Fluctuations.” PhD
dissertation, University of Chicago, December 1984.
Costa, Dora L. and Matthew E. Kahn. “Power Couples: Changes in the Locational Choice of the College
Educated, 1940-1990.” Quarterly Journal of Economics. 115(4), November 2000: 1287-1315.
Daniel, Kermit. Does Marriage Make Workers More Productive? PhD Dissertation, University of
Chicago, August 1993.
Eissa, Nada and Jeffrey B. Liebman. “Labor Supply Response to the Earned Income Tax Credit.”
Quarterly Journal of Economics. 111(2), May 1996: 605-37.
Goldin, Claudia. Understanding the Gender Gap. New York: Oxford University Press, 1990.
Gruber, Jonathan and Julie Cullen. “Spousal Labor Supply As Insurance: Does Unemployment
Insurance Crowd Out the Added Worker Effect?” NBER wp 5608, June 1996.
Hall, Robert E. and Alvin Rabushka. The Flat Tax. 2nd edition. Stanford, CA: Hoover Institution
Press, 1995.
Hayghe, Howard V. “Family Members in the Work Force.” Monthly Labor Review. 113(3), March
1990; 14-19.
Heckman, James J. “A Partial Survey of Recent Research on the Labor Supply of Women.” American
Economic Review. 68(2), May 1978: 200-7.
Heckman, James J. “What has been Learned about Labor Supply in the Past Twenty Years?” American

Household Accounts - 22
Economic Review. 83(2), May 1993: 116-21.
Heckman, James J., and Thomas E. MaCurdy. “A Life Cycle Model of Female Labour Supply.” Review
of Economic Studies. January 1980, 47-74. also "Corrigendum on a Life Cycle Model of Female
Labour Supply." Review of Economic Studies, October 1982, 659-60.
Heckman, James J. and Robert J. Willis. “The Distribution of Lifetime Labor Force Participation of
Married Women: Reply to Mincer and Ofek.” Journal of Political Economy. 87(1), February
1979: 203-11.
Hoynes, Hilary Williamson. “Welfare Transfers in Two-Parent Families: Labor Supply and Welfare
Participation under AFDC-UP.” Econometrica. 64(2), March 1996: 295-332.
Johnson, William R. and Jonathan Skinner. “Labor Supply and Marital Separation.” American
Economic Review. 76(3), June 1986: 455-69.
Juhn, Chinhui, and Kevin M. Murphy. “Wage Inequality and Family Labor Supply.” Journal of Labor
Economics. 15(1), Part 1 January 1997: 72-97.
Juhn, Chinhui, Kevin M. Murphy, and Robert H. Topel. “Why Has the Natural Rate Increased over
Time?” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity. 2, 1991: 75-126.
Killingsworth, Mark R. Labor Supply. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1983.
Kim, Sookon. “Cross-Substitution between Husband and Wife as One of the Factors Determining
Married Woman's Labor Supply.” Journal of Economic Development. 2(1), July 1977: 131-45.
Lucas, Robert E., Jr. and Leonard A. Rapping. “Real Wages, Employment, and Inflation.” Journal of
Political Economy. 77(5), September 1969.
Lundberg, Shelly and Robert A. Pollak. “Bargaining and Distribution in Marriage.” Journal of
Economic Perspectives. 10(4), Fall 1996: 139-58.
Mincer, Jacob. “Labor Force Participation of Married Women: A Study of Labor Supply.” in H.G.
Lewis, ed. Aspects of Labor Economics. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1962.
Mincer, Jacob. “Labor Force Participation and Unemployment.” in A. Gordon and M. Gordon, eds.
Prosperity and Unemployment. New York: Wiley, 1966: 73-112.
Mincer, Jacob. Schooling, Experience, and Earnings. New York: Columbia University Press, 1974.
Mincer, Jacob and Haim Ofek. “The Distribution of Lifetime Labor Force Participation of Married
Women: Comment.” Journal of Political Economy. 87(1), February 1979: 197-201.
Mulligan, Casey B. “Aggregate Implications of Indivisible Labor.” Advances in Macroeconomics, 1(1),
Article 4, 2001.
Owen, John D. Working Hours. Lexington, MA: DC Heath and Company, 1979.

Household Accounts - 23
Prescott, Edward C. “Prosperity and Depression.” American Economic Review. 92(2), May 2002: 1-15.
Slemrod, Joel. “Methodological Issues in Measuring and Interpreting Taxable Income Elasticities.”
National Tax Journal. 51(4), December 1998: 773-88.
Smith, James P. “Family Labor Supply over the Life Cycle.” Explorations in Economic Research. 4(2),
Spring 1977: 205-76.
Smith, James P. “The Distribution of Family Earnings.” Journal of Political Economy. 87, October
1979: S162-192.
Smith, James P. and Michael P. Ward. “Time-Series Growth in the Female Labor Force.” Journal of
Labor Economics. 3(1), Part 2, January 1985: S59-S90.
Smith, James P. and Michael P. Ward. “Women in the Labor Market and in the Family.” Journal of
Economic Perspectives. 3(1), Winter 1989: 9-23.
Sweet, James A. Women in the Labor Force. New York: Seminar Press, 1973.
Tenn, Steven. “Three Essays on the Relationship Between Migration and Occupational Licensing.”
PhD Dissertation, University of Chicago, August 2001.
United States, Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census. “Married-Couple Families with Wives'
Earnings Greater Than Husbands' Earnings: 1981 to 1999.” Historical Income Tables – Families,
Table F-22, published October 2000 (http://www.census.gov/hhes/income/histinc/f22.html,
accessed July 5, 2001).
Waite, Linda J. “Does Marriage Matter?” Demography. 32(4), November 1995: 483-507.
Winkler, Anne E. “Earnings of Husbands and Wives in Dual-Earner Families.” Monthly Labor Review.
121(4), April 1998: 42-48.

