                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                              THE EXPANDING PHARMACEUTICAL
                               ARSENAL IN THE WAR ON CANCER

                                           Frank R. Lichtenberg

                                           Working Paper 10328
                                   http://www.nber.org/papers/w10328


                        NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                 1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                   Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       February 2004




The views expressed herein are those of the author and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

©2004 by Frank R. Lichtenberg. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Expanding Pharmaceutical Arsenal in the War on Cancer
Frank R. Lichtenberg
NBER Working Paper No. 10328
February 2004
JEL No. I12, J1, O33

                                            ABSTRACT

Only about one third of the approximately 80 drugs currently used to treat cancer had been approved

when the war on cancer was declared in 1971. We assess the contribution of pharmaceutical

innovation to the increase in cancer survival rates in a ““differences in differences”” framework, by

estimating models of cancer mortality rates using longitudinal, annual, cancer-site-level data based

on records of 2.1 million people diagnosed with cancer during the period 1975-1995. We control for

fixed cancer site effects, fixed year effects, incidence, stage distribution of diagnosed patients, mean

age at diagnosis, and surgery and radiation treatment rates.


Cancers for which the stock of drugs increased more rapidly tended to have greater increases in

survival rates. The increase in the stock of drugs accounted for about 50-60% of the increase in age-

adjusted survival rates in the first 6 years after diagnosis. New cancer drugs increased the life

expectancy of people diagnosed with cancer by about one year from 1975 to 1995. The estimated

cost to achieve the additional year of life per person diagnosed with cancer – below $3000 – is well

below recent estimates of the value of a statistical life-year. Since the lifetime risk of being

diagnosed with cancer is about 40%, the estimates imply that new cancer drugs accounted for 10.7%

of the overall increase in U.S. life expectancy at birth.

Frank R. Lichtenberg
Graduate School of Business
Columbia University
3022 Broadway, 614 Uris Hall
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
frank.lichtenberg@columbia.edu
                                                                                                                 3

         In 1971, President Nixon declared “war on cancer”, and the National Cancer Act
was enacted.1 Since that time, both government and industry have devoted enormous
resources to fighting this war. Today, it behooves us to ask, "Are we winning the war?"
         At first blush, the answer appears to be, “definitely not!”. As Figure 1
reveals, the age-adjusted U.S. mortality rate from all malignant cancers was
essentially the same in 2000 as it was in 1969. (It was 8% higher in 1991 than it was
in 1969.) During the same period, the age-adjusted mortality rate from all other
causes of death declined by 38%. Today, cancer is the leading cause of years of
potential life lost before age 75.2
         But the stagnancy of the cancer mortality rate is potentially misleading. This
mortality rate depends on two distinct factors: the probability of being diagnosed with
cancer, and cancer survival rates—the probability of not dying t years after being
diagnosed with cancer (t = 1, 2, …). As Figure 2 reveals, the cancer incidence rate—the
number of new cancer cases per 100,000 people—increased sharply from 1975-1979 to
1992. Although it declined after 1992, it was still 16% higher in 2000 than it was in
1975-1979. The long-run increase in cancer incidence is presumably primarily
attributable to the decline in mortality from other causes, particularly cardiovascular
disease. Medical advances for diseases other than cancer have reduced the risk of dying
from those diseases, and have thereby increased the risk of developing cancer.
According to the National Cancer Institute, in the year 2000 the lifetime risk of
developing cancer was about 40%.
         Although cancer incidence has increased, so has cancer survival.3 Figure 3
shows the five-year relative survival rate from all malignant cancers from 1975-1979 to
1995. The probability that a person diagnosed with cancer in 1975-1979 would not die


1
  Cancer Facts and the War on Cancer.
2
  http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/hus/tables/2003/03hus030.pdf In 1980, cancer caused less premature
mortality than heart disease. In 2001, cancer caused 35% more premature mortality than heart disease.
3
  Epidemiologists calculate two kinds of survival rates: observed and relative survival rates. The observed
survival rate represents the proportion of cancer patients surviving for a specified time interval after
diagnosis. Some of those not surviving died of the given cancer and some died of other causes. The
relative survival rate is calculated using a procedure (Ederer et al., 1961) whereby the observed survival
rate is adjusted for expected mortality. The relative survival rate approximates the likelihood that a patient
will not die from causes associated specifically with the given cancer before some specified time after
diagnosis. It is always larger than the observed survival rate for the same group of patients.
                                                                                                         4

from causes associated specifically with the given cancer within 5 years was 50.0%. For
a person diagnosed with cancer in 1995, that probability was 25% higher: 62.7%.
        Figure 4 summarizes the trends in cancer mortality, incidence, and survival. The
relative stability of the cancer mortality rate is the result of two offsetting trends: an
increase in the cancer incidence rate, and an increase in the relative survival rate (or a
decrease in the relative non-survival rate).
        This paper’s main objective is to assess the contribution of pharmaceutical
innovation to the increase in cancer survival rates. I estimate that only about one third of
the approximately 80 drugs currently used to treat cancer had been approved when the
war on cancer was declared. In other words, there has been a threefold increase in the
size of the cancer drug armamentarium4 in the last three decades.5
        I recognize, of course, that pharmaceutical innovation is just one of a number of
factors that may have contributed to the increase in cancer survival. Other potential
factors include: a changing mix of cancers over time; technological advances in
diagnostic procedures that led to earlier detection and diagnosis; and changes in non-
pharmaceutical cancer treatment (surgery and radiation). The available data will enable
me to control for these factors to a very great extent.
        The survival rate data shown in Figure 3 are for all cancers combined. The mix of
cancers changes over time as the incidence of some cancers increases and the incidence
of others decreases. Annual growth rates during the period 1950-2000 of the incidence of
various cancers are shown in Figure 5. Incidence of two cancers—lung and bronchus
(among females) and melanoma—increased more than 4% per year, while incidence of
stomach and cervix uteri cancer declined more than 2% per year. Moreover, there is
considerable variation in survival rates across cancers. As shown in Figure 6, in 1950,
seven cancers had 5-year relative survival rates above 50%, while seven had rates at or
below 10%.6 In principle, the increase in the survival rate for all cancers combined could
be partly due to an increase in the relative incidence of cancers with high (initial) survival

4
  The word armamentarium has two definitions: “(1) the equipment and methods used, especially in
medicine; and (2) matter available or utilized for an undertaking or field of activity.” http://www.m-
w.com/cgi-bin/dictionary?book=Dictionary&va=armamentarium
5
  The growth rate of the cumulative stock of approved cancer drugs has been greater than the growth rate of
the cumulative stock of drugs approved for other diseases.
6
  The 5-year relative survival rate for all cancers combined in 1950 was 35.0%.
                                                                                                             5

rates. In practice, this is not the case. As shown in Figure 7, there is essentially no
relationship across cancers between the survival rate in 1950-54 and the 1950-2000
growth rate of incidence.7
          Survival data, by cancer site, of the type shown in Figure 6 can be calculated for
different periods. Cancer site-specific survival data (for whites only) for 1950-54 and
1992-99 are shown in Table 1 and Figure 8. In the figure, note that every point lies above
the 45o line: for every cancer site, the 1992-99 survival rate was greater than the 1950-54
survival rate. However the percentage increase in the survival rate varied considerably
across cancer sites. For example, the 1950-54 survival rate for both brain and other
nervous system cancers and childhood cancers was about 20%, but the 1992-99 survival
rate was 32.1% for the former and 78.7% for the latter. Similarly, the survival rate for
colon cancer increased from 41% to 63%, while the survival rate from prostate cancer
increased from 43% to 98%. I hypothesize that these differential rates of progress are
partly attributable to different rates of pharmaceutical innovation for different types of
cancer.
          To test this hypothesis within a “differences in differences” framework, I will
estimate models of cancer mortality rates using longitudinal, annual, cancer-site-level
data based on large samples of people diagnosed with cancer during the period 1975-
1995. The explanatory variable of primary interest is the (lagged value of the)
cumulative number of cancer drugs approved to treat that cancer type. The following
covariates will be included in the model: fixed cancer site effects, fixed year effects,
incidence, stage distribution of diagnosed patients, mean age at diagnosis, percent of
patients having surgery, and percent of patients having radiation. Including these
variables is likely to control for the effect of technological advances in diagnostic
procedures. As noted in the SEER Cancer Statistics Review, “improved earlier detection
and diagnosis of cancers may produce an increase in both incidence rates and survival
rates.” To the extent that these improvements apply to all forms of cancer, their effects
are captured by the fixed year effects. Cancer-site-specific improvements in detection


7
 This confirms the observation that “while it is possible to adjust the survival rate for all cancers combined
on the basis of the relative frequency of each specific cancer in some specified reference period, rates
adjusted in this manner differ by only a small amount from unadjusted rates.” (SEER Cancer Statistics
Review, p. 13.)
                                                                                              6

and diagnosis are likely to lead to reductions in age at date of diagnosis and to increased
measured incidence.
       Figure 9 depicts the general model that we will estimate. Section I of the paper
describes the data that will be used to estimate the model. Section II describes the
econometric specification and procedure. Estimates of the model are presented in
Section III. Interpretation and implications of the estimates are considered in Section IV.
Section V contains a summary.


I. Data


       The National Cancer Act of 1971 mandated the collection, analysis, and
dissemination of data useful in the prevention, diagnosis, and treatment of cancer. This
mandate led to the establishment of the Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results
(SEER) Program of the National Cancer Institute (NCI). A continuing project of the NCI,
the population-based cancer registries participating in the SEER Program routinely
collect data on all cancers occurring in residents of the participating areas. Trends in
cancer incidence and patient survival in the U.S. are derived from this database. The
SEER Program is a sequel to two earlier NCI programs — the End Results Program and
the Third National Cancer Survey.
       The SEER Program is considered as the standard for quality among cancer
registries around the world. Quality control has been an integral part of SEER since its
inception. Every year, studies are conducted in the SEER areas to evaluate the quality and
completeness of the data being reported (SEER's standard for case ascertainment is 98
percent). In some studies, a sample of cases is reabstracted to evaluate the accuracy of
each of the data elements collected from the medical records. In other studies, targeted
information gathering is performed to address specific data quality needs. Computer edits
also are used by registries to ensure accurate and consistent data.
       The initial SEER reporting areas were the States of Connecticut, Iowa, New
Mexico, Utah, and Hawaii; the metropolitan areas of Detroit, Michigan, and San
Francisco-Oakland, California; and the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico. Case
ascertainment began with January 1, 1973, diagnoses. In 1974-1975, the program was
                                                                                             7

expanded to include the metropolitan area of New Orleans, Louisiana, the thirteen-county
Seattle-Puget Sound area in the State of Washington, and the metropolitan area of
Atlanta, Georgia. New Orleans participated in the program only through the 1977 data
collection year. In 1978, ten predominantly black rural counties in Georgia were added.
American Indian residents of Arizona were added in 1980. In 1983, four counties in New
Jersey were added with coverage retrospective to 1979. New Jersey and Puerto Rico
participated in the program until the end of the 1989 reporting year. The National Cancer
Institute also began funding a cancer registry that, with technical assistance from SEER,
collects information on cancer cases among Alaska Native populations residing in
Alaska. In 1992, the SEER Program was expanded to increase coverage of minority
populations, especially Hispanics, by adding Los Angeles County and four counties in the
San Jose-Monterey area south of San Francisco. In 2002, the SEER Program expanded
coverage to include Kentucky and Greater California (the counties of California that were
not already covered by SEER). Also in 2002, New Jersey and Louisiana became SEER
participants again. Figure 10 is a map of SEER cancer registries.
   Data from the 9 SEER geographic areas used in this study represent, respectively,
approximately 10 percent of the U.S. population. By the end of the 1999 diagnosis year,
the database contained information on over 3,200,000 cases diagnosed since 1973. Over
170,000 new cases are added annually.
   Data contained in the SEER Public Use File (PUF) enable us to characterize a group
of people diagnosed with a given type of cancer in a given year. They may be
characterized in terms of:
   •   Their future survival prospects
   •   The size of the group (incidence)
   •   Their age distribution
   •   Their distribution by extent/severity of illness (cancer stage distribution)
   •   Whether their initial treatment included surgery and/or radiation
   Future survival prospects. Each record in the SEER Public-Use File indicates
whether the person had died by the cutoff date for this file (December 31, 2000), and if
so, the date of death. This allows us to compute, for each cancer site and year of
diagnosis, the survival distribution function (SDF) and several closely related functions.
                                                                                                             8

The SDF evaluated at t is the probability that a member of the population will have a
lifetime exceeding t, that is S(t) = Prob(T > t), where S(t) denotes the survival function
and T is the lifetime of a randomly selected experimental unit. Some functions closely
related to the SDF are the cumulative distribution function (CDF), the probability density
function (PDF), and the hazard function. The CDF F(t) is defined as 1 – S(t) and is the
probability that a lifetime is smaller than t. The PDF denoted f(t) is defined as the
derivative of F(t), and the hazard function denoted h(t) is defined as f(t)/S(t). Hence h(t)
= -S’(t)/S(t), where S’(t) is the derivative of S(t). The hazard rate is the percentage
reduction in the survival rate.) Discrete time: h(t) = (S(t) – S(t+1))/S(t) Î S(t) = ∏j=0t-1
(1 – h(j)))
         To illustrate, Figure 11 shows estimates of the survival and hazard functions of
people diagnosed with all types of cancer in 1975.8 The 5-year survival rate was 45%,
and the 10-year survival rate was 34%. The hazard rate declines very sharply during the
first several years. The probability of dying, conditional on being alive at the beginning
of the year, is 31% in the first year, 15% in the second year, and 10% in the third year. It
declines much more slowly during the next five years, when it levels off at about 5%.
         We compute hazard functions of this type for each cancer site and year of
diagnosis.9 That is, we compute estimates of HAZARDi,t-k,t: the hazard rate from year t
to year t+1 of people diagnosed with cancer type i in year t-k (i = 1,…,30; t =
1975,…,2000; k=1,…,24). For example, suppose i = breast cancer, t = 1990, and k = 5.
Then HAZARDi,t-k,t = the probability that a woman diagnosed with breast cancer in 1985
died in 1990, conditional on surviving until the beginning of 1990. We also compute
standard errors of these estimates.
         Incidence. Incidence of cancer type i in year t can be estimated by simply
counting the number of cases in the SEER PUF. The incidence rate is the number of new
cases per year per 100,000 persons:
         INCIDENCEit = CASESit / POPt
Hence ln(INCIDENCEit) = ln(CASESit) – ln(POPt)

8
  These survival and hazard rates, like all others we will compute and analyze, are observed rather than
relative rates. However, the models we will estimate will include covariates (e.g. fixed diagnosis-year
effects and mean age at diagnosis) that presumably effectively adjust for changes in “expected mortality”.
9
  These are computed using the LIFETEST procedure (LIFETABLE method) in SAS.
                                                                                                        9


                             = ln(CASESit) + δt
where δt = – ln(POPt). Including ln(CASESit) and a set of diagnosis-year dummies (δt‘s)
therefore controls for site-specific changes in cancer incidence. As observed in the
National Cancer Institute’s SEER Cancer Statistics Review, 1975-2000, “the improved
earlier detection and diagnosis of cancers may produce an increase in both incidence
rates and survival rates.”10 Hence including ln(CASESit) and a set of diagnosis-year
dummies (δt‘s) in cancer survival or hazard models may control, to an important extent,
for the effects of changes (improvements) in cancer detection and diagnosis.
     Cancer stage. In addition to cancer site, each SEER record indicates cancer stage at
the time of diagnosis. There are four main cancer stage categories:11
     •   In situ (Stage 0)—A noninvasive neoplasm; a tumor which has not penetrated the
         basement membrane nor extended beyond the epithelial tissue. Some synonyms
         are intraepithelial (confined to epithelial tissue), noninvasive and noninfiltrating.
     •   Localized (Stage 1)—An invasive neoplasm confined entirely to the organ of
         origin. It may include intraluminal extension where specified. For example for
         colon, intraluminal extension limited to immediately contiguous segments of the
         large bowel is localized, if no lymph nodes are involved. Localized may exclude
         invasion of the serosa because of the poor survival of the patient once the serosa
         is invaded.
     •   Regional (Stage 2)—A neoplasm that has extended 1) beyond the limits of the
         organ of origin directly into surrounding organs or tissues; 2) into regional lymph
         nodes by way of the lymphatic system; or 3) by a combination of extension and
         regional lymph nodes.
     •   Distant (Stage 4)—A neoplasm that has spread to parts of the body remote from
         the primary tumor either by direct extension or by discontinuous metastasis (e.g.,
         implantation or seeding) to distant organs, issues, or via the lymphatic system to
         distant lymph nodes.

Survival rates of patients diagnosed in a given year are strongly inversely related to
cancer stage, e.g. patients with Stage 4 cancer have much lower survival rates than
patients with Stage 0 cancer. In principle, therefore, it might seem desirable to calculate
survival rates by site, diagnosis year, and stage, rather than merely by site and diagnosis
year. However due to a phenomenon known as stage migration, analysis of survival rates


10
  http://seer.cancer.gov/csr/1975_2000/results_merged/sect_01_overview.pdf
11
  There are two additional categories: Localized/Regional (Stage 8)—Only used for Prostate cases, and
Unstaged (Stage 9)—Information is not sufficient to assign a stage. All lymphomas and leukemias are
considered unstaged (code `9').
                                                                                                10

and other variables by site, diagnosis year, and stage is likely to lead to erroneous
inferences.
           The assignment of a given stage to a particular cancer may change over time due
to advances in diagnostic technology. Stage migration occurs when diagnostic procedures
change over time, resulting in an increase in the probability that a given cancer will be
diagnosed in a more advanced stage. For example, certain distant metastases that would
have been undetectable a few years ago can now be diagnosed by a computer tomography
(CT) scan or by magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). Therefore, some patients who would
have been diagnosed previously as having cancer in a localized or regional stage are now
diagnosed as having cancer in a distant stage. The likely result would be to remove the
worst survivors — those with previously undetected distant metastases — from the
localized and regional categories and put them into the distant category. As a result, the
stage-at-diagnosis distribution for a cancer may become less favorable over time, but the
survival rates for each stage may improve: the early stage will lose cases that will survive
shorter than those remaining in that category, while the advanced stage will gain cases
that will survive longer than those already in that category. However, overall survival
would not change (Feinstein et al., 1985). Stage migration is an important concept to
understand when examining temporal trends in survival by stage at diagnosis as well as
temporal trends in stage distributions; it could affect the analysis of virtually all solid
tumors.12
           Among people diagnosed with the same kind of cancer in the same year, those
with later stage cancer always have lower survival rates. But, as we will show below,
increases in the share of patients with later-stage cancer are not always associated with a
reduction in the survival rate of that group.
           Since stage migration is very likely to result in misleading statistics for cancer
survival by stage, we will measure survival by cancer site and diagnosis year, rather than
by cancer site, diagnosis year, and stage. However, we will control for the effect of
changes in the measured stage distribution by including stage distribution variables (e.g.,
the % of cases that are Stage 0 cases) as covariates.



12
     SEER Cancer Statistics Review 1973-1999 Overview, p. 12.
                                                                                             11

       Cancer treatment. The medical community recognizes three types of
conventional cancer treatment: surgery, radiation therapy, and drugs.
       Surgery. Surgery is often the first step in cancer treatment because it is used both
to diagnose and to treat cancer. Surgery alone sometimes cures cancer. Sometimes it is
used in conjunction with other treatments such as chemotherapy (cancer drugs) or
radiation therapy. More than half of the people diagnosed with cancer will have some
type of surgery or operation at some point. Surgery is used to remove tumors confined to
a small space. Surgery is also used to reduce the size of large tumors so that follow-up
treatment by radiation therapy or chemotherapy will be even more effective.
       From the SEER PUF, we can determine whether the patient’s "first course of
treatment" included surgery. The "first course of treatment" is either the planned course
of treatment stated in the medical record, or the standard treatment for that site and extent
of disease when there is no treatment plan in the chart. In general terms, first course of
treatment extends through the end of the planned treatment, or until there is evidence of
treatment failure (progression of disease), and the patient is switched to another type of
treatment.
       Radiation. Radiation therapy uses radiation (high-energy rays) to kill or shrink
tumor cells. It is used to treat some, but not all cancers. Radiation therapy destroys cells
either directly or by interfering with cell reproduction. Normal cells are able to recover
from radiation damage better than cancer cells. Used alone, radiation therapy can be
curative in many cases. It is also used in combination with other treatments/therapies
such as surgery. It might be used both to reduce the size of tumors before surgery and to
destroy any remaining cancer cells after surgery. Radiation therapy is also used with
many other conventional cancer treatments such as chemotherapy and hormone therapy.
When cure is not possible, radiation therapy can also help alleviate symptoms such as
pain, and improve quality of life for patients. From the SEER PUF, we can also
determine whether the patient’s "first course of treatment" included radiation.
       Chemotherapy. According to the SEER Program Code Manual, data on
chemotherapy, hormone therapy, and immunotherapy are collected in SEER. With
respect to chemotherapy, cancer registries are asked to “code any chemical [that] is
                                                                                                   12

administered to treat cancer tissue and which is not considered to achieve its effect
through change of the hormone balance.”
           Unfortunately, the SEER Public Use File does not contain any information about
chemotherapy. According to NCI staff, this is because chemotherapy is generally not
performed in an inpatient hospital setting—it is usually performed in an outpatient
hospital setting, in a physician’s office, or at home. Chemotherapy data collected by
SEER are rather incomplete, so SEER does not include the information on the public use
file.13 I therefore constructed a cancer-site-specific and year-specific chemotherapy
variable--the cumulative number of drugs approved to treat each type of cancer in each
year--by combining data from two sources.
           The first source is the Cancer Drug Manual produced by the British Columbia
Cancer Agency, Division of Pharmacy (de Lemos (2004)). The Professional Drug Index
contains monographs on 83 cancer drugs. The monographs were written, reviewed and
edited by pharmacists practicing in oncology settings, and have been reviewed by
oncologists and an oncology nurse clinician. Each monograph contains a section on the
uses of the drug. For example, according to the monographs, there are seven uses for
asparaginase (acute lymphocytic leukemia, acute myeloblastic leukemia, acute
myelomonocytic leukemia, chronic lymphocytic leukemia, Hodgkin's disease,
melanosarcoma, and non-Hodgkin's lymphoma), and four for dacarbazine (Hodgkin's
disease, malignant melanoma, neuroblastoma, and soft tissue sarcomas). Using the
information contained in all 83 monographs, I constructed a list of drugs used to treat
each kind of cancer. I determined, for example that the following 12 drugs are used
today to treat bladder cancer: bcg, carboplatin, cisplatin, doxorubicin, fluorouracil,
gemcitabine, interferon alfa, methotrexate, mitomycin, porfimer, thiotepa, and
vinblastine.
           I used a second data source—Mosby’s Drug Consult—to determine the year in
which the FDA approved each of these drugs.14 This enabled me to track the cumulative
number of drugs approved by the FDA for each cancer type for each year.



13
     E-mail communication from April Fritz, Manager, Data Quality, SEER Program, 8 January 2004.
14
     The list of cancer drugs, in order of year of FDA approval, is shown in Appendix Table 1.
                                                                                                       13

         As Figure 12 indicates, the rate of increase of the stock of drugs varies
considerably across cancer sites in a given period, and also across periods for a given
cancer site. For example, between 1969 and 2002, there was a 4.4-fold increase in the
stock of drugs for breast cancer, and an 8-fold increase in the stock of drugs for prostate
cancer. Also, the stock of drugs for colon and rectum cancer remained constant from
1974 to 1980, but then doubled from 1980 to 1982.


II. Econometric Model


         For each cancer site and year of diagnosis (1975-1995), I computed a hazard
function. For people diagnosed in 1975, the hazard function had 25 points—one for each
of the years 1-25 (the cutoff date for the SEER PUF is Dec. 31, 2000). For people
diagnosed in 1976, the hazard function had 24 points, and so forth. For people diagnosed
in 1995, the hazard function had just 5 points.
         I estimated a separate model of the hazard rate for each of the k years after
diagnosis (k = 1, 2,…, 25): a model of the first-year hazard rate, the second-year hazard
rate, etc. Each model was of the following form:
ln(HAZARDi,t-k,t) = αik + δtk + β1k ln(DRUG_STOCKi,t-3) + β2k ln(Ni,t-k)
         + β3k AGE_MEANi,t-k + β4k SURGERY%i,t-k + β5k RADIATION%i,t-k
         + θ0k STAGE0%i,t-k + θ1k STAGE1%i,t-k + θ2k STAGE2%i,t-k
         + θ4k STAGE4%i,t-k + θ8k STAGE8%i,t-k + εi,t-k,t                                (1)
where:
HAZARDi,t-k,t            = the hazard rate from year t to year t+1 of people diagnosed with
                         cancer type i in year t-k.15
DRUG_STOCKi,t-3          = the cumulative number of drugs approved by the end of year t-3
                         that are (currently) used to treat cancer type i.
Ni,t-k                   = the number of people diagnosed with cancer type i in year t-k.
AGE_MEANi,t-k            = the mean age of people diagnosed with cancer type i in year t-k.
SURGERY%i,t-k            = the fraction of people diagnosed with cancer type i in year t-k
                         whose initial treatment included surgery
RADIATION%i,t-k          = the fraction of people diagnosed with cancer type i in year t-k
                         whose initial treatment included radiation
15
  For example, suppose i = breast cancer, t = 1990, and k = 5. Then HAZARDi,t-k,t= the probability that a
woman diagnosed with breast cancer in 1985 died in 1990, conditional on surviving until the beginning of
1990.
                                                                                                         14

STAGE0%i,t-k              = the fraction of people diagnosed with cancer type i in year t-k
                          whose cancer was classified as stage 0 (in situ).
STAGE1%i,t-k              = the fraction of people diagnosed with cancer type i in year t-k
                          whose cancer was classified as stage 1 (localized)
STAGE2%i,t-k              = the fraction of people diagnosed with cancer type i in year t-k
                          whose cancer was classified as stage 2 (regional)
STAGE4%i,t-k              = the fraction of people diagnosed with cancer type i in year t-k
                          whose cancer was classified as stage 4 (distant)
STAGE8%i,t-k              = the fraction of people diagnosed with cancer type i in year t-k
                          whose cancer was classified as stage 8 (localized/regional-prostate
                          only)

     Table 2 presents some summary statistics, by year of diagnosis, from the SEER
Public Use File (PUF). There appear to be sharp breaks in several of the series between
1974 and 1975 and again between 1995 and 1996. We therefore restricted the sample to
include only the 2.1 million people diagnosed with cancer during the years 1975-1995.
         In eq. (1), the hazard rate in year t for patients diagnosed with cancer type i in
year t-k is a function of: fixed cancer-site effects, fixed diagnosis-year effects, the stock
of drugs approved to treat that type of cancer by the end of year t-3, cancer incidence,
mean age at diagnosis, extent of surgery and radiation,16 and cancer stage distribution.
Since the dependent variable is the logarithm of the hazard rate, we are, in effect,
estimating a proportional hazards model. Such a model assumes that changing an
explanatory variable has the effect of multiplying the hazard rate by a constant.
Introduced by D. R. Cox (1972),17 the proportional hazards model was developed in order
to estimate the effects of different covariates influencing the times-to-failure of a system,
and has been widely used in the biomedical field.
         We assume that the log of the hazard rate depends on the log of the lagged stock
of drugs. Eq. (1) may be considered a health production function, and production
functions are often assumed to be log-linear, consistent with the hypothesis of



16
   Ideally, we would like to measure the number (and importance) of surgical and radiological innovations,
analogous to the number of pharmaceutical innovations. Since the FDA does not regulate surgery and
radiology in the same way that it regulates drugs, this is not feasible. However changes in the frequency of
surgery, for example, may be highly correlated with surgical innovation. If there are more surgical
innovations for one cancer site than there are for another, one would expect a greater increase (or smaller
decline) in surgical treatment of the former site.
17
   See also Cox and Oakes (1984).
                                                                                             15

diminishing marginal productivity of inputs. For example, in his model of endogenous
technological change, Romer (1990) hypothesized the production function
           ln Y = (1-α) ln A + (1-α) ln L + α ln K,
where Y = output, A = the “stock of ideas”, L = labor used to produce output, K = capital,
and 0 < α < 1. The cumulative number of drugs approved (DRUG_STOCK) is
analogous to the stock of ideas.
           In principle, the hazard rate could depend on the number of drug classes, as well
as (or instead of), the number of drugs. For example, introducing a drug that is the first
in its class might have a greater impact on the hazard rate than introducing a drug that is
the fifth in its class. We will test for this by estimating versions of the model that include
the number of drug classes as well as the number of drugs.18
           Inclusion of fixed cancer-site and year effects means that we are comparing the
(percentage) changes in hazard rates of different cancer sites during the same period.
Estimates of β1k that are negative and significantly different from zero would signify that
there were above-average declines in the hazard rates of cancer sites with above-average
increases in the stock of drugs, ceteris paribus.
           Instead of modeling hazard rates, one could model survival rates. Since, by
definition, Ht = (St – St+1)/ St, where Ht denotes the hazard rate during period t and St
denotes the percent surviving until the beginning of period t,
           Sn = (1 – H1) * (1 – H2) * … * (1 – Hn-1)
The probability of surviving until the beginning of year n is the product of one minus the
hazard rate of years 1 through n-1.19 For example, the 10-year survival rate of patients
diagnosed in 1975 depends on their hazard rates during 1975-1984. Suppose a new drug
was approved in 1980. This would be expected to reduce hazard rates after 1980 (or even
later, due to diffusion lags, discussed below), but not before that date. For this reason, to
pinpoint the effect of new drug approvals, modeling annual hazard rates is more
appropriate than modeling multi-year survival rates.




18
     The distribution of drugs, by drug class, is shown in Appendix Table 2.
19
     This also implies that ln Sn = Σin-1 ln (1 – Hi) ≈ - Σin-1 Hi
                                                                                               16

            There is ample evidence that, after a new drug is approved, it takes a few years for
that drug to be widely utilized. This may be illustrated using the following data on the
U.S. sales ranks of two major (non-cancer) drugs approved during the 1990s.20

                     U.S. sales rank: Alendronate (Fosamax)
                                 Approved in 1995

                                                 Year
              1996       1997       1998         1999        2000     2001    2002
        0

       50                                                                      36
                                                                         44
                                                  55
                                     76                        67
     100
                         102
     150
               167
     200



                      U.S. sales rank: Atorvastatin (Lipitor)
                                Approved in 1996

                                                 Year
              1997         1998           1999          2000        2001      2002
       0
                                           3             2           2         2
     20                     8

     40
     60
               62
     80


It took at least 3 years for each of these drugs to attain its peak sales rank. It therefore
seems sensible to hypothesize a lag of about three years in the impact of the stock of
approved drugs on the hazard rate. I estimated the model with alternative assumed lags
(1 to 4 years). Assuming a 3-year lag yielded the best fit. These are the estimates I will
report in the next section.


20
     Source: NDC Health, as reported on http://www.rxlist.com/top200.htm.
                                                                                               17


III. Estimates


       Estimates of eq. (1), by number of years after diagnosis (1,2,…,8) , are reported in
Table 3. All equations included 30 cancer-site fixed effects and year fixed effects. The
hazard models for the first six years (after diagnosis) were estimated using data on people
diagnosed during 1975-1995, and included fixed effects for each of those years. Starting
seven years after diagnosis, the sample period was reduced by one year for each year
after diagnosis. For example, the year-7 hazard model was estimated using data on
people diagnosed during 1975-1994 (due to censoring of the data after 12/31/2000).
All equations were estimated by weighted least squares, weighting by the reciprocal of
the estimated variance of the hazard rate.
       The estimates shown in lines 1-10 are of the first-year hazard model, i.e. the
hazard rate in the first year after diagnosis. The estimate of the coefficient on the lagged
drug-stock is negative and highly statistically significant (line 1). This indicates that
cancers for which the stock of drugs increased more rapidly tended to have larger
declines in the first-year hazard rate (and larger increases in the one-year survival rate).
During the period 1975-1995, the incidence-weighted mean increase in
ln(DRUG_STOCKi,t-3) was 1.31. (The stock of drugs increased 3.7-fold.) This implies
that the 1975-1995 increase in the stock of drugs reduced the first-year hazard rate by
about 22% (= .167 * 1.31). As shown in Figure 11, in 1975, the first-year hazard rate
was 30.6%. Hence, we estimate that the 1975-1995 increase in the stock of drugs
reduced the first-year hazard rate from 30.6% to 23.9%.
       We consider next the coefficients on the other regressors in the first-year hazard
model. The coefficient on ln(Ni,t-k) is negative and highly significant (line 2), indicating
that cancers with the highest growth of SEER incidence had the greatest declines in the
first-year hazard rate. This may reflect the fact that cancers with the highest growth of
SEER incidence had the greatest improvements in early detection and diagnosis. As the
NCI observes, “The improved earlier detection and diagnosis of cancers may produce an
increase in both incidence rates and survival rates. These increases can occur as a result
of the introduction of a new procedure to screen subgroups of the population for a
specific cancer; they need not be related to whether use of the screening test results in a
                                                                                                           18

decrease in mortality from that cancer. As the proportion of cancers detected at screening
increases, presumably as a result of increased screening of the population, patient
survival rates will increase, because they are based on survival time after diagnosis.”
           Not surprisingly, the coefficient on AGE_MEANi,t-k is positive and highly
significant (line 3): cancers with larger increases in mean age at diagnosis had smaller
reductions in first-year hazard rates.21
           The coefficient on SURGERY%i,t-k is negative and highly significant (line 4).
This indicates that cancers with greater increases in the probability of surgical treatment
had greater reductions in the first-year hazard rate. However, the coefficient on
RADIATION%i,t-k is not significantly different from zero (line 5).
           The last estimates to consider in the first-year hazard model are the coefficients
on the stage-distribution variables (lines 6-10). As one might expect, the stage 4
coefficient is larger than the stage 2 coefficient, which is larger than the stage 1
coefficient. This indicates that a shift to later stages increases the first-year hazard rate.
However the stage 1 coefficient is smaller than the stage 0 coefficient. This indicates that
a shift from stage 0 (in situ) cancers to stage 1 (localized) cancers is associated with a
reduction in the hazard rate. This is presumably due to differential rates of stage
migration for different types of cancers.
           Estimates of the second-year hazard model are shown in lines 12-21. In most
respects, this set is qualitatively similar to the first-year set. Once again, the estimate of
the coefficient on the lagged drug-stock is negative and highly statistically significant
(line 12). The only notable difference from the first-year estimates is that the coefficient
on RADIATION%i,t-k is now positive and significant (line 16). This indicates that
cancers with greater increases in the probability of radiation treatment had smaller
reductions in the second-year hazard rate.
           In the third-year hazard model estimates (lines 23-32), the coefficient on the
lagged drug-stock is negative and similar in magnitude to the coefficients in the first two
years, but is only marginally significant (p-value = 0.08). As in the estimates for the
previous two years, the hazard rate increases with respect to age at diagnosis, and
declines with respect to incidence and surgical intervention. The radiation variable is

21
     What is surprising, however, is that mean age at diagnosis increased from 61.4 in 1975 to 62.7 in 1995.
                                                                                               19

insignificant, and the stage-distribution coefficients (for stages 0-4) have their expected,
monotonic profile.
        In the fourth-year hazard model estimates (lines 34-43), the coefficient on the
lagged drug-stock is positive and its magnitude is large (0.48), which is inconsistent with
our hypothesis. However, the mean hazard rate in year 4 is substantially lower than it is
in previous years, and we will show below that this large positive effect offsets only a
small part of the negative effects of the drug stock on the hazard rates in years 1-3.
        The remainder of Table 3 shows estimates of the hazard model in years 5-8. To
summarize, in the first eight years, the coefficient on the drug stock is negative three
times as often as it is positive, and it is negative and significant twice as often as it is
positive and significant. Moreover, the coefficient on the drug stock is negative in the
first three years (and significant in the first two), when the hazard rate is highest.
        We estimated models that included the log of the number of drug classes in year t-
3, as well as the log of the number of drugs in year t-3. In general, the coefficient on the
drug-class variable was far from statistically significant, and inclusion of this variable
had virtually no effect on the estimates of β1k. This suggests that the introduction of a
first-in-class drug does not increase cancer survival more than the introduction of
subsequent drugs within the class (over and above the general effect of diminishing
marginal productivity).


IV. Interpretation and Implications of Estimates


        We can use the estimates of the drug-stock coefficients for all years (years 1-23)
to assess the effect of new drug introductions on the entire cancer survival distribution
function and on life expectancy at time of diagnosis. We begin with the vector of 1975
hazard rates shown in Figure 11. These reflect the prevailing conditions at that time: the
distribution of cancers by site and stage, average age of patients diagnosed, percent of
patients receiving surgery and radiation, etc. They also reflect the drugs that were
available at that time.
                                                                                                        20

        We then use our estimates to “predict” hazard rates in 1995, given the drugs
available in 1995, if all other conditions had remained the same as they had been in 1973.
The predicted k-year hazard rate (HAZ_PREk) is computed as follows:
        HAZ_PREk = HAZ_ACTk * (1 + β1k ∆ln(DRUG_STOCKt-3))
where HAZ_ACTk is the actual 1975 k-year hazard rate and ∆ln(DRUG_STOCKt-3) is
the 1975-1995 change in the incidence-weighted mean of ln(DRUG_STOCKi,t-3). As
noted above, this is equal to 1.31. Hence
        HAZ_PREk = HAZ_ACTk * (1 + (1.31* β1k)).
        From the vectors of actual and predicted hazard rates, we can compute vectors of
actual and predicted survival rates:
        SURV_ACTn = (1 – HAZ_ACT1) * (1 – HAZ_ACT2) * … * (1 – HAZ_ACTn-1)
        SURV_PREn = (1 – HAZ_PRE1) * (1 – HAZ_PRE2) * … * (1 – HAZ_PREn-1)
        These calculations are shown in Table 4. Columns 1-4 show the estimates of β1k
for k =1,2,…,24. Actual 1975 hazard rates (HAZ_ACTk) are shown in column 5.
Predicted 1975 hazard rates (computed as HAZ_PREk = HAZ_ACTk * (1 + (1.31* β1k)))
are shown in column 6. Actual and predicted 1975 survival rates are shown in columns 7
and 8. Actual 1995 survival rates for years 1-7 are shown in column 9. The three vectors
of survival rates are plotted in Figure 13.
        Our estimates imply that, ceteris paribus—holding constant the cancer site- and
stage-distribution, cancer incidence, mean age at diagnosis, and the probability of surgery
and radiation—the 1975-1995 increase in the stock of drugs increased the 1-year cancer
survival rate from 69.4% to 76.1%, the 5-year cancer survival rate from 45.5% to 51.3%,
and the 10-year cancer survival rate from 34.2% to 38.1%.
        From these figures, it appears that the increase in the stock of drugs accounted for
a very large percentage of the actual increase in survival rates between 1975 and 1995.
For example, the difference between 1-year predicted and actual 1975 survival rates
(76.1% - 69.4%) is 91% of the actual increase in 1-year survival rates (76.7% - 69.4%).
But these are crude survival rates, not age-adjusted rates.22 The mean age of people
diagnosed with cancer increased during the sample period. As a result, the age-adjusted

22
  Since we include mean age as a covariate in eq. (1), βk is an estimate of the effect of the drug stock on
the age-adjusted hazard rate.
                                                                                           21

survival rate increased more than the crude survival rate. Using methods similar to those
described above, we can “predict” what the 1975 survival function would have been if
mean age in 1975 had been the same as it was in 1995. These are the calculations for
years 1-6:
 Year                                  1975 survival rate if mean 1995 survival rate
                 1975 survival rate    age same as in 1995
             0               100.0%                         100.0%          100.0%
             1                 69.4%                         66.4%           76.7%
             2                 59.2%                         55.9%           67.9%
             3                 53.2%                         50.0%           62.6%
             4                 49.0%                         45.8%           58.6%
             5                 45.5%                         42.5%           55.2%
             6                 42.5%                         39.8%           51.8%

Consequently, the increase in the stock of drugs accounted for a smaller percentage of the
age-adjusted increase in survival rates than it did of the crude increase:
                % of increase in crude        % of increase in age-adjusted
              survival rate accounted for     survival rate accounted for by
  Year       by increase in stock of drugs      increase in stock of drugs
   1                      91%                              65%
   2                      92%                              66%
   3                      88%                              66%
   4                      47%                              35%
   5                      60%                              46%
   6                      74%                              57%

         Although the surgical treatment rate (SURGERY%) had a significant negative
effect on hazard rates in a number of years, there was very little change in the overall
surgical treatment rate during the sample period—it was actually slightly lower in 1995
(62.6%) than it was in 1975 (63.4%). Hence, our estimates imply that changes in the
surgical treatment rate had a negligible impact on cancer survival rates during this period.
The radiation treatment rate also remained almost constant (at about 27%); its impact on
cancer survival rates also appears to have been negligible.
         The vectors of actual and predicted survival rates allow us to compute actual and
predicted values of life expectancy at time of diagnosis:
         LE_ACT = Σk = 0 (k + 0.5) * (SURV_ACTk - SURV_ACTk+1)
                                                                                             22


           LE_PRE = Σk = 0 (k + 0.5) * (SURV_PREk - SURV_PREk+1)
Since the cutoff date for the SEER PUF is 12/31/2000, for people diagnosed in 1975, the
data are right-censored at 25 years. About 17.5% of people diagnosed in 1975 were alive
at the cutoff date. For these people, we need to make an assumption about remaining life
expectancy, and this assumption will affect the levels of LE_ACT and LE_PRE.
However, because SURV_PRE25 is virtually equal to SURV_ACT25, this assumption will
not affect the difference LE_PRE - LE_ACT. Estimated values of LE_PRE, LE_ACT,
and their difference, under three alternative assumptions about the longevity (from time
of diagnosis) of people surviving past the cutoff date (L’) are as follows:
 L'        LE_ACT LE_PRE difference
      27.5    9.13  10.15           1.02
      30.0    9.56  10.59           1.03
      35.0   10.44  11.47           1.03

If we assume that people diagnosed in 1975 who are alive at the end of 2000 die in 2005
(30 years after diagnosis), then the actual life expectancy of all people diagnosed in 1975
was 9.56 years, and their predicted life expectancy (had they had access to the 1995 stock
of drugs) was 10.59 years. In this sense, the 1975-1995 increase in the lagged stock of
drugs made the life expectancy of people diagnosed with cancer in 1995 just over a year
greater than the life expectancy of people diagnosed with cancer in 1975.
           In a previous study (Lichtenberg (2003)), I estimated the effect of launches of
new drugs for all diseases on the longevity of the entire populations of 52 countries
(including the U.S.) during the period 1986-2000. The methodology used in that study
differed from the one used here: the dependent variable was a measure of the age
distribution of deaths, rather than the hazard rate of people previously diagnosed.23
Although the sample and methodology were quite different, the estimated contribution of
pharmaceutical innovation to longevity increase was very similar to the one calculated
above. Before I estimated that the average annual increase in life expectancy of the entire
population resulting from new chemical entity launches is .056 years, or 2.93 weeks.
Now I estimate that the average annual increase in life expectancy of Americans



23
     27% of the deaths occurring in that sample were caused by cancer.
                                                                                             23

 diagnosed with cancer resulting from new chemical entity launches is .051 years, or 2.67
 weeks.
          According to the National Cancer Institute, the lifetime risk of being diagnosed
 with cancer is about 40%. This implies that the 1975-1995 increase in the lagged stock
 of cancer drugs increased the life expectancy of the entire U.S. population by 0.4 years (=
 40% * 1.03 years). Between 1975 and 1995, U.S. life expectancy at birth increased by
 3.8 years, from 72.3 years to 76.1 years.24 Thus, new cancer drugs accounted for 10.7%
 of the overall increase in life expectancy at birth.
          How much did it cost to achieve this additional year of life per person diagnosed
 with cancer? To determine this cost (c), I will estimate the average amount spent on
 cancer drugs by a cancer patient from time of diagnosis until death, using the following
 formula:
        total drug                                        ÷      1995    ×       mean life
       expenditure           cancer drug expenditure            cancer         expectancy at
c=       in 1995         ×    total drug expenditure          prevalence     time of diagnosis

 According to the Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services, Americans spent $60.8
 billion on prescription drugs in 1995.25 We have two different estimates of the share of
 cancer drug expenditure in total drug expenditure. According to the Census Bureau,
 “specific antineoplastic agents” accounted for 1.3% of the value of 1995 shipments of
 pharmaceutical preparations (except biologicals). According to IMS Health, cytostatic
 drugs accounted for 3.6% of total U.S. drug sales in 2002.26 Hence total cancer drug
 expenditure during 1995 was presumably between $803 million (= 1.3% * $60.8 billion)
 and $2194 million (= 3.6% * $60.8 billion). According to the NCI, cancer prevalence
 was 8.0 million in 1995. Hence average 1995 expenditure on cancer drugs per cancer
 patient was in the range $100-$274. As discussed above, estimated life expectancy of
 people diagnosed with cancer in 1995 is about 10.6 years. Hence, average
 (undiscounted) cancer drug expenditure per cancer patient from diagnosis till death is in
 the range $1064-$2907. The cost per life-year gained is in the $1040-$2842 range.



 24
    Arias and Smith (2003), Table 11.
 25
    http://cms.hhs.gov/statistics/nhe/historical/t2.asp
 26
    http://open.imshealth.com/download/oct2002.pdf
                                                                                             24

        This is far below recent estimates of the value of a statistical life-year. Murphy
and Topel (2003) and Nordhaus (2003) estimate that this value is in the neighborhood of
$150,000. Moreover, since drug expenditures calculated above include expenditures on
old as well as new drugs, this range represents an upper bound on the cost per life-year
gained. Data from the Medical Expenditure Panel Survey suggest that, in general, new
drugs—drugs approved within the previous 15-20 years—account for about half of total
drug expenditure. If this applied to cancer drugs, we should divide the cost per life-year
estimates by two. However, given the rapid increase in the number of cancer drugs, new
cancer drugs may account for more than half of total cancer drug expenditure.
        We have examined the effect of new cancer drugs on the life expectancy, or
number of remaining life-years, of cancer patients at time of diagnosis. Ideally, we
would like to measure the effect on the number of quality-adjusted life-years. Health
economists generally postulate a quality-of-life index (QOL) that ranges between 1
(corresponding to perfect health) and 0 (corresponding to death). The number of quality-
adjusted life-years (QALYs) is the number of years multiplied by the average value of the
quality-of-life index during those years. For example, 10 years lived at mean QOL=0.7
equals 7 QALYs. Unfortunately, SEER does not collect any data on the quality of life of
cancer survivors, so calculating the impact of new cancer drugs on the number of QALYs
is not feasible.
        While new cancer drugs appear to have increased the longevity of cancer
survivors by about a year, QOL in that additional year is likely to have been much less
than 1. However, it is also plausible that, in addition to delaying death, new cancer drugs
increased the quality of life of people at a given number of years after diagnosis. If this is
the case, the increase in QALYS is not necessarily less than the increase in life
expectancy.
        This is illustrated by Figure 14. Suppose that new cancer drugs shifted the time-
QOL profile from the curve labeled ‘1975’ to the curve labeled ‘1995’. This shift reflects
the estimated increase in life expectancy, from 9.56 years to 10.59 years. The increase in
life-years is equal to the sum of areas A and B. This is significantly larger than area A
alone—the QOL-adjusted value of the additional 1.03 years. But we hypothesize that
new drugs also increased average QOL from year 0 to year 9.56. The increase in QALYs
                                                                                             25

during that period is measured by area C. Clearly A < (A + B), but (A + C) is not
necessarily smaller than (A + B). Whether it is depends on the relative magnitudes of B
and C: average QOL in the marginal years versus QOL improvement in the inframarginal
years.
         One might suppose that increasing the longevity of cancer patients will inevitably
result in an increase in medical expenditure on them. But Lubitz et al (2003) found that
although elderly persons in better health had a longer life expectancy than those in poorer
health, they had similar cumulative health care expenditures until death.


V. Summary


         The age-adjusted U.S. mortality rate from all malignant cancers was essentially
the same in 2000 as it was in 1969. During the same period, the age-adjusted mortality
rate from all other causes of death declined by 38%. This suggests that the war on cancer
has been a failure. However, the relative stability of the cancer mortality rate is the result
of two offsetting trends: an increase in the cancer incidence rate, and an increase in the
relative survival rate. The five-year relative survival rate from all malignant cancers
increased from 50.0% in 1975-1979 to 62.7% in 1995. This increase is not due to a
favorable shift in the distribution of cancers.
         A variety of factors, including technological advances in diagnostic procedures
that led to earlier detection and diagnosis, have probably contributed to this increase.
This paper’s main objective has been to assess the contribution of pharmaceutical
innovation to the increase in cancer survival rates. Only about one third of the
approximately 80 drugs currently used to treat cancer had been approved when the war
on cancer was declared in 1971. In other words, there has been a threefold increase in the
size of the cancer drug armamentarium in the last three decades.
         The percentage increase in the survival rate varied considerably across cancer
sites. For example, the survival rate for colon cancer increased from 41% to 63%, while
the survival rate from prostate cancer increased from 43% to 98%. We hypothesized that
these differential rates of progress were partly attributable to different rates of
pharmaceutical innovation for different types of cancer. The rate of increase of the stock
                                                                                              26

of drugs also varied considerably across cancer sites in a given period, and also across
periods for a given cancer site. For example, between 1969 and 2002, there was a 4.4-
fold increase in the stock of drugs for breast cancer, and an 8-fold increase in the stock of
drugs for prostate cancer. Also, the stock of drugs for colon and rectum cancer remained
constant from 1974 to 1980, but then doubled from 1980 to 1982.
       We tested this hypothesis within a “differences in differences” framework, by
estimating models of cancer mortality rates using longitudinal, annual, cancer-site-level
data based on records of 2.1 million people diagnosed with cancer during the period
1975-1995. The explanatory variable of primary interest was the (lagged value of the)
cumulative number of cancer drugs approved to treat that cancer type. The following
covariates were also included in the model: fixed cancer site effects, fixed year effects,
incidence, stage distribution of diagnosed patients, mean age at diagnosis, percent of
patients having surgery, and percent of patients having radiation. Including these
variables is likely to control for the effect of technological advances in diagnostic
procedures.
       We argued that estimation of hazard-rate models was better suited to our purposes
than estimation of survival-rate models, and we estimated separate hazard models for
each of the years following diagnosis. Overall, the estimates indicated that cancers for
which the stock of drugs increased more rapidly tended to have larger reductions in
hazard rates. In hazard-rate models for the first eight years after diagnosis, the coefficient
on the drug stock was negative three times as often as it was positive, and it was negative
and significant twice as often as it was positive and significant. Moreover, the
coefficient on the drug stock was negative in the first three years (and significant in the
first two), when the hazard rate is highest. The estimates provided no support for the
hypothesis that the introduction of a first-in-class drug increases cancer survival more
than the introduction of subsequent drugs within the class.
       We used the estimates of the drug-stock coefficients to assess the effect of new
drug introductions on the cancer survival distribution function and on life expectancy at
time of diagnosis. The estimates implied that, ceteris paribus—holding constant the
cancer site- and stage-distribution, cancer incidence, mean age at diagnosis, and the
probability of surgery and radiation—the 1975-1995 increase in the stock of drugs
                                                                                             27

increased the 1-year crude cancer survival rate from 69.4% to 76.1%, the 5-year rate from
45.5% to 51.3%, and the 10-year rate from 34.2% to 38.1%. The increase in the stock of
drugs accounted for about 50-60% of the increase in age-adjusted survival rates in the
first 6 years after diagnosis.
        Although the surgical treatment rate had a significant negative effect on hazard
rates in a number of years, there was very little change in the overall surgical treatment
rate during the sample period. Hence, our estimates imply that changes in the surgical
treatment rate (and in the radiation treatment rate) had a negligible impact on cancer
survival rates during this period.
        We also estimated that the 1975-1995 increase in the lagged stock of drugs made
the life expectancy of people diagnosed with cancer in 1995 just over a year greater than
the life expectancy of people diagnosed with cancer in 1975. This figure increased from
about 9.6 to 10.6 years. This is very similar to the estimate of the contribution of
pharmaceutical innovation to longevity increase I obtained in an earlier study, although
that study was based on a very different sample (all diseases in 52 countries) and
methodology.
        Since the lifetime risk of being diagnosed with cancer is about 40%, the estimates
imply that the 1975-1995 increase in the lagged stock of cancer drugs increased the life
expectancy of the entire U.S. population by 0.4 years, and that new cancer drugs
accounted for 10.7% of the overall increase in U.S. life expectancy at birth.
        The estimated cost to achieve the additional year of life per person diagnosed with
cancer is well below recent estimates of the value of a statistical life-year. The average
amount spent on (new and old) cancer drugs by a cancer patient from time of diagnosis
until death in 1995 was apparently below $3000. Previous authors estimate that the value
of a statistical U.S. life-year is in the neighborhood of $150,000.
        Ideally, we would have measured the effect of new cancer drugs on the number of
quality-adjusted life-years (QALYs), but we were unable to do so due to lack of data.
While new cancer drugs appear to have increased the longevity of cancer survivors by
about a year, quality of life in that additional year is likely to have been much less than 1.
However, if new cancer drugs increased the quality of life of people as well as delayed
                                                                                       28

their death, the increase in QALYS is not necessarily less than the increase in life
expectancy.
                                                                                        29


                                        References

Arias E, and Smith BL. (2003), Deaths: Preliminary Data for 2001. National vital
statistics reports; vol. 51, no. 5. Hyattsville, Maryland: National Center for Health
Statistics, http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/nvsr/nvsr51/nvsr51_05.pdf

Cox, D.R (1972), “Regression Models and Life Tables (with Discussion),” Journal of the
Royal Statistical Society, B34, 187-220.

Cox, D.R and Oakes, D (1984), Analysis of Survival Data, Chapman and Hall, London.

de Lemos, ML, ed. B.C. Cancer Agency Cancer Drug Manual. (Vancouver, British
Columbia: B.C. Cancer Agency). http://www.bccancer.bc.ca/

Ederer F, Axtell LM, Cutler SJ. (1961), “The relative survival rate: A statistical
methodology,” J Natl Cancer Inst Monogr 6, pp. 101-121.

Feinstein AR, Sosin DM, Wells CK (1985), “The Will Rogers phenomenon: Stage
migration and new diagnostic techniques as a source of misleading statistics for survival
of cancer,” New England Journal of Medicine 312, pp.1604-1608.

Lichtenberg, Frank (2003), “The impact of new drug launches on longevity: evidence
from longitudinal disease-level data from 52 countries, 1982-2001,” NBER Working
Paper No. 9754, June, http://www.nber.org/papers/w9754

Lubitz, James, Liming Cai, Ellen Kramarow, and Harold Lentzner (2003), “Health, Life
Expectancy, and Health Care Spending among the Elderly,” New England Journal of
Medicine 349 (11), pp. 1048-1055, September 11.

Mosby (2004), Mosby's Drug Consult 2004, 14th Edition,
http://www.mosbysdrugconsult.com/

Murphy, Kevin M., and Robert H. Topel (2003) “The Economic Value of Medical
Research,” in Measuring the Gains from Medical Research: An Economic Approach,
edited by Kevin M. Murphy and Robert H. Topel (Chicago: University of Chicago Press).

Nordhaus, William (2003) “The Health of Nations: The Contribution of Improved Health
to Living Standards,” in Measuring the Gains from Medical Research: An Economic
Approach, edited by Kevin M. Murphy and Robert H. Topel (Chicago: University of
Chicago Press).

Romer, Paul (1990), “Endogenous technical change," Journal of Political Economy 98,
S71-S102.

SEER Cancer Statistics Review, 1975-2000,
http://seer.cancer.gov/csr/1975_2000/sections.html
                               Figure 1
       U.S. Mortality Age-Adjusted Rates, Total U.S., 1969-2000
                          (Index: 1969=1.00)
1.20




1.10




1.00




0.90

                                             All Malignant Cancers
                                             All OtherCauses of Death
0.80




0.70




0.60
   69
   70
   71
   72
   73
   74
   75
   76
   77
   78
   79
   80
   81
   82
   83
   84
   85
   86
   87
   88
   89
   90
   91
   92
   93
   94
   95
   96
   97
   98
   99
   00
 19
 19
 19
 19
 19
 19
 19
 19
 19
 19
 19
 19
 19
 19
 19
 19
 19
 19
 19
 19
 19
 19
 19
 19
 19
 19
 19
 19
 19
 19
 19
 20
                                    Year
                               Figure 2
                        Cancer incidence rate:
        Number of new cancer cases per year per 100,000 persons

520




500




480




460




440




420




400
 1975   1980             1985              1990             1995   2000
                                        Figure 3
                              5-year relative survival rate

64%



62%



60%



58%



56%



54%



52%



50%
  1976   1978   1980   1982      1984      1986      1988     1990   1992   1994   1996
                                       Figure 4
                   Trends in cancer mortality, incidence, and survival
                                 (Indices: 1975=1.00)


1.20



1.10



1.00



0.90

          U.S. Mortality Age-Adjusted Rates, Total U.S.,

          SEER Incidence Age-Adjusted Rates, 9 Registries
0.80
          5-year relative non-survival rate


0.70
   1975             1980                           1985         1990     1995
                                                      Year
-3%   -2%        -1%                    0%   1%     2%         3%          4%           5%

            Lung and Bronchus--Females
                             Melanoma

                                Prostate
                Non-Hodgkin lymphoma

                      Liver and Intrahep

                Kidney and Renal pelvis

                                  Testis
                                 Thyroid

                               Myeloma

                        Breast (females)

              Lung and Bronchus--Males
                Brain and Other nervous
                                 Urinary

                 Childhood (0-14 years)
                             Esophagus

                                  Colon
                                  Ovary
                                                               Figure 5
                              Leukemia
                                                  Growth rate of incidence, 1950-2000
                              Pancreas

                                 Larynx

                     Hodgkin lymphoma
                Corpus and Uterus, NOS
                                Rectum

                 Oral cavity and Pharynx

                               Stomach

                             Cervix uteri
                           0%   10%   20%   30%    40%      50%      60%       70%      80%     90%

                    Thyroid
    Corpus and Uterus, NOS
            Breast (females)
                Cervix uteri
                      Testis
                     Urinary
                     Larynx
                 Melanoma
     Oral cavity and Pharynx
                   Prostate
                      Colon
                    Rectum
    Kidney and Renal pelvis
    Non-Hodgkin lymphoma
                      Ovary
         Hodgkin lymphoma
    Brain and Other nervous
     Childhood (0-14 years)
                   Stomach
                  Leukemia
                                                                 Figure 6
Lung and Bronchus--Females
                                              5-year relative survival rate, 1950-54 (whites)
                   Myeloma
  Lung and Bronchus--Males
                 Esophagus
          Liver and Intrahep
                  Pancreas
                                                                                          Figure 7
                                                               Relationship between initial survival rate and incidence growth

                                            5.0%



                                            4.0%
Incidence growth rate, 1950-2000 (whites)




                                            3.0%



                                            2.0%



                                            1.0%



                                            0.0%
                                                0.0%   10.0%      20.0%      30.0%          40.0%         50.0%          60.0%   70.0%   80.0%   90.0%

                                            -1.0%



                                            -2.0%



                                            -3.0%
                                                                               5-year relative survival rate, 1950-54 (whites)
                                                                                             Figure 8
                                                                                Survival rates, 1992-99 vs. 1950-54

                                                  100%


                                                  90%
5-year relative survival rate, 1992-99 (whites)




                                                  80%


                                                  70%


                                                  60%


                                                  50%


                                                  40%


                                                  30%


                                                  20%


                                                  10%

                                                              45o
                                                   0%
                                                         0%         10%   20%    30%       40%        50%        60%        70%    80%   90%   100%
                                                                                 5-year relative survival rate, 1950-54 (whites)
                               Figure 9
                   Model of hazard and survival rates



Pharmaceutical treatment

  Surgical treatment

  Radiation treatment

   Age at diagnosis                        Hazard and survival rates
    Cancer site
    Cancer stage
  Year of diagnosis

     Incidence
                                             Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results Program, 2003
SEER Cancer Statistics Review 1975-2000




                                                              National Cancer Institute
                                                                       U.S.A
                                          Seattle/
                                          Puget Sound




                                                                                        Detroit
                                                                                                            Connecticut
                                          San Francisco/                     Iowa
                                          Oakland
                                                            Utah




                                                                                                                          Figure I-1
                                          San Jose/
                                          Monterey

                                                 Los                New
                                                 Angeles            Mexico
                                                                                         Atlanta
National Cancer Institute




                                             Alaska        Hawaii
                                                                                            http://seer.cancer.gov
                               Figure 11
 Survival and hazard functions of people diagnosed with cancer in 1975


             Survival function of people diagnosed with cancer in 1975


120%

100%

80%

60%

40%

20%

 0%
        0       3        6        9       12       15      18       21     24
                                  Years since diagnosis



             Hazard function of people diagnosed with cancer in 1975

35%

30%

25%

20%

15%

10%

 5%

 0%
       0.5     3.5      6.5      9.5     12.5     15.5     18.5     21.5   24.5
                                  Years since diagnosis
                                                     Figure 12
                     Log change since 1969 in stock of drugs approved for selected cancer sites
2.50

                         Colon and Rectum
                         Breast
                         Lung and Bronchus
2.00                     Prostate
                         Non-Hodgkin's lymphoma




1.50




1.00




0.50




0.00
       1969   1972       1975       1978     1981     1984     1987      1990     1993      1996   1999   2002
                                             Figure 13
                              Actual vs. predicted survival functions

120%



100%



80%



60%



40%


               1975 survival function
20%
               1975 survival function adjusted for 1975-1995 increase in drug stock

               1995 survival function
 0%
       0   1           2           3           4           5            6             7   8   9
                                          Years since diagnosis
                                        Figure 14
                  Hypothetical effect on new drugs on time-QOL profile


quality of life

1


                                      1995

                                                       B
                                     C

                        1975



                                                       A



    0                                           9.56       10.59 years since diagnosis
                                      Table 1
5-year relative survival rates, by primary cancer site, 1950-54 and 1992-99


                                        5-year relative survival    5-year relative survival rate,
Primary Site                            rate, 1950-54 (whites)      1992-99 (whites)
All                                                          35.0%                         64.4%
Oral cavity and Pharynx                                      46.0%                         59.7%
Esophagus                                                      4.0%                        15.4%
Stomach                                                      12.0%                         21.4%
Colon and Rectum                                             37.0%                         63.0%
 Colon                                                       41.0%                         63.0%
 Rectum                                                      40.0%                         63.0%
Liver and Intrahep                                             1.0%                          6.8%
Pancreas                                                       1.0%                          4.4%
Larynx                                                       52.0%                         66.6%
Lung and Bronchus                                              6.0%                        15.1%
 Lung and Bronchus--Males                                      5.0%                        13.4%
 Lung and Bronchus--Females                                    9.0%                        17.2%
Melanoma                                                     49.0%                         89.8%
Breast (females)                                             60.0%                         87.9%
Cervix uteri                                                 59.0%                         72.9%
Corpus and Uterus, NOS                                       72.0%                         86.3%
Ovary                                                        30.0%                         52.4%
Prostate                                                     43.0%                         98.4%
Testis                                                       57.0%                         95.8%
Urinary                                                      53.0%                         82.6%
Kidney and Renal pelvis                                      34.0%                         62.9%
Brain and Other nervous system                               21.0%                         32.1%
Thyroid                                                      80.0%                         96.1%
Hodgkin lymphoma                                             30.0%                         85.0%
Non-Hodgkin lymphoma                                         33.0%                         57.2%
Myeloma                                                        6.0%                        30.9%
Leukemia                                                     10.0%                         47.6%
Childhood (0-14 years)                                       20.0%                         78.7%


http://seer.cancer.gov/csr/1975_2000/results_single/sect_01_table.03.pdf
                                                  Table 2


                                                  Table 2
                                Summary statistics from SEER Public Use File


          number      mean
year of   of people   age at surgery     radiation
diagnos   diagnose    diagno treatment treatment
is        d           sis      rate      rate      stage0% stage1% stage2% stage4% stage8% stage9%
   1973      55,382       61.4     55.1%     33.2%     7.1%   26.2%   17.9%   19.8%    4.7%   24.3%
   1974      67,297       61.5     59.0%     31.2%     7.6%   29.3%   20.0%   20.7%    5.1%   17.4%
   1975      73,608       61.4     63.4%     27.0%     8.5%   29.5%   19.2%   20.4%    5.5%   16.8%
   1976      75,617       61.5     63.4%     26.4%     8.3%   29.4%   20.1%   20.6%    5.8%   15.8%
   1977      76,591       61.8     63.3%     26.2%     7.9%   29.1%   21.0%   20.7%    6.2%   15.1%
   1978      77,890       62.0     63.3%     26.5%     7.7%   29.6%   21.1%   21.2%    6.1%   14.4%
   1979      80,126       62.3     63.4%     26.7%     7.5%   29.6%   21.3%   21.1%    6.6%   13.9%
   1980      82,694       62.6     63.2%     26.3%     7.3%   29.4%   21.1%   21.3%    6.7%   14.0%
   1981      85,364       62.7     63.6%     26.2%     7.3%   29.4%   21.4%   20.9%    6.8%   14.2%
   1982      86,577       62.8     63.4%     26.3%     7.3%   29.0%   21.2%   21.3%    6.9%   14.5%
   1983      89,724       63.0     63.7%     26.4%     7.6%   29.0%   23.0%   22.0%    6.6%   11.9%
   1984      93,224       63.0     63.3%     26.4%     7.8%   28.9%   22.7%   22.0%    6.4%   12.3%
   1985      97,498       62.9     64.5%     26.7%     8.5%   29.5%   22.0%   21.3%    6.5%   12.2%
   1986    100,078        62.9     64.3%     26.1%     8.9%   29.9%   21.3%   20.4%    6.7%   12.8%
   1987    105,871        63.2     64.4%     26.4%     9.2%   29.6%   20.7%   20.1%    7.6%   12.8%
   1988    107,403        63.0     64.3%     26.2%     9.7%   29.7%   20.3%   20.1%    7.7%   12.4%
   1989    110,185        63.0     63.7%     26.0%     9.9%   29.1%   19.8%   20.1%    8.2%   13.0%
   1990    116,033        63.0     64.2%     26.3%    10.4%   28.7%   19.4%   19.3%    9.4%   12.8%
   1991    123,115        63.2     63.5%     27.2%    10.4%   27.6%   18.2%   18.7%   11.7%   13.4%
   1992    127,775        63.3     62.1%     27.9%    10.4%   27.5%   18.0%   17.8%   13.4%   12.9%
   1993    125,917        63.1     61.6%     27.6%    10.7%   28.2%   18.2%   17.8%   12.4%   12.7%
   1994    125,715        62.9     62.1%     27.4%    11.0%   29.3%   18.8%   17.7%   11.5%   11.7%
   1995    127,069        62.7     62.6%     27.5%    11.8%   29.7%   18.5%   17.7%   11.3%   10.9%
   1996    121,258        64.7     61.1%     30.0%     6.1%   32.1%   19.9%   18.8%   12.2%   11.0%
   1997    125,352        64.8     61.3%     30.5%     6.4%   31.9%   19.9%   18.7%   12.5%   10.6%
   1998    128,279        64.9     62.6%     31.7%     7.0%   32.2%   20.3%   18.3%   12.3%    9.8%
   1999    129,930        64.8     62.8%     31.3%     7.2%   31.9%   20.4%   17.9%   13.4%    9.2%
   2000    129,053        64.5     63.1%     30.9%     7.4%   32.3%   20.5%   18.1%   13.8%    7.9%




                                                   Page 1
                                              Table 3
                                         Estimates of eq. (1)
line   Years after diagnosis   Regressor                 Estimate   Std. Error   t Value   Pr > |t|
1                1             ln(DRUG_STOCKi,t-3)        -0.167      0.044       -3.78    0.0002
2                1             ln(Ni,t-k)                 -0.328      0.048       -6.88    <.0001
3                1             AGE_MEANi,t-k               0.075      0.006       13.35    <.0001
4                1             SURGERY%i,t-k              -1.494      0.213       -7.02    <.0001
5                1             RADIATION%i,t-k             0.071      0.104        0.69    0.4921
6                1             STAGE0%i,t-k               -1.381      0.389       -3.55    0.0004
7                1             STAGE1%i,t-k               -2.820      0.199      -14.16    <.0001
8                1             STAGE2%i,t-k               -1.935      0.266       -7.27    <.0001
9                1             STAGE4%i,t-k                2.855      0.236       12.11    <.0001
10               1             STAGE8%i,t-k               -1.658      0.419       -3.96    <.0001
11
12              2              ln(DRUG_STOCKi,t-3)        -0.156      0.049       -3.16    0.0016
13              2              ln(Ni,t-k)                 -0.249      0.055       -4.50    <.0001
14              2              AGE_MEANi,t-k               0.057      0.006        8.89    <.0001
15              2              SURGERY%i,t-k              -1.145      0.241       -4.75    <.0001
16              2              RADIATION%i,t-k             0.410      0.104        3.95    <.0001
17              2              STAGE0%i,t-k               -1.221      0.412       -2.96    0.0032
18              2              STAGE1%i,t-k               -2.740      0.215      -12.75    <.0001
19              2              STAGE2%i,t-k               -1.362      0.274       -4.97    <.0001
20              2              STAGE4%i,t-k                2.562      0.253       10.14    <.0001
21              2              STAGE8%i,t-k               -1.350      0.499       -2.70    0.0071
22
23              3              ln(DRUG_STOCKi,t-3)        -0.129      0.074      -1.73      0.084
24              3              ln(Ni,t-k)                 -0.391      0.073      -5.36     <.0001
25              3              AGE_MEANi,t-k               0.040      0.009       4.65     <.0001
26              3              SURGERY%i,t-k              -1.092      0.321      -3.40     0.0007
27              3              RADIATION%i,t-k             0.160      0.132       1.21     0.2257
28              3              STAGE0%i,t-k               -3.170      0.515      -6.15     <.0001
29              3              STAGE1%i,t-k               -2.517      0.267      -9.41     <.0001
30              3              STAGE2%i,t-k               -2.215      0.337      -6.56     <.0001
31              3              STAGE4%i,t-k                2.436      0.312       7.80     <.0001
32              3              STAGE8%i,t-k               -2.581      0.704      -3.67     0.0003
33
34              4              ln(DRUG_STOCKi,t-3)         0.484      0.132       3.66     0.0003
35              4              ln(Ni,t-k)                 -0.276      0.128      -2.15      0.032
36              4              AGE_MEANi,t-k               0.034      0.015       2.30     0.0217
37              4              SURGERY%i,t-k               0.408      0.572       0.71     0.4763
38              4              RADIATION%i,t-k             0.678      0.237       2.86     0.0044
39              4              STAGE0%i,t-k               -1.247      0.906      -1.38     0.1693
40              4              STAGE1%i,t-k               -4.328      0.454      -9.53     <.0001
41              4              STAGE2%i,t-k               -1.336      0.584      -2.29     0.0227
42              4              STAGE4%i,t-k                4.043      0.532       7.60     <.0001
43              4              STAGE8%i,t-k                1.222      1.300       0.94     0.3477
                                         Table 3 (continued)
                                         Estimates of eq. (1)
line   Years after diagnosis   Regressor                 Estimate   Std. Error   t Value   Pr > |t|
44               5             ln(DRUG_STOCKi,t-3)        -0.323      0.098       -3.30     0.001
45               5             ln(Ni,t-k)                 -0.010      0.098       -0.10    0.9221
46               5             AGE_MEANi,t-k               0.013      0.011        1.23    0.2174
47               5             SURGERY%i,t-k               0.454      0.430        1.06    0.2913
48               5             RADIATION%i,t-k             0.090      0.173        0.52    0.6026
49               5             STAGE0%i,t-k                1.256      0.679        1.85    0.0648
50               5             STAGE1%i,t-k               -1.213      0.347       -3.50    0.0005
51               5             STAGE2%i,t-k                1.302      0.437        2.98     0.003
52               5             STAGE4%i,t-k               -0.011      0.419       -0.03    0.9791
53               5             STAGE8%i,t-k               -1.867      1.030       -1.81    0.0706
54
55              6              ln(DRUG_STOCKi,t-3)        -0.327      0.120      -2.73     0.0066
56              6              ln(Ni,t-k)                  0.024      0.118       0.20     0.8377
57              6              AGE_MEANi,t-k              -0.006      0.013      -0.43     0.6664
58              6              SURGERY%i,t-k               0.573      0.514       1.11     0.2654
59              6              RADIATION%i,t-k            -0.360      0.211      -1.71     0.0882
60              6              STAGE0%i,t-k               -4.545      0.843      -5.39     <.0001
61              6              STAGE1%i,t-k               -1.840      0.400      -4.60     <.0001
62              6              STAGE2%i,t-k               -1.877      0.549      -3.42     0.0007
63              6              STAGE4%i,t-k                1.454      0.489       2.97     0.0031
64              6              STAGE8%i,t-k               -3.811      1.338      -2.85     0.0046
65
66              7              ln(DRUG_STOCKi,t-3)         0.385      0.134       2.88     0.0042
67              7              ln(Ni,t-k)                 -0.325      0.139      -2.33     0.0203
68              7              AGE_MEANi,t-k               0.078      0.015       5.09     <.0001
69              7              SURGERY%i,t-k              -0.628      0.590      -1.06     0.2879
70              7              RADIATION%i,t-k             0.786      0.247       3.18     0.0015
71              7              STAGE0%i,t-k                2.080      0.971       2.14     0.0327
72              7              STAGE1%i,t-k               -0.295      0.446      -0.66      0.509
73              7              STAGE2%i,t-k                2.131      0.576       3.70     0.0002
74              7              STAGE4%i,t-k               -0.708      0.546      -1.30     0.1951
75              7              STAGE8%i,t-k               -2.602      2.023      -1.29      0.199
76
77              8              ln(DRUG_STOCKi,t-3)        -0.179      0.193      -0.93     0.3551
78              8              ln(Ni,t-k)                 -0.456      0.172      -2.66     0.0082
79              8              AGE_MEANi,t-k               0.038      0.020       1.90     0.0575
80              8              SURGERY%i,t-k              -1.613      0.707      -2.28     0.0229
81              8              RADIATION%i,t-k            -0.709      0.319      -2.22     0.0269
82              8              STAGE0%i,t-k                2.593      1.198       2.16      0.031
83              8              STAGE1%i,t-k               -0.441      0.509      -0.87      0.386
84              8              STAGE2%i,t-k                1.069      0.701       1.52      0.128
85              8              STAGE4%i,t-k               -0.339      0.629      -0.54     0.5908
86              8              STAGE8%i,t-k               -2.679      2.994      -0.89     0.3713
                                                      Table 4
                                   Actual vs. predicted hazard and survival rates

Column    1        2       3      4          5             6              7         8              9



Year      βk     Error   t Value Pr > |t| HAZ_ACT HAZ_PRE SURV_ACT SURV_PRE                 1995 SURV_ACT


0                                                                         100.0%    100.0%             100.0%
1        -0.167   0.044    -3.78 2E-04       30.6%         23.9%           69.4%     76.1%              76.7%
2        -0.156   0.049    -3.16 0.002       14.7%         11.7%           59.2%     67.2%              67.9%
3        -0.129   0.074    -1.73 0.084       10.1%          8.4%           53.2%     61.5%              62.6%
4         0.484   0.132     3.66 3E-04        8.0%         13.1%           49.0%     53.5%              58.6%
5        -0.323   0.098    -3.30 0.001        7.1%          4.1%           45.5%     51.3%              55.2%
6        -0.327   0.120    -2.73 0.007        6.5%          3.7%           42.5%     49.4%              51.8%
7         0.385   0.134     2.88 0.004        5.6%          8.4%           40.1%     45.2%
8        -0.179   0.193    -0.93 0.355        5.3%          4.0%           38.0%     43.4%
9         0.247   0.191     1.29 0.197        5.0%          6.6%           36.1%     40.6%
10        0.098   0.187     0.53 0.599        5.3%          5.9%           34.2%     38.1%
11       -0.709   0.240    -2.96 0.003        4.7%          0.3%           32.6%     38.0%
12       -0.467   0.247    -1.89 0.059        4.7%          1.8%           31.1%     37.3%
13        0.436   0.240     1.82  0.07        4.5%          7.1%           29.7%     34.7%
14        0.084   0.236     0.36 0.723        4.4%          4.9%           28.4%     33.0%
15       -0.088   0.318    -0.28 0.782        4.6%          4.1%           27.1%     31.6%
16       -0.567   0.358    -1.58 0.115        4.6%          1.2%           25.8%     31.2%
17        0.095   0.320     0.30 0.766        4.5%          5.0%           24.7%     29.7%
18        0.984   0.327     3.01 0.003        4.3%          9.9%           23.6%     26.7%
19        0.943   0.483     1.95 0.053        4.4%          9.9%           22.5%     24.1%
20        1.114   0.517     2.16 0.033        4.5%         11.2%           21.5%     21.4%
21       -0.344   0.534    -0.64 0.522        5.0%          2.7%           20.4%     20.8%
22        0.112   0.587     0.19 0.849        4.6%          5.3%           19.5%     19.7%
23       -1.306   1.076    -1.21  0.23        5.4%         -3.8%           18.4%     20.5%
24        1.290   0.613     2.10 0.046        5.3%         14.3%
                                             Appendix Table 1
              Drugs listed in British Columbia Cancer Drug Manual, by year of FDA approval

FDA
approval
year          drug                              FDA approval year    drug
before 1938   ASPARAGINASE                      1987                 MITOXANTRONE
before 1938   BCG                               1988                 IFOSFAMIDE
1949          MECHLORETHAMINE                   1988                 MESNA
1953          METHOTREXATE                      1988                 OCTREOTIDE
1954          BUSULFAN                          1989                 CARBOPLATIN
1955          DIETHYLSTILBESTROL                1989                 FLUTAMIDE
1955          FLUDROCORTISONE                   1989                 GOSERELIN
1958          FLUOXYMESTERONE                   1990                 IDARUBICIN
1959          CYCLOPHOSPHAMIDE                  1990                 LEVAMISOLE
1959          THIOTEPA                          1991                 FLUDARABINE
1961          VINBLASTINE                       1991                 PAMIDRONATE
1962          FLUOROURACIL                      1991                 PENTOSTATIN
1962          MEDROXYPROGESTERONE               1992                 PACLITAXEL
1963          MERCAPTOPURINE                    1992                 TENIPOSIDE
1964          DACTINOMYCIN                      1993                 CLADRIBINE
1966          THIOGUANINE                       1994                 TAMOXIFEN
1967          HYDROXYUREA                       1994                 VINORELBINE
1969          CHLORAMBUCIL                      1995                 ANASTROZOLE
1969          CYTARABINE                        1995                 BICALUTAMIDE
1969          PROCARBAZINE                      1995                 DAUNORUBICIN
1970          MELPHALAN                         1995                 PORFIMER
1970          MITOTANE                          1996                 DOCETAXEL
1970          PLICAMYCIN                        1996                 GEMCITABINE
1971          TRETINOIN                         1996                 IRINOTECAN
1973          BLEOMYCIN                         1996                 NILUTAMIDE
1974          DOXORUBICIN                       1996                 TOPOTECAN
1974          LEUCOVORIN                        1997                 LETROZOLE
1975          DACARBAZINE                       1997                 RITUXIMAB
1976          LOMUSTINE                         1998                 CAPECITABINE
1976          MEGESTROL                         1998                 TRASTUZUMAB
1977          CARMUSTINE                        1999                 EPIRUBICIN
1978          CISPLATIN                         1999                 EXEMESTANE
1980          AMINOGLUTETHIMIDE                 1999                 TEMOZOLOMIDE
1981          ESTRAMUSTINE                      2002                 OXALIPLATIN
1981          MITOMYCIN                         not FDA approved     AMSACRINE
1982          STREPTOZOCIN                      not FDA approved     BUSERELIN
1983          ETOPOSIDE                         not FDA approved     CLODRONATE
1984          VINCRISTINE                       not FDA approved     CYPROTERONE
1985          LEUPROLIDE                        not FDA approved     RALTITREXED
1986          INTERFERON ALFA                   not FDA approved     VINDESINE
                                       Appendix Table 2
Distribution of drugs listed in British Columbia Cancer Drug Manual, by drug class



Drug class                                                       Number of drugs
ALKYLATING AGENT                                                                     12
ANTITUMOUR ANTIBIOTIC                                                                 9
ANTIMETABOLITE                                                                        8
ENDOCRINE HORMONE                                                                     8
ENDOCRINE ANTIHORMONE                                                                 5
MITOTIC INHIBITOR                                                                     4
ALKYLATING AGENT, CYTOTOXIC                                                           3
ANTIMETABOLITE, CYTOTOXIC                                                             3
AROMATASE INHIBITOR, NONCYTOTOXIC                                                     3
BIOLOGICAL RESPONSE MODIFIER                                                          3
BONE METABOLISM REGULATOR, NONCYTOTOXIC                                               2
MITOTIC INHIBITOR, CYTOTOXIC                                                          2
MONOCLONAL ANTIBODY, NONCYTOTOXIC                                                     2
TOPOISOMERASE I INHIBITOR, CYTOTOXIC                                                  2
ANTITUMOUR ANTIBIOTIC (EMERGENCY RELEASE)                                             1
DIFFERENTIATION INDUCING AGENT, NONCYTOTOXIC                                          1
ENDOCRINE ANTIHORMONE, NONCYTOTOXIC                                                   1
ENDOCRINE HORMONE, NONCYTOTOXIC                                                       1
MISCELLANEOUS                                                                        10
