                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         THE (UN)CHANGING GEOGRAPHICAL
                 DISTRIBUTION OF HOUSING TAX BENEFITS: 1980 to 2000

                                               Todd Sinai
                                             Joseph Gyourko

                                          Working Paper 10322
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w10322


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      February 2004




This paper was prepared for the November 2003 Tax Policy and the Economy conference in Washington, DC,
and is forthcoming in Tax Policy and the Economy, Volume 18. We are grateful to the National Bureau of
Economic Research and the Research Sponsor Program of the Zell/Lurie Real Estate Center at Wharton for
supporting this research, and to Daniel Feenberg, Jim Poterba, and Steven Sheffrin for helpful advice and
comments. Dan Simundza provided excellent research assistance. Correspondence should be directed to:
Todd Sinai, 308 Lauder-Fischer Hall, 256 S. 37th Street, Philadelphia, PA 19104-6330. Phone: (215) 898-
5390. Email: sinai@wharton.upenn.edu.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

©2004 by Todd Sinai and Joseph Gyourko. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
The (Un)changing Geographical Distribution of Housing Tax Benefits: 1980 to 2000
Todd Sinai and Joseph Gyourko
NBER Working Paper No. 10322
February 2004
JEL No. H20, R38

                                             ABSTRACT

Even though the top marginal income tax rate has fallen substantially and the tax code has become

less progressive since 1979, the tax benefit to homeowners was virtually unchanged between 1979-

1989, and then rose substantially between 1989-1999. Using tract-level data from the 1980, 1990,

and 2000 censuses, we estimate how the income tax-related benefits to owner-occupiers are

distributed spatially across the United States. Geographically, gross program benefits have been and

remain very spatially targeted. At the metropolitan area level, tax benefits are spatially targeted, with

a spatial skewness that is increasing over time. In 1979, owners in the top 20 highest subsidy areas

received from 2.7 to 8.0 times the subsidy reaped by owners in the bottom 20 areas. By 1999,

owners in the top 20 areas received from 3.4 to 17.1 times more benefits than owners in any of the

20 lowest recipient areas. Despite the increasing skewness, the top subsidy recipient areas tend to

persist over time. In particular, the very high benefit per owner areas are heavily concentrated in

California and the New York City to Boston corridor, with California owners alone receiving

between 19 and 22 percent of the national aggregate gross benefits. While tax rates are somewhat

higher in these places, it is high and rising house prices which appear most responsible for the large

and increasing skewness in the spatial distribution of benefits.

Todd Sinai                                              Joseph Gyourko
Wharton School                                          Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania                              University of Pennsylvania
308 Lauder-Fischer Hall                                 308 Lauder-Fischer Hall
256 South 37th Street                                   256 South 37th Street
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6330                             Philadelphia, PA 19104-6330
and NBER                                                gyourko@wharton.upenn.edu
sinai@wharton.upenn.edu
Introduction

        It is generally accepted that the favorable tax subsidy to homeownership in the United

States stimulates the demand for housing, raising prices and increasing the homeownership rate.1

That this subsidy comes at a significant cost is also well documented at the national level, with a

number of authors having estimated the tax expenditure associated with the mortgage interest

and property tax deductions as well as the untaxed return on housing equity.2

        Over time, these marginal incentives for homeownership – and the aggregate cost of

those subsidies – have changed considerably. For example, Poterba’s (1992) analysis of the

impacts of the various tax reforms of the 1980s reports a significant increase in the marginal cost

of owner-occupied housing between 1980 and 1990 across the income distribution, but

particularly for high income owners, due in large part to a drop in marginal tax rates for high

income households and an overall reduction in the progressivity of the tax code. In our work

below, we calculate that the real cost of the tax subsidy to homeownership has risen substantially

in the last 20 years, from $198 billion (in 1999 dollars) in 1979, to $284 billion in 1989, and

$420 billion in 1999.

        In addition, recent evidence shows that the value of the subsidy to owner-occupied

housing varies dramatically over space. Gyourko and Sinai (2003), using 1990 Census data, find

that the benefits of the tax subsidy are highly skewed with just a handful of metropolitan areas

reaping most of the net gains from the favored tax treatment of owner-occupiers.

        These sets of stylized facts naturally lead one to wonder whether the changes over time in

marginal incentives for homeownership and in the aggregate cost of the homeownership subsidy


1
  See Rosen (1989) for a classic analysis and Bruce and Holtz-Eakin (1999), Capozza, Green, and Hendershott
(1996), and the report to the Ford Foundation by Green and Reschovsky (2001) for more recent investigations into
how the tax code might function in these regards.
2
  For example, see Follain and Ling (1991) and Follain, Ling, and McGill (1998).


                                                                                                                   3
have also affected the geographic distribution of the benefits. Because housing markets are

inextricably tied to a physical location, and are not national in scope, knowing the extent to

which the tax benefits vary spatially is important for determining the potential impact of any

change in the tax treatment of owner-occupied housing. Moreover, the nature of the spatial

distribution of benefit flows is likely to be important for any consideration of the potential

impacts on house prices, the homeownership rate, or the political economy of fundamental tax

reform.

          In addition, knowledge of how the geographical distribution of program benefits changes

also is useful for analysis of the spatial equity of the tax treatment of owner-occupied housing.

For example, every year the Tax Foundation calculates each state’s ratio of federal spending

received to taxes paid, and finds substantial variation across states. Our results, that the benefits

of the subsidy to owner-occupied housing vary spatially, suggest that this sort of calculation

should include implicit tax expenditures and subsidies alongside the observable taxes and

spending. Indeed, many of the Tax Foundation’s states with the lowest ratios of spending to

actual taxes paid are the same ones whose home owners receive the largest housing-related

subsidies.

          In this paper, we examine how the spatial distribution of the tax subsidy to owner-

occupied housing changes over three decades. Using the 1980, 1990, and 2000 Censuses, we

calculate the value of the tax subsidy to owner-occupied housing as the difference in ordinary

state and federal income taxes currently paid by home owners and the taxes they would pay if the

tax code treated them like landlords. In the latter scenario, there is no preference for investing in

one’s home relative to other assets.

          Interestingly, while we find that the marginal tax subsidy for homeownership has



                                                                                                        4
decreased over the last 20 years on net, the aggregate value of the tax benefits actually increased.

Our analysis indicates that this is due to rising house prices and growth in the number of

homeowners more than offsetting the decline in average tax benefit per dollar of house. In

particular, the after-tax cost of a dollar of owner-occupied housing rose between 1979 and 1989

before falling slightly by 1999, as the marginal tax rates on housing deductions were reduced and

then increased. All else constant, one would expect the value of the tax benefit to fall with tax

rates. However, this is not the case at the per-owner level, where the benefit remained flat

during the 1980s before rising by 20 percent during the 1990s. The fact that the aggregate

subsidy rose substantially during the 1980s, from $198 billion in 1979 to $284 billion in 1989, is

due at least in part to growth in the number of homeowners.

       In regard to the spatial distribution of the subsidy, these tax changes, increases in house

prices, and growth in the number of homeowners were not individually neutral. However, they

happen to offset each other so that at the state level the spatial distribution of the tax benefits

changes little over time. At the metropolitan area level, however, spatial skewness of the

subsidy has been increasing. This phenomenon appears to driven by the relatively large house

price increases experienced in various coastal areas of California and in the Northeast between

New York City and Boston. Even so, the top recipients tend to persist; they just receive a larger

fraction of the total subsidy over time.

       Among states, California always receives the largest gross subsidy flow, but this is not

due solely to the fact that it has the most owners. For example, in 2000 it received 18.7 percent

of the aggregate subsidy while having only 9.4 percent of the nation’s owners. That high ratio of

benefits to owners applies to only a very small number of other states such as New York (9.5

percent of total benefit flow while being home to only 5.3 percent of the nation’s owners in



                                                                                                      5
2000), indicating that this program has highly spatially targeted beneficiaries. This pattern of

spatial skewness to where program benefits flow is even more extreme at the metropolitan area

level. Comparing subsidy flows in 1979 in the top 20 areas versus those in the bottom 20 areas

finds that owners in the high recipient areas received from 2.7 to 8.0 times the subsidy reaped

per owner in the bottom group. By 1999, the analogous calculation finds the typical owner in

the top twenty areas receiving from 3.4 to 17.1 times more benefits than owners in any of the 20

lowest recipient areas.

        The precise economic implications of these results depend upon whether or not the

subsidy is capitalized into land prices. While such an analysis is well beyond the scope of this

paper, the broad range of possible outcomes can be readily understood. If the subsidy were fully

capitalized, eliminating it would not affect the user cost of owning but many owners in a few

metropolitan areas would experience significant changes in wealth. While the savings associated

with eliminating the subsidy would be redistributed back to homeowners, the net wealth effect

still could be significant in many areas regardless of how one thinks the tax benefits are

financed. If the tax subsidy is not capitalized into land prices, then the user cost of ownership

must reflect it.

        The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows. In the first section, we describe the tax

subsidy to owner-occupied housing and how we measure it. Section two reports our results,

beginning with an analysis of how benefits flow across states and followed by a description of

the distribution across metropolitan areas. Finally, there is a brief conclusion and summary.



I. Measuring Housing-Related Tax Benefits

        The fact that there is a subsidy to owner-occupied housing can most easily be seen by



                                                                                                    6
comparing the current tax treatment of home owners to how they would be taxed if housing were

treated like any other asset. In particular, owner-occupied housing gets favorable tax treatment,

but housing owned by a landlord is treated like any other income-producing, depreciable asset.

Both homeowners and landlords are allowed to deduct mortgage interest and property taxes as

expenses (as long as the homeowner itemizes). But a landlord must pay tax on her rental income

while a homeowner does not. The homeowner implicitly pays herself rent to occupy her house,

but because she is both landlord and tenant, that transfer is tax-free whereas if the parties were

distinct, the rent would be taxed. On the other hand, landlords can deduct depreciation and

maintenance, while homeowners cannot.

       It is apparent from this comparison that the tax subsidy to owner-occupancy arises

largely from the non-taxation of the implicit rent on the home. However, it is not so

straightforward to compute the amount of the benefit. Implicit rent is unobserved and the

components of landlords’ tax bills are often difficult to estimate. Instead, as we show below, it is

much more straightforward to calculate the difference between the equilibrium taxes paid by

homeowners and landlords. Underlying this approach is the same assumption used in the

familiar user cost of owning concept developed in Hendershott and Slemrod (1983) and Poterba

(1984): the marginal home owner invests in owner-occupied housing until the point where the

annual cost she incurs exactly equals the rent she would have to pay as a tenant in the same

property.

       We begin with the equilibrium annual flow cost of owning. That user cost is described in

equation (1) and takes into account the fact that implicit rental income is untaxed while mortgage

interest and property taxes are deductible for itemizers:

(1)    RH = (1-τded)αi + (1-τded)τp + (1-τint)(1-α)r + (1-τint)β + M + δ - ΠH.



                                                                                                     7
The left-hand side variable, RH, is the annual cost of owner occupancy per dollar of housing

value. These costs include: (a) the after-tax cost of mortgage interest, (1-τded)αi, where α is the

loan-to-value ratio on the house, i is the mortgage interest rate, and τded is the owner-occupier’s

marginal tax rate, equal to her marginal rate (denoted τint) if she itemizes and zero otherwise; (b)

the after-tax cost of property tax payments, (1-τded)τp, with τp the effective property tax rate; (c)

the after-tax opportunity cost of investing equity in the house rather than in some other riskless

investment at rate of return, r; this is given by (1-τint)(1-α)r and is a cost to all owners, whether

they itemize or not;3 (d) an after-tax risk premium, (1-τint)β, to account for the difference in risk

between bonds and housing; this applies to the entire long position in the house and thus is

unaffected by the choice of leverage;4 (e) annual maintenance costs per unit of housing which

are given by M; (f) the cost of true economic depreciation per unit of house which is assumed to

occur at rate δ; and (g) any annual appreciation in the house value, ΠH, which reduces the

carrying cost.5

         If the home owner were treated as a landlord, the residence would be taxed just like any

other asset. Neutral tax treatment obviously requires taxing the implicit rental income on the

home, but if treated like landlords, owner occupiers also would be able to deduct maintenance

3
 Implicitly, we assume that the opportunity cost of tying up equity in a house is foregoing taxable returns. If the
home owner were to invest in a tax-exempt asset instead, we assume the return would be (1-τ)r rather than r, yielding
the same after-tax return.

4
  In this framework, the homeowner’s financial position can be thought of as being long one house and short one
bond (the mortgage). This allows us to decompose the opportunity cost of being long the house as the riskless rate
of return plus a premium that reflects the difference in risk between a bond position and an equivalent risk
alternative to investing in housing. The difference between the mortgage interest rate and the equivalent duration
riskless rate is reflected in the options to default on or prepay the mortgage. These options have value to the owner,
so the premium above the riskless rate for borrowing is rolled into the mortgage rate as a cost.
5
  This specification treats capital gains on housing as untaxed and realized every year. Given that there now is a
$250,000 capital gains exclusion ($500,000 for married couples filing jointly) that can be applied every other year,
this is not unrealistic. Even in earlier periods, the assumption of no capital gains taxation on housing was valid for
the vast majority of households.



                                                                                                                         8
expenses and depreciation, not just the mortgage interest and local property taxes presently

allowed. In this case, a different annual cost would result, as described in equation (2):

(2)         RH’= (1-τ)αi + (1-τ)τp + (1-τ)(1-α)r + (1-τ)β + τ RH’ + (1-τ)M + (1-τ)δ - (1-τ)ΠH .

With perfect competition in the rental housing market, rents must equal the annual cost, so τRH’

would be the tax due on imputed rent.6 Grouping the RH’ terms and dividing both sides by (1-τ)

yields the simplified version in equation (3),

(3)         RH’ = αi + τp + (1-α)r + β + M + δ - ΠH.

            One possible strategy to estimate the tax benefits of owner-occupancy would be to

compute RH′ as the sum of the terms of on the right-hand side of equation (3), add that value to

the homeowner’s reported income, and then determine the additional tax that would be paid.

There are two important drawbacks to that approach. One is that we do not have good data on

maintenance, depreciation, or expected capital gains, so the estimate is likely to be a noisy one.

The other is that simply adding the implicit rent to income does not accurately capture the impact

of itemization rates because the tax rates on deductions differ for non-itemizers.

            The alternative strategy we pursue in this paper is to compute the difference between RH’

and RH directly by subtracting equation (1) from (3). Doing so yields the following:

      (4)      RH’-RH = τdedαi + τded⋅(τp) + τint((1-α)r + β).7


6
  This also assumes accrual taxation of capital gains which, when combined with statutory ordinary income and
capital gains rates being equal, allows us to focus on program benefits arising from differential tax treatment of
ordinary income. As our 2003 paper shows, in this setting a dollar of house price appreciation has approximately the
same value to owner-occupiers and landlords, so there is no differential impact on user costs. The analysis behind
this conclusion is fairly complex, and we refer the interested reader to that paper for the details.
7
  Note that we have abstracted throughout from how many housing dollars on which a home owning family receives
a subsidy. A change in the tax treatment of owner-occupied housing might affect house values, but because we
measure the subsidy on a per dollar basis, we abstract from the possibility that there is a second order effect through
changes in house prices. This is done for two reasons. First, determining precisely how a change in the subsidy
would be capitalized into house values is beyond the scope of this paper. Second, any change in house price would
only increase the magnitudes of our estimates. For example, if the benefit to owner-occupied housing were reduced,


                                                                                                                     9
Not only does this approach get the impact of itemization correctly, but the terms for which we

would have the most problems measuring accurately (M, δ, and П) difference out in the

subtraction. Thus, the tax subsidy to owner-occupancy can be computed as the sum of three

components: (a) the tax value of home mortgage interest deductions (τded⋅α⋅i); (b) the tax value

of local property tax deductions (τded⋅τp); and (c) the tax that would have been paid on the equity

invested in the home had it been invested elsewhere (τint⋅((1-α)⋅r+β)).8 While the sum of these

three terms represents total ordinary income tax benefits to owner occupiers under the current

code, we hasten to emphasize that this does not imply that mortgage interest or local property tax

deductions themselves are responsible for creating the subsidy. As noted above, the subsidy

arises from the non-taxation of imputed rent. It simply is the case algebraically that the subsidy

can be represented by the three terms on the right-hand side of equation (4). Looking at the

deductions alone would underestimate the true subsidy.



                                          Estimation Strategy and Data

         The procedure for estimating the tax code-related subsidy to owner-occupiers is

represented graphically in the tax schedule with three marginal tax brackets shown in Figure 1.

A home-owning family with no housing-related deductions would have a taxable income (TI) of

Y1. However, if they were not owners, they may have invested their housing equity in a vehicle

that yielded a taxable return that would raise their TI to Y2. Thus, Y2 is the counterfactual TI for


house prices might also fall, further decreasing the subsidy.

8
 The depreciation term nets out because we have assumed landlords can deduct economic depreciation and, after
1986, that is probably not far from the truth. Deloitte and Touche (2000) and Gravelle (2001) conclude that
economic lifetimes for rental properties in 1989 (and now) are somewhat shorter than the statutory lifetimes. The
statutory depreciable life in 1981 (of 15 years) was shorter than true economic depreciation, so we may overestimate
the subsidy to owner-occupiers in 1979.



                                                                                                                  10
a home-owning family if it were to stop being an owner. Starting with that TI, we can compute

the tax value of each of the three aforementioned deductions. With a taxable income of Y2, this

hypothetical family would have a tax liability of T1. Assume that claiming the home mortgage

interest deduction (HMI) would lower TI to Y2−HMI (presuming for simplicity that all of HMI

was above the standard deduction) and the tax liability to T2. Therefore, the tax savings for this

family from the mortgage interest deduction is T1−T2.

       Although in this example the mortgage interest deduction does not move the family into a

lower tax bracket, the property tax deduction does. Beginning with TI equal to Y2−HMI, we can

compute the tax savings from the property tax deduction as the tax bill with only the mortgage

interest deduction, T2, minus the tax bill with both the mortgage interest and property tax

deductions, T3. In this case, T2 and T3 span a kink in the tax schedule, but still account for the

fact that the average tax rate is less than the marginal tax rate at Y2−HMI.

       Finally, we compute the value of the non-taxation of the return on housing equity.

Because the return on housing equity is not included in TI, taxable income is measured at Y1

instead of the greater amount Y2. The tax value of not including that income is measured as the

change in tax between T3 (the tax bill corresponding to a TI of Y2−HMI−Tp) and T4 (the tax bill

corresponding to an TI of Y1−HMI−Tp).

       It is apparent from Figure 1 that the order in which the deductions are taken matters when

the tax schedule is not linear. For example, T1−T2 > T3−T4, even though HMI < Y1−Y2. After

adding back the implicit return on housing equity, we compute the deductions in the following

order: (a) tax savings from the mortgage interest deduction; (b) the tax savings associated with

the property tax deduction; and (c) the savings from the return on housing equity being untaxed.

We have repeated the estimation using all six possible sequences in which the deductions can be


                                                                                                     11
taken. While the relative magnitudes of the categories change, the differences are minor.

         We calculate each of the tax liabilities T1 through T4 by combining tract level

information covering the entire United States from the STF3 files of the 1980, 1990, and 2000

decennial Censuses with the National Bureau of Economic Research’s (NBER) TAXSIM

program. TAXSIM calculates federal and state tax liabilities from our tax data and allows us to

engage in a “what-if” calculation to determine what taxes would have been paid had a household

not had various housing deductions or had invested in an asset with a taxable income stream.

For each year in our data, the TAXSIM program incorporates all relevant federal and state tax

law, including housing and property tax deductions.

         To construct representative households to pass through the TAXSIM tax calculator, we

start by computing the distribution of household income among homeowners at the tract level.9

For each tract, we divide the household income distribution into deciles and assign the median

income for each decile to all the households in that category. Thus, the lowest-income one-tenth

of the households are assumed to have an income equal to that of the fifth percentile for the tract,

the next lowest-income tenth of the households are assigned an income equal to that of the 15th

percentile for the tract, and so forth.

         We then map tract-level information on the distribution of house values, PH, to incomes

by assigning to households in each decile of the income distribution the value corresponding to

the same decile of the house value distribution. For example, we assume that the household in

the 5th percentile of the income distribution for the tract also owns the home in the 5th percentile




9
 All tax benefit figures reported in this paper are based on tract-level data that aggregates household income across
its various sources.



                                                                                                                    12
of the housing price distribution for the same tract.10

        The actual value of the tax benefits depends on certain demographic data that are likely

to affect the number of exemptions and the overall amount of deductions. Tract level data that

are available in each census year include the distribution of whether households are single,

married, or single with children; the percentage of households with children; and the percentage

of households over 65 years of age. We create a representative household for each possible

combination of these characteristics and then compute the weighted average estimated tax,

where the weights are the tract-level distributions of the demographic characteristics.

        Unfortunately, the census data lack information on most non-housing categories of

potential tax deductions. We compute mortgage interest, state tax, and property tax deductions,

but we do not observe medical expenses, charitable giving, deductible interest (other than for a

home mortgage), and several other miscellaneous categories. Two countervailing problems arise

from underestimating possible deductions. First, we would be more likely to incorrectly assume

the family does not itemize. This error would cause us to underestimate the tax value of the

mortgage interest and property tax deductions since less would be deducted at the margin. On

the other hand, undercounting deductions for itemizers could increase the tax value we do

measure since the remaining deductions are applied against higher marginal tax rates.

Consequently, we impute missing tax deductions to our census data based on data from the

Department of the Treasury’s Statistics of Income (SOI) public use tax micro sample. A

10
  This matching process presumes that owners and renters in a tract have identical income distributions.
Fortunately, our spatial results are robust to assuming an extreme case in which all the owners in a tract have a
higher income than any of the renters, and houses are matched to owners so that the highest income owner owns the
highest value house, the next highest income owner occupies the next highest valued house, and so forth. In reality,
any sorting into houses by income would not be perfect, as is suggested by the data in O’Sullivan et al (1995) which
matches tax returns and property tax assessments in California. Unfortunately, those data are no longer available.
However, for the 1989 data we have tried using the mean income and house value in each tract, rather than the full
distribution, and it does not make any qualitative difference to the spatial skewness we observe.



                                                                                                                  13
modified Heckman-style sample selection model is employed to correct for the selective

observing of deductions only by itemizers.11

         Following the procedure shown in Figure 1, we augment the observed income by an

estimate of how much higher the household’s income would have been had they invested in an

equivalently risky taxable asset rather than housing. First, we calculate the opportunity cost of

the equity in one’s home, or PH*((1-α)*r + β), where r is the riskless yield on seven-year

Treasuries in the relevant census year: 9.47, 8.57, and 5.79 percent, respectively. Then we

compute β: the risk premium for the whole house.12 The estimates below assume that the

expected equivalent-risk opportunity cost of investing in a house was equal to the geometric

mean on the value-weighted S&P500 return (including dividends) over a certain time period.

For simplicity, we assume the relevant period always runs from the beginning of 1926 to the end

of the census year (i.e., 1926-1979, 1926-1989, and 1926-1999), yielding expected returns of

8.79, 10.13, and 11.22 percent, respectively. The risk premium is the difference between this

yield and the risk-free yield. Thus, for 1989, we define β to be the 10.13 percent S&P500 return

minus the 8.57 percent Treasury yield, for a premium of 1.56 percentage points. The opportunity

cost of riskless equity and the risk premium are then added to income.

11
   The interested reader should see the Appendix to Gyourko & Sinai (2003) for a detailed description of the
procedure. The imputation results indicate that, absent the correction, we would have underestimated deductions
and therefore the number of itemizers. This turns out to be important because the underestimation of itemizers was
not random across space. In high house value and high income tax states such as California, not observing non-
housing deductions only infrequently caused us to miscategorize an owner family as a non-itemizer. Home
mortgage interest, local property taxes, and state income taxes generally were sufficient to make California residents
itemizers. This was not the case in many states with lower house values and lower state taxes. Hence, the
imputation has an important effect on the measured spatial distribution of program benefits.

12
   The risk adjustment follows from Poterba (1991), with the calculation effectively assuming that the mortgage rate
would be the yield on seven-year Treasuries in the absence of the options to prepay or default. Other assumptions
regarding the relative risk of owner-occupied housing obviously could be made, as there is no clear agreement on
this issue. However, we have repeated all the analyses reported in the paper under widely varying assumptions
about the relative risk of owner-occupied housing. While the aggregate subsidy certainly does vary with the
presumed opportunity cost of equity in the home, the nature of the spatial distribution of the subsidy across states
and metropolitan areas largely is unaffected.


                                                                                                                    14
         We estimate the value of the mortgage interest deduction by computing each tract-

decile’s tax value as the weighted average difference in tax bills with and without it. The

mortgage interest deduction itself is defined as PH*α*i. Leverage ratios, α, vary by age and are

computed from household data in the Survey of Consumer Finances (SCF) closest in time to the

relevant census year. A weighted average leverage for each tract was computed based on the

tract’s age distribution.13 The mortgage interest rate, i, was calculated by taking an average

across households in the same SCFs. From the 1983 SCF, which is the closest in time to 1979,

we calculate the average mortgage rate was 10.21 percent. For 1989, the analogous rate was

9.56 percent, with a rate of 7.85 percent matched from the 1998 SCF to the 1999 census data.

         The tax value of the mortgage interest deduction can differ from mortgage interest paid

times the marginal tax rate for three reasons. First, only families that itemize on their tax returns

receive any benefit on the margin from the deductibility of mortgage interest. Also, only the

excess of the mortgage interest deduction plus other itemized deductions over the standard

deduction has value for a taxpayer. Therefore, we would only multiply the portion of mortgage

interest in excess of the standard deduction (after itemizing all other non-housing related

deductions first) by the tax rate. Additionally, since the tax schedule is nonlinear, taking the

mortgage interest deduction may lower the taxpayer’s marginal and average tax rates.

         The second component involves the value of the deduction of local property taxes.

Property tax payments themselves are defined as PH*τp, where τp is the average effective

property tax rate. We were not able to find reliable estimates for this variable over time.

13
  There is considerable heterogeneity in leverage by age in all years. For example, in 1998, loan-to-value ratios by
age are as follows: 20-24 year olds – 66.5 percent; 25-29 year olds – 64.2 percent; 30-34 year olds – 62.6 percent;
35-39 year olds – 61.0 percent; 40-44 year olds – 52.3 percent; 45-49 year olds – 44.5 percent; 50-54 year olds –
41.3 percent; 55-59 year olds – 30.9 percent; 60-64 year olds – 21.3 percent; 65-69 year olds – 13.2 percent; 70-74
year olds – 9.6 percent; and 75+ year olds – 4.6 percent. Leverage in previous decades is, on average, lower.



                                                                                                                   15
Consequently, we use information for an intermediate year—1990.14 This variable is allowed to

vary by metropolitan area using data provided by Stephen Malpezzi, who has calculated average

property tax rates in 1990 for a large number of areas. Census tracts not located within

metropolitan areas covered in the Malpezzi data are assigned the average state-level local

property tax rate as reported by the Advisory Commission on Intergovernmental Relations

(ACIR (1987)).15 The tax value of the deduction associated with these payments then is

computed the same way as for the mortgage interest deduction.

         The third term we estimate arises from the fact that the government does not tax as

income the return home owners could have earned on their equity had they not invested in their

homes. We calculate the reduction in tax liabilities that occurs when we remove the imputed

income that we had added in the first step. This approach accounts for the possibility that a

family might move into a higher marginal tax bracket if the return on its housing equity were

taxed.



II. Results

                                      Summary Statistics for the Nation

         The national aggregate gross value to owners of housing-related ordinary income tax

benefits, reported in the first panel of Table 1, is quite large and has risen over time—from $198

billion in 1979 to $284 billion in 1989 to $420 billion in 1999 (in constant 1999 dollars).16


14
   Property taxes are such a small component of the total subsidy – about 10 percent – that the noise in this measure
probably has little qualitative effect on our conclusions.
15
   The ACIR did not report state-by-state breakdowns for 1989, so we use the 1987 data. We have also
experimented with assuming a 1 percent and 1.5 percent national average effective rate. Our findings are not
sensitive to these changes.
16
   The bulk of the tax code-related benefits to owners arises from the third of the three components from equation
(4). Depending upon the census year, from two-thirds to three-quarters of the total benefits are due to not having to
pay tax on the return to equity invested in the home plus the difference in expected return on housing versus the cost


                                                                                                                    16
These subsidies are large and are significantly higher than those typically reported by Treasury

or the Joint Committee on Taxation primarily because those government agencies calculate only

the traditional tax expenditures – the tax cost of the mortgage interest and property tax

deductions – rather than the failure to tax implicit rent. Since houses are only partially leveraged

and the expected return on a house is greater than mortgage rates, those deductions measure only

a portion of the true tax expenditure.17 In addition, our figures include state tax subsidies.

         The housing subsidy is sizeable – and growing – even on a per owner or per household

basis. While the aggregate real subsidy amount increased 112 percent since 1979, the number of

owner-occupied units rose just 70 percent between 1979 and 1999 (from 40.9 million in 1979 to

69.7 million in 1999) so the subsidy per owner-occupied household has been going up. Gross

program benefits per owner-occupied household were $4,840 in 1979, remained constant over

the ensuing decade with the 1989 figure being $4,818, and then rose in the 1990s to $6,024 in

1999. The analogous figures on a per household basis range from just over three thousand

dollars in 1979 to just over four thousand dollars in 1999.

         While it has long been understood that the subsidy is skewed in aggregate towards those

with high incomes and high house values, much less is known about the spatial skewness of this

aspect of the tax code. It is to that issue we now turn. We begin by documenting just how the

tax subsidy to owner-occupied housing is skewed, describe how that skewness changes over

time, and then investigate the factors driving any changes in the distribution of the subsidy



of the mortgage. Results on the decomposition of the subsidy are available upon request.
17
  Our estimates of the tax savings from the mortgage interest deduction alone are quite close to, but lower than,
what we obtain by looking at actual tax return data. We cannot use the Statistics of Income data to compute the full
tax expenditure because tax return data do not include information about house values, only itemized deductions. In
addition, the SOI data do not report state of residence for taxpayers with AGI above a threshold, so our calculations
using the SOI are also below the true figure. On the other hand, the Joint Committee on Taxation’s projected tax
expenditure on mortgage interest deductions for 1999 (these do not include state taxes) is slightly lower than what
we calculate.


                                                                                                                   17
across states and metropolitan areas.

                                                 State-Level Results

           While we will focus most of our analysis on the amount of tax benefits per owner, we

begin with the most basic measure of the spatial distribution of the benefits: the aggregate

benefit flow for each state by year. Not surprisingly, the most populous state, California, stands

out in Table 2, with its owners receiving gross benefits of nearly $40 billion in 1979, well over

$60 billion in 1989, and almost $80 billion in 1999. No other state approaches these levels,

although the benefit flow to New York has risen dramatically over time. A closer examination

shows that, as the national aggregate value of the subsidy increases, the additional benefits

appear to be distributed in rough proportion to where they were already going. That is, while the

aggregate benefit to California doubles between 1979 and 1999, so does the subsidy to small

beneficiaries such as Georgia, Maryland, and North Carolina. Thus, the states tend to maintain

their same relative standing, but the absolute (real) dollar difference between the highest and

lowest recipient increases substantially.

           Of course, changes in aggregate subsidy flows are heavily affected by population growth.

To net out differential increases in the number of homeowners, Figure 2 reports benefits scaled

by the number of owners in each state in 1979 and 1999.18 Even on a per owner basis, people in

only a handful of states, often the most populous ones, reap substantially more from tax code-

related housing benefits than the typical owner nationally. For example, while California is no

longer the extreme outlier it was in the aggregate data in Table 2, it still is one of only seven

states that received at least $6,000 per owner in 1979 and at least $8,000 per owner in 1999.

Overall, the per owner subsidies in the top few states are well over double those received by


18
     Data for all three years – 1979, 1989, and 1999 – is reported in the Appendix.


                                                                                                    18
owners in the vast majority of states. Thus, while the Gini coefficients for the distribution of per

owner benefits across states are relatively low in each decade (0.20 in 1979, 0.32 in 1989, and

0.25 in 1999), it would not be accurate to consider the benefit distribution an especially

egalitarian one in spatial terms.

        Although the subsidy per owned unit has risen over time, the skewness has persisted at

least since 1979. Benefit flows always are concentrated in the hands of owners in just a few

states and the top three states have remained there for the last 20 years. However, the spatial

distribution has changed some with owners in northeastern states doing better over time.

        Of course, Figure 2 confounds changes in the national level of subsidy with its

distribution across space. However, the typical state receives less than the national average

benefit per owner, with a few states receiving about double the average. These disparities rise

between 1979 and 1989, but are mitigated somewhat by 1999.19 To isolate the spatial distribution

from the dollar value of the subsidy, we have computed the ratio of each state’s share of the

subsidy to its share of the nation’s owners. For example, the median state has a ratio of subsidy

share to owner share of 0.83 in 1979, 0.71 in 1989, and 0.76 in 1999. These generally are less

than half of California’s numbers which are 1.77 in 1979, 2.29 in 1989, and 2.00 in 1999.20

        Figure 3 provides more detail on the heterogeneity in benefit changes by state over the

1980s and 1990s by measuring each state’s changes relative to the national average change. The

top panel highlights that owners in northeastern and mid-Atlantic states did better than average

in the 1980s. California and Hawaii are the only exceptions to that statement. There was less

19
   While one cannot compute transfers across states without making assumptions regarding how the program is
financed, it seems certain that transfers are flowing from a host of states to owners in California and a select few
other states. See our 2003 paper for transfer estimates assuming lump sum and proportional financing schemes using
1990 data. In both cases, the outcome is the majority of states transferring resources to owners in the smaller
number of other states.
20
   While Hawaii’s and the District of Columbia’s ratios are higher in each decade, California’s are more relevant
empirically because of its very large number of owners.


                                                                                                                 19
heterogeneity in the 1990s, and it was owners in the less populous western states of Colorado,

Oregon, and Utah who experienced significantly greater than average increases that decade.

Owners in California and Hawaii received smaller than average benefit flow increases that

decade.

         As suggested in the introduction, many factors have changed over time that could

influence the value of the tax benefits associated with owner-occupancy. The most obvious is

tax rates themselves. Because owner-occupied housing is a true tax shelter in the sense that one

can deduct expenses without declaring any income on the asset, a reduction in tax rates naturally

lowers the value of the tax shelter. Figure 4 plots the ‘average’ marginal tax rate (state+federal)

on housing deductions for 1979 and 1999, calculated using the Census data and the NBER’s

TAXSIM program. While marginal rates do differ across states, those differences have declined

over time. Overall, marginal rates fell significantly during the 1980s and then rose modestly

during the 1990s due to a series of tax reforms at the federal level. 21

         That aggregate benefits rose and benefits per owner did not decline on average between

1979 and 1989 indicates that other factors were changing to counterbalance the negative effect

that an increase in the tax price of housing would have on the value of the benefit. In addition,

the fact that most of the important tax changes were at the federal level may help explain why

the nature of the spatial distribution across states was not affected very much.

         Other components of the subsidy were changing, of course, and house prices in

particular. Figure 5 graphs mean house price by state in 1979, 1989, and 1999, with Figure 6

reporting the percentage changes over time for each state. Values in many of the coastal states in

21
  Like tax rates, the probability of itemizing declined significantly between 1979 and 1999, reducing the subsidy to
owner-occupied housing. Changes in the spatial distribution of itemizers, once one nets out the effect of house
prices on the likelihood of itemization, do not seem to determine the changes in the benefits. This is not surprising
since we saw in section I that itemization only affects the value of a small portion of the tax subsidy.


                                                                                                                    20
particular have skyrocketed over the past 20 years. In California, mean real prices rose from just

over $200,000 in 1979 to nearly $300,000 in 1999. The change has been even more dramatic in

places such as Massachusetts, where the average home was worth a little more than $100,000 in

1979. One decade later, mean prices had doubled (in real terms), and prices held firm in that

state during the 1990s. It seems clear that it is this type of change that has allowed the average

subsidy per owner in Massachusetts to rise so much over the past two decades. Indeed, a

comparison of Figures 3 and 6 suggests that rising real house prices can help account for the

dramatic increases in benefits per owner that have occurred in a small number of states,

especially northeastern ones in the 1980s.

       Of course, there are other factors at work, including the rising return in equity markets

which raises the value of the tax shield on home equity in our calculations. While a detailed

decomposition analysis of changes in the tax benefit over time is beyond the scope of this study,

the data show that the factors that do change did so in a largely offsetting fashion with respect to

the spatial distribution across states in the 1980s. The rise in aggregate and per owner benefits in

the 1990s probably reflects a growing share of households that are owners, rising real house

prices, and increasing tax rates. On net, the spatial distribution of benefits across states is fairly

skewed in each census year, with very few states experiencing significant changes in their

relative status. Whether this holds at the metropolitan area level is the subject of the following

subsection.

                                Between-Metropolitan Area Results

       In this subsection, we disaggregate the data further to examine subsidy flows at the

metropolitan area level and find that the distribution of housing benefits are more skewed than at

the state level, and that skewness is increasing over time. Results are computed for 380 areas



                                                                                                     21
that were identifiable Census Core-Based Statistical Areas (CBSAs).22

         Aggregate benefit flows at the CBSA level, which are reported for selected areas in the

Appendix, document how extremely spatially targeted are the overall benefit flows. The vast

majority of metropolitan areas receive a relatively modest benefit flow, while a relatively small

number of areas receive very large aggregate benefit flows.

         This form of spatial skewness also has increased over time at the metropolitan area level.

For example, if we focus just on the three CBSAs that contain the nation’s three largest cities of

New York City, Los Angeles, and Chicago, their owners received benefit flows equal to $27.3

billion in 1979. While being home to just 10.1 percent of all owners living in designated

metropolitan areas in the 1980s, they received 14.7 percent of all benefits flowing to

metropolitan census tracts. By 1989, the spatial skewness of aggregate tax subsidy flows had

become even more extreme. Owners in just these three CBSAs received 17.7 percent of all

metropolitan area benefits while constituting an even smaller share of the nation’s owners at 9.3

percent. The share of owners in these areas had fallen to 8.5 percent by 1999, but their benefit

share was 1.72 times higher at 14.6 percent.

         Figure 7, which plots benefits scaled by the number of owners in the CBSA, highlights

that the subsidy flows disproportionately towards owners in a relatively small number of

metropolitan areas and that the skewness is increasing over time. In this figure, CBSAs are

ordered by their per-owner subsidy. Thus, the more extreme curvature in the graphs as the


22
  Benefit flows to census tracts not located within CBSAs are not included in the figures reported in this section.
CBSAs are Census’s new (2003) county-based definition of metropolitan areas. We apply the same definition in
each of the three Census files, realizing of course that the economic relationship between the counties is weaker
earlier in previous decades. By construction, a CBSA must contain at least one urban area of 10,000 or more
population. The county (or counties) “in which at least 50 percent of the population resides within urban areas of
10,000 or more population, or that contain at least 5,000 people residing within a single urban area of 10,000 or
more population, is identified as a "central county"” and is included in the CBSA. Additional "outlying counties"
are included in the CBSA if they meet specified requirements of commuting to or from the central counties.


                                                                                                                      22
decades progress is an indication that spatial skewness, net of population changes, has been on

the rise.

        This is made even more clear in Tables 3 and 4, which report the top and bottom 20

CBSAs in terms of benefits per owner in 1979 and 1999, respectively. (We limit consideration

to the 179 CBSAs that are above the median in terms of the number of households. 23) The table

also includes per household values of the subsidy, although the sorting is on a per owner basis.

        These two tables make clear that there are very wide disparities in the size of benefit

flows across places. For example, Table 3 documents that in 1979 an owner in one of the top 20

areas received from three to eight times the benefit flow of an owner in one of the bottom 20

areas.24 The differentials are narrower on a per household basis, with households in the top

twenty areas having benefit flows that are from 2 to 4 times those in the bottom twenty areas.

While differences in ownership rates – which are lower in the top subsidy areas – do account for

some of the gap between the top and bottom recipient areas, the disparity still is large even on a

per household basis.

        Table 4’s figures based on 1999 data indicate that the differentials widened considerably

over the ensuing two decades. For example, a comparison of the per owner subsidy in the 20th

highest ranked area (Lake County-Kenosha County, IL-WI, Metropolitan Division) with the

same figure for the 20th lowest ranked area (Scranton-Wilkes-Barre, PA, MSA) finds a ratio of

3.4 to 1—or 1.3 times the ratio for the analogously ranked areas in 1979. Comparing the 10th

highest area’s (Honolulu, HI, MSA) benefit per owner value with that for the 10th lowest area


23
   The top twenty areas in terms of benefits per owner are virtually unchanged by restricting the sample to more
populous areas containing more than the median number of households. This is not the case among the bottom
twenty areas. If the full sample of 380 CBSAs is used, Texas is even more overrepresented as it contains a large
number of less populous metropolitan areas.
24
   These ranges were determined by computing the ratio of benefit per owner in the top-ranked area versus the
bottom ranked area, from the second-to-highest ranked area versus the second-to-lowest ranked area, and so forth.


                                                                                                                    23
(Fort Smith, AR-OK, MSA) finds a ratio of 5.6 to 1—which is 1.5 times the ratio for similarly

ranked areas in 1979. The disparity widens even further when comparing the top-ranked area

(San Francisco-San Mateo-Redwood City, CA, Metropolitan Division) to the bottom-ranked area

(McAllen-Edinberg-Pharr, TX, MSA) in terms of benefit per owner, with a ratio of 17.1 to 1

($26,385/$1,541). Thus, the top recipient areas are receiving relatively more per area than the

bottom ranked areas in 1999 than in 1979. Moreover, the benefits flowing to owners in the very

top areas rose by 50-100 percent in real terms, while they were flat or declined slightly in the

very bottom-ranked areas.

           An even clearer face can be put on the skewness depicted in Figure 7 by examining who

and where the top and bottom recipient areas are on a per owner basis. Fourteen of the top 20

areas appear in both 1979 and 1999. They include Honolulu, HI, Bridgeport-Stamford-Norwalk,

CT, Bethesda-Frederick-Gaithersburg, MD, Lake County-Kenosha County, IL-WI, and ten areas

spanning the length of California’s coastline. By 1999, a series of areas, primarily located along

the New York City-Boston corridor (Suffolk County-Nassau County, NY, New York-Wayne-

White Plains, NY-NJ, Cambridge-Newton-Framingham, MA, Boston-Quincy, MA, and Newark-

Union, NJ-PA) joined the top 20 list, replacing midwestern areas such as Ann Arbor, MI,

Warren-Farmington Hills-Troy, MI, and Milwaukee-Waukesha-West Allis, WI, along with

Anchorage, AK, and Washington-Arlington-Alexandria, DC-VA-MD-WV. Thus, the top

recipient areas have become even more dominated by coastal areas, with the northeast being

much more heavily represented in the 1999 rankings.25 There is less stability among the bottom

twenty ranked areas, with ten being present in both 1979 and 1999. Moreover, this group always

has a very strong southern representation (especially, but not exclusively, Texas), and the


25
     The only interior area to join the top twenty list in 1999 was Boulder, CO.


                                                                                                   24
metropolitan areas tend not to situated along the Atlantic or Pacific coasts.

       In sum, the spatial skewness of benefit flows per owner has grown over time, with the top

areas now receiving very large multiples of the subsidy received by the bottom areas.

Geographically, this skewness now is a bi-coastal phenomenon, with metropolitan areas

spanning the state of California and between New York and Boston dominating the top 20

benefit per owner rankings. Still, there is strong persistence over time in the areas that receive

the most benefit, and their share of the total has been rising.

       Because the most important tax code changes tend to have occurred at the federal level,

plots of tax rates and tax rate changes at the metropolitan level are not particularly helpful in

increasing our understanding of these results. In contrast, examining house prices over time at

the local level is very illuminating. For example, Figure 8’s plots of the distribution of mean

house values by metropolitan area over time look strikingly similar to the distributions of

benefits per owner in Figure 7. While it is the case that incomes and tax rates are somewhat

higher in coastal metropolitan areas, those differences are not nearly as pronounced as for house

values. Thus, it is rising real house prices, especially in key coastal metropolitan areas,

augmented by generally higher tax rates in those areas, that is increasing the absolute and

relative benefits flowing to their owners. Because how the housing is financed has only a

second-order effect (through itemization) on the value of the subsidy, it is not necessary for

households to refinance their houses to increase their subsidies. Since higher prices reflect

higher implicit rental value, if housing were treated symmetrically tax revenues would increase

with house prices.



III. Conclusions



                                                                                                     25
       Estimating the tax subsidy to home owners by comparing the taxes they now pay with

those they would pay if they faced neutral tax treatment – like landlords, in our example – shows

a substantial increase in the value of the tax benefit over time. While some of the aggregate

increase clearly is due to a rise in the number of homeowners, benefits per owner are about 20

percent higher in 1999 than they were in 1979 at the national level. This is particularly

interesting given that it occurs despite marginal and average tax rates falling over the past two

decades. The evidence suggests that rising house prices, especially in key coastal areas and in

certain regions of the country, can help account for the fact that the value of the subsidy has risen

even though the tax subsidy per dollar of housing has declined.

       Spatially, we demonstrate that the subsidy flows disproportionately to owners in a

relatively small number of states—California, especially. Spatial skewness is even more

extreme at the metropolitan level, and the data indicate that skewness there has increased over

time, though the top recipient areas tend to remain so. Rising house prices in certain coastal

metropolitan areas appear to play a large role in explaining this phenomenon.

       While the magnitude and skewness of the subsidy are striking, one note of caution is in

order when interpreting these results. While it may appear that current homeowners in some

parts of the country reap a large tax subsidy, their house prices may be higher to reflect it. That

is, the after-tax annual cost of housing in high-subsidy areas may not differ from low-subsidy

areas by the full amount of the tax benefit. In the extreme case, if house prices have fully

capitalized the benefit, current homeowners are no better off on a flow basis.

       Computing the incidence of the tax subsidy to owner-occupied housing – the degree to

which the subsidy shows up in higher house prices rather than as a reduced flow cost of

homeownership – is beyond the scope of this paper. In addition, there is no consensus in the



                                                                                                      26
economics literature on the answer: estimates range from full capitalization to very low

capitalization.26 Unfortunately, where the incidence lies has crucial implications for public

policy. For example, it would be easy to jump to the conclusion that, due to the spatial inequity

of the tax subsidy to owner occupied housing, policymakers should restructure the tax benefit.

But if a reduction in benefit is capitalized into house prices, current homeowners may experience

a loss of wealth. If those homeowners had been the beneficiaries of the rise in house prices when

the tax subsidy increased, such a reduction in asset value might be equitable. However, it is

quite likely that current homeowners purchased their house with the tax benefit already

capitalized into the price, paying more on the expectation of future subsidies.

            The degree of the capitalization of the subsidy into house prices also is unlikely to be

spatially neutral. In places where land is in short supply, an increase in demand for housing is

likely to show up more in house prices than it would in cities where it is easy to add more

housing stock. That housing demand can be created by local economic factors or the subsidy to

owner occupied housing. Thus, for the same underlying economic reasons, places where the tax

benefit is the greatest are places with high land prices and also places where the subsidy is more

likely to be capitalized into the house price. While we cannot say how much of any reduction in

the tax benefit would show up as lower house prices, it seems likely that a larger fraction (of a

larger benefit) would be reflected in house prices in the high benefit areas.




26
     For examples, see Bruce and Holtz-Eakin (1999) and Capozza, Green, and Hendershott (1996).


                                                                                                       27
Selected References
Bruce, Donald, and Douglas Holtz-Eakin. “Apocalypse Now? Fundamental Tax Reform
       and Residential Housing Values,” mimeo, Syracuse University, November 1999.
Capozza, Dennis, Richard Green and Patric Hendershott. “Taxes, Mortgage Borrowing,
      and Residential Land Prices.” In Henry Aaron and William Gale, eds. Economic
      Effects of Fundamental Tax Reform. Washington, D.C.: Brookings, 1996, pp.
      171-210.
Deloitte & Touche. “Analysis of the Economic and Tax Depreciation of Structures,”
       Deloitte & Touche working paper. Washington, D.C.: June 2000.
Feenberg, Daniel Richard, and Elizabeth Coutts, “An Introduction to the TAXSIM
      Model,” Journal of Policy Analysis and Management vol. 12 no. 1, Winter 1993,
      pages 189-194.
Follain, James, and David Ling. “The Federal Tax Subsidy to Housing and the Reduced
        Value of the Mortgage Interest Deduction,” National Tax Journal, Vol. 44, no. 2
        (1991): 147-168.
----------, David Ling, and Gary McGill. “The Preferential Income Tax Treatment of
         Owner-Occupied Housing: Who Really Benefits?” Housing Policy Debate, Vol.
         4, no. 1 (1993): 1-24.
----------, and Lisa Melamed. “The False Messiah of Tax Policy: What Elimination of the
         Home Mortgage Interest Deduction Promises and a Careful Look at What It
         Delivers,” Journal of Housing Research, Vol. 9 no. 2 (1998): 179-199.
Geolytics, Inc. CensusCD 1980, 1990, 2000, census tract-level data, East Brunswick, NJ.
Gravelle, Jane. “Whither Depreciation?” National Tax Journal, Vol. 54, no. 3 (2001):
       513-526.
Green, Richard and Andrew Reschovsky. Using Tax Policy to Increase Homeownership
       Among Low- and Moderate-Income Households. Final Report to the Ford
       Foundation, 2001.
Gyourko, Joseph and Todd Sinai. “The Spatial Distribution of Housing-Related
      Ordinary Income Tax Benefits,” Real Estate Economics, forthcoming 2003.
Hendershott, Patric and Joel Slemrod. “Taxes and the User Cost of Capital for Owner-
      Occupied Housing,” AREUEA Journal, Winter 1983, 10 (4), 375-393.
Joint Committee on Taxation. “Estimates of Federal Tax Expenditures for Fiscal Years
       1999-2003 (JCS-7-98),” (Washington, DC) U.S. Government Printing Office,
       December 14, 1998.


                                                                                       28
Moody, J. Scott. “Federal Tax Burdens and Expenditures by State: Which States Gain
     Most from Federal Fiscal Operations?” Tax Foundation Monograph No. 124, July
     2003
Poterba, James. “Tax Subsidies to Owner-Occupied Housing: An Asset Market
       Approach,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, November 1984, 99 (4), 729-752.
Poterba, James. “House Price Dynamics: The Role of Tax Policy and Demography,”
       Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1991, 2, 143-203.
----------. “Taxation and Housing: Old Questions, New Answers,” American Economic
         Review, May 1992, 82 (2), 237-242.
Rosen, Harvey. “Housing Decisions and the U.S. Income Tax,” Journal of Public
       Economics, June 1979, 36 (1), 87-109.
O’Sullivan, Arthur, Terri Sexton, and Steven Sheffrin. Property Taxes and Tax Revolts:
       The Legacy of Proposition 13. Cambridge Press, 1995.
U. S. Bureau of the Census. Summary Tape File 3 (STF3), census tract-level data.
       Washington, D.C.: 1990.
U.S. Department of the Treasury. Statistics of Income, 1979, 1989, and 1999 Public Use
       Microsamples. Washington, D.C.: 1980, 1990, 2000.




                                                                                     29
       Table 1: Aggregate Tax Subsidy,
           National Level, by Year

            Total (billions of $99)
1979                $197.9
1989                $284.0
1999                $420.1

               Per Owner ($99)
1979                $4,840
1989                $4,818
1999                $6,024

             Per Household ($99)
1979               $3,023
1989               $3,121
1999               $4,015




                                         30
Table 2: Aggregate Benefit Flow in Billions of $1999
By State and Year
                         1979            1989           1999
Alabama                  $1.80           $2.25          $4.18
Alaska                   $0.38           $0.40          $0.67
Arizona                  $2.69           $3.23          $6.55
Arkansas                 $0.65           $1.17          $2.09
California              $38.07          $63.73         $78.66
Colorado                 $3.37           $3.07          $8.56
Connecticut              $4.29           $8.10          $8.23
Delaware                 $0.58           $0.89          $1.20
District of Columbia     $0.99           $1.23          $1.41
Florida                  $8.61          $11.83         $19.62
Georgia                  $3.63           $5.30         $10.49
Hawaii                   $1.81           $2.70          $2.91
Idaho                    $0.43           $0.65          $1.55
Illinois                 $9.92          $11.87         $19.71
Indiana                  $3.01           $3.31          $6.13
Iowa                     $1.43           $1.70          $3.07
Kansas                   $1.77           $1.94          $2.93
Kentucky                 $1.28           $1.89          $3.81
Louisiana                $2.22           $2.04          $3.49
Maine                    $0.54           $1.37          $1.59
Maryland                 $4.53           $7.42          $9.56
Massachusetts            $5.12          $11.84         $14.03
Michigan                $10.39           $9.92         $17.59
Minnesota                $4.11           $4.14          $7.67
Mississippi              $1.01           $1.11          $2.00
Missouri                 $2.61           $3.64          $6.11
Montana                  $0.43           $0.49          $1.04
Nebraska                 $0.76           $0.85          $1.67
Nevada                   $0.82           $0.93          $2.30
New Hampshire            $0.64           $1.60          $1.74
New Jersey               $8.96          $15.01         $17.60
New Mexico               $0.84           $1.12          $2.15
New York                $15.20          $32.99         $39.72
North Carolina           $2.59           $5.03         $10.54
North Dakota             $0.26           $0.27          $0.41
Ohio                     $8.09           $7.82         $13.32
Oklahoma                 $1.77           $1.72          $2.67
Oregon                   $2.87           $2.50          $6.48
Pennsylvania             $8.80          $10.45         $13.82
Rhode Island             $0.80           $1.48          $1.49
South Carolina           $1.48           $2.48          $4.76
South Dakota             $0.23           $0.24          $0.48
Tennesseee               $2.26           $2.84          $5.61
Texas                    $9.12           $8.88         $15.60
Utah                     $1.22           $1.14          $3.21
Vermont                  $0.11           $0.59          $0.72
Virginia                 $5.30           $7.82         $10.90
Washington               $4.04           $4.77          $9.52
West Virginia            $0.87           $0.90          $1.40
Wisconsin                $4.90           $5.11          $8.64
Wyoming                  $0.31           $0.22          $0.46
                      Table 3: Benefits Per Owner and Per Household, Select CBSAs above median population in 1979, in $1999

Top 20 (by 1979 per owner)                                                      Top 20 Areas by per owner subsidy, 1979

                                                                       Subsidy Per Owner Occupied Unit          Subsidy Per Household
                               CBSA Name                                              1979                                1979
Honolulu, HI Metropolitan Statistical Area                                           $13,491                             $7,132
San Francisco-San Mateo-Redwood City, CA Metropolitan Division                       $13,126                             $6,156
San Jose-Sunnyvale-Santa Clara, CA Metropolitan Statistical Area                     $11,320                             $6,830
Santa Barbara-Santa Maria-Goleta, CA Metropolitan Statistical Area                   $10,731                             $5,615
Santa Ana-Anaheim-Irvine, CA Metropolitan Division                                   $10,719                             $6,430
Bethesda-Frederick-Gaithersburg, MD Metropolitan Division                            $10,669                             $7,080
Bridgeport-Stamford-Norwalk, CT Metropolitan Statistical Area                        $10,189                             $6,870
Los Angeles-Long Beach-Glendale, CA Metropolitan Division                            $9,585                              $4,621
San Diego-Carlsbad-San Marcos, CA Metropolitan Statistical Area                      $8,758                              $4,813
Lake County-Kenosha County, IL-WI Metropolitan Division                              $8,637                              $6,236
Anchorage, AK Metropolitan Statistical Area                                          $8,616                              $4,843
Santa Cruz-Watsonville, CA Metropolitan Statistical Area                             $8,598                              $5,332
Oxnard-Thousand Oaks-Ventura, CA Metropolitan Statistical Area                       $8,553                              $5,744
Oakland-Fremont-Hayward, CA Metropolitan Division                                    $8,427                              $4,856
Washington-Arlington-Alexandria, DC-VA-MD-WV Metropolitan Division                   $8,349                              $4,425
Salinas, CA Metropolitan Statistical Area                                            $8,037                              $4,549
Milwaukee-Waukesha-West Allis, WI Metropolitan Statistical Area                      $7,738                              $4,611
Santa Rosa-Petaluma, CA Metropolitan Statistical Area                                $7,677                              $4,857
Ann Arbor, MI Metropolitan Statistical Area                                          $7,483                              $4,094
Warren-Farmington Hills-Troy, MI Metropolitan Division                               $7,387                              $5,689

                                                                               Bottom 20 Areas by per owner subsidy, 1979

                                                                       Subsidy Per Owner Occupied Unit          Subsidy Per Household
                               CBSA Name                                              1979                                1979
McAllen-Edinburg-Pharr, TX Metropolitan Statistical Area                             $1,687                              $1,173
Waco, TX Metropolitan Statistical Area                                               $2,010                              $1,252
Fort Smith, AR-OK Metropolitan Statistical Area                                      $2,177                              $1,490
Lakeland-Winter Haven, FL Metropolitan Statistical Area                              $2,180                              $1,539
Killeen-Temple-Fort Hood, TX Metropolitan Statistical Area                           $2,247                              $1,332
Kingsport-Bristol, TN-VA Metropolitan Statistical Area                               $2,294                              $1,751
Pensacola-Ferry Pass-Brent, FL Metropolitan Statistical Area                         $2,303                              $1,614
Scranton--Wilkes-Barre, PA Metropolitan Statistical Area                             $2,307                              $1,564
Columbus, GA-AL Metropolitan Statistical Area                                        $2,418                              $1,496
Johnstown, PA Metropolitan Statistical Area                                          $2,418                              $1,740
Jacksonville, FL Metropolitan Statistical Area                                       $2,564                              $1,670
Deltona-Daytona Beach-Ormond Beach, FL Metropolitan Statistical Area                 $2,599                              $1,848
Chattanooga, TN-GA Metropolitan Statistical Area                                     $2,602                              $1,800
Fayetteville, NC Metropolitan Statistical Area                                       $2,612                              $1,619
Beaumont-Port Arthur, TX Metropolitan Statistical Area                               $2,628                              $1,885
Hickory-Morganton-Lenoir, NC Metropolitan Statistical Area                           $2,652                              $2,001
Huntington-Ashland, WV-KY-OH Metropolitan Statistical Area                           $2,652                              $1,896
Macon, GA Metropolitan Statistical Area                                              $2,667                              $1,666
Augusta-Richmond County, GA-SC Metropolitan Statistical Area                         $2,733                              $1,855
Springfield, MO Metropolitan Statistical Area                                        $2,760                              $1,851

Note: Median number of households in 1979 among all 380 CBSAs is 56,664
                          Table 4: Benefits Per Owner and Per Household, Select CBSA's above median pop, 1999

                                                                                     Top 20 areas by per owner subsidy, 1999

                                                                       Subsidy Per Owner Occupied Unit           Subsidy Per Household
      CBSA Name                                                                      1999                                  1999
San Francisco-San Mateo-Redwood City, CA Metropolitan Division                      $26,385                              $13,327
San Jose-Sunnyvale-Santa Clara, CA Metropolitan Statistical Area                    $24,629                              $14,874
Bridgeport-Stamford-Norwalk, CT Metropolitan Statistical Area                       $17,418                              $12,075
Santa Barbara-Santa Maria-Goleta, CA Metropolitan Statistical Area                  $16,759                               $9,593
Suffolk County-Nassau County, NY Metropolitan Division                              $15,655                              $12,520
Oakland-Fremont-Hayward, CA Metropolitan Division                                   $15,151                               $9,189
New York-Wayne-White Plains, NY-NJ Metropolitan Division                            $14,776                               $6,123
Santa Ana-Anaheim-Irvine, CA Metropolitan Division                                  $14,593                               $8,953
Salinas, CA Metropolitan Statistical Area                                           $14,554                               $7,994
Honolulu, HI Metropolitan Statistical Area                                          $14,115                               $7,944
Santa Rosa-Petaluma, CA Metropolitan Statistical Area                               $13,030                               $8,338
Oxnard-Thousand Oaks-Ventura, CA Metropolitan Statistical Area                      $12,895                               $8,734
Cambridge-Newton-Framingham, MA Metropolitan Division                               $12,643                               $7,804
Los Angeles-Long Beach-Glendale, CA Metropolitan Division                           $12,096                               $5,845
Boulder, CO Metropolitan Statistical Area                                           $11,855                               $7,719
San Diego-Carlsbad-San Marcos, CA Metropolitan Statistical Area                     $11,641                               $6,476
Bethesda-Frederick-Gaithersburg, MD Metropolitan Division                           $11,223                               $7,894
Boston-Quincy, MA Metropolitan Division                                             $10,941                               $6,389
Newark-Union, NJ-PA Metropolitan Division                                           $10,870                               $6,823
Lake County-Kenosha County, IL-WI Metropolitan Division                             $10,700                               $8,127


                                                                                    Bottom 20 areas by per owner subsidy, 1999

                                                                       Subsidy Per Owner Occupied Unit           Subsidy Per Household
      CBSA Name                                                                       1999                                1999
McAllen-Edinburg-Pharr, TX Metropolitan Statistical Area                             $1,541                              $1,126
Brownsville-Harlingen, TX Metropolitan Statistical Area                              $1,696                              $1,149
Beaumont-Port Arthur, TX Metropolitan Statistical Area                               $2,027                              $1,428
El Paso, TX Metropolitan Statistical Area                                            $2,153                              $1,380
Lubbock, TX Metropolitan Statistical Area                                            $2,326                              $1,380
Corpus Christi, TX Metropolitan Statistical Area                                     $2,341                              $1,483
Killeen-Temple-Fort Hood, TX Metropolitan Statistical Area                           $2,345                              $1,329
Huntington-Ashland, WV-KY-OH Metropolitan Statistical Area                           $2,448                              $1,765
Ocala, FL Metropolitan Statistical Area                                              $2,466                              $1,969
Lakeland-Winter Haven, FL Metropolitan Statistical Area                              $2,528                              $1,855
Fort Smith, AR-OK Metropolitan Statistical Area                                      $2,537                              $1,785
Kingsport-Bristol, TN-VA Metropolitan Statistical Area                               $2,789                              $2,136
Deltona-Daytona Beach-Ormond Beach, FL Metropolitan Statistical Area                 $2,866                              $2,162
Shreveport-Bossier City, LA Metropolitan Statistical Area                            $2,873                              $1,901
San Antonio, TX Metropolitan Statistical Area                                        $2,931                              $1,891
Pensacola-Ferry Pass-Brent, FL Metropolitan Statistical Area                         $3,000                              $2,134
Youngstown-Warren-Boardman, OH-PA Metropolitan Statistical Area                      $3,069                              $2,275
Charleston, WV Metropolitan Statistical Area                                         $3,071                              $2,272
Mobile, AL Metropolitan Statistical Area                                             $3,087                              $2,158
Scranton--Wilkes-Barre, PA Metropolitan Statistical Area                             $3,156                              $2,199

Note: Median number of households in 1999 among all 380 CBSAs is 92,249.
    Figure 1

Tax Bill




       T1
       T2

       T3
       T4




               Y1-HMI-Tp   Y2-HMI-Tp    Y1         Y2              Adjusted
                                                                   Gross
                                              Y2-HMI               Income
                                       Base             Base +
                                                        Implicit
                                                        Equity
                                                        Return
                                                                       10000
                                                                               12000
                                                                                       14000




                                           2000
                                                  4000
                                                         6000
                                                                8000




                                       0
                            alabama
                               alaska
                              arizona
                           arkansas
                            california
                            colorado
                         connecticut
                            delaware
                                   D.C.
                               florida
                              georgia
                               hawaii
                                 idaho
                                illinois
                              indiana
                                   iowa
                              kansas
                            kentucky
                            louisiana
                               maine




1979 Subsidy per OU
                           maryland
                      massachusetts
                            michigan
                          minnesota
                         mississippi
                             missouri
                            montana
                           nebraska
                              nevada
                                   N.H.
                          new jersey
                        new mexico
                            new york
                                   N.C.
                        north dakota


1999 Subsidy per OU
                                    ohio
                           oklahoma
                              oregon
                       pennsylvania
                        rhode island
                                   S.C.
                       south dakota
                          tennessee
                                 texas
                                   utah
                             vermont
                                                                                               Figure 2: Average Tax Benefits Per Owned Unit, by State and Year




                              virginia
                         washington
                        west virginia
                           wisconsin
                            wyoming
-5000
           -3000
                     -1000
                              1000
                                     3000
                                            5000
                                                                                                   -5000
                                                                                                              -3000
                                                                                                                        -1000
                                                                                                                                 1000
                                                                                                                                        3000
                                                                                                                                               5000
               alabama                                                                                            alabama
                  alaska                                                                                             alaska
                 arizona                                                                                            arizona
             arkansas                                                                                           arkansas
             california                                                                                         california
               colorado                                                                                           colorado
           connecticut                                                                                        connecticut
             delaware                                                                                           delaware
                       D.C.                                                                                               D.C.
                   florida                                                                                            florida
                georgia                                                                                            georgia
                  hawaii                                                                                             hawaii
                     idaho                                                                                              idaho
                   illinois                                                                                           illinois
                 indiana                                                                                            indiana
                      iowa                                                                                               iowa
                 kansas                                                                                             kansas
              kentucky                                                                                           kentucky
              louisiana                                                                                          louisiana
                   maine                                                                                              maine
             maryland                                                                                           maryland
        massachusetts                                                                                      massachusetts
              michigan                                                                                           michigan
            minnesota                                                                                          minnesota
            mississippi                                                                                        mississippi
               missouri                                                                                           missouri
               montana                                                                                            montana
             nebraska                                                                                           nebraska
                 nevada                                                                                             nevada
                       N.H.                                                                                               N.H.
            new jersey                                                                                         new jersey
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Average, by State




           new mexico                                                                                         new mexico
              new york                                                                                           new york
                       N.C.                                                                                               N.C.
          north dakota                                                                                       north dakota
                       ohio                                                                                               ohio
             oklahoma                                                                                           oklahoma
                                                      Change in Average Benefits Per Owner
                                                                                                                                                         Change in Average Benefits Per Owner




                  oregon                                                                                             oregon
         pennsylvania                                                                                       pennsylvania
          rhode island                                                                                       rhode island
                                                   Relative to National Average, 1989-1999 ($99)
                                                                                                                                                      Relative to National Average, 1979-1989 ($99)




                       S.C.                                                                                               S.C.
         south dakota                                                                                       south dakota
            tennessee                                                                                          tennessee
                     texas                                                                                              texas
                       utah                                                                                               utah
                vermont                                                                                            vermont
                 virginia                                                                                           virginia
           washington                                                                                         washington
          west virginia                                                                                      west virginia
             wisconsin                                                                                          wisconsin
                                                                                                                                                                                                      Figure 3: Changes in Benefits per Owner Relative to National




              wyoming                                                                                            wyoming
                                              0.1
                                                    0.2
                                                          0.3
                                                                0.4
                                                                      0.5




                                          0
                                alabama
                                  alaska
                                 arizona
                              arkansas
                               california
                                colorado
                            connecticut
                               delaware
                                      D.C.
                                   florida
                                 georgia
                                   hawaii
                                    idaho
                                   illinois
                                 indiana
                                      iowa
                                 kansas
                               kentucky
                               louisiana
                                   maine
                              maryland
                         massachusetts
                               michigan




1979 Marginal Tax Rate
                             minnesota
                             mississippi
                                missouri
                               montana
                              nebraska
                                 nevada
                                      N.H.
                             new jersey
                            new mexico
                               new york
                                      N.C.
                           north dakota
                                       ohio
                              oklahoma
                                  oregon
                          pennsylvania
1999 Marginal Tax Rate

                           rhode island
                                       S.C.
                          south dakota
                             tennessee
                                     texas
                                                                            Figure 4: Average Marginal Tax Rates, by State and Year




                                       utah
                                vermont
                                 virginia
                            washington
                           west virginia
                              wisconsin
                               wyoming
                0
                                                                                                 0
                                                                                                                                                                                  0




                    100000
                             200000
                                      300000
                                               400000
                                                                                                     100000
                                                                                                              200000
                                                                                                                       300000
                                                                                                                                400000
                                                                                                                                                                                      100000
                                                                                                                                                                                               200000
                                                                                                                                                                                                        300000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 400000
      alabama                                                                          alabama                                                                          alabama
         alaska                                                                           alaska                                                                           alaska
       arizona                                                                          arizona                                                                          arizona
     arkansas                                                                         arkansas                                                                         arkansas
     california                                                                       california                                                                       california
      colorado                                                                         colorado                                                                         colorado
  connecticut                                                                      connecticut                                                                      connecticut
     delaware                                                                         delaware                                                                         delaware
            D.C.                                                                             D.C.                                                                             D.C.
         florida                                                                          florida                                                                          florida
       georgia                                                                          georgia                                                                          georgia
         hawaii                                                                           hawaii                                                                           hawaii
          idaho                                                                            idaho                                                                            idaho
         illinois                                                                         illinois                                                                         illinois
       indiana                                                                          indiana                                                                          indiana
            iowa                                                                             iowa                                                                             iowa
        kansas                                                                           kansas                                                                           kansas
     kentucky                                                                         kentucky                                                                         kentucky
     louisiana                                                                        louisiana                                                                        louisiana
         maine                                                                            maine                                                                            maine
    maryland                                                                         maryland                                                                         maryland
massachuse                                                                       massachuse                                                                       massachuse
     michigan                                                                         michigan                                                                         michigan
   minnesota                                                                        minnesota                                                                        minnesota
   mississippi                                                                      mississippi                                                                      mississippi
      missouri                                                                         missouri                                                                         missouri
     montana                                                                          montana                                                                          montana
    nebraska                                                                         nebraska                                                                         nebraska
       nevada                                                                           nevada                                                                           nevada
            N.H.                                                                             N.H.                                                                             N.H.




                                                        Mean Price, 1999 ($99)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Mean Price, 1979 ($99)




                                                                                                                                         Mean Price, 1989 ($99)


   new jersey                                                                       new jersey                                                                       new jersey
  new mexico                                                                       new mexico                                                                       new mexico
     new york                                                                         new york                                                                         new york
            N.C.                                                                             N.C.                                                                             N.C.
north dakota                                                                     north dakota                                                                     north dakota
             ohio                                                                             ohio                                                                             ohio
    oklahoma                                                                         oklahoma                                                                         oklahoma
        oregon                                                                           oregon                                                                           oregon
pennsylvania                                                                     pennsylvania                                                                     pennsylvania
 rhode island                                                                     rhode island                                                                     rhode island
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Figure 5: Average House Prices by State




             S.C.                                                                             S.C.                                                                             S.C.
south dakota                                                                     south dakota                                                                     south dakota
   tennessee                                                                        tennessee                                                                        tennessee
          texas                                                                            texas                                                                            texas
            utah                                                                             utah                                                                             utah
      vermont                                                                          vermont                                                                          vermont
        virginia                                                                         virginia                                                                         virginia
  washington                                                                       washington                                                                       washington
 west virginia                                                                    west virginia                                                                    west virginia
    wisconsin                                                                        wisconsin                                                                        wisconsin
     wyoming                                                                          wyoming                                                                          wyoming
  0.0%
                                                                0.0%




-60.0%
-40.0%
-20.0%
                                                              -60.0%
                                                              -40.0%
                                                              -20.0%




 20.0%
 40.0%
 60.0%
 80.0%
                                                               20.0%
                                                               40.0%
                                                               60.0%
                                                               80.0%




100.0%
                                                              100.0%
      alabama                                                       alabama
         alaska                                                        alaska
       arizona                                                       arizona
     arkansas                                                      arkansas
     california                                                    california
      colorado                                                      colorado
  connecticut                                                   connecticut
     delaware                                                      delaware
            D.C.                                                          D.C.
         florida                                                       florida
       georgia                                                       georgia
         hawaii                                                        hawaii
          idaho                                                         idaho
         illinois                                                      illinois
       indiana                                                       indiana
            iowa                                                          iowa
        kansas                                                        kansas
     kentucky                                                      kentucky
     louisiana                                                     louisiana
         maine                                                         maine
    maryland                                                      maryland
massachuse                                                    massachuse
     michigan                                                      michigan
   minnesota                                                     minnesota
   mississippi                                                   mississippi
      missouri                                                      missouri
     montana                                                       montana
    nebraska                                                      nebraska
       nevada                                                        nevada
            N.H.                                                          N.H.
   new jersey                                                    new jersey
  new mexico                                                    new mexico
     new york                                                      new york
            N.C.                                                          N.C.
north dakota                                                  north dakota
             ohio                                                          ohio
    oklahoma                                                      oklahoma
        oregon                                                        oregon
                    % Change in Mean Price, 1989-1999 ($99)
                                                                                  % Change in Mean Price, 1979-1989 ($99)




pennsylvania                                                  pennsylvania
 rhode island                                                  rhode island
             S.C.                                                          S.C.
south dakota                                                  south dakota
   tennessee                                                     tennessee
          texas                                                         texas
            utah                                                          utah
      vermont                                                       vermont
        virginia                                                      virginia
  washington                                                    washington
 west virginia                                                 west virginia
    wisconsin                                                     wisconsin
                                                                                                                            Figure 6: Percentage Change in Mean House Prices, by State




     wyoming                                                       wyoming
Figure 7: Benefits Per Owner, by Metropolitan Area and Year
                Per Owner Benefits ($99), 1979

30,000

25,000

20,000

15,000

10,000

 5,000

    0



                Per Owner Benefits ($99), 1989

30,000

25,000

20,000

15,000

10,000

 5,000

     0



                Per Owner Benefits ($99), 1999

30,000

25,000

20,000

15,000

10,000

 5,000

    0
          Figure 8: Mean House Value By Metro Area and Year
                      Mean House Value ($99), 1979

700,000

600,000

500,000

400,000

300,000

200,000

100,000

      0



                      Mean House Value ($99), 1989

700,000

600,000

500,000

400,000

300,000

200,000

100,000

     0



                      Mean House Value ($99), 1999

700,000

600,000

500,000

400,000

300,000

200,000

100,000

     0
Appendix Table A: Selected Data for U.S. States
state name              value of aggregate tax benefits ($99)           tax benefit per owner-occ unit ($99)            number of owners                   mean house value ($99)           average marginal tax rate
                     1979               1989               1999            1979         1989        1999         1979        1989            1999       1979       1989        1999        1979      1989        1999
alabama           1,802,227,840      2,253,063,424      4,175,816,448        2,675        2,121        3,318      673,806   1,062,054       1,258,635    96,129     82,428      106,983     26.9%     21.9%        24.9%
alaska              379,607,232        397,060,160        672,533,120        7,947        3,746        4,856       47,765     105,994         138,502   205,408    135,935      157,736     37.8%     24.8%        25.5%
arizona           2,690,386,432      3,231,756,288      6,554,214,400        4,984        3,678        5,069      539,757     878,580       1,292,938   148,093    123,851      149,931     32.3%     25.8%        26.8%
arkansas            650,788,864      1,167,047,424      2,090,370,944        2,790        1,882        2,890      233,238     620,027         723,428    92,488     70,168        87,847    26.1%     21.0%        25.5%
california       38,067,302,400    63,727,050,752     78,659,928,064         8,545       11,041      12,020     4,455,057   5,772,075       6,544,294   235,602    319,707      288,367     37.0%     31.5%        32.3%
colorado          3,373,017,856      3,073,462,784      8,560,170,496        5,806        3,851        7,670      580,961     798,109       1,116,008   165,177    126,149      204,708     33.6%     26.5%        29.6%
connecticut       4,288,072,448      8,098,544,128      8,226,069,504        6,144       10,032        9,460      697,929     807,271         869,568   180,498    286,864      230,847     31.8%     31.4%        30.6%
delaware            582,245,824        891,791,488      1,198,751,488        4,235        5,129        5,549      137,485     173,874         216,046   117,084    157,535      153,474     32.3%     28.0%        29.2%
D.C.                987,615,872      1,225,863,040      1,412,150,912       10,995       12,655      13,983        89,828       96,866        100,993   236,762    316,488      296,733     37.4%     31.3%        32.9%
florida           8,611,905,536    11,832,546,304     19,615,412,224         3,941        3,427        4,418    2,185,388   3,452,472       4,439,483   136,515    137,655      146,958     26.9%     21.7%        23.3%
georgia           3,629,056,000      5,302,925,824    10,490,105,856         3,206        3,451        5,170    1,131,977   1,536,745       2,029,097    98,568    112,028      138,960     28.6%     25.4%        28.1%
hawaii            1,806,276,224      2,702,411,520      2,905,577,472       12,390       14,223      12,759       145,783     190,005         227,729   313,646    394,430      316,968     40.5%     33.5%        33.1%
idaho               428,736,544        652,517,888      1,548,928,000        4,018        2,582        4,557      106,701     252,670         339,913   129,274     89,276      130,260     31.8%     25.6%        28.7%
illinois          9,924,210,688    11,869,473,792     19,707,949,056         5,300        4,406        6,391    1,872,329   2,694,029       3,083,895   148,959    140,727      171,253     32.5%     25.0%        27.5%
indiana           3,012,318,464      3,314,499,584      6,128,819,200        3,103        2,285        3,672      970,666   1,450,766       1,669,036   101,982     83,422      113,003     29.1%     23.7%        26.0%
iowa              1,432,509,056      1,702,115,200      3,070,541,312        4,187        2,284        3,693      342,165     745,371         831,419   110,751     68,159        97,233    29.4%     23.0%        26.0%
kansas            1,765,733,888      1,938,567,168      2,932,505,088        4,750        3,021        4,079      371,740     641,760         718,852   113,504     78,970      100,258     30.6%     23.9%        27.3%
kentucky          1,278,161,536      1,891,647,360      3,814,249,728        3,107        1,969        3,390      411,350     960,473       1,125,263   101,580     75,539      100,380     27.9%     21.0%        25.6%
louisiana         2,216,166,400      2,039,128,320      3,485,700,096        3,611        2,064        3,099      613,664     987,958       1,124,960   123,998     86,733      104,837     28.3%     20.7%        23.9%
maine               539,102,592      1,367,156,992      1,591,701,248        3,145        4,170        4,292      171,395     327,846         370,893   102,243    132,530      120,413     29.0%     27.0%        28.2%
maryland          4,525,458,432      7,418,500,096      9,560,833,024        5,858        6,524        7,127      772,546   1,137,154       1,341,442   155,912    192,235      181,120     34.9%     28.9%        30.1%
massachusetts     5,115,107,840    11,840,002,048     14,027,061,248         4,658        8,901        9,322    1,098,037   1,330,122       1,504,750   126,902    252,197      239,309     36.7%     33.7%        31.2%
michigan         10,390,330,368      9,924,272,128    17,592,858,624         5,360        4,089        6,299    1,938,581   2,427,308       2,793,111   109,309     96,207      141,093     33.1%     25.5%        27.9%
minnesota         4,107,958,272      4,137,303,552      7,665,030,144        5,930        3,497        5,426      692,749   1,183,118       1,412,679   144,255    107,095      139,938     34.0%     27.9%        30.5%
mississippi       1,007,276,608      1,105,440,512      2,002,671,872        2,157        1,697        2,645      466,907     651,565         757,115    82,710     69,491        87,925    23.9%     19.9%        23.8%
missouri          2,607,953,152      3,644,891,392      6,112,291,840        3,471        2,703        3,963      751,437   1,348,536       1,542,237   105,572     90,693      110,746     29.4%     23.1%        26.3%
montana             428,192,928        490,939,264      1,037,627,648        3,879        2,384        4,190      110,392     205,895         247,622   118,764     81,022      119,956     30.2%     23.1%        26.2%
nebraska            763,762,240        853,186,688      1,674,232,704        3,721        2,131        3,727      205,278     400,382         449,178   108,070     72,160      100,306     30.9%     23.1%        27.1%
nevada              817,402,432        932,990,656      2,297,021,184        5,781        3,665        5,024      141,395     254,566         457,199   188,371    147,546      168,613     31.8%     23.2%        24.7%
N.H.                638,592,448      1,596,936,704      1,743,287,424        3,842        5,695        5,270      166,213     280,415         330,783   125,703    187,447      153,730     32.6%     29.3%        29.6%
new jersey        8,955,282,432    15,010,032,640     17,601,245,184         5,687        8,282        8,753    1,574,611   1,812,339       2,010,815   154,362    246,995      214,630     32.6%     28.3%        30.0%
new mexico          843,683,584      1,122,229,888      2,145,111,168        3,567        3,068        4,522      236,538     365,736         474,400   119,025    106,216      131,164     29.0%     24.2%        26.9%
new york         15,197,323,264    32,992,880,640     39,722,639,360         5,067        9,683      10,824     2,998,990   3,407,462       3,669,796   125,073    227,971      214,444     34.6%     30.1%        30.8%
N.C.              2,587,712,512      5,025,573,376    10,542,273,536         3,237        2,936        4,853      799,308   1,711,672       2,172,152   101,989    102,358      133,273     29.5%     24.2%        28.6%
north dakota        260,747,040        266,344,288        414,378,784        3,767        1,688        2,420       69,218     157,788         171,259   123,919     67,123        80,265    29.6%     20.8%        23.7%
ohio              8,087,154,176      7,822,331,392    13,320,946,688         3,812        2,836        4,336    2,121,384   2,757,772       3,072,384   120,203     97,637      125,233     30.0%     24.6%        27.4%
oklahoma          1,766,557,312      1,717,336,960      2,668,697,600        3,362        2,091        2,907      525,460     821,267         918,136   105,161     72,772        84,317    29.0%     22.8%        26.0%
oregon            2,869,642,496      2,504,379,392      6,482,011,648        6,001        3,599        7,565      478,187     695,772         856,858   152,463    104,173      177,739     34.2%     27.2%        31.2%
pennsylvania      8,800,496,640    10,449,649,664     13,818,100,736         3,415        3,290        4,057    2,577,100   3,176,255       3,406,045   105,430    115,942      120,697     29.3%     23.4%        25.7%
rhode island        803,631,232      1,482,526,720      1,485,555,840        4,056        6,594        6,060      198,140     224,829         245,128   123,122    202,311      160,513     30.7%     28.6%        29.2%
S.C.              1,481,468,416      2,477,453,568      4,762,169,344        3,107        2,820        4,299      476,795     878,396       1,107,619    98,249     96,554      123,803     29.4%     24.9%        27.3%
south dakota        226,558,576        239,957,360        484,884,800        2,869        1,402        2,450       78,964     171,122         197,902   108,525     61,841        87,845    25.5%     18.1%        21.3%
tennessee         2,262,095,872      2,840,229,632      5,612,573,696        2,975        2,252        3,595      760,328   1,260,974       1,561,394   101,570     90,677      116,947     29.9%     23.4%        26.6%
texas             9,122,002,944      8,877,802,496    15,597,929,472         3,700        2,403        3,307    2,465,540   3,694,082       4,716,914   116,826     96,644      107,786     27.8%     20.4%        22.8%
utah              1,217,788,160      1,136,289,280      3,210,896,384        5,028        3,106        6,401      242,219     365,781         501,605   153,176    105,104      174,779     32.3%     26.6%        29.7%
vermont             114,842,080        593,118,784        723,118,464        3,754        4,080        4,259       30,593     145,368         169,777   126,830    144,010      129,562     32.1%     27.5%        28.4%
virginia          5,300,419,584      7,820,744,192    10,895,771,648         4,564        5,148        5,928    1,161,331   1,519,273       1,837,926   131,179    159,395      157,349     31.6%     26.8%        31.7%
washington        4,037,749,760      4,768,554,496      9,521,277,952        4,813        4,074        6,494      838,846   1,170,590       1,466,081   157,329    156,948      207,334     30.0%     23.0%        25.3%
west virginia       874,336,896        899,306,240      1,402,487,936        3,147        1,763        2,533      277,790     510,041         553,619   106,439     71,315        85,444    28.6%     21.3%        24.3%
wisconsin         4,895,357,440      5,110,471,168      8,643,598,336        6,317        4,206        6,060      775,010   1,214,900       1,426,329   129,365     92,239      129,357     32.6%     27.4%        29.9%
wyoming             305,814,560        222,550,080        459,084,256        4,113        1,946        3,389       74,358     114,373         135,471   151,016     89,961      125,252     30.8%     20.4%        22.6%

Nation           197,878,141,392   284,002,854,736   420,069,163,200         4,840        4,818        6,024   40,885,208   58,951,786     69,730,677   137,536     148,106     158,764
Appendix Table B: Data for Selected CBSAs
CBSA name                                                 value of aggregate tax benefits ($99)          tax benefit per owner occ unit ($99)        number of owners                mean house value ($99)            marginal tax rates
                                                        1979              1989               1999           1979         1989       1999        1979      1989          1999      1979       1989        1999      1979      1989        1999
Akron, OH                                              638,726,656       516,888,928       932,638,016        4,012        3,006       4,827     159210    171939        193216   123,480    101,418     135,480    30.4%     24.9%       27.9%
Albany-Schenectady-Troy, NY                            640,422,528     1,238,426,112     1,248,092,544        3,673        6,251       5,866     174374    198129        212761    97,292    146,335     122,295    33.3%     29.1%       29.5%
Albuquerque, NM                                        464,202,976       528,685,024       979,671,808        4,158        3,630       5,130     111640    145651        190951   136,033    122,163     145,352    30.8%     26.3%       28.6%
Anchorage, AK                                          294,608,640       222,468,304       386,975,904        8,616        4,157       5,291      34195      53517        73139   218,177    145,365     165,659    38.3%     25.4%       26.0%
Atlanta-Sandy Springs-Marietta, GA                   2,001,247,616     3,397,691,136     7,016,630,272        4,288        4,716       6,764     466664    720466       1037289   121,854    144,184     171,392    31.7%     28.0%       30.3%
Atlantic City, NJ                                      227,104,752       288,889,664       318,181,024        5,016        5,249       5,047      45272      55032        63040   145,769    168,175     143,500    29.9%     26.3%       27.2%
Augusta-Richmond County, GA-SC                         221,483,200       283,350,624       454,939,360        2,733        2,712       3,533      81039    104464        128785    89,463     93,675     105,276    28.1%     24.8%       26.8%
Austin-Round Rock, TX                                  433,828,544       517,870,752     1,510,661,632        4,275        3,100       5,496     101491    167072        274860   134,011    119,051     160,781    27.6%     21.6%       25.1%
Baltimore-Towson, MD                                 2,138,101,504     3,112,937,728     4,169,964,032        4,755        5,555       6,399     449670    560385        651626   133,862    166,357     165,544    33.0%     28.0%       29.3%
Baton Rouge, LA                                        397,446,304       335,150,976       635,060,992        3,963        2,309       3,569     100294    145173        177926   134,767     94,846     117,445    30.0%     22.2%       25.2%
Bellingham, WA                                         100,510,848       111,412,976       216,015,664        4,050        3,567       5,286      24816      31237        40863   149,040    146,820     187,997    28.0%     22.1%       24.3%
Bend, OR                                                18,944,644        86,332,608       264,858,176        4,869        4,165       8,034       3891      20728        32967   133,093    121,326     191,411    33.3%     27.8%       31.1%
Billings, MT                                            98,110,192        86,549,648       166,627,648        4,458        2,723       4,267      22008      31779        39052   136,578     89,560     117,921    31.2%     24.1%       26.7%
Boise City-Nampa, ID                                   255,588,224       235,741,696       617,279,104        4,210        2,894       5,046      60713      81459       122329   133,148     96,915     138,922    32.1%     26.9%       29.9%
Boston-Quincy, MA                                    1,444,536,960     3,393,614,336     4,288,292,608        4,772        9,753     10,941      302726    347955        391958   128,819    275,059     275,346    36.8%     34.1%       32.0%
Boulder, CO                                            243,525,776       280,866,944       880,046,848        6,889        5,199     11,855       35348      54027        74233   196,032    163,109     297,575    35.2%     28.7%       32.0%
Bridgeport-Stamford-Norwalk, CT                      1,923,640,576     3,205,777,664     3,909,148,416       10,189       15,405     17,418      188793    208103        224436   257,432    407,753     393,162    35.7%     33.3%       33.1%
Buffalo-Cheektowaga-Tonawanda, NY                    1,090,865,536     1,417,401,856     1,724,492,544        3,885        4,758       5,560     280786    297911        310169    95,849    103,569     101,591    33.0%     26.5%       27.9%
Cambridge-Newton-Framingham, MA                      1,686,670,848     3,441,761,792     4,381,857,792        6,107       11,114     12,643      276194    309685        346591   156,010    302,768     307,466    39.6%     34.9%       33.1%
Camden, NJ                                             905,497,472     1,473,746,176     1,661,466,496        3,684        5,095       5,160     245816    289236        321989   114,437    161,389     141,217    31.1%     27.2%       28.6%
Cape Coral-Fort Myers, FL                              216,397,632       369,687,648       688,554,688        3,849        3,657       4,774      56220    101093        144240   145,256    149,217     159,251    27.2%     22.2%       23.5%
Cedar Rapids, IA                                       152,935,744       164,628,496       321,963,552        4,372        2,858       4,647      34981      57598        69290   113,523     83,039     118,592    31.1%     24.6%       27.5%
Champaign-Urbana, IL                                   131,526,608       120,526,896       175,654,320        4,328        2,771       3,599      30389      43501        48802   130,475     97,901     108,430    30.3%     23.6%       25.4%
Charleston-North Charleston, SC                        298,552,576       392,901,024       814,481,280        3,492        3,538       5,887      85498    111039        138360   109,154    118,143     158,663    29.9%     26.0%       28.4%
Charlotte-Gastonia-Concord, NC-SC                      630,344,000       961,951,872     2,171,821,824        3,819        3,773       6,298     165057    254932        344824   111,778    122,980     160,711    31.3%     26.4%       30.5%
Chicago-Naperville-Joliet, IL                        7,231,012,352     8,616,651,776    14,298,169,344        5,916        5,763       8,185    1222261   1495156       1746863   163,745    179,722     214,446    33.4%     26.5%       28.8%
Cincinnati-Middletown, OH-KY-IN                      1,349,861,376     1,492,849,408     2,720,939,264        4,086        3,350       5,192     330386    445659        524044   125,086    112,169     142,408    30.0%     25.3%       28.3%
Cleveland-Elyria-Mentor, OH                          2,340,626,688     1,891,229,824     3,076,908,288        4,619        3,535       5,298     506780    535003        580806   137,384    115,657     145,946    31.7%     25.7%       28.1%
Columbia, MO                                            66,004,672        68,706,872       143,254,080        3,614        2,667       4,290      18265      25761        33395   116,401     91,526     122,095    29.3%     23.5%       26.9%
Columbia, SC                                           310,364,192       441,571,616       758,316,736        3,654        3,291       4,406      84942    134160        172118   111,649    108,000     124,057    31.1%     26.6%       28.3%
Columbus, GA-AL                                        125,229,640       135,079,872       219,418,608        2,418        2,487       3,528      51800      54308        62194    82,239     87,537     103,540    26.2%     23.1%       25.7%
Columbus, OH                                           907,619,136     1,094,443,392     2,082,875,776        3,741        3,389       5,193     242635    322933        401117   121,344    113,436     143,824    29.4%     25.8%       28.4%
Dallas-Plano-Irving, TX                              1,787,127,680     2,052,730,112     3,614,394,368        4,704        3,773       4,926     379955    544026        733778   139,413    138,433     145,829    29.9%     23.0%       25.0%
Dayton, OH                                             650,570,688       641,685,248       929,741,120        3,571        3,024       4,092     182160    212196        227208   115,115    102,132     120,683    29.7%     25.4%       27.6%
Denver-Aurora, CO                                    2,126,247,552     1,727,210,368     4,661,587,968        6,653        4,235       8,257     319579    407822        564536   181,670    134,048     214,808    35.3%     27.5%       30.5%
Detroit-Livonia-Dearborn, MI                         2,523,734,528     1,749,090,432     2,907,995,904        4,606        3,508       5,681     547912    498536        511861    92,172     80,599     125,817    31.9%     24.1%       27.1%
Durham, NC                                             167,461,488       309,861,376       646,727,616        3,856        3,957       6,442      43430      78309       100396   115,163    128,616     163,509    30.4%     26.1%       29.9%
El Paso, TX                                            234,032,432       202,286,624       287,609,920        3,019        1,935       2,153      77511    104525        133596   107,332     88,590      82,208    24.9%     19.2%       21.1%
Erie, PA                                               214,140,800       152,758,544       240,796,192        3,169        2,192       3,267      67577      69705        73701   101,504     82,905     102,053    28.5%     22.4%       24.8%
Eugene-Springfield, OR                                 352,309,856       230,356,576       548,142,784        5,948        3,418       6,750      59234      67387        81208   154,441    100,775     163,778    33.3%     26.6%       30.5%
Fairbanks, AK                                           48,781,984        41,802,852        67,040,700        5,564        3,195       4,172       8767      13083        16070   157,684    122,467     138,943    34.5%     24.2%       25.1%
Flagstaff, AZ                                           27,159,490        63,852,540       137,561,136        4,954        3,539       5,549       5482      18042        24790   155,558    119,531     164,975    32.6%     24.7%       26.3%
Flint, MI                                              555,334,336       381,794,816       615,705,408        4,852        3,361       4,950     114454    113585        124382    96,477     76,577     110,748    33.3%     25.0%       27.1%
Fort Lauderdale-Pompano Beach-Deerfield Beach, FL    1,646,826,880     1,605,702,016     2,339,358,976        5,853        4,466       5,146     281351    359532        454625   186,762    172,201     166,958    30.0%     23.4%       24.3%
Fort Worth-Arlington, TX                               714,726,016       895,811,776     1,444,907,520        3,322        2,906       3,629     215119    308241        398192   112,082    112,403     116,109    28.0%     22.5%       24.0%
Fresno, CA                                             486,070,144       468,251,712       651,644,352        5,177        3,906       4,562      93896    119869        142856   160,012    132,301     130,421    32.3%     26.3%       27.4%
Grand Junction, CO                                      84,098,384        59,602,872       151,216,544        4,694        2,533       4,540      17917      23534        33306   146,049     94,419     142,770    31.3%     23.7%       26.8%
Grand Rapids-Wyoming, MI                               589,228,928       658,072,000     1,137,655,680        4,486        3,938       5,716     131340    167128        199044    98,972     96,166     131,514    31.6%     26.0%       28.2%
Greensboro-High Point, NC                              340,587,552       452,484,608       814,777,856        3,430        3,210       4,745      99286    140951        171721   105,193    109,639     129,803    30.3%     25.3%       29.1%
Harrisburg-Carlisle, PA                                366,251,072       386,465,376       573,905,792        3,300        3,084       4,069     110999    125306        141039   108,277    111,617     125,401    30.0%     24.8%       26.4%
Hartford-West Hartford-East Hartford, CT             1,158,310,656     2,346,470,912     2,000,050,816        5,021        8,571       6,763     230680    273757        295713   159,024    252,005     174,273    31.6%     31.4%       30.3%
Honolulu, HI                                         1,502,906,240     2,205,694,720     2,204,443,648       13,491       16,218     14,115      111399    136004        156179   335,396    446,772     346,203    41.4%     34.3%       33.7%
Houston-Baytown-Sugar Land, TX                       3,217,568,256     2,229,041,408     4,054,737,408        5,122        2,922       4,019     628231    762905       1008875   146,784    109,944     123,350    31.3%     22.0%       23.9%
Huntsville, AL                                         148,019,184       234,739,440       393,487,488        2,935        3,156       4,104      50432      74386        95890   101,690    110,519     122,707    28.7%     25.3%       26.8%
Indianapolis, IN                                       873,032,064       949,692,672     1,911,556,224        3,457        2,984       4,751     252532    318234        402315   109,099    103,797     138,588    30.0%     25.2%       27.3%
Iowa City, IA                                           62,661,960        88,865,784       176,962,272        5,519        3,651       5,698      11354      24342        31055   144,804    105,105     143,365    31.6%     25.4%       27.6%
Ithaca, NY                                              66,261,812       114,455,608       124,161,200        4,062        6,211       6,340      16312      18427        19583   108,107    143,203     118,815    32.3%     28.2%       28.4%
Jonesboro, AR                                           23,401,900        44,457,928        79,336,656        3,180        1,908       2,901       7358      23306        27351   100,033     69,860      86,894    26.6%     20.4%       25.5%
Kansas City, MO-KS                                   1,351,621,504     1,420,376,064     2,399,717,888        4,240        3,428       4,902     318750    414357        489569   113,505     99,453     124,990    30.9%     25.2%       28.3%
Kennewick-Richland-Pasco, WA                           143,552,320        76,011,232       175,173,440        4,656        2,240       3,800      30829      33940        46094   148,891     94,512     132,466    31.7%     21.6%       24.2%
Knoxville, TN                                          338,131,616       343,717,664       679,502,080        2,965        2,402       3,825     114060    143120        177630   102,427     95,948     123,920    29.8%     24.1%       26.8%
Lafayette, IN                                           80,248,152        86,830,472       158,273,760        3,781        2,543       3,985      21223      34141        39721   125,626     93,652     123,865    29.7%     24.1%       26.2%
Lake County-Kenosha County, IL-WI                      881,901,568     1,269,607,936     2,215,093,760        8,637        7,874     10,700      102105    161245        207026   197,791    220,613     249,906    36.6%     28.2%       30.7%
Las Vegas-Paradise, NV                                 481,587,744       521,283,520     1,474,359,168        5,221        3,518       4,869      92232    148158        302807   175,772    143,027     163,791    31.0%     23.1%       24.8%
Lawrence, KS                                            38,067,052        59,406,500       109,807,448        4,391        3,755       5,504       8669      15821        19951   114,497    100,642     139,411    28.3%     24.2%       28.1%
Lewiston-Auburn, ME                                     57,581,660        92,324,232        92,302,400        2,655        3,707       3,466      21687      24906        26628    92,088    122,663      99,836    27.6%     26.9%       27.7%
Lexington-Fayette, KY                                  247,835,472       242,404,256       466,688,000        3,920        3,128       4,758      63228      77504        98076   128,039    112,415     133,161    29.2%     24.0%       27.9%
Lincoln, NE                                            165,446,768       149,776,992       298,532,896        4,317        2,779       4,651      38323      53892        64193   122,495     90,875     123,599    31.6%     24.9%       28.4%
Los Angeles-Long Beach-Glendale, CA                 12,335,770,624   19,375,642,624     18,130,198,528        9,585       13,457     12,096     1287008   1439801       1498881   254,380    386,087     295,509    37.1%     32.1%       32.0%
Louisville, KY-IN                                      623,438,208       680,264,640     1,443,264,256        3,027        2,468       4,492     205993    275630        321312    97,123     89,075     126,171    28.2%     23.2%       27.4%
Appendix Table B: Data for Selected CBSAs
CBSA name                                           value of aggregate tax benefits ($99)          tax benefit per owner occ unit ($99)        number of owners              mean house value ($99)            marginal tax rates
                                                  1979              1989               1999           1979         1989       1999        1979      1989        1999      1979       1989        1999      1979      1989        1999
Macon, GA                                        106,113,760       124,471,864       197,234,224        2,667        2,591       3,548      39792      48041      55594    86,153     89,470     105,459    27.5%     23.7%       26.2%
Madison, WI                                      373,065,632       495,135,296       942,124,736        7,008        5,150       7,733      53238      96139     121835   148,707    110,895     162,775    33.4%     29.1%       31.2%
Manchester-Nashua, NH                            252,867,904       494,829,472       519,464,800        4,212        6,235       5,537      60031      79363      93820   132,885    197,864     155,980    33.6%     30.1%       30.3%
McAllen-Edinburg-Pharr, TX                        84,481,144        84,757,600       176,520,048        1,687        1,166       1,541      50078      72715     114570    72,628     59,351      65,744    20.9%     15.3%       18.9%
Memphis, TN-MS-AR                                572,445,952       663,853,760     1,195,546,112        3,055        2,763       4,040     187405    240235      295908   100,904    103,283     122,037    29.7%     24.5%       27.5%
Miami-Miami Beach-Kendall, FL                  1,600,257,280     1,605,941,248     2,571,840,768        5,492        4,271       5,737     291367    375990      448280                          180,534    28.3%     21.7%       23.3%
Milwaukee-Waukesha-West Allis, WI              2,199,099,648     1,747,426,944     2,720,813,568        7,738        5,467       7,581     284193    319630      358877   149,936    115,181     154,504    34.4%     28.5%       30.3%
Minneapolis-St. Paul-Bloomington, MN-WI        3,359,491,072     3,105,091,072     5,678,496,768        6,812        4,701       6,897     493185    660569      823283   160,214    135,993     169,146    36.0%     30.3%       32.1%
Montgomery, AL                                   182,564,864       181,515,440       324,919,904        3,005        2,451       3,584      60763      74048      90661   103,484     92,742     112,540    27.8%     23.1%       25.7%
Napa, CA                                         185,243,440       266,457,696       422,983,296        7,754        9,994     14,307       23890      26662      29564   217,283    296,582     341,203    36.6%     31.9%       33.8%
Naples-Marco Island, FL                          123,653,272       311,607,616       804,793,664        6,538        7,193     10,341       18912      43319      77829   197,018    254,473     287,863    28.8%     24.3%       26.1%
Newark-Union, NJ-PA                            2,659,852,800     4,215,533,312     5,068,328,448        6,923        9,929     10,870      384233    424570      466273   175,800    287,460     254,550    33.4%     28.7%       30.6%
New Haven-Milford, CT                            756,322,624     1,546,504,576     1,366,751,872        4,559        8,073       6,789     165903    191558      201320   150,936    244,286     177,198    29.6%     30.2%       29.2%
New Orleans-Metairie-Kenner, LA                  955,555,328       757,202,432     1,262,510,592        4,321        2,801       4,118     221142    270328      306586   144,274    111,223     131,447    29.1%     22.6%       25.2%
New York-Wayne-White Plains, NY-NJ             7,755,856,896   17,816,422,400     22,499,680,256        6,341       12,827     14,776     1223091   1388925     1522705   165,309    342,882     327,423    34.1%     30.8%       31.7%
Norwich-New London, CT                           199,853,296       439,776,064       429,275,584        3,858        7,291       6,451      51806      60315      66548   137,116    229,243     171,501    28.8%     29.5%       29.0%
Oakland-Fremont-Hayward, CA                    3,027,167,744     5,568,395,776     7,949,591,552        8,427       12,156     15,151      359203    458087      524702   228,772    340,522     346,390    37.6%     32.7%       34.4%
Ocala, FL                                         65,046,552       117,274,488       210,059,008        2,023        1,984       2,466      32149      59112      85171    91,699     96,685     100,479    21.9%     19.4%       21.1%
Oklahoma City, OK                                757,557,952       601,781,632       957,260,928        3,824        2,498       3,418     198083    240886      280030   113,343     83,771      95,609    30.3%     24.4%       27.1%
Olympia, WA                                      100,586,032       120,403,280       270,171,008        3,765        2,993       4,970      26713      40226      54364   142,915    121,344     168,830    28.6%     22.6%       24.8%
Omaha-Council Bluffs, NE-IA                      468,226,624       465,733,024       940,805,696        3,604        2,768       4,780     129908    168235      196838   102,600     86,825     120,099    31.0%     25.0%       28.6%
Orlando, FL                                      565,440,832       967,848,448     1,668,616,320        3,255        3,240       4,025     173703    298736      414548   121,413    131,411     136,957    26.4%     22.6%       23.8%
Oshkosh-Neenah, WI                               161,374,368       150,973,088       236,083,616        5,558        4,262       5,681      29037      35423      41558   114,657     92,898     121,612    31.7%     27.9%       30.2%
Oxnard-Thousand Oaks-Ventura, CA                 927,708,288     1,920,400,768     2,117,084,288        8,553       13,501     12,895      108469    142242      164185   244,050    379,015     297,286    38.6%     34.0%       34.1%
Palm Bay-Melbourne-Titusville, FL                244,048,880       349,099,968       486,164,704        3,764        3,124       3,288      64832    111742      147878   133,669    128,269     120,474    28.0%     22.6%       23.1%
Peoria, IL                                       340,588,960       214,362,224       371,938,432        4,384        2,291       3,565      77684      93555     104331   125,203     77,900     105,416    31.7%     23.2%       25.9%
Philadelphia, PA                               3,228,380,672     4,720,415,744     5,614,452,736        3,742        4,979       5,627     862778    947977      997749   110,273    162,830     153,021    30.2%     25.2%       27.0%
Phoenix-Mesa-Scottsdale, AZ                    1,897,470,592     2,175,566,336     4,587,456,512        5,171        4,033       5,653     366932    539474      811467   151,625    132,229     160,945    32.9%     26.7%       27.8%
Pittsburgh, PA                                 2,370,635,520     1,693,993,728     2,559,060,736        3,809        2,475       3,598     622376    684553      711338   109,745     87,896     105,831    29.9%     22.3%       25.2%
Portland-South Portland, ME                      311,336,096       680,303,936       802,344,640        3,595        5,969       5,882      86610    113967      136405   113,144    178,725     154,830    29.8%     29.6%       30.1%
Portland-Vancouver-Beaverton, OR-WA            1,915,478,144     1,454,741,760     4,102,248,704        6,423        3,986       8,745     298227    364981      469092   162,216    115,700     205,031    34.7%     27.7%       31.5%
Poughkeepsie-Newburgh-Middletown, NY             481,094,112     1,227,028,224     1,362,951,680        4,632        9,416       9,363     103852    130318      145570   115,355    209,302     167,594    34.9%     31.5%       31.1%
Providence-New Bedford-Fall River, RI-MA       1,118,298,240     2,216,024,576     2,237,987,840        3,801        6,602       6,025     294217    335660      371451   115,752    200,987     163,042    31.6%     29.8%       29.3%
Provo-Orem, UT                                   119,019,400       136,340,208       449,609,312        4,698        3,000       6,542      25332      45445      68727   153,190    106,098     185,641    30.6%     26.2%       29.7%
Raleigh-Cary, NC                                 273,847,648       568,685,760     1,464,367,872        4,163        4,267       7,055      65779    133280      207558   123,745    135,440     176,139    32.3%     27.1%       31.5%
Rapid City, SD                                    52,500,996        43,098,092        85,072,720        3,307        1,837       2,940      15874      23455      28937   123,886     79,631     105,847    26.6%     19.9%       22.4%
Redding, CA                                      124,933,808       141,344,464       195,947,280        4,560        3,914       4,671      27397      36112      41949   155,614    139,517     142,253    31.3%     26.4%       27.3%
Reno-Sparks, NV                                  291,332,256       254,740,128       510,701,760        7,002        4,536       6,426      41607      56155      79472   214,022    175,032     202,884    33.3%     23.8%       25.3%
Richmond, VA                                     669,487,680       908,106,944     1,464,138,752        3,793        3,794       5,007     176500    239381      292409   115,089    122,637     137,469    30.9%     26.6%       30.8%
Riverside-San Bernardino-Ontario, CA           1,846,830,848     3,668,636,672     4,094,103,296        5,265        6,491       5,938     350795    565185      689482   168,143    204,026     162,849    33.3%     29.5%       29.4%
Roanoke, VA                                      214,533,808       226,308,672       365,496,800        3,287        3,058       4,328      65270      74008      84449   103,743    104,160     126,589    29.2%     24.9%       25.9%
Sacramento--Arden-Arcade--Roseville, CA        1,423,387,776     2,240,527,104     3,018,712,832        5,736        6,823       7,404     248142    328401      407689   176,334    211,623     192,757    34.6%     30.0%       31.1%
St. Louis, MO-IL                               1,820,621,184     2,325,556,992     3,613,991,424        3,732        3,425       4,769     487892    678994      757785   111,153    111,186     127,647    30.2%     24.9%       27.5%
Salt Lake City, UT                               713,197,184       573,228,224     1,654,642,688        5,484        3,446       7,473     130047    166327      221403   160,980    113,302     195,723    33.2%     27.2%       30.7%
San Antonio, TX                                  615,769,728       662,697,600     1,136,645,376        2,909        2,246       2,931     211699    295080      387744    98,278     93,760      99,789    25.2%     20.1%       22.5%
San Diego-Carlsbad-San Marcos, CA              3,071,007,488     4,980,189,184     6,419,328,000        8,758       10,435     11,641      350663    477281      551431   249,665    306,009     286,299    36.4%     31.5%       32.5%
Sandusky, OH                                      70,773,448        58,789,320       100,586,704        3,815        2,849       4,401      18553      20633      22854   122,551     98,353     130,743    31.0%     25.7%       27.8%
San Francisco-San Mateo-Redwood City, CA       3,709,906,944     5,785,719,296     8,834,676,736       13,126       18,697     26,385      282648    309446      334833   332,138    518,772     583,460    41.3%     34.6%       37.2%
San Jose-Sunnyvale-Santa Clara, CA             2,758,220,288     5,184,223,744     8,606,179,328       11,320       16,494     24,629      243657    314308      349429   290,104    449,598     538,704    41.6%     34.7%       37.5%
Santa Ana-Anaheim-Irvine, CA                   4,166,436,096     6,879,275,520     8,379,301,376       10,719       13,847     14,593      388700    496824      574181   280,805    384,555     326,706    41.2%     34.0%       34.3%
Santa Barbara-Santa Maria-Goleta, CA             558,587,776       994,041,536     1,283,205,888       10,731       13,992     16,759       52053      71043      76569   288,900    402,659     398,362    37.9%     32.6%       33.5%
Santa Cruz-Watsonville, CA                       333,710,304       677,507,904       995,440,064        8,598       13,536     18,210       38812      50052      54665   261,270    392,714     432,492    36.2%     33.0%       35.1%
Santa Fe, NM                                      55,636,284       150,503,536       345,525,184        5,339        5,877       9,604      10421      25608      35977   168,263    189,389     251,715    30.7%     27.6%       30.9%
Sarasota-Bradenton-Venice, FL                    436,005,728       605,854,720     1,071,165,696        3,983        3,783       5,317     109453    160172      201474   144,247    150,912     171,466    26.9%     22.4%       23.9%
Savannah, GA                                     151,784,432       185,250,416       355,236,000        3,235        3,157       4,970      46919      58678      71471    98,719    104,369     134,631    28.5%     25.1%       27.6%
Seattle-Bellevue-Everett, WA                   2,229,990,912     2,890,294,784     5,330,780,160        6,068        6,088       9,240     367495    474735      576927   184,888    220,745     276,008    32.6%     25.4%       27.5%
Shreveport-Bossier City, LA                      198,112,160       181,614,032       274,112,640        3,195        2,075       2,873      62013      87508      95407   107,286     85,519      94,969    27.4%     20.8%       23.7%
Sioux City, IA-NE-SD                              89,235,160        66,895,184       125,322,664        3,277        1,971       3,373      27230      33941      37156    91,953     61,679      91,749    27.9%     21.7%       25.9%
Spokane, WA                                      285,376,064       194,817,424       401,747,264        3,339        2,159       3,749      85460      90221     107166   126,012     93,394     134,843    27.0%     20.5%       23.1%
Springfield, MA                                  388,719,040       908,740,160       770,020,096        3,241        5,994       4,678     119955    151613      164620    95,752    179,553     137,132    34.5%     32.3%       28.7%
Suffolk County-Nassau County, NY               4,128,623,360     9,964,110,848    11,485,210,624        6,469       14,493     15,655      638170    687506      733627   144,078    303,670     271,158    40.4%     33.5%       34.0%
Syracuse, NY                                     530,014,112       832,231,296       861,968,960        3,762        5,155       5,102     140902    161439      168948    94,019    112,818      97,032    33.3%     27.9%       28.0%
Tampa-St. Petersburg-Clearwater, FL            1,237,367,680     1,688,922,880     2,503,383,040        2,827        2,804       3,510     437714    602266      713279   110,606    119,167     124,169    25.2%     21.4%       23.0%
Toledo, OH                                       587,011,584       472,215,840       747,959,936        3,786        2,852       4,224     155038    165601      177066   116,684     95,903     121,175    30.0%     24.7%       27.0%
Topeka, KS                                       205,075,568       167,908,912       228,201,648        4,496        2,926       3,593      45608      57376      63505   109,656     77,186      90,824    30.4%     24.7%       27.4%
Trenton-Ewing, NJ                                348,361,920       594,385,728       703,982,080        5,113        7,638       8,348      68136      77818      84325   136,347    222,056     198,387    32.3%     28.0%       29.7%
Tucson, AZ                                       631,105,600       561,815,424       992,154,624        4,964        3,525       4,645     127132    159362      213613   148,231    120,121     140,680    31.5%     25.3%       26.2%
Tulsa, OK                                        576,693,888       510,295,296       828,991,872        3,789        2,595       3,647     152221    196646      227323   117,616     87,982     101,605    30.4%     24.6%       27.4%
Washington-Arlington-Alexandria, DC-VA-MD-WV   4,013,167,872     6,601,027,584     8,239,034,880        8,349        9,371       9,463     480683    704426      870699   203,658    260,940     225,074    38.5%     31.5%       32.9%
Wichita, KS                                      460,482,208       439,964,768       595,440,128        4,696        3,410       3,967      98055    129026      150090   109,382     85,665      96,959    30.8%     25.1%       27.6%
Appendix Table B: Data for Selected CBSAs
CBSA name                                      value of aggregate tax benefits ($99)          tax benefit per owner occ unit ($99)        number of owners              mean house value ($99)            marginal tax rates
                                             1979             1989                1999           1979         1989       1999        1979      1989        1999      1979       1989        1999      1979      1989        1999
Wilmington, DE-MD-NJ                        505,963,968      796,335,040        987,129,664        4,240        5,389       5,686     119345    147772      173622   118,327    165,297     154,280    32.8%     28.6%       29.8%
Winston-Salem, NC                           248,565,392      322,453,408        571,343,360        3,532        3,281       4,811      70374      98271     118770   106,231    110,821     132,112    30.2%     25.4%       28.9%
York-Hanover, PA                            279,696,768      296,279,584        439,873,792        3,358        3,097       3,899      83291      95670     112816   113,860    115,345     124,982    29.5%     24.8%       26.4%
