NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE ILLUSION OF SUSTAINABILITY
Michael Kremer
Edward Miguel
Working Paper 10324
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10324
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2004

We thank ICS Africa and the Kenya Ministry of Health for their cooperation in all stages of the project,
and would especially like to acknowledge the contributions of Alicia Bannon, Elizabeth Beasley, Laban
Benaya, Simon Brooker, Pascaline Dupas, Alfred Luoba, Sylvie Moulin, Robert Namunyu, Carol
Nekesa, Peter Wafula Nasokho, Polycarp Waswa and the entire PSDP staff, without whom the project
would not have been possible. Gratitude is extended to the teachers, school children, and households of
Busia for participating in the study. Melissa Gonzalez-Brenes, Tina Green, Jean Lee, Emily Oster, and
Avery Ouellette have provided excellent research assistance. We thank Andrew Foster, Caroline Hoxby,
Guido Imbens, Botond Koszegi, Kaivan Munshi, Mark Rosenzweig, John Strauss, and Chris Udry for
helpful conversations. We are grateful for financial support from the World Bank, NIH Fogarty
International Center (R01 TW05612-02), and Berkeley Center for Health Research. All errors are our
own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
©2004 by Michael Kremer and Edward Miguel. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

The Illusion of Sustainability
Michael Kremer and Edward Miguel
NBER Working Paper No. 10324
February 2004, Revised August 2006
JEL No. I1, I3, O2
ABSTRACT
The history of foreign development assistance is one of movement away from addressing immediate
needs and toward focusing on the underlying causes of poverty. A recent manifestation is the move
towards "sustainability," which stresses community mobilization, education, and cost-recovery. This
stands in contrast to the traditional economic analysis of development projects, with its focus on
providing public goods and correcting externalities. We examine evidence from randomized
evaluations on strategies for combating intestinal worms, which affect one in four people worldwide.
Providing medicine to treat worms was extremely cost effective, although medicine must be
provided twice per year indefinitely to keep children worm-free. An effort to promote sustainability
by educating Kenyan schoolchildren on worm prevention was ineffective, and a "mobilization"
intervention from psychology failed to boost deworming drug take-up. Take-up was highly sensitive
to drug cost: a small increase in cost led to an 80 percent reduction in take-up (relative to free
treatment). The results suggest that, in the context we examine, the pursuit of sustainability may be
an illusion, and that in the short-run, at least, external subsidies will remain necessary.
Michael Kremer
Harvard University
Department of Economics
Littauer Center 207
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
mkremer@fas.harvard.edu
Edward Miguel
Department of Economics
Evans Hall, #3880
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and NBER
emiguel@econ.berkeley.edu

I. Introduction
The history of overseas development assistance can be viewed as a series of attempts to identify and
address ever more fundamental causes of global poverty. Oxfam, for example, founded in 1942 as the
Oxford Committee for Famine Relief, later shifted to “support for self-help schemes whereby
communities improved their own water supplies, farming practices, and health provision”1. In the 1950's
and 1960's, it was widely argued that long-run economic performance depended on capital investment,
and raising savings through a “big push” [Rosenstein-Rodin, 1943] would launch countries into selfsustaining growth or “take-off” [Rostow, 1960]. Accordingly, the World Bank largely funded
infrastructure like dams and roads. By the 1980’s international financial institution policymakers decided
that capital accumulation and technological progress depended not so much on investment and careful
engineering, but rather on a better economic policy environment [Williamson, 1990; World Bank, 1993a].
Development assistance was extended conditionally to encourage countries to adopt economic policies
associated with this “Washington Consensus” view, characterized by reduced tariffs, appropriate foreign
exchange rates and low inflation. By the 1990’s, this approach also became seen as inadequate by many.
According to a new consensus, these policies would have only limited impact in the absence of more
fundamental institutional reforms [World Bank, 1998].
Part of this new consensus in overseas development assistance involved reforms to national level
institutions, but given widespread central government failures in delivering public goods, another strand
emphasized encouraging local communities to sustainably provide their own public goods. Whereas
orthodox public finance analysis suggests that governments or donors should indefinitely fund activities
that generate positive externalities, advocates of sustainability emphasize the importance of local project
“ownership”, and promote public goods projects that only require start-up funding and can then continue
without external support. These efforts typically rely on voluntary activities by community members
rather than on the granting of coercive fundraising powers to local governments.
The idea that development projects should aim at financial sustainability through voluntary local
action has had tremendous influence in development thinking, in areas from microfinance to the

1

environment.2 In public health and water supply, sustainability advocates concentrate on cost-recovery
from beneficiaries, community mobilization, and health education rather than simply building wells or
subsidizing medical treatments that generate externalities. The idea of replacing dependency on aid with a
one-time investment that leads to long-run sustainability is certainly ideologically attractive.
Yet anecdotal evidence suggests that financial sustainability has often been an illusion, and
sometimes a costly one. Morduch [1999] argues that the pursuit of sustainability by microfinance
organizations has led them to move away from serving the poor. Meuwissen [2002] argues that a health
cost-recovery program in Niger led to unexpectedly large drops in health care utilization, and that the
local health committees set up by the program failed in most of their responsibilities. In a large water
project in the Kenyan area we study, 43% of borehole wells were useless ten years after the shift from
external donor support for water-well maintenance to the training of local maintenance committees
[Miguel and Gugerty, 2005].
While it is certainly true that in some cases communities have developed institutions that lead
individuals to contribute to local public goods [Ostrom, 1990], it is less clear that external interventions,
such as training sessions or the formation of user committees by donors, reliably lead to sustainable
voluntary provision of local public goods. It is difficult for outsiders to understand how other societies’
institutions and politics function, let alone how to influence them in a way that creates the correct
incentives and does not generate unforeseen negative consequences.
In this paper we seek to shed light on these issues using evidence from a randomized evaluation of a
deworming program in Kenya. Intestinal worms infect one in four people worldwide. They can be fought
in several different ways. One approach emphasizes periodic medical treatment with low-cost drugs.
Public provision of deworming medicine can likely be justified on standard public finance grounds since
an estimated three quarters of the social benefit of treatment comes through reducing disease transmission
[Miguel and Kremer, 2004]. However, some argue that too much emphasis has been placed on just
handing out deworming drugs. Since people soon become reinfected, deworming drug treatment must be
continued twice per year indefinitely. In a Lancet article entitled “Sustainable Schistosomiasis Control –

2

The Way Forward,” Utzinger et al. [2003] argue that rather than focusing narrowly on drugs, a broader
approach with greater emphasis on health education would be more sustainable. Other potential ways to
make anti-worm programs sustainable include requiring cost-sharing payments from those taking the
drugs, promoting the diffusion of worm prevention information and behaviors through social networks,
and encouraging local ownership of deworming programs.
In this study we find that, first, the introduction of a small fee for deworming drugs (“costsharing”) led to an 80% reduction in treatment rates, consistent with the hypothesis that people have low
private valuation for deworming. Take-up dropped sharply when going from a zero price to a positive
price but was not sensitive to the exact (positive) price level, suggesting that it may be particularly
counter-productive to charge small positive prices for the treatment of infectious diseases. Second, an
intensive school health education intervention had no impact on worm prevention behaviors. Third, a
verbal commitment “mobilization” intervention – in which people were asked in advance whether they
planned to take deworming drugs, exploiting a finding from social psychology that individuals strive for
consistency in their statements and actions – had no impact on adoption.
We also examine peer effects in adoption, since if imitation effects in technology adoption are
sufficiently strong, then a sufficiently large temporary investment to introduce deworming drugs could
move society from a low-adoption to a high-adoption equilibrium. A number of recent papers, including
Foster and Rosenzweig [1995], Conley and Udry [2000], Burke et al. [2003], and Munshi [2004] find
evidence for peer effects in technology adoption using nonexperimental data. Like Like Duflo and Saez
[2003], we exploit experimental variation in exposure to a new technology to address the well-known
econometric challenges in estimating peer effects [Manski, 1993]. We develop a theoretical framework
that allows for peer effects from pure imitation, social learning about how to use technologies optimally,
social learning about the benefits of new technologies, and epidemiological externalities. This model
suggests that as long as a small fraction of the population receives subsidies sufficient to induce their
adoption, further subsidies will affect steady state take-up only in the presence of imitation effects. We
collect data on the network structure of links between school communities and use this to empirically

3

estimate the impact on adoption decisions not only of individuals’ direct social links, but also of higherorder social links. Rather than imposing a preexisting definition of social links, based for example on
geography [Foster and Rosenzweig, 1995; Burke et al., 2003], we allow survey respondents to specify
their social links themselves and estimate the impact of learning through different types of links. We then
simulate the impact of alternative ways of seeding the new technology given the observed network
structure of links across schools in our sample.
We find that additional social links to early treatment schools reduce the probability that children
take deworming drugs, and increase the probability that parents say that deworming drugs are “not
effective”. This negative take-up result holds both for direct social links and for indirect second order
connections. We find evidence that Granovetter’s [1973] “weak ties” are important, with individuals
learning both from “close” and “distant” contacts, as measured by the frequency with which they
communicate. There is also some evidence for learning through child networks, in addition to the parent
networks that form the core of the analysis. In contrast, analysis of our data using nonexperimental
methods would imply that individuals are more likely to take the drugs if they have greater social contact
with others who have recently been exposed to deworming, suggesting substantial omitted variable bias in
the nonexperimental estimates.
The lower take-up among those with more knowledge may be due to the high proportion of
deworming benefits flowing not to the treated child or her family, but to others in the local community
through externalities. People may only have realized how much of the benefits were external as they
gained experience with the program. Negative social effects on take-up are especially large empirically
for families with more schooling, a group who start out with particularly favorable beliefs about the
technology but then rapidly revise their beliefs downwards as they acquire more information.
Our results are consistent with peer effects due to learning from others about the benefits of the
technology, and suggest that at least in this context, peer effects due to imitation, or due to learning about
how to use the technology, are small. In this context, a policymaker uncertain about the benefits of a new

4

technology might want to subsidize a small number of people to adopt in hopes of spurring a shift to a
new equilibrium, but temporary subsidies beyond this level would not affect steady-state adoption.
Overall, the empirical results on cost-sharing, health education, and social learning, are all
consistent with the hypothesis that people put limited private value on deworming. Miguel and Kremer
[2004], however, suggest the social value is large. Together these results suggest that large ongoing
external subsidies may be necessary to sustain high take-up. These results may generalize to other
infectious and parasitic diseases characterized by large positive treatment externalities. More generally, it
is probably an illusion to think that a one-time infusion of external assistance will lead to the indefinitely
sustainable voluntary provision of most local public goods. There may simply be no alternative to
ongoing subsidies financed by tax revenue raised either from local or national governments, or
international donors.3
The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. Section II provides information on worm
infections and the project we study. In Section III we present a simple theoretical framework for
understanding the determinants of deworming take-up. Section IV describes the empirical take-up
impacts of direct and higher-order social links. Sections V, VI, and VII describe the cost-sharing, health
education, and verbal commitment results, respectively. The final section discusses broader implications
for public finance and development assistance in less developed countries. Readers interested primarily in
social learning may wish to focus on sections III and IV while those interested in development policy
issues could focus mainly on sections V through VIII.

II. The Primary School Deworming Project
Over 1.3 billion people worldwide are infected with hookworm, 1.3 billion with roundworm, 900 million
with whipworm, and 200 million with schistosomiasis [Bundy 1994]. Most have light infections, which
are often asymptomatic, but more severe worm infections can lead to iron-deficiency anemia, protein
energy malnutrition, stunting, wasting, listlessness, and abdominal pain. Heavy schistosomiasis infections
can have even more severe consequences.4

5

Helminths do not reproduce within the human host, so high worm burdens are the result of
frequent reinfection. The geohelminths (hookworm, roundworm, and whipworm) are transmitted through
ingestion of, or contact with, infected fecal matter. This can occur, for example, if children defecate in the
fields near their home or school, areas where they also play. Schistosomiasis is acquired through contact
with infected freshwater. For example, in our Kenyan study area people often walk to nearby Lake
Victoria to bathe and fish. Medical treatment for helminth infections creates externality benefits by
reducing worm deposition in the community and thus limiting reinfection among other community
members [Anderson and May, 1991]. The geohelminths and schistosomiasis can be treated using the
low-cost single-dose oral therapies of albendazole and praziquantel, respectively. The drugs sometimes
cause unpleasant and salient, but medically minor, side effects including stomach ache, diarrhea, fever
and occasionally vomiting [WHO, 1992], but these effects rarely last more than one day. Side effects are
more severe for heavier schistosomiasis infections, but can be mitigated by not consuming the drugs on
an empty stomach. Private benefits of deworming may not always be particularly salient to individuals
since they typically occur gradually as individual nutritional status improves in the months following
treatment.
Miguel and Kremer [2004] found that deworming treatment can generate large externality
benefits by interfering with disease transmission. Providing treatment to Kenyan school children led to
large reductions in worm infections and increased school participation among both treated and untreated
children in the treatment schools, and among children in neighboring schools. Three quarters of the social
benefit of treatment was in the form of externalities. Since deworming costs only $3.50 per extra year of
school participation generated, it is likely one of the most cost-effective ways to boost participation.
Both this paper and Miguel and Kremer [2004] study the Primary School Deworming Project
(PSDP), a school health program carried out by a Dutch non-governmental organization (NGO), ICS
Africa, in cooperation with the Kenyan Ministry of Health. The project took place in Busia district, a poor
and densely-settled farming region in western Kenya, and the 75 project schools include nearly all rural
primary schools in the area, with over 30,000 enrolled pupils between the ages of six and 18, over 90% of

6

whom suffer from intestinal worm infections. In January 1998, the schools were randomly divided into
three groups (Group 1, Group 2, and Group 3) of twenty-five schools each: the schools were first divided
by administrative sub-unit (zone) and by involvement in other non-governmental assistance programs,
and were then listed alphabetically and every third school assigned to a given project group.
The intervention included both health education on worm prevention behaviors and the provision
of deworming medicine. Due to administrative and financial constraints the program was phased in over
several years. Group 1 schools received assistance in 1998, 1999, 2000 and 2001, and Group 2 schools in
1999, 2000 and 2001, while Group 3 began receiving assistance in 2001. This design implies that in 1998
Group 1 schools were treatment schools, while Group 2 and Group 3 schools were the comparison
schools; and in 1999 and 2000 Group 1 and Group 2 schools were the treatment schools and Group 3
schools were comparison schools. At each school, the project started out with a community meeting of
parents and teachers organized by the NGO, which included a discussion of worm infections, the nature
of medical deworming treatment, and worm prevention measures. All primary school communities in the
baseline sample agreed to participate in the project. Starting in 1999, the Ministry of Health required
signed individual parental consent, while in 1998 only community consent had been required, with
individuals having the ability to opt out of the program if they wished. This change in 1999 may have
reduced take-up in some cases if parents were reluctant to visit the school headmaster, particularly if they
were late on other school fee payments.
Health education efforts focused on preventing worms through hand washing, wearing shoes, and
avoiding infected fresh water. This included classroom lectures and culturally appropriate Swahili
language health education materials. This health education effort was considerably more intensive than is
typical in Kenyan primary schools, and thus the program may be more likely than existing government
programs to impact child behavior. Two teachers in each school attended a full day training session on
worm prevention lessons as well as on the details of the deworming program, and were instructed to
impart these lessons during school hours. These classroom lessons were supplemented through lectures

7

by an experienced NGO field team (the team leader was a trained Public Health Technician) which visited
each treatment school several times per year.
At all schools where helminth prevalence was sufficiently high, the project provided periodic
treatment with deworming drugs to be taken at the school. The World Health Organization has endorsed
mass school-based deworming in areas with prevalence over 50% since mass treatment eliminates the
need for costly individual screening [Warren et al., 1993; WHO, 1987], and the drugs are cheap when
purchased in bulk.5
Our best estimate is that teacher training, teacher lessons at school, the lectures delivered by the
NGO field team, and the classroom wall-charts and other educational materials taken together cost at least
US$0.44 per pupil per year in the assisted schools6 – which is comparable to the total cost of deworming
drug purchase and delivery in a nearby Tanzanian program, at US$0.49 [PCD, 1999]. In our case, it is
difficult to break out the costs of health education, data collection, and drug delivery since the same field
team was responsible for all activities, so cost estimates should be seen as approximate.
The NGO we worked with has a policy of using community cost-recovery in its projects to
promote sustainability and confer project ownership on beneficiaries. In the case of deworming, the NGO
temporarily waived this policy initially, and then planned to phase it in gradually. The 50 Group 1 and
Group 2 schools were stratified by treatment group and geographic location and then 25 were randomly
selected (using a computer random number generator) to pay user fees for medical treatment in 2001,
while the other 25 continued to receive free medical treatment that year; all Group 3 schools received free
treatment in 2001. The deworming fee was set on a per family basis like most Kenyan primary school
fees at the time. This introduced within-school variation in the per child cost of deworming since
households have different numbers of primary school children, variation that we also use to estimate the
effect of price on drug take-up. Of the 25 Group 1 and Group 2 schools participating in cost-sharing, two
thirds received albendazole at a cost of 30 Kenyan shillings per family (US$0.40 in 2001) and one third
received both albendazole and praziquantel at a cost of 100 shillings (approximately US$1.30). Whether
praziquantel was given depended on the local prevalence of schistosomiasis. Since parents have 2.7

8

children in school on average, the average cost of deworming per child in cost-sharing schools was
slightly more than US$0.30 – still a heavily subsidized price, about one fifth the cost of drug purchase
and delivery through this program (at US$1.49) and 60% of the cost in the Tanzania program.7
The study area seems fertile ground for encouraging voluntary community provision of local
public goods like deworming control. Kenya has a long history of community self-help programs, and
indeed the national motto of “Harambee” refers to such programs. The project we examine was
conducted at primary schools, one of the most widespread and firmly established institutions in rural
Kenya. All primary schools have a committee composed of parents and community representatives, and
historically these committees have been entrusted with raising funds locally for most non-salary costs of
running the school, including everything from chalk to classroom construction.
Cultural understandings of health, and particularly worms, in our study area also merit a brief
discussion; this account draws heavily on the work of Geissler [1998a, 1998b, 2000], who studies
deworming take-up in the Kenyan district that borders our study area. Medical anthropologists have long
pointed out that people can simultaneously hold traditional and biomedical views of health, in a manner
similar to religious syncretism, and Geissler argues that this is the case for views about worms in western
Kenya. In the traditional view, worms are an integral part of the human body and necessary for digestion,
and many infection symptoms are attributed to malevolent occult forces (“witchcraft”) or breaking taboos
[Government of Kenya, 1986]. Educated people are more likely to engage in the biomedical discourse
and thus more likely to treat illnesses medically rather than using traditional remedies. Geissler finds that
most people do not place much value on deworming treatment because worms are not seen as a pressing
health problem, especially compared to malaria and HIV/AIDS.8 As a result, there was almost no
deworming outside the school health program he studies, and most children relied on local herbal
remedies to alleviate the abdominal discomfort caused by worms.
Local knowledge regarding private benefits of receiving treatment under a mass deworming
program was likely very poor in our study area. The project we study was the first mass deworming
treatment program in the district, to our knowledge. Albendazole and praziquantel were only approved for

9

human use in the mid-1980s and by 1998 were still rarely used in the area. Prior to the program, fewer
than five percent of people reported taking deworming drugs [Miguel and Kremer, 2004]. While many
medicines, such as aspirin and anti-malarials, are cheaply available in nearly all local shops, deworming
was only available in a few shops and at high mark-ups, presumably due to a thin market. In fact, none of
64 local shops surveyed in 1999 had either albendazole (or its close substitute, mebendazole) or
praziquantel in stock, though a minority carried less effective deworming drugs (levamisole
hydrochloride and piperazine). Albendazole and praziquantel were available in some local health clinics.
Inference about likely mass treatment impacts based on observed individual impacts was complicated for
local residents by non-random selection into treatment, as well as the possibility of spillover effects.

III. A Framework for Understanding the Adoption of a New Health Technology
We model the spread of information and the evolution of take-up of a new technology in a social network.
The model provides a framework for the empirical estimation of adoption peer effects and helps clarify
the conditions under which a one-time subsidy can change the long-run level of adoption and thus achieve
“sustainability”.
We develop a simple framework in which people adopt deworming if expected private benefits
exceed the expected cost. They are heterogeneous both in their taste for deworming and in their priors
about the effectiveness of the drugs. People are linked in a social network and receive signals about
adoption, drug effectiveness, and how to use the drugs. The model nests four types of peer effects
proposed in the existing literature. Others’ adoption can (i) influence own adoption through the disease
environment, (ii) directly enter the utility function through a pure imitation effect, (iii) provide
information about how to effectively use the technology (as in Jovanovic and Nyarko [1996] or Foster
and Rosenzweig [1995]), or (iv) provide information on the benefits of the technology (as in Banerjee
[1992] or Ellison and Fudenberg [1993]).

A. Assumptions

10

We assume that an individual i decides to adopt a new technology (or health practice) if the expected
private benefits are greater than the costs, conditional on her prior beliefs and the information received
from social contacts. As noted above, the cost of deworming adoption is privately incurred, immediate
and salient, while much of the benefit is in the form of externalities and even the private benefits are
delayed, so private benefits may not exceed costs, particularly for people with high discount rates.
Suppose that the total private benefit to taking the deworming drug depends on the individual’s
infection level γ ; the effectiveness of the drug φ (which incorporates the percentage reduction in worm
load that results from taking the drug and the rapidity of re-infection) 9; and an idiosyncratic individual
specific taste for deworming μi which is assumed to have a continuous distribution with no mass points
and a sufficiently large support such that some individuals always take up the drug. (Note that
policymakers can always guarantee that some take up the drug, by heavily subsidizing a small fraction of
consumers.) Individual infection γ may depend on individual characteristics X, and also on others'
treatment history. Because worms are transmitted through environmental contamination rather than from
person to person, infection levels are likely to depend on average population treatment, rather than an
individual’s social links.
Financial, time, or utility costs of treatment are denoted by C > 0. Below we allow for the
possibility that people may learn from their own experience and from others about how to reduce the cost
of using the technology (for example, how to control side effects by taking food with the medicine), but,
as in Jovanovic and Nyarko [1996] and Foster and Rosenzweig [1995], we assume this learning is
bounded so that C approaches some positive C∞. The drug subsidies, health education, and verbal
commitment interventions discussed in sections V, VI, and VII can be regarded as changing the adoption
cost.
Finally, a desire to imitate one’s social contacts may influence the decision to take up the
technology. The parameter β > 0 captures the importance of this effect.

11

Let φˆit denote the individual’s beliefs in period t about drug effectiveness φ conditional on prior
beliefs and any signals received, and let Tit∈{0, 1} be an indicator variable for drug take-up in period t.
Then the individual’s expected private benefit from adoption can be expressed as
(1)

E [U (Tit = 1) − U (Tit = 0 )] = φˆit h(γ it )μ i − C + βω it

where U is individual utility from deworming, conditional on the treatment choices of other individuals,
and ω it is the share of social contacts who took up the drug in the previous period.
We assume that individuals decide whether to adopt deworming at time t based on the current
costs and benefits of adoption, and do not consider the additional motive of adopting in order to learn
more about the impact of the technology or how to use it in the future. This is partly to keep the model
tractable, but is also a reasonable assumption in our context. Discount rates were likely high given the
temporary nature of the program and the limited foresight of schoolchildren. Moreover, deworming was
introduced at the level of whole schools, so most people offered the chance to take it would have many
opportunities to learn about impacts from classmates, limiting the marginal value of their own experience.

B. Information Structure
At the moment the new technology is introduced, individual i has a prior belief about the effectiveness of
taking deworming medicine as part of a mass campaign, denoted φi0, which may be greater or less than
the actual effectiveness φ. Priors could be less than φ due to traditional beliefs about worms in the study
region [Geissler, 1998a, 1998b]. However, people could also have had overly optimistic estimates about
private benefits. The enthusiasm of NGO field officers promoting deworming at schools may have
reflected the drugs’ social rather than private benefits. Although the scripts made clear that the medicine
kills worms in the body but does not prevent reinfection, people may not have realized how quickly they
would be reinfected. Moreover, if people estimated their expected private benefits by comparing
individuals in treatment versus comparison schools, they would incorrectly assign some of the school-

12

wide treatment externality to private benefits, again making prior beliefs about private deworming
benefits overly optimistic.
Priors about deworming effectiveness could also vary systematically with individual
characteristics, such as education. This is a departure from the standard assumption of common priors but
is plausible for Kenya. In the context of rural Kenya, formal schooling is considered an important
predictor of favorable views about new health technologies [Akwara, 1996; Kohler et al., 2001]. This
could reflect either the causal impact of education, or simply the fact that people who are more open to
“modern” or “Western” ideas and technologies obtain more education. We formalize this variation in
prior beliefs by modeling the common effectiveness parameter φ as a draw from a distribution believed to
have mean φ0(Xi) and variance σ02. While people can learn about the realization of φ through signals from
their social links, beliefs about its distribution need not have converged to a common prior before the
program intervention since mass deworming had not taken place in the area before.
All individuals who take the drug obtain a signal about effectiveness. These signals are noisy due
to individual time-specific shocks to health status (e.g., malaria, typhoid, cholera) that are hard to
distinguish from drug effects. Let these signals have mean φ and variance σε2.
We assume information diffuses through an infinite social network with a simple structure in
which the network, viewed from the perspective of any node, is a proper tree. This implies that a single
path connects any two nodes.10 Each individual has m direct social links, people with whom they may
exchange information, where m is a positive integer. Each of those links, in turn, also has m direct links.
In the special case where m=2, this is equivalent to people being arrayed along an infinite line, each with
direct links to two immediate neighbors.
Time is discrete. At the beginning of each period, individuals can send messages to their direct
links with information both from their own signals received and from others’ signals. Signals are
transmitted to each link with probability p each period. Later in the same period, people receive these

13

messages from their social contacts. These lags in information diffusion are consistent with the data from
Kenya, as discussed below.

C. Steady State Adoption
We first solve the steady state of this model, before turning to the transition path.
Note that in our model as long as some fraction of people always adopt, information will
eventually diffuse completely. This implies that in steady state φˆit = φ and C = C∞ for all individuals i.
Consider first the case in which β = 0 (no pure imitation effects). Let λ denote the share of the
population taking up treatment and let λ* denote the steady state share such that if a proportion λ* of the
population took the drug in the past, the same proportion will find it optimal to take the drug. An
individual will adopt in the steady state if:

φh(γ (λ *, X i ))μ i − C ∞ > 0

(2)

and forgo treatment if not. It is straightforward to show that there exists a unique equilibrium cutoff
value λ* =

∫∫1{φh(γ (λ*, X ))μ − C

∞

> 0}⋅ P( X , μ )dXdμ , where P(X, μ) denotes the probability of those

values occurring in the population.11
While λ* is unique if β = 0 , there can be multiple steady states under sufficiently strong pure
imitation effects, in which others' take-up decisions directly enter the utility function in a manner
complementary with own take-up. Even if parameters are such that λ* is arbitrarily close to zero in the
absence of imitation effects, if imitation effects are sufficiently strong that

β > C ∞ − φ min{h(γ (1, X i ))μ i } , there will be another steady state in which everyone uses the
i

technology since then: φh(γ (1, X i ))μ i − C∞ + β > 0 for all i. A sufficiently large temporary subsidy can
in this case lead to a switch from the partial use equilibrium to the full use equilibrium, leading to
sustainable increases in take-up.

14

Peer effects in technology adoption are sometimes cited as a rationale for why temporary
subsidies may have long run effects. The model suggests that subsidizing a small number of people will
be sufficient to ensure that those people will learn both the returns to the technology and how to best use
the technology. In the absence of pure imitation effects, this will be enough to assure widespread long-run
adoption of technologies with positive private returns.12 There is no need to subsidize a large number of
people to achieve steady state diffusion. While this result is specific to this particular model, we
conjecture that similar results will apply under other Bayesian learning models. If policymakers are
uncertain about the benefits of a particular technology, then providing heavy subsidies to a few people
seems much more prudent than widely subsidizing what may turn out to be an unattractive technology.13

D. Take-up along the Transition Path
We next turn to modeling take-up along the transition path. By time τ, the probability that a signal is
transmitted from a first-order link to the receiver is [1 – (1 – p)τ], the probability that signal is transmitted
from a second-order link to the receiver is [∑k = 2…τ (k–1)⋅{p2(1 – p)k – 2}], and more generally the

⎛ k − 1⎞
∑ ⎜⎜ j − 1⎟⎟ ⋅ {p (1 − p ) } for j ≤ τ, and 0
τ

probability that a signal is transmitted from a jth order link is

k= j

j

⎝

k− j

⎠

for j > τ.
Holding fixed the take-up behavior of intermediate nodes, the direct impact of an additional
signal acquired by a jth order link on take-up is then the probability that the signal is transmitted,
multiplied by an indicator for whether the receiver changes her take-up decision in response to the new
signal. Let i index an individual node as above. Take-up occurs (Tit = 1) if and only if E[U(Tit = 1) –
U(Tit = 0)] > 0, and the direct impact of an additional signal from a jth order link by time τ is thus:

{

⎡ τ k − 1⎞
k− j
j
(3) ⎢∑ ⎛⎜
⎜ j − 1⎟⎟ ⋅ p (1 − p )
⎠
⎣k = j ⎝

}⎤⎥ ⋅ [1{φˆ h(γ
⎦

it

it

)μi − C + βωit > 0 Signal}− 1{φˆit h(γ it )μi − C + βωit > 0

[

}]

No signal .

]

An additional signal can impact take-up behavior, so that (Tit Signal) − (Tit No signal) is
nonzero, by changing beliefs about φ (or similarly by reducing the cost of take-up C, as discussed below).

15

If a Bayesian individual has N itE total signals from early treatment school links, both direct (first-order)
and indirect (higher-order), she then weights her prior beliefs and signals received from social links such
that the posterior belief on expected effectiveness becomes:
(4)

⎡⎧

⎤
⎛ ⎧ σ N2 ⎫ ⎞
σ N2 ⎫
⎜
⎟
(
)
φ
X
1
φ
⋅
+
−
⋅
⎬
⎨
⎬
S ⎥
0
i
2
2
2
2 ⎟
⎜
⎝ ⎩σ N + σ 0 ⎭ ⎠
⎣⎢⎩σ N + σ 0 ⎭
⎦⎥

φˆit = ⎢⎨

where φ0(Xi) is the mean of her prior distribution, φS is the sample average of signals received through the
social network, and σN2 ≡ σε2 / N itE denotes the variance of the sample average. As individuals accumulate
more signals through their social network, the variance of the sample average goes to zero, and the value
of both the sample average and posterior beliefs approach the true expected effectiveness, φ.
When the prior belief is greater than the true expected effectiveness (φ0(Xi) > φ), individuals with
more early treatment social links tend to have falling posterior beliefs about expected effectiveness, and
thus the likelihood of adoption declines in the number of early treatment links. From equation 4, the
decline in the expected benefit of treatment with respect to early links will be convex, as the posterior
asymptotically approaches the true expected effectiveness. Similarly, when the prior is less than the true
expected effectiveness, the posterior asymptotically approaches the true benefit from below. When φ0(Xi)
> φ for all education levels (Xi) and the prior is increasing in Xi, then individuals with more education
generally have higher adoption, but additional early links will lead to sharper drops in their adoption.
Similarly, the framework allows for the possibility that people may learn from signals they
receive as well as from their own experience about how to use the technology so C(•) is a decreasing
function of the total number of signals ever received about the technology, N itE , with C′(•) < 0, C′′ (•) >
0, C(0) > 0, and C(∞) = C∞.
Although epidemiological effects are likely to depend on the broader population rather than
immediate social contacts, because worm infections result from contamination of water or soil rather than
direct person-to-person transmission, it is worth considering the possibility that children whose families

16

have close social interactions with households in early treatment schools may experience somewhat lower
helminth infection rates and thus reductions in infection intensity. We model this by allowing the
infection level to be a function of the share of direct social contacts treated.
The impact of early treatment links on the expected private benefits to adoption is thus

(5)

∂E [U (Tit = 1) − U (Tit = 0 )]
=
∂N itE

−

⎡ −σ 2σ 2
⎤
N 0
⎢
⎥ ⋅ (φ 0 ( X i ) − φ S ) ⋅ h(γ (ω it , X i )) ⋅ μ i
2
⎢⎣ σ N2 + σ 02 N itE ⎥⎦

(

)

( )

∂ω it
∂C N itE
∂h ∂γ (ω it , X i ) ∂ω it
.
μi + β
+ φˆit
⋅
⋅
E
E
∂γ
∂ω it
∂N itE
∂N it
∂N it

The first right-hand side term is the social effect from information on drug effectiveness, and can
be positive or negative depending on the difference between priors and true private adoption benefits. The
second term captures the social effect from learning how to use the drugs described above, and is always
positive. The third term is the infection social effect, which should be negative because having more early
treatment links could lead to a lower individual infection level (due to epidemiological externalities),
which in turn reduces treatment benefits. The positive imitation effect is captured in the fourth term.
We conclude that, to the extent that we observe negative overall social effects empirically, this is
evidence that the combined effect of the information and infection externalities is larger than the learningby-doing effect plus the pure imitation effect. Furthermore, since infection externalities appear small
empirically, as we show below, we interpret negative estimated social effects as strong evidence that
social effects work through the transmission of information about drug effectiveness. We find no
evidence for learning-by-doing or imitation here, although we cannot rule out small effects of these types.
These formulae describe the impact of an additional signal holding fixed the behavior of
intermediate nodes in the social network. In the long run, with repeated opportunities for adoption, there
will be additional effects mediated by the effect of a link’s information on the take-up behavior of
intermediate nodes, and thus on the subsequent number of signals that intermediate nodes possess and can
send to the receiver, as well as any effects on the information and take-up of intermediate nodes mediated

17

by imitation effects. These indirect effects would accumulate over time, but since in our experiment
people could only adopt every six months, and they were only able to adopt the drugs through the
program for either zero, two or three years (depending on their treatment group), we focus above on the
case in which the direct effects of signals dominate the indirect effects. In section 4.6, though, we report
results from a simulation of the transition path allowing for these indirect effects.

IV. Empirical Results on Networks, Social Learning and Technology Adoption
A. Data, Measurement, and Estimation
We test whether households with more social links to schools randomly chosen for early treatment were
more likely to take deworming drugs, conditional on their total number of links to all project schools.
The PSDP Parent Questionnaire was collected in 2001 during household visits among a
representative subsample of parents with children currently enrolled in Group 2 and Group 3 schools. A
representative subsample of children (typically 10 to 17 years old) present in school on the survey day
were administered a Pupil Questionnaire.
Parent Questionnaire respondents were asked for information on their closest social links: the five
friends they speak with most frequently, the five relatives they speak with most frequently, additional
social contacts whose children attend local primary schools, and individuals with whom they speak
specifically about child health issues. These individuals are collectively referred to as the respondent’s
direct “social links.” The survey also collected information on the deworming treatment status of social
links’ children and the effects of treatment on their health, how frequently the respondent speaks with
each social link, which primary schools links’ children attend, the global positioning system (GPS)
location of the respondent’s home, and the respondent’s knowledge of worm infections and attitudes
toward deworming. The Parent Questionnaire was administered in two rounds in 2001 with households
randomly allocated between the rounds. The Round 2 survey collected more detailed information on the
impact of deworming on links’ children. Two different samples are used in the analysis. Sample 1

18

contains the 1,678 parents surveyed in either Round 1 or 2 with complete child treatment and parent
social network data.14 Sample 2 contains the 886 parents surveyed in Round 2.
On average, parent respondents have 10.2 direct (first-order) social links with children in primary
school, of whom 4.4 attend the respondent’s child’s own school, 2.8 attend other project schools (Groups
1, 2, or 3), and 1.9 attend nearby “early treatment schools” (Groups 1 and 2—Table I, panel A). There is
considerable variation in the number of direct early treatment links: the standard deviation is 2.0, and
approximately one third of respondents have no social links to Group 1 or 2 schools, one third have one
or two links, and one third have three or more links.
Approximately 40 parents were surveyed in each Group 2 and Group 3 school to construct
second-order link measures. For each school we compute the average number of links that parents have to
early treatment (Group 1, Group 2) schools and to late treatment (Group 3) schools, once again excluding
links to their own school. We do not have information on the social links’ own social contacts at the
individual level, and so rely on average school social network contacts in the higher-order analysis. In all
main specifications, we exclude all self-referential links, in other words, all direct and higher-order links
back to the respondent’s own school.
The school average of second order social connections is likely to be a noisy proxy for the true
individual level second-order measures, first due to idiosyncratic variation in the number of social
contacts to particular schools, and second due to the fact that the social network data is based on surveys
with samples of Group 2 and 3 parents alone, rather than with all parents in all local schools. This
measurement error should not be systematically correlated with the randomized deworming group
assignment of social contacts’ schools, preserving the identification strategy. However, it is likely to
generate some attenuation bias towards zero in the estimated impact of second (and higher) order social
contacts on deworming take-up.
In order to keep the theoretical framework tractable, above we considered a network of
individuals with uncorrelated signals arranged in a proper tree such that two individuals are linked by a
single pathway and there are no redundant links. In practice, however, signals on the impact of

19

deworming are likely to be correlated among individuals within the same school (due to the geographic
proximity of particular local schools), and there will be cases in which school A is linked directly to
school B both directly through first order links, and indirectly through second order links to school C
which in turn has direct links to School B. In such cases, the second order links will still convey some
new information since the correlation among signals within a school is not perfect, but they are likely to
convey less additional information than second-order links to a school where an individual has no direct
first-order links. We focus below on specifications that exclude all such redundant higher-order links to a
school, but results are similar when redundant links are included (results not shown).
Parents have 2.9 second-order social links to early treatment schools (standard deviation 2.9) and
4.5 second-order links to all program schools (excluding the respondent’s own school, Table I Panel A).
There remains considerable variation in these second-order link measures across individuals, and similar
patterns hold for third-order social links.
We have also examined the structure of social connections among the 50 Group 2 and Group 3
schools with complete social network data. In our data there is not a marked sense in which some schools
are net “senders” and others net “receivers” of information. The social network is remarkably symmetric:
the correlation coefficient of the average number of social links to school A named by individuals in
school B, and the average number of links to school B named by individuals in school A, is high at 0.82.
The pattern of connections between schools is most strongly influenced by physical distance: for every
additional 10 km separating two schools, the average number of named links falls by 0.06 (standard error
0.005, statistically significant at 99% confidence). Perhaps surprisingly, schools with the same dominant
ethnic group do not have significantly more social connections, nor do schools with similar test score
results. An indicator for the location of one of the schools in a market center is not statistically
significantly associated with more social connections at traditional confidence levels (regressions not
shown). Thus there does not appear to be huge scope for take-up gains here by exploiting knowledge of
the social network to optimally “seed” deworming interventions, and we expand on this point below in
the simulations (section IV.F).

20

The social effect analysis with parent network data is conducted at the household level using
probit estimation, and the outcome measure takes on a value of one if any child in the household was
treated with deworming drugs in 2001, and zero otherwise (although results are similar if the analysis is
conducted using the child as the unit of observation, results not shown).15 Tij is the main dependent
variable, the 2001 treatment indicator, where i is a household in school j. The idiosyncratic deworming
benefit term, eij, captures unobserved variation in parent beliefs about deworming benefits, tastes for
deworming, or the costs of obtaining treatment (for instance, whether the pupil was sick on the treatment
day, which increases the cost of walking to school). The individual treatment decision becomes Tij =

′
1( N ijE a + X ij ′ b + eij > 0 ), where N ijE is a vector of social links to early treatment schools, defined in
2001 as the Group 1 and 2 schools (not including the respondent’s own school). This vector may include
both direct (first-order) social links as well as higher-order exposure to early treatment schools.
Among the explanatory variables, Xij, we include total links to all program schools other than the
respondent’s own school (both for direct and higher-order links), as well as the number of links to nonprogram schools and these are represented by the vector N ij . Given the randomized design of the original
deworming program, the number of social links to early treatment schools is randomly assigned
conditional on total links to other program schools. The interpretation of the coefficient on the total
number of links is complicated by the possibility that more sociable individuals (i.e., those able to name
more social links) differ from less sociable people in certain unobserved dimensions. However, given the
design, this does not affect the estimated impact of early treatment links since the number of early
treatment links is orthogonal to the error term conditional on total named links.
The cost-sharing indicator variable, COSTj, takes on a value of one for schools participating in the
cost-sharing project, where the financial cost of treatment was higher. Zij is a vector of additional
household socioeconomic characteristics (parents’ education and asset ownership), demographic
characteristics (respondent fertility), and other controls (respondent membership in community groups,
and a Group 2 indicator) that may affect real or perceived deworming benefits and costs. Idiosyncratic

21

disturbance terms are allowed to be correlated within each school as a result of common influences, such
as headmaster efforts in promoting the program. Equation 6 presents the main probit specification:
(6)

′

′

′

E
Pr(Tij = 1) = Φ{N ij a + N ij b1 + b2 COST j + Z ij b3 + eij } .

We include interaction terms between household characteristics and social links to estimate
heterogeneous treatment effects, for example, as a function of respondent education, and also estimate
effects of different types of social connections (e.g., links to relatives versus friends).
To validate the identification strategy, we first confirm that the randomization succeeded in
creating program groups balanced along observable dimensions: the number of direct (first-order) social
links and second- and third-order exposure to early treatment schools, as well as the Group 2 indicator
variable and the cost-sharing indicator, are not significantly associated with most observable household
characteristics (Table II), including parent years of education, community group membership (e.g.,
women's or farming groups), or the total number of children in the household, or with household ethnic
group or religious affiliation variables (ethnic and religious results not shown). The numbers of first
order and second order early links are, however, positively and significantly associated with iron roof
ownership in one specification (Table II, regression 4), and we thus include these controls in most
specifications below to control for any independent effects they may have on take-up. The measure of
second-order links to early treatment schools is significantly associated with moderate to heavy infection
in 2001 at the 10% level, but the coefficient is small (and, surprisingly, positive). Third-order links to
early treatment schools are not significantly associated with any observable characteristics.

B. Nonexperimental Social Effect Estimates
We first present nonexperimental social effect estimates. In a specification similar to many existing
studies, we examine the take-up rate of children in a predefined local social unit—here the primary
school—as the key explanatory variable. We find that the local school treatment rate (excluding the
respondent) is strongly positively correlated with take-up, as expected, with coefficient estimate 0.84

22

(standard error 0.11—Table III, regression 1). Take-up among children who are members of the
respondent’s own ethnic group in their school is somewhat more influential than take-up in other ethnic
groups (regression not shown), a finding similar to Munshi and Myaux [2002], although in our case we
argue that this pattern is likely due to omitted variable bias rather than to actual social learning as they
claim in their context. Similarly, there is a positive, though not statistically significant relationship
(estimate 0.015, standard error 0.011, regression 2) between the number of treated first-order links named
in the survey (among those attending the respondent’s school) and take-up, in a specification similar to
several other recent studies [Kohler et al., 2001; Bandiera and Rasul, 2005].
Social links’ experiences with deworming may also affect individuals’ choices. In particular, we
test whether take-up is higher when first-order links had “good” experiences with the technology, as in
Conley and Udry [2000]. Having more links whose children had “good effects” is not associated with
higher take-up, but those who had more links with “side effects” are somewhat less likely to be treated
(Table III, regression 3)—the p-value on the hypothesis that the two estimates are equal is 0.09—but this
is only suggestive.16

C. Experimental Social Effect Estimates
Experimental social effect estimates are markedly different from the nonexperimental estimates above,
suggesting that omitted variable bias in the nonexperimental estimates is large and positive. We begin by
considering direct first-order social effects to be comparable with existing work, before moving onto
higher-order social effect estimates.
Each additional direct parent social link to an early treatment school is associated with 3.1
percentage points lower likelihood that the respondent’s children received deworming drugs in 2001, and
this effect is significantly different from zero at over 95% confidence (Table IV, regression 1 presents
marginal probit estimates evaluated at mean values). This suggests that the respondent’s small, selfdefined social network has a major impact on treatment choices: having two additional early treatment
links (roughly a one standard deviation increase) reduces take-up by 6 percentage points.

23

This result cannot simply be due to imitation, or to social effects related to learning about how to
use the new technology, since the overall effect is negative. This implies that learning about the benefits
of the technology plus the infection externality, taken together, are negative and larger in magnitude than
the sum of the effect of imitation and the effect due to learning to use the technology. A quadratic term in
parent social links to early treatment schools is also statistically significantly different from zero at 95%
confidence in some specifications (Appendix Table A.I., regression 1). However, this quadratic term is
not significant for interactions with household characteristics nor is the quadratic second-order early
treatment exposure term statistically significant (regressions not shown), so we principally focus on the
linear measure for simplicity in what follows.17
None of the demographic or socioeconomic controls is significantly associated with 2001 take-up
except for distance from home to school, which is negatively related to take-up and large: take-up drops
nearly two percentage points for each additional kilometer from home to school (using GPS measures).
Distance apparently makes it costlier for parents to walk to school to provide written consent for
deworming and for children to attend school, a first piece of empirical evidence that take-up is sensitive to
treatment costs. Parent years of education (typically maternal education in our sample) is positively but
not statistically significantly associated with higher take-up (point estimate 0.003, standard error 0.003,
Table IV, regression 1).
Social effects are more negative for Group 3 schools (point estimate –0.041, Table IV, regression
2) than for Group 2 (–0.023, the sum of the direct effect of early treatment links and its interaction with
the Group 2 indicator), although the difference is not statistically significant. This pattern of coefficient
estimates is reasonable: Group 2 parents had by 2001 already observed the impact of deworming
treatment in their own household and community and should therefore be less influenced than Group 3
parents by early links (i.e., in equation 5, σ N2 is smaller for Group 2 parents than Group 3 parents).
Nonetheless, the persistent influence of early links on Group 2 households after two years of the program

24

is noteworthy. One possible non-Bayesian explanation is that initial pieces of information carry
disproportionate weight in subsequent decision making [Rabin and Schrag, 1999].18
The results are robust to including the proportion of links with children in early treatment schools
rather than the number of such links (Table IV, regression 3), and to controlling for the total number of
parent social links nonparametrically using a set of indicator variables (results not shown). An interaction
between the cost-sharing indicator and the number of early treatment links is imprecisely estimated, but is
near zero and not statistically significant (estimate -0.013, standard error 0.039 – regression not shown).19
Several pieces of evidence suggest that learning takes place not only among individuals with
strong social ties but also among those with relatively weak ties, along the lines of Granovetter [1973].
When the framework is extended to include different types of parent social links – “close” friends,
defined as those with whom the respondent speaks at least twice a week, versus relatively “distant”
friends – each additional close link to an early treatment school is associated with 0.030 lower probability
of deworming treatment in 2001 and the estimated effect of distant links is similar, although not
statistically significant due to reduced precision (Table IV, regression 4, estimate –0.033, standard error
0.033).20 We are similarly unable to reject the hypotheses that social effects are the same for links to
relatives versus non-relatives, or for members of the respondent’s own ethnic group versus other groups,
conditional on being named a social link (results not shown).
Social effects are more strongly negative for respondents with more education (Table IV,
regression 5). Other studies—most notably Foster and Rosenzweig [1995]—find that educated
individuals learn most rapidly about new technologies and adopt first. Note that the overall impact of an
additional year of schooling on deworming take-up remains positive though not statistically significant
when all the education interaction terms, including the terms interacting education with total links, are
considered (interaction term coefficient estimates not shown in regression 5).
Additional social links could have a larger impact on more educated individuals in the theoretical
framework presented above if they had overly optimistic prior beliefs (φi0) about the drugs, rather than
any greater receptiveness to new information. Although we cannot decisively distinguish these two

25

explanations empirically, the relation between respondents’ education and their stated belief that
deworming drugs are “very effective” does provide further evidence supporting the overoptimism model.
Among Group 3 parents interviewed in Round 1, before deworming treatment was phased into their
schools individuals who had completed primary school were 17 percentage points more likely to believe
deworming drugs are “very effective” than parents who had not completed primary school. However,
several months after deworming had been introduced into their schools, this falls by about half to a 9
percentage point gap between more educated and less educated Group 3 parents interviewed in Round 2
(recall that parents were randomly allocated between survey rounds), and there is a similar gap among
Group 2 parents in 2001, at 10 percentage points, two years after these schools had begun receiving
treatment. Presenting the result in levels rather than differences, among Group 3 parents who completed
primary school the perceived effectiveness of deworming also fell dramatically from 59% to 45% from
Round 1 to Round 2, but fell only slightly among the less educated. To summarize, through exposure to
deworming over time, views toward the drugs partially converged across parents with different
educational levels and the drugs were increasingly viewed as ineffective among Group 3 parents. As the
medical effectiveness of the drugs is well documented, we conjecture that their disillusionment with the
drugs is due to reinfection.
We also estimate social effects as a function of child social contacts in early treatment schools
using the 2001 Pupil Questionnaire data. Average social connections across schools (for the Group 2 and
Group 3 schools) are very similar for parents and children with a correlation coefficient of 0.92, and this
complicates the task of distinguishing between parent and child impacts. Among those children aged 13
years and older, the estimated effect of direct child social links is negative, similar to the parent first-order
early treatment estimate and statistically significant at over 95% confidence in a specification analogous
to those in Table IV (point estimate -0.028, standard error 0.012). However, the point estimate is much
smaller for younger children (-0.006, standard error 0.014 – regressions not shown). Multiple
interpretations of this pattern are possible, including the possibility that adolescents are more influenced
by peer information or pressure than younger children, as claimed by Steinberg and Cauffman [1996], or

26

perhaps that younger children are less able to process health information from their social contacts, or that
the interaction of information from parents and adolescents is particularly influential.
Unfortunately, we only have limited statistical power to disentangle parent and child impacts or
to investigate possible interaction effects due to the high correlation of parent and child social networks
and because matched information on both parent and child social networks exists for only a limited subset
of children, reducing the sample size in the child network regressions by over half. When parent and child
first order social links to early treatment schools are both included as explanatory variables, both
coefficient estimates remain negative but are no longer statistically significant due to the large increase in
standard errors (regression not shown).21
We next consider higher-order exposure to early treatment schools through parent social
networks. After reproducing the main direct first-order social link result (Table V, regression 1), we
examine the impact of second-order exposure to early treatment schools, where second-order links are
constructed using school average connections, and find that second-exposure to early treatment schools is
also associated with significantly lower deworming drug take-up in 2001 (estimate -0.035, standard error
0.013, regression 2), conditional on total second-order exposure to all program schools. When both firstorder and second-order social networks terms are included, the estimated second-order effect is -0.047,
nearly identical to the average first-order effect of -0.044, and both effects are statistically significant at
high levels of confidence (regression 3). While the theoretical framework predicts that coefficients should
decline monotonically for higher-order links along the transition path to steady state (since information
from more distant social links is less likely to have reached the individual), we cannot reject the
hypothesis that the coefficient estimates on the first-order and second-order links are equal or that firstorder effects are somewhat more negative, so we do not emphasize this difference. An increase of one
standard deviation in second-order early treatment school exposure is associated with a very large 19
percentage point reduction in deworming take-up. Mirroring the first-order results, more total secondorder exposure to all schools (not just early treatment schools) is associated with higher take-up, which

27

we interpret as reflecting a positive correlation between overall individual “sociability” and positive
priors toward deworming in our sample.
The negative second-order effects we estimate suggest that higher-order links can affect behavior
not only by influencing the take-up behavior of first-order links, but also through changing the
information of first-order links. To see this, note that theoretically one could imagine negative imitation
effects, if people like to be different than their neighbors. However, a model in which higher-order links
affect behavior only through changing the behavior of intermediate links (such as a pure imitation model)
would imply that the impact of second order link adoption should be equal to the square of the first-order
link effect of -0.044, or 0.002. Given the results below ruling out large infection externalities at the level
of individual social contacts, the large negative coefficient on second-order adoption we estimate thus
provides additional evidence that diffusion works via information transmission through social networks.
This negative social learning result holds and is highly statistically significant for both first-order
and second-order links when the proportion of early treatment exposure is used (Table V, regression 4)
rather than the number of links. The interaction between second-order early treatment school exposure
and respondent education remains negative, as was the case for first-order links, but the point estimate is
not statistically significant (regression not shown). The second-order exposure results also hold if the
first-order exposure is constructed using average school social network connections in a manner
analogous to the construction of the higher-order links (coefficient estimate is -0.077, standard error
0.036, significant at 95% confidence – regression not shown).
Extending the analysis, we find that third-order exposure to early treatment schools – constructed
analogously to the second-order links, using school averages for higher-order connections – is not
statistically significantly associated with deworming take-up, although the point estimate is again
negative (Table V, regression 5). Within the theoretical framework we outline in Section III, a possible
explanation for the weaker estimated third order effect is that insufficient time had passed for some thirdorder social contacts’ information to reach respondents, perhaps because social contacts only discuss
deworming infrequently, as suggested by our survey data.

28

D. Further Econometric Identification Issues
The estimated negative peer effect in technology adoption implies that social learning about the benefits
of deworming and the infection externality taken together are negative and far larger in magnitude than
any possible social learning about how use the new technology plus imitation effects. Here we argue that
infection effects cannot empirically explain even a small fraction of the overall direct first-order social
effect of –3.1% (Table IV, regression 1), since any plausible estimate of the effect of early treatment
school social contacts on infection status, times the effect of infection on take-up, is much smaller. Thus
social learning about deworming benefits appears to be the key channel driving our results.
First, having additional direct social links to early treatment schools is associated with lower rates
of moderate-heavy helminth infection, as expected (Table II, regression 6), but the effect is small and not
statistically significant (coefficient estimate –0.3 percentage points, relative to a mean moderate-heavy
infection rate of 27%). An additional second-order social link to early treatment schools is even
associated with a somewhat higher rate of infection, though the estimate is only statistically significant at
90% confidence. Note that this relatively weak relationship between early treatment school social links
and child infection is not inconsistent with the strong infection externality findings in Miguel and Kremer
[2004]. Worm infections are not transmitted directly person to person but rather through contaminated
soil and water, and a child’s named social links constitute only a small fraction of all people who defecate
near the child’s home, school, and church, or who bathe at the same points on Lake Victoria.
In terms of the second step—from infection status to take-up—prior infection status is not
significantly associated with drug treatment for either Group 1 in 1998 or Group 2 in 1999 [Miguel and
Kremer, 2004], or for Groups 2 and 3 in 2001 (results not shown) and the point estimates suggest that
moderate-heavy worm infection is weakly negatively related to treatment rates.22 Of course, the crosssectional correlation between infection and treatment cannot be interpreted as causal due to omitted
variables: children from unobservably low socioeconomic status households may have both high infection
rates and low take-up, for example. However, the treated and untreated children look remarkably similar

29

along many observable baseline socioeconomic and health characteristics [Miguel and Kremer, 2004],
and the relationship is similar using school-level average infection rates rather than individual data (not
shown), weakening the case for strong selection into deworming treatment.
Further evidence that more infected people are not much more likely to take up the drugs is
provided by the 1999 cross-school infection externality estimates, identified using exogenous program
variation in the local density of early treatment schools. Although we find large average reductions in
moderate-heavy worm infection rates as a result of cross-school externalities (an average reduction in
infection of 0.23, Miguel and Kremer, [2004]), proximity to early treatment schools leads to an average
reduction in drug take-up of only 0.02, which has the expected sign but is near zero (regression not
shown). Using this estimate, having a moderate-heavy infection is associated with a 0.02/0.23 = 0.09
reduction in the likelihood of treatment, and this implies a drop in take-up due to infection first-order
social effects of only (0.09)*(-0.3%) = 0.03%, rather than the -3.1% overall reduction we estimate. Even
if eliminating a moderate-heavy infection reduced the likelihood of drug take-up by a massive 0.5 on
average (rather than the 0.09 we estimate), health externalities would account only for a (0.5)*(-0.3%) =
-0.15% reduction in take-up.
Pupil transfers among local primary schools are another potential concern, but any resulting bias
would likely work against our findings. For example, parents with more health-conscious social contacts,
whose children may have been more likely to transfer into early treatment schools to receive deworming,
may themselves also be more health-conscious and eager to have their own children receive treatment.
This would bias the estimated social effect upward, in which case our negative social effect estimate
would be a bound on the true negative effect. In any case, the rate of pupil transfers between treatment
and comparison schools was low and nearly symmetric in both directions [Miguel and Kremer, 2004],
suggesting that any transfer bias is likely to be small.
A related identification issue concerns whether social networks measured in 2001—three years
after the program started—were themselves affected by the program. Any extent to which healthconscious individuals became more socially linked to individuals with children in early treatment schools

30

would again lead to an upward bias, working against the negative effects we estimate. However,
respondents were statistically no more likely to name early treatment links than links to other schools: the
average number of links to early treatment schools is 1.92, while (Total number of links to PSDP schools)
x (Total number of Group 1, 2 pupils / Total number of Groups 1, 2, 3 pupils) is nearly identical at 1.91.

E. Parent Attitudes and Knowledge
Respondents with more direct (first-order) early treatment links are significantly more likely to claim that
deworming drugs are “not effective” (respondents could choose between “not effective”, “somewhat
effective” and “very effective”, Table VI, row 1).23 This is consistent with the hypothesis that some
people initially thought deworming would provide large and persistent private benefits but learned
otherwise from their early treatment school contacts. We do not find a significant impact of additional
early links on beliefs that deworming drugs are “very effective” although the point estimate is negative
(row 2), nor that the drugs have “side effects” (row 3). This last result is evidence against the possibility
that drug side effect rumors were the key driver of lower take-up among those with more early treatment
links.
Second-order early treatment exposure does not have a statistically significant effect on parents’
belief that deworming drugs are “not effective” (regressions not shown). The discrepancy between firstorder and second-order effects on deworming attitudes may be due to the deterioration of information
quality with higher-order social connections: speculatively, individuals may learn from their higher-order
social contacts that deworming is basically “not good” even though the precise reason why is lost to them.
Although direct first-order early treatment links do affect the belief that deworming drugs are
“not effective”, they do not affect beliefs that “worms and schistosomiasis are very bad for child health”
(Table VI, row 4). However, some parents may report what they think the survey enumerator wants to
hear regarding worms’ health consequences: 92% of respondents claimed that helminth infections are
“very bad” for child health, even though take-up is much lower than 92%. The number of direct early
treatment links has no effect on parents’ self-reported knowledge of the ICS (NGO) deworming program,

31

the effects of worms and schistosomiasis , (rows 5 and 6), ) or the deworming treatment status of their
own child (not shown). It also did not affect their objective knowledge of common worm infection
symptoms (rows 7 to 10). Respondents could name only 1.8 of ten common symptoms on average.24 This
suggests health education messages failed to spread.
Nonexperimental methods would have suggested different results. The actual number of treated
social links, and the number of social links with whom the respondent speaks directly about deworming,
are both positively and significantly related to most deworming attitudes and knowledge outcomes (Table
VI). The observed positive correlation in outcomes within social networks in the study area appears to be
due to omitted variables rather than actual peer effects. Those with unobservably more interest in child
health plausibly discuss worms more frequently with social links, who are themselves more likely to have
their own children receive treatment.

F. Simulating Take-up along the Transition Path
The framework in section III suggests that subsidies to take-up will not affect steady state adoption under
social learning either about how to use new technologies or learning about their benefits, as long as at
least a subset of the population uses the technology. However, subsidies could potentially have effects
along the transition path to the steady state. We therefore use the empirical school-to-school social
connections matrix to simulate the take-up gains along the transition path from a one-time drug subsidy
for parameter values that match the estimated first-order social effects. We consider a hypothetical
technology where true private benefits exceed most people’s expectations as it is of more general interest
to study technologies where social learning could potentially contribute to take-up.
The simulation is based on the theoretical framework in section III with several functional form
assumptions made for tractability. We assume that the health benefits of the technology times
idiosyncratic utility from using the technology (the γ(Xi)⋅μi term) is uniformly distributed on the interval

[b, b] ; assume that everyone in a given school starts out with the same prior belief on benefits but that

32

priors differ across schools (and thus focus on the diffusion of information across schools rather than on
heterogeneity within schools); and assume that all the social effects we observe are due to learning about
the benefits of the technology.
One time period in the simulation roughly corresponds to one month. Information may diffuse
between schools in each period, but individuals only get an opportunity to adopt the technology once
every six months (as in the program we study). Our results are qualitatively robust to either shorter (τ = 1)
or longer (τ = 12) lags between adoption opportunities. For tractability we assume that information
diffuses instantly within schools.
We consider parameter values for which the simulated first-order social effects fall within two
standard deviations of the first-order social effect estimated empirically, though again, we consider
diffusion of a hypothetical technology for which actual returns exceed prior beliefs, so social learning
speeds adoption. 25 While we do not explicitly match parameter values to the empirically estimated
second-order social effect, the simulated second-order effect is on average close to the estimated secondorder effects. As in our data, the simulated second-order effect is of a similar magnitude to the simulated
first-order effect – the difference between the simulated second-order and first-order social effects is on
average 0.006 (relative to an average simulated first-order effect of 0.02, a slightly smaller magnitude
than the effect estimated in section IV.C above).
For a wide range of parameter values, we find that beliefs about the technology and take-up rates
converge quickly (within five adoption opportunities) to very close to the correct long-run value. Even in
a case where signals have high variance (e.g, σ ε2 = 9), by the third adoption opportunity the variance of
posterior beliefs is on average less than 0.01.
Optimal “seeding” of a particular school with a one-time drug subsidy (in period one) makes little
difference to total discounted technology take-up. After 30 opportunities to adopt (15 years of a program
like the one we study), the difference in total discounted take-up between seeding the single “best” school
– the school that generates the highest total discounted take-up when seeded – versus the average of

33

seeding a randomly chosen school in the sample is negligible (less than 0.01%) for our range of plausible
parameter values. This finding of small gains to “optimal seeding” is consistent with the largely
symmetric observed social network structure across schools (section IV.A). Given that it may be costly to
identify the optimal school to subsidize, and that those funds could alternatively be spent on subsidizing
drugs for additional schools (or subsidizing them for a longer period), efforts to target temporary drug
subsidies to influential “opinion leader” schools appear misguided in our context.
Finally, even the take-up gains from one-time subsidies to additional schools are quite small on
average. Since information diffuses rapidly, these gains are primarily comprised of the direct effect of the
subsidy on take-up in the initial round; the impact of information spillovers is negligible. The indirect
effects on take-up (through the generation of additional information) are small in magnitude and exhibit
diminishing returns to additional subsidies. Total discounted take-up increases by only 0.027% (as a
percentage of take-up in the absence of the subsidy) on average above and beyond the direct effect of the
subsidy when a single school is subsidized at random. Going from subsidizing five to ten schools yields
an additional marginal gain of only 0.016% per school.
Thus, at least in this particular context, there is little reason to think temporary subsidies will lead
to a sustainable increase in technology adoption. More generally, even if a hypothetical social planner
knew the returns to a particular technology were better than people expected, subsidizing even a small
fraction of the population for a relatively brief period would have been sufficient to assure long-run
diffusion. In the absence of strong imitation effects, the fact that dynamic gains to subsidizing additional
schools are small suggest that a “big push” is unnecessary for a technology that spreads naturally – and of
course is futile in the long-run for a technology where social effects are negative. To be effective in
boosting adoption, ongoing subsidies appear necessary in that case.

V. The Impact of Subsidies on Drug Take-up

34

In the remainder part of the paper, we examine the effects of three other approaches to making
deworming sustainable: cost-sharing through user fees (section V), health education lessons (section VI),
and a mobilization intervention (section VII).
Cost-sharing through user fees has been advocated as necessary for the sustainability of public
health services in many less developed countries [World Bank, 1993b]. Revenues from these fees could
be used to improve the quality of health services (i.e., through expanded drug availability) or to fund other
government expenditures. User fees could theoretically promote more efficient use of scarce public
resources if those in greatest need of health services are willing to pay the most for them.
Several non-experimental studies from Africa have found large drops in health care utilization
after the introduction of user fees (e.g., McPake [1993], Meuwissen [2002]), including in Kenya, where
Mwabu et al. [1995] find utilization fell by 52% in 1989. Our analysis uses random assignment to
estimate the effect of cost sharing.26 The theoretical framework in section III suggests that increasing the
monetary cost of deworming should lead to lower drug take-up, but the actual elasticity of demand needs
to be estimated. 75% of households in the free treatment schools received deworming drugs in 2001
(Table I, Panel C), while the rate was only 19% in cost-sharing schools (the survey data used in these
regressions is described in Section IV). A regression analysis suggests the small fee reduced treatment by
62 percentage points (Table VII, regression 1), with the effect similar across households with various
socioeconomic characteristics (regression 2).27 This negative effect of monetary cost is consistent with
our finding (in Table IV) of large negative effects of household distance to the school, which proxies for
the time costs as parents need to walk to school to provide written consent.
The drop in take-up in cost-sharing schools cannot be attributed to the hypothesis that user fees
help ensure that scarce health resources are directed to those who need them most. In fact, sicker pupils
were no more likely to pay for deworming drugs: the coefficient estimate on the interaction between 2001
helminth infection status and the cost-sharing indicator is not statistically significant (not shown).
Variation in the deworming price per child was generated by the fact that cost-sharing came in the
form of a per family fee, so that parents with more children in the primary school in 2001 effectively

35

faced a lower price per child. Cost-sharing reduced treatment rates regardless of the per child price that
the household was required to pay (Table VII, regression 3). Ariely and Shampan’er [2004] similarly find
sharp decreases in demand for goods with a small positive price relative to goods with a zero price in lab
experiments. This regression specification also includes the inverse of the number of household children
in primary school and the total number of household children of all ages as additional explanatory
variables to control for the direct effects of household demographic structure on deworming drug demand
and thus to isolate the price effect. However, we cannot explicitly control for the interaction between
family size and price changes given the school-level randomization design.
The cost-sharing results suggest that introducing a small positive user fee is a particularly
unattractive policy in this context, since it dramatically reduces take-up while raising little revenue, and
typically requires considerable administrative cost. Yet this is precisely the approach that many less
developed countries, including Kenya, have adopted in the health sector [World Bank, 1994; McPake,
1993]. The net public cost per pupil treated in our program under a full subsidy was US$1.478. Assuming
a US$15 per school fixed cost of visiting a school (which we base on actual field costs), and a US$0.03
cost per pupil of collecting funds, the net public cost per student treated under cost sharing was
US$1.374. Pupils contributed about US$0.30 additionally in cost-sharing schools. For a fixed public
budget B, the difference between the total number of students treated under cost-sharing versus under a
full subsidy in this case will be (B/1.374) – (B/1.478) = B*0.0512. The extra revenue collected from the
private sector under cost-sharing will be US$0.30*(B/1.374) = B*0.2183. The cost per additional student
treated under cost-sharing is thus (B*0.2183)/(B*0.0512) = US$4.26. One can understand why a program
administrator with a fixed public budget might institute cost-sharing, but since the cost per additional
student treated under a full subsidy would be only US$1.478, the deadweight cost of taxation would have
to be enormous to make it rational for governments to seek to finance deworming out of user fees rather
than through taxation.
It is worth bearing in mind the sequencing of the current project in interpreting the cost-sharing
results. Prior to the program fewer than 5% of people reported taking deworming drugs [Miguel and

36

Kremer, 2004]. The schools received free treatment for two or three years, after which half the Group 1
and 2 schools were assigned to cost-sharing, following NGO policy. One rationale behind this sequencing
was that people may be more likely to spend money on a new product if they can first try it and witness
its benefits first-hand. However, some could argue that it is essential to introduce cost-sharing from the
outset, because after becoming accustomed to free treatment people will develop a sense of entitlement
and will refuse to pay when positive prices are later introduced. Although we are unable to directly test
either hypothesis here given the study design, it is worth noting that there was no significant difference in
the impact of cost-sharing on take-up across Group 1 and Group 2 schools despite their differing lengths
of exposure to free treatment (three versus two years, respectively – regression not shown), exposure that
could theoretically have provided a stronger sense of entitlement among Group 1 households.
The huge drop in take-up with cost-sharing and the extremely low level of private deworming
purchases both suggest that most households in the study area place little value on deworming drugs.
Even if deworming is socially beneficial, perceived private gains were smaller than private costs for most
households under the cost-sharing regime. The social learning results indicate that additional information
about deworming through social contacts only reinforces this view, further depressing adoption.

VI. The Impact of Health Education
There were no significant differences across treatment and comparison school pupils in early 1999 (one
year into the program) on the three worm prevention behaviors that the program emphasized: pupil
cleanliness (of the hands and uniform) observed by enumerators28, the proportion of pupils observed
wearing shoes, or self-reported exposure to fresh water (Table VIII, Panel A). The results do not vary
significantly by pupil age, gender, or grade (results not shown). As we found with cost-sharing for
deworming drugs, individuals appear unwilling to take a costly private action – here, buying shoes for
their children or adopting new hygiene practices – that help to combat worms in their local community.
One alternative explanation is that treatment school children neglected to adopt worm prevention
practices precisely because they were also taking deworming drugs and thus (falsely) felt protected from

37

re-infection. This does not seem to explain the lack of health education impacts, however, since there was
no evidence of behavioral change even among older girls who did not receive the medical treatment (due
to concerns about potential embryotoxicity, Table VIII, Panel B). The lack of basic knowledge about
worm infections in this area makes remote the possibility that older girls in treatment schools neglected to
adopt better worm prevention practices because they realized that they were benefiting from spillovers.
Moreover, there is no evidence that other children benefiting from treatment spillovers changed
their prevention behavior: children attending comparison (Group 2) primary schools located near
deworming treatment schools in early 1999 showed large reductions in worm infection levels [Miguel and
Kremer, 2004] but they did not receive health education, and there was no significant change in their
worm prevention behaviors either (Table VIII, Panel C), although one limitation of this analysis is that
these cross-school effects are very imprecisely estimated.
Although we cannot directly measure the depreciation of knowledge, other researchers find that
depreciation of health education knowledge and practices is often rapid even in settings where direct
short-run program impacts were positive (Aziz et al. [1990], Haggerty et al. [1994], Hoque et al. [1996]).

VII. The Impact of Commitment
Advocates of the sustainability approach in development argue that projects should only be implemented
if there is local “ownership”, often conveyed by beneficiaries making an affirmative commitment to the
project. In the project we study, for instance, treatment took place only after the community collectively
decided to participate during a village meeting.
The notion of ownership also relates to the claim in social psychology that asking individuals
whether they plan to take an action will make it more likely that they go through with it. A number of
studies suggest that individuals can be motivated to take socially beneficial, but individually costly,
actions by being asked whether they intend to perform them. Most people answer that they do and many
then feel motivated to follow through with their commitment. For example, Cioffi and Garner [1998] find
large impacts of such commitments on blood donation on a U.S. university campus. (Greenwald et al.

38

[1987] find such effects for voting behavior among university students in the United States, but in recent
work Smith et al. [2003] fail to reproduce this finding using a much larger and more representative
sample of U.S. voters.)
In an application of this technique, a random subsample of pupils in PSDP schools were asked
whether they would take deworming drugs in the upcoming treatment round, in an attempt to boost drug
take-up without providing additional external subsidies. During 2001 Pupil Questionnaire administration,
a random subsample of pupils were asked whether they were planning to come to school on the treatment
day and whether the PSDP workers should bring pills for them on that day: 98% of children answered
“Yes” to both questions. All pupils interviewed – including both those offered the opportunity for verbal
commitment and those not offered this opportunity – were provided the same information on the effects
of deworming and the upcoming date of medical treatment. (All respondents were, of course, also
informed that participation in data collection and treatment was voluntary.)
The verbal commitment intervention failed, reducing drug take-up by one percentage point in
2001, although this effect is not statistically significant (Table IX, regression 1). This result is robust to
controls for pupil age and gender (regression 2), and the impact of the intervention did not vary
significantly with child characteristics (regression 3). The effect is somewhat more negative for pupils in
cost-sharing schools and those with moderate-heavy worm infections, although in neither case are the
estimates on these interactions significantly different than zero (results not shown).
These results underscore the need for further research clarifying when and where marketing
techniques based on prior commitments have an impact.

VIII. Conclusion
A program which provided free deworming drugs for primary school students led to high drug take-up,
large reductions in moderate-heavy worm infections, and increased school participation, all at low cost.
Most of the deworming program benefit was in the form of externalities due to reduced disease

39

transmission [Miguel and Kremer, 2004]. Yet mass deworming treatment programs like the one we study
are rare, and one in four people worldwide still suffer from these easily treated infections.
One reason for this failure is that rather than allocating funding on the basis of a standard public
finance analysis, development agencies often prefer to fund “sustainable” interventions that do not require
continued external funding. We examine several “sustainable” approaches to worm control in this paper,
including cost-recovery from beneficiaries, health education, and individual mobilization and find all
were ineffective at combating worms relative to the provision of free deworming drugs. The fact that drug
take-up fell as more individuals were exposed to deworming through their social network is consistent
with the idea that private valuation is low and casts doubt on the notion that a temporary intervention
could lead to a sustainable long-run increase in deworming take-up through a process of social learning in
this context. The analysis suggests people learned about the private benefits of deworming but provides
no evidence for large pure imitation effects. Our model suggest that in the absence of such effects,
expending temporary subsidies beyond a small number of people will not affect long-run take-up.
Taken together, these findings suggest that continued subsidies may be needed to control diseases
characterized by large positive treatment externalities, like worms. In Africa, where half the disease
burden is associated with infectious and parasitic diseases [WHO, 1999], this means extensive and
indefinite health care subsidies may be needed to adequately address public health problems.
A broader lesson of this paper is that it may be difficult for external interventions to promote
sustainable voluntary local public good provision. If local public goods are to be provided, they will
likely have to be paid for by tax revenue collected either by local governments, national governments, or
by external donors. Standard theories of fiscal federalism suggest local governments might be best suited
to this task, but in Kenya as in many other developing countries, there are no locally elected bodies with
taxation powers or control over revenue, perhaps because this could threaten central government primacy
by creating rival power centers. National governments in Africa have not historically supplied deworming
and have a poor record on local public goods provision. Donors have sometimes provided local public

40

goods, but typically not on a long-term basis. Rather they often structure projects so as to be able to claim
they are sustainable.
Donors may simply choose not to provide local public goods under these circumstances, or they
may choose to provide them on an ongoing long-run basis, but there is little economic rationale for
pursuing the illusion of sustainability. Even if donors wish to fund investment activities rather than
consumption, there is little reason why they should seek projects that are sustainable on a project-byproject basis rather than taking a broader view of what constitutes a good investment. For instance, a
public health project providing subsidized deworming may not be financially sustainable by itself in the
short-run – in the sense that communities will not voluntarily provide it – but it will help children obtain
more education and this can contribute to long-run development for society as a whole. If donors are
concerned that projects such as roads or wells will go awry without regular maintenance, they could
endow funds earmarked for this purpose rather than counting on potentially illusory voluntary local
contributions for maintenance.
Why then do aid agencies place so much emphasis on financial sustainability?
We believe that rather than reflecting an economic social welfare calculation on behalf of
optimizing donors, this reflects the politics of aid and principal-agent problems between aid agencies and
their ultimate funders in wealthy countries, who are generally ill-informed about conditions in countries
receiving aid. Aid agencies competing for limited donor funds have incentives to make bold claims about
what their programs can achieve. In the short-run, these claims may be useful fundraising tools if the
ultimate funders find it impossible to distinguish between, say, genuine claims regarding the temporary
health benefits of providing free deworming medicine (as in the project we study) versus overstated
claims about the permanent benefits of a one-time worm prevention health education intervention.
Individual claims about spectacular project “bang for the buck” typically remain unchallenged since aid
agencies are not directly accountable to their programs’ beneficiaries through either political mechanisms
(e.g., democratic elections) or through the market mechanism, and rigorous development program
evaluations remain rare.

41

In the longer-term, of course, pursuing sustainability leads to failed projects, disillusionment
among donors, and the search for the next development panacea. Rather than pursue the illusion of
sustainability, development organizations and developing country governments would be better off
rigorously evaluating their projects, ultimately identifying a limited number with high social returns, and
funding these interventions on an ongoing basis.
Appendix
Appendix Table A.I
Robustness of social effect results – parent networks
Dependent variable:
Child took deworming drugs in 2001
Probit
Probit
Probit
Probit
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
# Parent links with children in early treatment schools
(Group 1, 2, not own school)

-0.071***
(0.023)

{# Parent links with children in early treatment schools
(Group 1, 2, not own school)}2

0.0064**
(0.0029)

-0.027*
(0.014)

-0.029**
(0.014)

-0.016
(0.014)

-0.20***
(0.07)

# Pupils in early treatment schools < 3 km from home
(per 1000 pupils)

0.14**
(0.07)

# Pupils in all schools < 3 km from home
(per 1000 pupils)
Parent social links controls
Other household controls
Ethnic, religious controls

Yes
Yes
No

Yes
No
No

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
No

Number of observations (parents)
Mean of dependent variable

1678
0.61

1678
0.61

1678
0.61

1678
0.61

Notes: Data from 2001 Parent Survey, and 1999 and 2001 administrative records. Probit estimation, robust standard
errors in parentheses. Disturbance terms are clustered within schools. Significantly different than zero at 99 (***),
95 (**), and 90 (*) percent confidence. Parent social links controls include total number of parent links, number of
parent links to Group 1, 2, 3 schools (not own school), and number of parent links to non-program schools. Other
household controls include respondent years of education, community group member indicator variable, total
number of children, iron roof at home indicator variable, and distance from home to school in km, as well as the
Group 2 indicator and Cost-sharing school indicator.
Ethnic controls include indicators for Luhya-Samia, Luhya-Nyala, Luo, Luhya-Khayo, Luhya-Marachi, and Teso
groups, and an indicator for being a member of the largest ethnic group in the school (which is near zero and
statistically insignificant). Religion controls include indicators for Catholic, Anglican, Pentecostal, Apostolic, Legio
Mario, Roho, and Muslim faiths, and an indicator for being a member of the largest religious group in the school
(which is negative and marginally statistically significant). In regression 2, no household controls are included as
explanatory variables other than the standard social link controls from Table IV.

42

Michael Kremer
Harvard University
The Brookings Institution
The Center for Global Development
NBER
Edward Miguel
University of California, Berkeley
NBER
References
Adams, E.J., Stephenson, L.S., Latham, M.C., and Kinoti, S.N.,“Physical Activity and Growth of Kenyan
School Children with Hookworm, Trichuris trichiura and Ascaris lumbricoides Infections Are
Improved after Treatment with Albendazole,” Journal of Nutrition, CXX (1994), 1199-1206.
Akwara, Priscilla A., “Socio-economic Perspectives in Child Health in Kenya: A Strategy for Population
Action,” African Anthropology, III (1996), 3-43.
Anderson, R.M., and R.M. May, Infectious Diseases of Humans. New York: Oxford University Press,
1991.
Ariely, Dan, and Kristina Shampan’er, “Tradeoffs betweens costs and benefits: Lessons from ‘the price of
0’”, MIT unpublished manuscript, 2004.
Aziz, K., B. Hoque, K. Hasan, M. Patwary, S. Huttly, M. Arman, and R. Feachem, “Reduction in
Diarrhoeal Diseases in Children in Rural Bangladesh by Environmental and Behavioural
Modifications,” Transactions of the Royal Society of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene, LXXXIV
(1990), 433-438.
Bandiera, Oriana, and Imran Rasul, “Social Networks and Technology Adoption in Northern
Mozambique”, Economic Journal, (2005), forthcoming.
Banerjee, Abhijit V., “A Simple Model of Herd Behavior”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, CVII
(1992), 797-817.
Bundy, D.A.P., “The Global Burden of Intestinal Nematode Disease.” Transactions of the Royal Society
of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene, LXXXVIII (1994), 259-261.
Burke, M., G. Fournier and K. Prasad., “Physician Social Networks and Geographical Variation in Care”,
unpublished working paper, 2003.
Cioffi, D., and R. Garner, “The Effect of Response Options on Decisions and Subsequent Behavior:
Sometimes Inaction is Better”, Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, XXIV (1998), 463-72.
Conley, Timothy, and Christopher Udry, “Learning About a New Technology: Pineapple in Ghana”,
Economic Growth Center Discussion Paper 817, Yale University, 2000.
Corbett, E.L., Butterworth, A.E., Fulford, A.J.C., Ouma, J.H., Sturock, R.F., “Nutritional Status of
Children with Schistosomiasis Mansoni in Two Different areas of Machakos District, Kenya.”
Transactions of the Royal Society of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene, LXXXVI (1992), 266-273.
Cowden, J., and P. Hotez, “Mebendazole and Albendazole Treatment of Geohelminth Infections in
Children and Pregnant Women,” Pediatric Infectious Disease Journal, XIX (2000), 659-60.

43

Duflo, Esther, and Emmanuel Saez, “The Role of Information and Social Interactions in Retirement Plan
Decisions: Evidence from a Randomized Experiment”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, CXVIII
(2003), 267-299.
Ellison, Glenn and Drew Fudenberg, “Rules of Thumb for Social Learning”, Journal of Political
Economy, CI (1993), 612-643.
Foster, Andrew, and Mark Rosenzweig, “Learning by Doing and Learning from Others: Human Capital
and Technical Change in Agriculture”, Journal of Political Economy, CIII (1995), 1176-1209.
Geissler, Wenzel, “‘Worms are Our Life’, Part I: Understandings of Worms and the Body among the Luo
of Western Kenya,” Anthropology and Medicine, V (1998a), 63-79.
Geissler, Wenzel, “‘Worms are Our Life’, Part II: Luo Children’s Thoughts about Worms and Illness,”
Anthropology and Medicine, V(1998b), 133-144.
Geissler, Wenzel, “Children and Medicines. Self-treatment of Common Illnesses among Luo School
Children in Western Kenya,” Social Science and Medicine, L (2000), 1771-1783.
Gertler, Paul, and Jack Molyneaux, “Pricing Public Health Services: Results from a Social Experiment in
Indonesia,” RAND mimeograph, 1996.
Government of Kenya, Kenya Socio-Cultural Profiles: Busia District, ed. Gideon Were. Ministry of
Planning and National Development, Nairobi, 1986.
Granovetter, Mark, “The Strength of Weak Ties.” American Journal of Sociology, LXVIII (1973), 13601380.
Green, E.C., “Purity, Pollution and the Invisible Snake in Southern Africa”, Medical Anthropology, XVII
(1997), 83-100.
Green, E.C., A. Jurg, and A. Djedje, “The Snake in the Stomach: Child Diarrhoea in Central
Mozambique,” Medical Anthropology Quarterly, VIII (1994), 4-24.s.
Greenwald, A.G., C.G. Carnot, R. Beach, and B. Young, “Increasing Voting Behavior by Asking People
if they Expect to Vote”, Journal of Applied Psychology, LXXII (1987), 315-318.
Haggerty P.A., K. Muladi, B.R. Kirkwood, A. Ashworth, and M. Manunebo, “Community-based Hygiene
Education to Reduce Diarrhoeal Disease in Rural Zaire: Impact of the Intervention on Diarrhoeal
Morbidity,” International Journal of Epidemiology, XXIII (1994), 1050-59.
Hoque B A., T. Juncker, R.B. Sack, M Ali, and K.M. Aziz, “Sustainability of a Water, Sanitation and
Hygiene Education Project in Rural Bangladesh: a 5-year Follow-up,” Bulletin of the World Health
Organization, LXXIV (1996), 431-437.
Hotez, P.J., and Pritchard, D.I., “Hookworm Infection,” Scientific American, CCLXXII (1995), 68-74.
Jovanovic, Boyan and Yaw Nyarko, “Learning by Doing and the Choice of Technology,” Econometrica,
LXIV (1996), 1299-1310.
Kohler, Hans-Peter, Jere Behrman, and Susan Watkins, “The Density of Social Networks and Fertility
Decisions: Evidence from South Nyanza District, Kenya”, Demography, XXXVIII (2001), 43-58.
Lengeler, C., “From Rio to Iragua: Sustainability versus Efficiency and Equity for Preventative Health
Interventions”, Tropical Medicine and International Health, IV (1999), 409-411.
Manning, W.G., J.P. Newhouse, N. Duan, E.B. Keeler, A. Leibowitz, and M.S. Marquis, “Health
Insurance and the Demand for Medical Care: Evidence from a Randomized Experiment”, American
Economic Review, LXXVII (1987), 251-277.
Manski, Charles, “Identification of Endogenous Social Effects: The Reflection Problem”, Review of
Economics Studies, LX (1993), 531-542.

44

McPake, Barbara, “User Charges for Health Services in Developing Countries: A Review of the
Economic Literature,” Social Science and Medicine, XXXVI (1993), 1397-1405.
Meuwissen, Liesbeth Emm, “Problems of cost recovery implementation in district health care: A case
study from Niger”, Health Policy and Planning, XVII (2002), 304-313.
Miguel, Edward, and Michael Kremer, “Networks, Social Learning, and Technology Adoption: The Case
of Deworming Drugs in Kenya”, unpublished manuscript, 2003.
Miguel, Edward, and Mary Kay Gugerty, “Ethnic Diversity, Social Sanctions, and Public Goods in
Kenya”, Journal of Public Economics, LXXXIX (2005), 2325-2368.
Miguel, Edward, and Michael Kremer, “Worms: Identifying Impacts on Education and Health in the
Presence of Treatment Externalities”, Econometrica, LXXII (2004), 159-217.
Morduch, Jonathan, “The Microfinance Promise,” Journal of Economic Literature, XXXVII (1999),
1569-1614.
Munshi, Kaivan, and Jacques Myaux, “Social Change and Individual Decisions: With an Application to
the Demographic Transition”, University of Pennsylvania unpublished working paper, 2002.
Munshi, Kaivan, “Social Learning in a Heterogeneous Population: Technology Diffusion in the Indian
Green Revolution”, Journal of Development Economics, LXXIII (2004), 185-215.
Mwabu, G. J. Mwanzia, W. Liambila, “User Charges in Government Health Facilities in Kenya: Effect on
Attendance and Revenue”, Health Policy and Planning, X (1995), 164-170.
Ostrom, Elinor, Governing the Commons: The Evolution of Institutions for Collective Action, New York:
Cambridge University Press, 1990.
Pant C.R., et al., “Impact of Nutrition Education and Mega-Dose Vitamin A Supplementation on the
Health of Children in Nepal,” Bulletin of the WHO, LXXIV (1996), 533-45.
Partnership for Child Development [PCD], “The Cost of Large-scale School Health Programmes which
Deliver Anthelmintics in Ghana and Tanzania,” Acta Tropica, LXXIII (1999), 183-204.
Pollitt, E., “Infection: Schistosomiasis”, Malnutrition and Infection in the Classroom, Paris: Unesco,
1990, 151-162.
Rabin, Matthew, and Joel Schrag, “First Impressions Matter: A Model of Confirmatory Bias”, Quarterly
Journal of Economics, CXIV (1999), 37-82.
Rosenstein-Rodan, Paul N., “Problems of Industrialization of Eastern and South-Eastern Europe”,
Economic Journal, LIII (1943), 202-211.
Rostow, Walt W., The Stages of Economic Growth, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1960.
Savioli L., Crompton, W.T. and M. Niera, “Use of Anthelminthic Drugs During Pregnancy.” American
Journal of Obstetrics and Gynecology, CLXXXVIII (2003), 5-6.
Smith, Jennifer K., Alan S. Gerber, and Anton Orlich, “Self-Prophecy Effects and Voter Turn-out: An
Experimental Replication”, Political Psychology, XXIV (2003), 593-604.
Steinberg, Laurence, and Elizabeth Cauffman, “Maturity of Judgement in Adolescence: Psychosocial
factors in Adolescent Decision Making”, Law and Human Behavior, XX (1996), 249-272.
Utzinger, J., R. Berquist, Xiao Shu-Hua, B.H. Singer, and M. Tanner, “Sustainable Schistosomiasis
Control – the Way Forward”, Lancet, XXLXII (2003), 1932-34.
Warren, K.S., et al., “Helminth infections,” in Dean T. Jamison et al. (eds.), Disease Control Priorities in
Developing Countries, New York: Oxford University Press and The World Bank, 1993, 131-60.

45

Watts, D.J., and S.H. Strogatz, “Collective Dynamics of ‘smallworld’ networks”, Nature, XXXXCIII
(1998), 440-2.
Williamson, John., “What Washington Means by Policy Reform”, in John Williamson (ed.), Latin
American Adjustment: How Much has Happened?, Washington, D.C.: Institute for International
Economics, 1990.
World Bank, The East Asian Miracle: Economic Growth and Public Policy, New York: Oxford
University Press, 1993a.
World Bank, World Development Report: Investing in Health, New York: Oxford University Press,
1993b.
World Bank, Better Health in Africa: Experience and Lessons Learned, Development in Practice Series,
Washington, D.C.: World Bank, 1994.
World Bank, Beyond the Washington Consensus: Institutions Matter, New York: Oxford University
Press, 1998.
World Bank. World Development Indicators, retrieved from www.worldbank.org/data, 1999.
World Bank, School Deworming at a Glance, [Electronic version], Washington D.C.: World Bank, 2003.
World Health Organization, Prevention and Control of intestinal parasitic infections. Report of the WHO
Scientific Group, WHO Technical Report Series: 749. Geneva: World Health Organization, 1987.
World Health Organization, Model Describing Information. Drugs used in Parasitic Diseases, Geneva:
World Health Organization, 1992.
World Health Organization, The World Health Report 1999, Geneva: World Health Organization, 1999.
Notes
1. Refer to the Oxfam website for the details (http://www.oxfam.org.uk/about_us/history/history2.htm).
2. Sustainability has other meanings, including an environmental meaning, but we focus on financial sustainability.
3. Lengeler [1999] reaches similar conclusions.
4. Refer to Adams et al. [1994], Corbett et al. [1992], Hotez and Pritchard [1995], and Pollitt [1990].
5. The project followed the standard practice at the time in mass deworming programs of not treating girls of
reproductive age – typically aged 13 years and older in practice – due to concern about the possibility that
albendazole could cause birth defects [WHO, 1992; Cowden and Hotez, 2000]. The WHO recently called for this
policy to be changed based on an accumulating record of safe usage by pregnant women (see Savioli et al. [2003]).
6. This figure is based on an estimate that each health education teacher taught two full hours on worm prevention
behaviors in each grade per school year (given an annual teacher salary and benefits of approximately US$2,000),
and that the NGO team also provided two hours of health education per school per year.
7. Kenyan per capita income was US$340 [World Bank, 1999], and incomes may be even lower in Busia.
8. Geissler studies an ethnically Luo population (Luos speak a Nilotic language). The majority of our sample are
ethnically Luhya (a Bantu-speaking group) though Luos are four percent of our sample. However, traditional
Luo,views are closely related to views found among other African groups [Green et al., 1994; Green, 1997].

46

9. The effect of other people’s treatment choices on the magnitude of private treatment benefits is unclear a priori.
As a benchmark, if helminth reinfection rates are independent of own current worm load, and if the health burden of
infection is linear in own worm load, the private health benefits of treatment are independent of others’ choices. If,
instead, the health costs of infection are convex in worm load, deworming benefits will be greater in an environment
that is expected to have high exposure to worms in the future. Thus the net private benefits of treatment will be
lower if others are treated. The opposite holds with concavity. Miguel and Kremer [2004] estimate average
deworming treatment spillovers and find that they are roughly linear in local treatment rates, but due to data
limitations have little power to detect nonlinear higher order terms. Here we assume the benchmark linear case.
10. As observed by Watts and Strogatz [1998], the addition of even a few links to a sparsely connected network
greatly reduces the average path length between any two nodes, so in general information will propagate more
quickly in more densely connected networks than in the simple tree we consider.
11. Note that infection status will in general be a function of the entire treatment history of the network. In the
steady state, however, the equilibrium takeup rate λ* is a sufficient statistic for the entire history since the take-up
rate is the same in every period.
12. We conjecture that even in the presence of peer effects, if social connections are in a tree network structure as
modeled here, then subsidizing a small group of tightly socially linked people may be sufficient to ensure adoption
and further diffusion of the technology, unless private returns are low enough and peer effects strong enough that
people will not adopt unless a majority of contacts adopt. This is because subsidizing a small group of
interconnected people will be sufficient to ensure adoption within this group, and once learning takes place within
the group, adoption can then spread outwards to others.
13. Of course, additional subsidies may be justified if there is learning by doing in production. Here we examine the
extent to which social learning by consumers generates a case for subsidies.
14. Survey refusal rates were low, as is typical for this region. 13% of households were dropped due to either
missing network information, treatment information, household characteristics, or difficulty matching across the
2001 surveys and earlier PSDP datasets.
15. Treatment within a family is highly correlated, as expected, so we use the household as the unit of analysis.
16. The experiences and choices of people in social links’ communities may theoretically affect respondent take-up
[Munshi, 2004]. For each early treatment school, we computed the average difference in 1999 school participation
between treated and untreated pupils and use this to classify schools into “large treated minus untreated difference”
schools (those above the median difference) versus small difference schools. The treated minus untreated difference
captures the average observed private benefit to deworming in that school. However, the effect of links to early
treatment schools in large difference schools is not significantly different than the effect in small difference schools.
Similarly, links to early treatment schools with low take-up do have a somewhat more negative effect on respondent
treatment rates than links to schools with high take-up, but the difference is not significant (not shown). However,
omitted variable bias concerns and limited statistical power mean these results should be interpreted cautiously.
17. Given the correlation of information among individuals in the same school, it is theoretically possible that the
first signal in a particular school would be more influential than subsequent signals. We estimated these effects in
our data, but due to limited statistical power cannot reject the hypothesis that the first, second, and third links to a
particular early treatment school all have the same impact on take-up (regressions not shown).
18. A finding that casts some doubt on the “first impressions matter” explanation, however, is the fact that links to
Group 1 schools (phased in during 1998) have nearly identical impacts as links to Group 2 schools (phased in during
1999, estimates not shown). Note that the persistent effects of early treatment links on take-up might be reconciled
with Bayesian learning, though, if individuals believed there was an important school-year specific random
component to treatment effects, leading them to place extra weight on outcomes in schools other than their own.

47

19. The results are also robust to a specification without socioeconomic controls (Appendix Table A.I, regression 2),
and to the inclusion of additional ethnic and religious controls, and indicators for whether the respondent is a
member of the dominant local ethnic and religious group (regression 3); none of the six ethnic group indicator
variables is significantly related to take-up. The results are similar when the local density of early treatment school
pupils (located within 3 km of the respondent’s school), and the density of all local primary school pupils, are
included as controls (regression 4). However, the point estimate on early links falls by more than a third and loses
statistical significance, possibly because the local density of early treatment schools picks up part of the effect of
interactions with other individuals not named in the social links roster. An F-test indicates that the early treatment
social links and local density of early treatment pupils terms are jointly significant at 99% confidence.
20. Using another definition of link strength yields similar results. While most links were provided in response to
questions about the individuals with whom the respondent speaks most frequently, others were provided in response
to prompts about contacts in particular local schools. There is not a statistically significant difference in the effects
of “unprompted” and “prompted” links (in fact, prompted links are somewhat more influential—not shown).
21. Refer to the working paper version [Miguel and Kremer, 2003] for further discussion of child social effects.
22. The 2001 worm infection results are for a subsample of only 745 children who were randomly sampled for stool
collection and were present in school on the day of the parasitological survey. Due to the relatively small sample
size, we do not focus on the parasitological data in the main empirical analysis.
23. A fourth option, “effective, but the worms come back” was rarely chosen by respondents.
24. The ten symptoms (row 7) include fatigue, anemia, weight loss, stunted growth, stomach ache, bloated stomach,
blood in stool, worms in stool, diarrhea, and fever. Parents were asked: “Could you name the symptoms of worm
and schistosomiasis infections?” and their unprompted responses were recorded by the enumerator.
25. We focus on the following range of parameter values for the model: b =0, b =2,

σ 02 =1, σ ε2 =1 to 10, C=0.1 to

2, φ=0.75, τ=6, annual discount rate δ=0.9 to 1, and p=0.05 to 0.2. In the simulation, we assume that all students
within a school receive separate signals and exchange information. However, to compensate for making this
extreme assumption, we also assume there are only a maximum of 50 possible signals that can be received per
school with full take-up; with more signals per school, convergence is even faster. Given b and b , varying C
between 0.1 and 2 covers all of the relevant cases. Similarly, fixing

σ 02 , choosing various values for σ ε2

covers all

of the interesting cases, since only their relative magnitudes influence weight placed on signals versus prior beliefs.
The simulation code and complete results are available from the authors upon request.
26. Gertler and Molyneaux [1996] find that utilization of medical care is highly sensitive to price in an experimental
study in Indonesia, but since the unit of randomization in their analysis is the district, and their intervention affected
only eleven districts, statistical power is relatively low. In a large-scale experimental study, Manning et al. [1987]
find in contrast that the price elasticity of demand for medical services in the United States is a modest –0.2.
27. Results are unchanged if Group 1 households are included in the analysis (results not shown). They are excluded
here since they lack the social networks data that we use as explanatory variables here and in Section 4 above.
28. This also holds controlling for initial 1998 cleanliness or using differences-in-differences (regressions not
shown).

48

49

Table I
Summary statistics
Mean

Std dev.

Obs.

Panel A: Parent Social Links (Round 1 and Round 2 Data)
Total direct (first-order) links
With children in own school
With children not in Group 1, 2, or 3 schools
With children in Group 1, 2, 3 schools – not own school
With children in Group 1, 2 schools – not own school (“early treatment”)
With children in Group 1 schools – not own school
Proportion with children in early treatment schools
With children in early treatment schools, with whom respondent speaks at least twice per week (“Close Links”)
With children in early treatment schools, with whom respondent speaks less than twice per week (“Distant Links”)
Second-order exposure to Group 1, 2 or 3 schools (not own school), through parent links
Second-order exposure to early treatment schools (Groups 1 and 2, not own school), through parent links
Third-order exposure to Group 1, 2 or 3 schools (not own school), through parent links
Third-order exposure to early treatment schools (Groups 1 and 2, not own school), through parent links

10.2
4.4
3.0
2.8
1.9
0.9
0.66
1.2
0.7
4.5
2.9
3.9
2.8

3.4
2.8
2.4
2.4
2.0
1.4
0.37
1.6
1.1
4.1
2.9
5.3
4.1

1678
1678
1678
1678
1678
1678
1358
1678
1678
1678
1678
1678
1678

Panel B: Parent Social Links (Round 2 Data)
With children in own school who received deworming
With children in early treatment schools who received deworming
With children in early treatment schools who received deworming and had “good effects” (according to respondent)
With children in early treatment schools who received deworming and had “side effects” (according to respondent)
With children in early treatment schools who received deworming, respondent does not know effects
With children in early treatment schools, respondent does not know whether they received deworming
With children in early treatment schools who did not receive deworming

1.5
0.31
0.21
0.02
0.10
1.34
0.05

2.2
0.89
0.76
0.18
0.43
1.77
0.31

886
886
886
886
886
886
886

Panel C: Deworming Treatment Take-up
Took deworming drugs in 2001 (Group 2 and 3)
Proportion deworming drug take-up in 2001, respondent’s own school
Took deworming drugs in 2001, free treatment schools
Took deworming drugs in 2001, cost-sharing schools
Provided parental consent for deworming drugs in 2001

0.61
0.61
0.75
0.19
0.76

0.49
0.28
0.43
0.39
0.43

1678
1678
1251
427
1678

Panel D: Cost-Sharing Interventions
Cost-sharing school indicator
0.25
0.43
1678
Cost-sharing school indicator, albendazole only treatment
0.17
0.38
1678
Cost-sharing school indicator, albendazole and praziquantel treatment
0.08
0.27
1678
Effective price of deworming per child (Kenyan shillings)
6.3
15.7
1678
Notes: From 2001 Parent Questionnaire and NGO administrative records. The “Proportion in early treatment schools” variables exclude respondents with no
links to program schools (other than their own), hence the reduced sample since the denominator is zero in that case.

50

Table II
Validating the randomizations (Group 2 and Group 3 households)
Dependent variable:
Total
Iron roof at
number of
home
children

Respondent
years of
education

Community
group
member

OLS
(1)
0.017
(0.085)
0.086
(0.096)
-0.122
(0.083)
0.058
(0.072)

Probit
(2)
-0.004
(0.012)
0.007
(0.013)
-0.004
(0.010)
-0.000
(0.007)

OLS
(3)
-0.039
(0.067)
-0.047
(0.072)
-0.060
(0.060)
0.044
(0.048)

Probit
(4)
0.029**
(0.014)
-0.016
(0.017)
0.021*
(0.011)
-0.012*
(0.009)

OLS
(5)
-0.178
(0.128)
0.295***
(0.101)
-0.168*
(0.086)
0.031
(0.096)

Moderateheavy
infection,
2001
Probit
(6)
-0.003
(0.018)
-0.030
(0.025)
0.044*
(0.023)
-0.023
(0.018)

Third-order exposure to early treatment schools (Groups 1 and 2,
not redundant with first and second order links), parent links
Third-order exposure to Group 1, 2 or 3 schools (not redundant
with first and second order links), parent links
Cost-sharing school indicator

-0.057
(0.104)
0.101
(0.077)
0.16
(0.289)

-0.008
(0.015)
0.006
(0.011)
0.003
(0.042)

0.008
(0.055)
0.015
(0.051)
0.073
(0.232)

0.006
(0.017)
-0.002
(0.012)
0.011
(0.059)

-0.103
(0.097)
0.044
(0.084)
1.361
(0.852)

-0.168
(0.021)
0.024
(0.018)
0.03
(0.096)

Group 2 school indicator

-0.578*
(0.290)
Yes

-0.033
(0.04)
Yes

0.091
(0.202)
Yes

0.021
(0.048)
Yes

-0.090
(0.308)
Yes

-0.209***
(0.069)
Yes

1678
4.6 (3.9)

1678
0.58 (0.49)

1678
5.5 (2.3)

1678
0.61 (0.49)

1678
1.7 (2.0)

745
0.27 (0.45)

Explanatory variables:
# Parent links with children in early treatment schools (Group 1,
2, not own school)
# Parent links with children in Group 1, 2, or 3 schools, not own
school
Second-order exposure to early treatment schools (Groups 1 and
2, not redundant with first order links), parent links
Second-order exposure to Group 1, 2 or 3 schools (not redundant
with first order links), parent links

Other social link controls, socio-economic controls
(excluding dependent variable)
Number of observations (parents)
Mean (s.d.) of dependent variable

Distance
home to
school (km)

Notes: Data from 2001 Parent Survey, 2001 Parasitological Survey, and 2001 administrative records. Robust standard errors in parentheses. Disturbance terms
are clustered within schools. Significantly different than zero at 99 (***), 95 (**), and 90 (*) percent confidence. The socioeconomic controls include
Respondent years of education, Community group member, Total number of children, Iron roof at home, and Distance from home to school (but when any of
these is the dependent variable, it is not included as an explanatory variable). The other social link controls include # Parent links with children not in Group 1, 2,
or 3 schools, and # Parent links, total.

51

Table III
Non-experimental social effect estimates (Groups 2 and 3)
Explanatory variables:
Proportion deworming drug take-up in 2001, respondent’s own school
(not including respondent)

Dependent variable:
Child took deworming drugs in 2001
(1)
(2)
(3)
0.84***
(0.11)

# Parent links with children in respondent’s own school whose children
received deworming

0.015
(0.011)

# Parent links with children in early treatment schools whose children
received deworming and had “good effects”

-0.005
(0.025)

# Parent links with children in early treatment schools whose children
received deworming and had “side effects”

-0.152*
(0.080)

# Parent links with children in early treatment schools whose children
received deworming and respondent does not know effects

-0.004
(0.049)

# Parent links with children in early treatment schools whose children
did not receive deworming

0.006
(0.056)

# Parent links with children in early treatment schools, respondent does
not know whether they received deworming
Total social link controls, socio-economic controls
Number of observations (parents)
Mean of dependent variable

-0.010
(0.019)
Yes
886
0.56

Yes
1678
0.61

Yes
886
0.56

Notes: Data from 2001 Parent Survey, and 2001 administrative records. Marginal probit coefficient estimates are
presented. Robust standard errors in parentheses. Disturbance terms are clustered within schools. Significantly
different than zero at 99 (***), 95 (**), and 90 (*) percent confidence. Social links controls include total number of
parent links, number of parent links to Group 1, 2, 3 schools (not own school), and number of links parent to nonprogram schools. Other controls include respondent years of education, community group member indicator
variable, total number of children, iron roof at home indicator variable, and distance from home to school in km, as
well as the Group 2 indicator and Cost-sharing school indicator. Regression 1 presents results from Round 1 and
Round 2 of the 2001 Parent Survey, and regressions 2 and 3 present results from Round 2 alone, since only Round 2
has detailed information regarding deworming treatment impacts on social links. In regression 3, we can reject that
the coefficient estimates on (# Links with children in early treatment schools whose children received deworming
and had good effects) and on (# Links with children in early treatment schools whose children received deworming
and had side effects) are equal at 90% confidence (p-value=0.092).

52

Table IV
Experimental social effect estimates (Groups 2 and 3)
Explanatory variables:
# Parent links with children in early treatment schools
(Groups 1 and 2, not own school)

Dependent variable:
Child took deworming drugs in 2001
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
-0.031**
-0.041**
-0.002
(0.014)
(0.017)
(0.018)

# Parent links with children in early treatment schools
* Group 2 school indicator

0.018
(0.029)
-0.098**
(0.045)

Proportion direct (first-order) parent links with children in
early treatment schools
# Parent links with children in early treatment schools,
with whom respondent speaks at least twice/week

-0.030**
(0.016)

# Parent links with children in early treatment schools,
with whom respondent speaks less than twice/week

-0.033
(0.033)

# Parent links with children in Group 1, 2, or 3 schools,
not own school, with whom respondent speaks at least
twice/week

0.008
(0.012)

# Parent links with children in Group 1, 2, or 3 schools,
not own school, with whom respondent speaks less than
twice/week

0.025
(0.028)
-0.0062*
(0.0032)

# Parent links with children in early treatment schools
* Respondent years of education
# Parent links with children in Group 1, 2, or 3 schools,
not own school

0.013
(0.011)

0.013
(0.017)

-0.006
(0.009)

# Parent links with children not in Group 1, 2, or 3 schools

-0.008
(0.007)

-0.008
(0.009)

-0.005
(0.007)

-0.008
(0.007)

-0.008
(0.011)

# Parent links, total

0.019***
(0.005)

0.029***
(0.007)

0.021***
(0.007)

0.018***
(0.005)

0.013
(0.008)

Respondent years of education

0.003
(0.003)

0.003
(0.003)

0.002
(0.004)

0.002
(0.003)

-0.016
(0.012)

Community group member

0.029
(0.025)

0.033
(0.026)

0.038
(0.029)

0.031
(0.025)

0.025
(0.025)

Total number of children

0.005
(0.006)

0.006
(0.006)

0.005
(0.007)

0.005
(0.006)

0.006
(0.006)

Iron roof at home

0.010
(0.027)

0.007
(0.027)

0.010
(0.032)

0.010
(0.027)

0.008
(0.027)

Distance home to school (km)

-0.018**
(0.009)

-0.018**
(0.009)

-0.014
(0.010)

-0.017*
(0.009)

-0.018**
(0.009)

0.01
(0.05)

0.20**
(0.09)

0.01
(0.05)

0.01
(0.05)

0.01
(0.05)

-0.62***
(0.08)
1678
0.61

-0.62***
(0.08)
1678
0.61

-0.62***
(0.09)
1358
0.61

-0.63***
(0.08)
1678
0.61

-0.63***
(0.08)
1678
0.61

Group 2 school indicator
Cost-sharing school indicator
Number of observations (parents)
Mean of dependent variable

-0.014
(0.014)

53

Notes: Data from 2001 Parent Survey, and 2001 administrative records. Marginal probit coefficient estimates are
presented. Robust standard errors in parentheses. Disturbance terms are clustered within schools. Significantly
different than zero at 99 (***), 95 (**), and 90 (*) percent confidence. Regression 2 also includes interaction terms
(# Parent social links with children in Group 1, 2, or 3 schools, not own school)*(Group 2), (# Parent social links
with children not in Group 1, 2, or 3 schools)*(Group 2), and (# Parent social links, total)*(Group 2). Regression 3
excludes parents for which (# Parent social links with children in Group 1, 2, or 3 schools, not own school) = 0,
since the proportion of links is undefined, leading to the reduction in sample size. Regression 5 also includes
interaction terms (# Parent social links with children in Group 1, 2, or 3 schools, not own school)*(Respondent years
of education) and (# Parent social links with children not in Group 1, 2, or 3 schools)*(Respondent years of
education), not shown.

54

Table V
First-order and higher-order social effect estimates (Groups 2 and 3)
Explanatory variables:
# Parent links with children in early treatment schools (Groups 1 and 2, not own school)
# Parent links with children in Group 1, 2, or 3 schools, not own school

(1)
-0.031**
(0.014)
0.013
(0.011)

Proportion direct (first-order) parent links with children in early treatment schools
Second-order exposure to early treatment schools (Groups 1 and 2, not own school), parent links
Second-order exposure to Group 1, 2 or 3 schools (not own school), parent links
Proportion second-order parent links with children in early treatment schools
Third-order exposure to early treatment schools (Groups 1 and 2, not own school), parent links
Third-order exposure to Group 1, 2 or 3 schools (not own school), parent links
Total social link controls, socio-economic controls
Number of observations (parents)
Mean of dependent variable

Yes
1678
0.61

Dependent variable:
Child took deworming drugs in 2001
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
-0.044***
-0.037**
(0.015)
(0.015)
0.020
0.02
(0.015)
(0.015)
-0.14***
(0.05)
-0.035***
-0.047***
-0.048***
(0.013)
(0.013)
(0.014)
0.025**
0.032**
0.033***
(0.012)
(0.012)
(0.012)
-0.23***
(0.09)
-0.014
(0.012)
0.008
(0.01)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
1678
1678
1173
1678
0.61
0.61
0.61
0.61

Notes: Data from 2001 Parent Survey, and 2001 administrative records. Marginal probit coefficient estimates are presented. Robust standard errors in
parentheses. Disturbance terms are clustered within schools. Significantly different than zero at 99 (***), 95 (**), and 90 (*) percent confidence. Social links
controls and other controls are included in all specifications. Social links controls include total number of parent links, number of parent links to Group 1, 2, 3
schools (not own school), and number of parent links to non-program schools. Other controls include respondent years of education, community group member
indicator variable, total number of children, iron roof at home indicator variable, and distance from home to school in km, as well as the Group 2 indicator and
Cost-sharing school indicator.

55

Table VI
Effects on deworming attitudes and knowledge
Estimate on
# Parent links with
children in early
treatment schools

Estimate on
# Parent links with
children in early
treatment schools
whose children
received deworming

Dependent variable:
Panel A: Attitudes
1) Parent thinks deworming drugs
“not effective”

[Experimental]

[Non-experimental]

Estimate on
# Parent links with
children in early
treatment schools
with whom
respondent spoke
about deworming
[Non-experimental]

0.017**
(0.007)

0.013
(0.008)

0.009**
(0.004)

0.12

2) Parent thinks deworming drugs
“very effective”

-0.007
(0.010)

0.026**
(0.013)

0.040***
(0.007)

0.43

3) Parent thinks deworming drugs
have “side effects”

0.000
(0.003)

-0.001
(0.003)

0.003*
(0.002)

0.04

4) Parent thinks worms and
schisto. “very bad” for child health

-0.001
(0.006)

-0.004
(0.006)

-0.006*
(0.003)

0.92

Panel B: Knowledge
5) Parent “knows about ICS
deworming program”

0.004
(0.011)

0.050***
(0.014)

0.055***
(0.011)

0.70

6) Parent “knows about the effects
of worms and schistosomiasis”

-0.001
(0.013)

0.045***
(0.013)

0.039***
(0.009)

0.68

7) Number of infection symptoms
parents able to name (0-10)

-0.006
(0.005)

0.018**
(0.008)

0.010**
(0.005)

1.8

8) Parent able to name “fatigue” as
symptom of infection

-0.004
(0.010)

0.028***
(0.009)

0.021***
(0.006)

0.20

9) Parent able to name “anemia” as
symptom of infection

0.005
(0.009)

-0.003
(0.011)

0.010**
(0.005)

0.22

10) Parent able to name “weight
loss” as symptom of infection

0.002
(0.006)

0.004
(0.005)

-0.001
(0.004)

0.06

Mean
dep. var.

Notes: Data from 2001 Parent Survey, and 2001 administrative records. Marginal probit coefficient estimates are
presented, and each entry is the result of a separate regression. Robust standard errors in parentheses. Disturbance
terms are clustered within schools. Significantly different than zero at 99 (***), 95 (**), and 90 (*) percent
confidence. Social links controls and other controls are included in all specifications. Social links controls include
total number of parent links, number of parent links to Group 1, 2, 3 schools (not own school), and number of parent
links to non-program schools. Other controls include respondent years of education, community group member
indicator variable, total number of children, iron roof at home indicator variable, and distance from home to school
in km, as well as the Group 2 indicator and Cost-sharing school indicator. The number of observations (parents)
across regressions ranges from 1656 to 1678 depending on the extent of missing data for the dependent variable.
The ten possible infection symptoms (row 7) include fatigue, anemia, weight loss, stunted growth, stomach ache,
bloated stomach, blood in stool, worms in stool, diarrhea, and fever. Parents were asked: “Could you name the
symptoms of worm and schistosomiasis infections?”, and their responses were recorded by the enumerator.

56

Table VII
The impact of cost-sharing
Explanatory variables:
Cost-sharing school indicator
Cost-sharing * Respondent years of education
Cost-sharing * Community group member
Cost-sharing * Total number of children
Cost-sharing * Iron roof at home
Effective price of deworming per child
(= Cost / # household children in that school)

Dependent variable:
Child took deworming drugs in 2001
(1)
(2)
(3)
-0.62***
-0.49***
-0.62***
(0.08)
(0.15)
(0.12)
0.003
(0.007)
0.027
(0.067)
-0.015
(0.016)
-0.04
(0.06)
-0.001
(0.002)

1 / (# household children in that school)
Social links, other controls
Number of observations (parents)
Mean of dependent variable

Yes
1678
0.61

Yes
1678
0.61

-0.35***
(0.07)
Yes
1678
0.61

Notes: Data from 2001 Parent Survey, and 2001 administrative records. Marginal probit coefficient estimates are presented. Robust standard errors in
parentheses. Disturbance terms are clustered within schools. Significantly different than zero at 99 (***), 95 (**), and 90 (*) percent confidence. Social links
controls include total number of links, number of links to Group 1, 2, 3 schools (not own school), and number of links to non-program schools (as in Table IV
above). Other controls include respondent years of education, community group member indicator variable, total number of children in the household, iron roof
at home indicator variable, and distance from home to school in km, as well as the Group 2 indicator (as in Table IV above).

57

Table VIII
PSDP health behavior impacts (1999)
Group 1

Group 2

Group 1 –
Group 2 (s.e.)

Panel A: Health Behaviors, all pupils (Grades 3-8)
Clean (observed by field worker), 1999

0.59

0.60

Wears shoes (observed by field worker), 1999

0.24

0.26

Days contact with fresh water in past week (self-reported), 1999

2.4

2.2

-0.01
(0.02)
-0.02
(0.03)
0.2
(0.3)

Panel B: Health behaviors, girls ≥ 13 years old
Clean (observed by field worker), 1999

0.75

0.77

Wears shoes (observed by field worker), 1999

0.39

0.42

Days contact with fresh water in past week (self-reported), 1999

2.3

2.2

Panel C: Health behaviors, all pupils (Grades 3-8)
Clean (observed by field worker), 1999
Wears shoes (observed by field worker), 1999
Days contact with fresh water in past week
(self-reported), 1999

-0.02
(0.02)
-0.03
(0.06)
0.0
(0.3)

Overall crossschool externality
effect for Group 2
0.09
(0.21)
-0.01
(0.08)
0.98
(0.68)

Notes: These results use the data from Miguel and Kremer (2004). These are averages of individual-level data for grade 3-8 pupils; disturbance terms are
clustered within schools. Robust standard errors in parentheses. Significantly different than zero at 99 (***), 95 (**), and 90 (*) percent confidence.
The effects in Panel C are the result of a regression in which the dependent variable is the change in the health behavior between 1998 and 1999 (school average),
and the local density of Group 1 pupils within 3 km (per 1000 pupils), Group 1 pupils within 3-6 km (per 1000 pupils), Total pupils within 3 km (per 1000
pupils) and Total pupils within 3-6 km (per 1000 pupils) are the key explanatory variables. Grade indicators, school assistance controls (for other NGO
programs), and the average school district mock exam score are additional explanatory variables (as in Miguel and Kremer 2004).

58

Table IX
The impact of a verbal commitment

Verbal commitment intervention indicator
Pupil age
Pupil female
Verbal commitment intervention indicator *Age
Verbal commitment intervention indicator * Female
Social links, other controls
Number of observations (pupils)
Mean of dependent variable

Dependent variable:
Child took deworming drugs in 2001
(1)
(2)
(3)
-0.014
-0.013
0.023
(0.021)
(0.021)
(0.145)
-0.004
-0.003
(0.006)
(0.006)
-0.048**
-0.050
(0.024)
(0.035)
-0.003
(0.010)
0.005
(0.006)
Yes
Yes
Yes
3164
3164
3164
0.54
0.54
0.54

Notes: Data from 2001 Parent and Pupil Surveys, and administrative records. Marginal probit coefficient estimates are presented, robust standard errors in
parentheses. Disturbance terms are clustered within schools. Significantly different than zero at 99 (***), 95 (**), and 90 (*) percent confidence. Social links
controls are described in Miguel and Kremer (2003). Other controls include respondent years of education, community group member indicator variable, total
number of children, iron roof at home indicator variable, and distance from home to school in km, as well as the Group 2 and Cost-sharing school indicators.
Summary statistics from the 2001 Pupil Questionnaire (Mean [s.d.]): Pupil age (12.9 [2.3]), Pupil female indicator (0.23 [0.42]) (older girls were dropped from
the sample because they were not eligible for deworming, due to the potential embryotoxicity of the drugs).

59

