                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                           CAPITAL CONTROLS, LIBERALIZATIONS,
                             AND FOREIGN DIRECT INVESTMENT

                                              Mihir A. Desai
                                              C. Fritz Foley
                                            James R. Hines Jr.

                                          Working Paper 10337
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w10337


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      March 2004




The statistical analysis of firm-level data on U.S. multinational companies was conducted at the International
Investment Division, Bureau of Economic Analysis, U.S. Department of Commerce under arrangements that
maintain legal confidentiality requirements. The views expressed are those of the authors and do not reflect
official positions of the U.S. Department of Commerce. The authors thank Kristen Forbes, Gita Gopinath,
Nandini Gupta, Joe Kogan, Robert Lawrence, William Zeile and various seminar and conference participants
for helpful comments on an earlier draft, and the Lois and Bruce Zenkel Research Fund at the University of
Michigan and the Division of Research at Harvard Business School for financial support. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

©2004 by Mihir A. Desai, C. Fritz Foley, and James R. Hines Jr. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Capital Controls, Liberalizations, and Foreign Direct Investment
Mihir A. Desai, C. Fritz Foley, and James R. Hines Jr.
NBER Working Paper No. 10337
March 2004
JEL No. F21, F23, G15, H87, G18, G38

                                              ABSTRACT

Affiliate-level evidence indicates that American multinational firms circumvent capital controls by

adjusting their reported intrafirm trade, affiliate profitability, and dividend repatriations. As a result,

the reported profit impact of local capital controls is comparable to the effect of 24 percent higher

corporate tax rates, and affiliates located in countries imposing capital controls are 9.8 percent more

likely than other affiliates to remit dividends to parent companies. Multinational affiliates located

in countries with capital controls face 5.4 percent higher interest rates on local borrowing than do

affiliates of the same parent borrowing locally in countries without capital controls. Together, the

costliness of avoidance and higher interest rates raise the cost of capital, significantly reducing the

level of foreign direct investment. American affiliates are 13-16 percent smaller in countries with

capital controls than they are in comparable countries without capital controls. These effects are

reversed when countries liberalize their capital account restrictions.

Mihir A. Desai                                           James R. Hines Jr.
Harvard Business School                                  University of Michigan
Morgan 363                                               Business School
Soldiers Field                                           701 Tappan Street
Boston, MA 02163                                         Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1234
and NBER                                                 and NBER
mdesai@hbs.edu                                           jrhines@umich.edu

C. Fritz Foley
University of Michigan
Business School
701 Tappan Street
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1234
ffoley@umich.edu
1.     Introduction

       Countries that fear the economic disruptions that may accompany capital flows are often
tempted to impose controls on international capital movements. These controls can take many
forms, and their efficacy in promoting or deterring growth is hotly debated. The same countries
are also typically eager to attract foreign direct investment due to the presumed salutary effects
of such investment. The potential inconsistency of the desire to control capital movements and
the desire to attract inbound foreign direct investment has heretofore received limited attention,
in spite of its obvious policy relevance.

       This paper offers evidence of the effects of capital controls on foreign direct investment,
in the process addressing several related questions: What is the effect of capital controls on the
cost of capital for foreign investors? Do multinational firms employ their internal product and
capital markets to circumvent capital controls, and how do such efforts compare to actions
triggered by income taxes? Are the effects of capital controls reversed when countries liberalize
their capital account restrictions? And how much foreign direct investment does a country lose
by imposing capital controls?

       The results indicate that local borrowing rates are considerably higher in countries
imposing capital controls; that multinational firms distort reported trade patterns, profitability,
and dividend repatriations in order to mitigate the impact of capital controls; and that the costs
that must be incurred in order to avoid capital controls together with higher interest rates
significantly reduce levels of foreign direct investment. Borrowing rates are 5.4 percentage
points higher in countries imposing capital controls than they are elsewhere for affiliates of the
same multinational parents. The distortions to reported profitability are comparable to those
incurred in response to 24 percent differences in corporate tax rates, and dividend repatriations
are regularized to facilitate the extraction of profits from countries imposing capital controls.
The avoidance of capital controls and high interest rates impose costs on foreign affiliates and
therefore reduce the volume of investment by American firms. The initial capitalization of
affiliates in countries with capital controls is 13–16 percent smaller than affiliates elsewhere and
this smaller initial size is not offset by greater growth through increased profit retentions. These
patterns are reversed when capital controls are removed.



                                                                                               1
       These results emerge from an analysis of how foreign affiliates of U.S. multinational
firms respond to capital controls and their removal. The use of confidential affiliate-level data
makes it possible to distinguish the behavior of foreign affiliates of the same parent companies
operating in markets with and without capital controls. As a result, it is possible to obtain
estimates of the impact of capital controls, while implicitly controlling for considerations that are
common to all affiliates of the same company. The sample, which varies depending on the
analysis, covers the activities of all U.S. multinational firms from 1982 to 1997.

       Any analysis of firm-level responses to capital controls is complicated by two important
considerations: capital controls are not randomly distributed among nations, and available
indexes measure capital controls imprecisely. This paper attempts to overcome these difficulties
by focusing on subtle predictions regarding firm behavior and by employing a measure tailored
to capture the aspects of capital controls relevant for multinational firms. Although it is possible
to control for observable country characteristics and firm fixed effects, the measured effect of
capital controls on foreign investment may reflect the impact of omitted variables that affect
investment and are correlated with the desire to control capital flows. Since there is a shortage of
available instruments for the imposition or removal of capital controls, it is useful to look beyond
predictions of the effects of controls on levels of foreign direct investment and to consider
subtler predictions regarding the avoidance behavior of American firms. Consistent with these
predictions, the evidence indicates that foreign affiliates in countries that control remittances are
significantly more likely than other affiliates to smooth dividend repatriations, in spite of the
associated tax and resource-allocation costs. The same affiliates have 4.7 percent lower reported
profit rates than do comparable affiliates in countries without capital controls, and exhibit
intrafirm trade patterns that shift profits away from host countries restricting capital flows, this
behavior characteristic of affiliates located in countries with high tax rates. While it is
impossible to rule out the confounding effects of the non-random assignment of capital controls,
the tests suggest that the overall results do not merely reflect the conditions that give rise to the
desire to impose capital controls.

       Studies of capital controls and capital account liberalizations are also commonly
hampered by the imprecise measurement of capital controls. As noted in Edison et al. (2003),
measures employed in empirical work on capital controls typically are blunt. In order to address



                                                                                                2
this problem, the empirical work in this paper employs a measure of capital account restrictions
that is specifically associated with the activities of multinational firms, comparing the results to
those obtained using a widely-adopted measure of capital account restrictions developed by the
International Monetary Fund. This analysis of firm responses to capital account restrictions
offers the advantage of being closely tied to the restrictions that firms actually face. As it
happens, results obtained using the two control measures are consistent, though stronger when
using the measure of capital controls tailored for situations facing multinational firms.

        Section 2 of the paper reviews the empirical literature on the impact of capital account
restrictions and liberalizations and ties the paper’s results to the open questions in the literature.
Section 3 offers an overview of the available data and describes aggregate patterns of
multinational activity and capital account regulations. Section 4 presents empirical evidence of
the effects of capital account restrictions on local interest rates, profit extraction, and investment
levels. Section 5 is the conclusion.

2.      Capital Controls, Liberalizations and Economic Growth

        This section reviews the sizable macroeconomic and finance literature analyzing the
effect of capital account restrictions on aggregate investment and the growing literature on the
distributional consequences of capital account restrictions. Evidence of the effects of capital
account restrictions on the behavior of multinational firms is complementary to these research
streams. This section also examines the likely effects of capital controls on multinationals firms.

2.1.    Investment responses to capital controls and liberalizations

        Eichengreen (2002) provides an overview of the large literature on the aggregate effects
of capital account liberalizations, concluding with the observation that liberalization “remains
one of the most controversial and least understood policies of our day.” While few definitive
conclusions have emerged, two important viewpoints can be distinguished. The skeptical view
of capital account liberalization is most often associated with Rodrik (1998) and related work.
Using the IMF classification of capital controls, Rodrik finds no significant statistical association
between capital account openness and growth. This evidence is used to bolster a more general
skepticism regarding the virtues of financial openness in the world of the second-best, as in



                                                                                                 3
Bhagwati (1998). The more optimistic view of capital account liberalization is advanced by
Fischer (1998), and supported by evidence provided in Quinn (1997). Using an index
subsequently adopted by many authors, Quinn reports a significant positive correlation between
changes in his measure of capital account openness and subsequent economic growth.

       The salience of these issues for policy makers has motivated work attempting to
disentangle the reasons for these contradictory findings. In particular, researchers have focused
on the distinctive nature of the IMF and Quinn measures (as in Edwards (2001)), the possibility
that capital liberalization operates differently for countries of different income levels (as in
Alesina, Grilli and Milesi-Ferretti (1994), which can be compared to Grilli and Millesi-Ferreti
(1995)), the role of preexisting policies and the role of sequencing in determining the effects of
capital control liberalizations (as in Arteta, Eichengreen and Wyplosz (2001) and Chinn and Ito
(2002)), and the role of political institutions in dictating outcomes associated with capital
account liberalizations (as in Quinn, Inclan and Toyoda (2001)). The effect of capital account
liberalizations in stimulating economic growth and investment remains an open question.

       Finance scholars have emphasized the effects of stock market liberalizations on
investment using firm-level data. Following the intuition of Stulz (1995, 1999), Henry (2000),
Bekeart and Harvey (2000), and Bekaert, Harvey and Lundblad (2002) find that stock market
liberalizations in a set of emerging market countries are followed by investment booms by local
firms listed on equity markets. Chari and Henry (2002) confirm the existence of investment
booms, but find no evidence that the distribution of investment subsequent to a liberalization
follows the predictions associated with the repricing of systematic risk. As such, investment
booms may be more associated with reductions in the risk-free interest rate than with repricing of
equity risk. Multinational responses to capital controls and liberalizations can shed light on the
mechanisms underlying this investment boom by analyzing their investment behavior directly
and by considering the extent to which borrowing costs are associated with capital controls.

2.2.   The distributional consequences of capital controls

       In addition to the aggregate effects described above, it is possible that capital controls
distort the composition of investment and firm activity. Morck, Strangeland and Yeung (1998)
and Rajan and Zingales (2003) both characterize capital controls as one example of a financial


                                                                                                   4
regulation that can have important distributional consequences across firms within the same
country. Specifically, they argue that capital controls can favor entrenched firms and that these
firms then lobby for their preservation. Johnson and Mitton (2003) demonstrate the nature of
these distributional consequences by examining how political connections are linked to firm
performance under capital controls in the case of Malaysia.

         The distributional consequences of capital account policies need not arise from political
connections alone. Forbes (2003) shows how smaller firms suffered during the Chilean encaje,
suggesting that the consequences of these regulations may be quite heterogeneous across firms
due to access to capital markets. Similarly, Auguste et al. (2003) consider the use of ADRs to
facilitate capital flight during a period of capital controls, indicating that the impact of capital
controls may depend on differential access to avoidance tactics.

         Access to internal capital markets facilitates the evasion of capital controls by
multinational firms. Desai, Foley, and Hines (2003) document the extent to which internal
capital markets permit multinationals firms to substitute parent-provided debt for local
borrowing in countries with underdeveloped capital markets. Similarly, Desai, Foley, and
Forbes (2003) show that multinationals outperform local firms during severe currency crises by
accessing internal capital markets as they pursue investment opportunities created by
depreciations.1 Since multinationals may circumvent capital controls through the use of their
internal markets and these internal markets are not available to all firms, capital controls could
have significant distributional consequences. Given the overall importance of foreign direct
investment to economic growth, as suggested by the findings of Aitken and Harrison (1999),
understanding the effect of capital controls on the behavior of multinational firms is valuable in
assessing the economic impact of capital account policies.

2.3      Capital controls, capital costs and FDI

         The influence of capital controls – and their liberalization – on foreign direct investment
depends on how controls influence the cost of capital for multinational firms. Capital controls
are commonly thought to increase the cost of local borrowing, as in Dooley and Isard (1980),

1
 In a similar vein, Johnson, Boone, Breach and Friedman (2000) and Mitton (2002) suggest how cross-country and
cross-firm variation in responses to corporate governance is associated with differential responses to currency crises.


                                                                                                               5
given that these controls, or the expectation of their imposition, prevent international capital
flows from equalizing interest rates. Since a considerable fraction of the funding for local
affiliates of multinational investors typically comes from local loans, higher interest rates
increase the cost of capital and should be expected to discourage investment. By comparing the
borrowing costs of affiliates of the same parent in countries with and without capital controls, it
is possible to identify the degree to which interest rates respond to capital controls in a manner
that is not confounded by differences in credit quality or other firm characteristics.

        In addition to these differences in interest costs, profit repatriation restrictions that
accompany capital controls can reduce effective returns to foreign investment by preventing
multinational investors from repatriating their profits to the extent that they would do so in the
absence of restrictions. It is useful to consider a simple formalization of this point. For firms
investing in countries with capital controls the value of an investment can be expressed as V(K),
in which K is the stock of capital held by the affiliate. Higher interest rates in countries with
capital controls generally imply that V(K) is less than the value of a comparable investment in a
country without capital controls, but that is not the only impact of capital controls as controls
also constrain the repatriation behavior of such affiliates. Following a period in which an
affiliate earns profits of π , and putting tax considerations aside for simplicity, the affiliate has
the choice of reinvesting its profits, remitting them as dividends, or using financial or other
means to relocate the profits to other affiliates or the parent company in non-dividend form,
possibly by adjusting the prices at which intercompany transactions are booked.

        In the absence of capital controls, dividend repatriation policies would be governed by
tax considerations and the need to use dividends to control cash flows and incentives within
multinational firms.2 Let d* denote the firm’s desired level of dividend remittance, and d
represent dividends actually paid; the affiliate is assumed to incur a cost equal to α (d − d *) ,
                                                                                                    2



with α > 0 , reflecting tax and organizational costs from imperfectly tailored dividend policies.
The effect of capital controls on dividend levels is to impose that dividends satisfy d ≤ d , in
which d is the affiliate’s maximum permitted repatriation. Firms also have the ability to use
various devices to relocate profits outside of affiliates in countries with capital controls, though




                                                                                                    6
these devices are likewise costly. Let δ denote the volume of profits earned by the affiliate in a
capital control country but reported to be earned outside; the associated cost is given by µδ 2 ,
with µ > 0 .

         The problem facing the multinational affiliate with previous period capitalization of K −1
is then to choose d and δ to maximize:


                           max[V ( K ) + d + δ ]
                            d ,δ

(1)                                                [                    ]
                           s.t. : K = K −1 + π − d + α (d − d *) − δ (1 + µδ )
                                                                    2


                           d ≤d

The first order conditions corresponding to this maximization are:


                                    V ′(K ) =
                                                   1
(2)
                                                1 + µδ

                                                     1− λ
(3)                                 V ′(K ) =                   ,
                                                1 + α (d − d *)


in which λ is the shadow value associated with the constraint that d ≤ d .

         Important features of the multinational firm’s reactions to capital controls are evident
from examination of conditions (2) and (3). If the repatriation restriction does not bind, then
λ = 0 , d = d * , and δ = 0 , so V ′(K ) = 1 , and all of the effects of capital controls on
discouraging local investment come from the associated higher interest rates. In the more
realistic case that repatriation restrictions bind, then λ > 0 , d = d , and
                   [               ]
V ′(K ) = (1 − λ ) 1 + α (d − d *) < 1 , so δ > 0 . When repatriations restrictions bind, dividend
remittances are insensitive to changes in desired dividends, and investors relocate some of their
profits to other jurisdictions.




2
 For a discussion of the tax and agency motivations for dividend repatriation policies, see Desai, Foley and Hines
(2001, 2002).


                                                                                                             7
        Costs associated with higher local interest rates and regulatory impediments to profit
repatriations reduce the desirability of investing in countries with capital controls, thereby
reducing the value of V(K) at any given level of K. Firms initially capitalize affiliates to the
point that V ′(K ) = 1 , but given the costs associated with capital controls, the level of K at which

V ′(K ) = 1 is smaller if a country has capital controls. The fact that V ′ ( K ) < 1 for affiliates

facing binding repatriation restrictions implies that such affiliates might grow quickly, since a
fraction of profits is effectively trapped. It does not follow that these affiliates will grow more
quickly than others located in countries without capital controls, since firms can moderate
growth rates with dividend repatriations and profit reallocations, and have incentives to do so
given the costliness of operations in countries with capital controls. Hence, in order to measure
the net impact of capital controls it is necessary to consider their impact on initial sizes of
affiliates as well as patterns of retained earnings.

        Finally, it is also possible that capital controls actually increase expected returns for
multinational firms. Specifically, Aizenman (2002) examines the conditions under which
macroeconomic volatility can discourage types of foreign direct investment. Given that one of
the rationales for capital controls is reduced volatility, it is possible that multinationals respond
to capital controls with increased investment. Consequently, the degree to which increased costs
associated with higher interest rates, repatriation restrictions, and costly evasion technologies are
offset by reduced volatility remains an open empirical question. The analysis that follows
proceeds by directly examining borrowing costs, avoidance behavior, and affiliate sizes in order
to assess the impact of capital controls on foreign direct investment.

3.      Data and Descriptive Statistics3

        The empirical work presented in section 4 is based on the most comprehensive available
data on the activities of American multinational firms. The Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA)
annual survey of U.S. Direct Investment Abroad from 1982 through 1997 provides a panel of
data on the financial and operating characteristics of U.S. firms operating abroad. These surveys
ask reporters to file detailed financial and operating items for each affiliate and information on
the value of transactions between U.S. parents and their foreign affiliates. The International




                                                                                                   8
Investment and Trade in Services Survey Act governs the collection of the data and the Act
ensures that “use of an individual company’s data for tax, investigative, or regulatory purposes is
prohibited.” Willful noncompliance with the Act can result in penalties of up to $10,000 or a
prison term of one year. As a result of these assurances and penalties, BEA believes that
coverage is close to complete and levels of accuracy are high.

         U.S. direct investment abroad is defined as the direct or indirect ownership or control by
a single U.S. legal entity of at least ten percent of the voting securities of an incorporated foreign
business enterprise or the equivalent interest in an unincorporated foreign business enterprise. A
U.S. multinational entity is the combination of a single U.S. legal entity that has made the direct
investment, called the U.S. parent, and at least one foreign business enterprise, called the foreign
affiliate. In order to be considered as a legitimate foreign affiliate, the foreign business
enterprise should be paying foreign income taxes, have a substantial physical presence abroad,
have separate financial records, and should take title to the goods it sells and receive revenue
from the sale. In order to determine ownership stakes in the presence of indirect ownership,
BEA determines the percentage of parent ownership at each link and then multiplies these
percentages to compute the parent’s total effective ownership.

         The foreign affiliate survey forms that U.S. multinational enterprises are required to
complete vary depending on the year, the size of the affiliate, and the U.S. parent’s percentage of
ownership of an affiliate. The most extensive data for the period examined in this study are
available for 1982, 1989, and 1994, when BEA conducted Benchmark Surveys. In these years,
all affiliates with sales, assets, or net income in excess of $3 million in absolute value and their
parents were required to file extensive reports. In non-benchmark years between 1982 and 1995,
exemption levels were higher and less information was collected.4 Although majority owned
affiliates report many accounting items and information concerning operations each year,


3
 This description of the data is drawn from Desai, Foley and Hines (2002).
4
 From 1983-1988, all affiliates with an absolute value of sales, assets, or net income less than $10 million were
exempt from reporting requirements, and this cutoff increased to $15 million from 1990-1993 and $20 million in
1995. BEA uses reported data to estimate universe totals when surveys cover only larger affiliates or when only
certain affiliates provide information on particular survey forms. Estimated data is unlikely to have a significant
impact on the BEA’s published data at the industry or country level as data based on actual reports exceeds 90
percent of the estimated totals of assets and sales in each of the years between 1982 and 1995. To avoid working
with estimated data, only affiliates required to provide all the information associated with a particular analysis are
considered.


                                                                                                                 9
minority owned affiliates must only file information about sales, net income, assets,
employment, employment compensation, and trade with the United States in non-benchmark
years. Majority owned affiliates are foreign affiliates in which the combined direct and indirect
ownership of U.S. persons exceeds 50 percent. BEA collects identifiers linking affiliates through
time, thereby permitting the creation of a panel.

         Table 1 displays basic information on the incidence and size of affiliates in the three
benchmark years – 1982, 1989, and 1994. In the most recent benchmark year, 20,898 entities are
covered, with median sales and assets of approximately $14 million. The bottom panel of Table
1 provides descriptive statistics for the variables employed in the statistical analysis presented in
section 4. The parent trade surplus is the ratio of the parent company trade surplus (exports
minus imports) with its foreign affiliate to total trade (exports plus imports). Net income is after-
tax income reported in U.S. dollars, and the return on assets is the ratio of net income to the book
value (in U.S. dollars) of gross assets. Tax rates are calculated from BEA data by taking the
ratio of foreign income taxes paid to foreign pretax income for each affiliate, and using the
medians of these rates as country-level observations for each country and year.5 Mean and
median country tax rates are equal to approximately 34 percent over the sample period. Private
Credit is the ratio of private credit lent by deposit money banks to GDP, as provided in Beck,
Demirguc-Kunt, and Levine (2000). Political Risk is the average monthly assessment from the
International Country Risk Guide, rescaled to lie between 0 and 1, with higher values indicating
greater risk.6 Similarly, the Rate of Inflation is the contemporaneous percentage change in a host
country’s GDP deflator.

         The BEA data also contain information on the interest expense associated with affiliate
debt, and it is possible to use this information to calculate an affiliate’s average interest rate in a
year. Because the data do not contain detailed information on interest rates charged on
individual loans or on which types of debt are interest-bearing, the analysis uses two estimates of

5
  Affiliates with negative net income are excluded for the purposes of calculating country tax rates. For a more
comprehensive description of the calculation of affiliate tax rates, see Desai, Foley and Hines (2001). In particular,
these income tax rates do not include withholding taxes on cross-border interest payments to related parties, since
such taxes are endogenous to interest payments and in any case immediately creditable against home-country tax
liabilities. Desai and Hines (1999) report that adjusting country tax rates for withholding taxes does not affect the
estimated impact of taxation on affiliate borrowing, due to the combination of creditability and low withholding tax
rates on related-party interest payments.
6
  Since Political Risk data for 1982 are unavailable, 1984 values are used in their place.


                                                                                                               10
interest rates. The first measure is the Interest Rate on External Borrowing, which is calculated
by dividing affiliate interest payments to non-parents by current liabilities and long-term debt
borrowed from non-parent sources. This variable has a mean of 4.9 percent. One of the reasons
that this average interest rate appears low is that the broad measure of debt used in this
calculation includes trade credit which is often non-interest bearing.7 The second interest rate is
the Interest Rate on Non-Trade Account Borrowing, which is the ratio of total interest paid to a
measure of current liabilities and long term debt that excludes trade accounts and trade notes
payable. This alternative interest rate variable has a mean of 7.9 percent. This variable includes
interest payments to parents and external sources in the numerator and total debt in the
denominator.

         Table 2 provides detail on the two measures of capital account restrictions employed in
the statistical analysis that follows.8 The IMF measure is the one most commonly used in the
literature and, as documented in Table 2, is one that classifies many countries as having capital
controls during the 1980s and 1990s.9 The IMF capital control classification is a yes-no
measure, based on multiple aspects of a country’s capital account restrictions, not all of them
relevant to multinational firms. It is useful to consider an alternative to the IMF classification
that emphasizes restrictions that are important to foreign investors; fortunately, Shatz (2000)
provides one such measure. Shatz (2000) details measures of openness to FDI for a sample of 57
countries along a number of dimensions.10 Two of these are restrictions on capital repatriation
and restrictions on profit remittance. Capital account restrictions obtained from these data are
coded as a dummy variable equal to one if either of the restrictions is rated two or less, indicating
policies that impose strict time or quantity limits on the ability of affiliates to move funds out of
the host country.


7
  Interest rates are based on current interest payments and are recorded in U.S. dollars. The currency denomination
of debt may be important to financial decision making within a multinational firm, but it is impossible to tell from
the BEA data in which currency debt is formally denominated. See Kedia and Mazumdar (2003) and Allayannis,
Brown and Klapper (2003) for analyses of the determinants of the currency denomination of debt.
8
  Table II is limited to countries for which the Shatz measure exists. Fortunately, these countries are the hosts to the
vast majority of outbound U.S. foreign direct investment.
9
  The deficiencies in this measure, along with the revised measure, are considered in Eichengreen (2001).
10
   The IMF dummy covers the 1982-1995 period. Using the tables and text in Shatz (2000), it is possible to create
the Shatz measure over the same time horizon. In order to increase the power of tests of the effects of
liberalizations, we track the use of capital controls in countries that liberalize controls in the years between 1982 and
1995 through 1997 and use data over the 1982-1997 period.


                                                                                                                 11
         The comparison between the measures in Table 2 yields some interesting results.11 Any
country that is considered free of capital controls by the IMF measure is likewise classified as
free under the Shatz measure. However, numerous countries classified as restricted by the IMF
are not considered restricted under the Shatz measure. In 1990, the correlation between the
Shatz measure and the IMF measure was 0.30.12

         The middle panel of Table 1 provides another vantage on how these measures differ with
respect to the activities of U.S. multinationals. By the IMF measure, nearly half of all U.S.
multinational affiliates were located in countries with capital controls in 1982, though the
fraction dropped to 21.0 percent by 1994. In contrast, 11.3 percent of all U.S. multinational
affiliates were located in countries that Shatz classifies as imposing capital controls in 1982, a
figure that falls to 3.1 percent by 1994. By both measures of capital account restrictions,
affiliates in countries with capital controls have disproportionately fewer assets and sales and
greater numbers of employees. Across all affiliate-year observations, as indicated in the bottom
panel of Table 1, 8.5 percent of all observations were in countries with capital controls as
measured by Shatz, while 34.0 percent were in countries with capital controls as measured by the
IMF.

4.       Capital Account Restrictions and Foreign Direct Investment

         In order to isolate the impact of capital controls on the performance of American
multinational firms, this section begins by considering one of the most basic elements of the cost
of functioning under these regimes - the local borrowing environment. This analysis has the
advantage of identifying how interest costs for the same borrower vary because of these regimes.
This analysis of interest rates is followed by an examination of the degree to which multinational
firms circumvent capital controls through various mechanisms. Finally, the section considers the
overall effect of capital controls by presenting estimates of the impact of capital controls on
investment levels.


11
   This table displays information on capital controls for countries that are covered by both measures. In addition,
the Shatz measure covers Taiwan, which imposes capital controls from 1982-1987. The IMF measure covers a
sample of more than 150 countries. Most of those countries in this sample and not the Shatz sample are home to a
very small number of affiliates.
12
   The so-called Quinn index that was originally employed in Quinn (1997) is not employed here as it was not
available on a continuous basis and only for two years - 1982 and 1988 – that were in the sample.


                                                                                                              12
4.1.     Interest rates

         Table 3 presents estimated coefficients from regressions estimating the determinants of
interest rates. The dependent variable in the regressions reported in the first four columns is the
interest rate paid on loans from unrelated parties. Interest costs are only collected in benchmark
years, so the sample includes observations from 1982, 1989, and 1994. Columns one and two
offer simple specifications, the independent variables including capital control indicators,
dummy variables for parent companies, affiliate industries, and years, three powers of log GDP,
and median total annual compensation per employee paid by American multinationals in
country-year cells.13 The use of capital controls as measured by the IMF is associated with 2.3
percent higher interest rates; the use of capital controls as measured by Shatz is associated with
7.9 percent higher interest rates. 14 Since the sample mean interest rate is just five percent, these
are sizable effects.

         The regressions reported in columns 3-8 of Table 3 add independent variables in order to
control for observable affiliate and country attributes that might contribute to interest rate
differences. In the regressions reported in columns 3 and 4, greater political riskiness and higher
rates of local inflation are both associated with higher (dollar-denominated) interest rates, in both
cases interpretable as reflecting the impact of greater uncertainty over the likelihood and level of
ultimate repayment. After controlling for these additional variables, capital controls as measured
by the IMF are associated with 1.2 percent higher interest rates, while capital controls as
measured by Shatz are associated with 5.4 percent higher interest rates.

         The regressions presented in columns 1-4 of Table 3 indicate that interest rates are higher
in countries with capital controls. It is noteworthy that, since parent company fixed effects are
included as independent variables, these interest rate effects appear between affiliates of the
same companies. This evidence is, however, subject to the limitation that the denominator of the
interest rate variable is total liabilities, including trade credits on which explicit interest is seldom

13
   Studies such as Eichengreen and Mody (2000a,b) examine the determinants of corporate borrowing spreads across
countries and the impact of differing legal regimes on sovereign borrowing costs. The alternative of analyzing
interest rates paid by multinational firms implicitly controls for a host of unobservable factors by comparing interest
rates faced by the same company in different institutional environments. The absence of detailed data on affiliate
borrowing makes it infeasible, however, to incorporate term structure considerations emphasized in papers such as
Duffee (2002).
14
   All standard errors presented in the tables are clustered at the country-year level.


                                                                                                               13
paid. As a result, measured interest rates are somewhat low and may vary between countries due
to trade financing practices.

        Columns 5-8 of Table 3 report estimated coefficients from regressions designed to
address this issue. The dependent variable is again the interest rate, in this case constructed as
the ratio of total affiliate interest payments to other current liabilities and long-term debt,
excluding trade accounts. The estimated capital market effects obtained using this dependent
variable, reported in columns five and six, have the same signs and almost exactly the same
magnitudes as those obtained using the first interest rate variable and reported in columns three
and four.

        Data limitations make it impossible to measure average interest rates paid to external
sources when the denominator of the calculated interest rate excludes trade account debt. It is
nonetheless possible to evaluate circuitously the difference between interest rates on parent loans
and local loans, and the effect of capital controls on this difference, using a measure of interest
rates that does not include trade account debt. Columns seven and eight of Table 3 present
estimated coefficients from regressions in which the dependent variable is the same as that in the
regressions reported in columns five and six, but adds two independent variables: the share of
debt from non-parent sources,15 and the interaction between this share and measures of capital
controls. If the cost of capital is higher in countries imposing capital controls, then the
coefficient on the interaction between the share of debt from local sources and capital control
measures should be positive, reflecting the extent of the difference.

        The results indicate that greater borrowing from non-parent sources is associated with
higher interest rates in countries imposing capital controls. The 0.0314 coefficient on the
interaction of the IMF capital control measure and the share of debt borrowed from non-parent
sources, reported in column 7, implies that interest rates on external debt (measured exclusive of
trade credit) are 3.1 percent higher in countries with capital controls. The 0.0619 coefficient
reported in column eight implies that interest rates are 6.2 percent higher in countries with capital
controls as measured by Shatz. Since the mean interest rate on non-trade account borrowing is
7.7 percent, these are sizable effects and consistent with the earlier analysis.




                                                                                                  14
4.2.    Profit extraction

        Multinational firms whose affiliates are located in countries with capital controls have
incentives to find creative ways to extract profits for deployment elsewhere. Profits can be
relocated by changing the locations in which they are reported, and by changing patterns of profit
remittances much as multinational firms respond to taxation.

4.2.1. Transfer pricing

        It is possible for multinational firms to sidestep repatriation restrictions by manipulating
the prices at which foreign affiliates trade with their American parent companies, since
overinvoicing parent exports to affiliates, or underinvoicing parent imports from affiliates, serves
to relocate profits. The same tactics reduce total tax liabilities when used to relocate taxable
income from high-tax to low-tax jurisdictions. Governments typically insist that firms use arm’s
length prices in trade with other members of the same controlled group, but such prices are
notoriously difficult to enforce, particularly when (as is often the case for multinational firms)
traded goods have unique characteristics that make it difficult to identify perfectly comparable
items. As a result, affiliates located in countries with high tax rates or binding repatriation
controls are likely to run larger trade deficits (or smaller trade surpluses) with their parent
companies than would otherwise be the case, since firms have incentives to structure and record
such trades in ways that relocate as many profits as possible. There is an extensive literature that
analyzes the reported profitability patterns of American multinational firms, finding that
affiliates located in high-tax countries tend to report lower profit rates than do those located in
low-tax countries.16

        Table 4 presents results of specifications similar to those used to study the impact of
taxes in which the dependent variable is the rate of return on affiliate equity. The sample covers
all years from 1982 to 1995. In a smoothly functioning competitive market the expected rate of
return should be the same everywhere, but in a setting in which firms systematically understate




15
   The share of debt from non-parent sources equals one minus the ratio of current liabilities and long-term debt
owed to the parent to total current liabilities and long-term debt.
16
   See, for example, Grubert and Mutti (1991), Hines and Rice (1994), and the literature surveyed by Hines (1999).


                                                                                                            15
profits earned in high-tax countries and in countries with capital controls, there should be a
negative association between profit rates and tax rates or the use of capital controls.

        The –0.2075 coefficient reported in column one of Table 4 implies that ten percent higher
tax rates are associated with 2.1 percent lower profit rates, controlling for parent company,
affiliate industry, year, three powers of log GDP, and median employee compensation paid by
U.S. multinationals. The magnitude of this effect is similar to that reported elsewhere in the
transfer-pricing literature, and corresponds to commonly observed avoidance methods. The
regression reported in column two indicates that capital controls as measured by the IMF have
insignificant effects on reported profits, whereas the –0.0472 coefficient in the regression
reported in column three indicates that affiliates located in countries with capital controls as
measured by Shatz have 4.7 percent lower reported profit rates. Together with the estimated -
0.1959 coefficient on local tax rates, the capital control coefficient implies that the imposition of
capital controls has the same (negative) effect on reported profits as would a 24.1 percent higher
tax rate.

        Columns four and five of Table 4 report estimated coefficients from regressions in which
the sample is restricted to affiliates in countries that remove capital controls (as defined by
Shatz) during the sample period, and the regressions include affiliate fixed effects, thereby
estimating the impact of capital controls on the basis only of changes induced by their removal.17
This necessarily entails a much smaller sample size than that used in the regressions reported in
columns 1-3. The estimated tax effects, which are likewise estimated based on changes, are
comparable in sign and magnitude to those appearing in columns 1-3. The 0.0823 coefficient on
the post liberalization dummy variable in the regression reported in column five implies that the
removal of capital controls is associated with 8.2 percent higher affiliate profit rates, though this
effect is not statistically significant. In order to assess the reasonableness of the estimated impact
of capital controls on reported profitability, it is useful to consider more directly their impact on
transfer pricing.

        The regressions presented in Table 5 analyze the effect of capital controls on a measure
of the trade balance of U.S. parents with affiliates in particular industry/country/year cells. The




                                                                                                  16
dependent variable in these specifications is a ratio, the numerator of which is the difference
between total U.S.-parent exports to their foreign affiliates and total U.S.-parent imports from
foreign affiliates; the denominator is the sum of these exports and imports. This variable is
calculated by summing trade between parents and affiliates in country/industry/year cells over
the 1982-1995 period, and omitting cells for which there is zero trade (and for which the ratio
has a denominator of zero). Clausing (2001) develops this measure at an aggregate country level
and employs it to explore the extent to which firms relocate profits in response to local tax
incentives.

        Tax rate differences encourage American parent companies to run larger trade surpluses
with their affiliates in high-tax countries than with those in low-tax countries, since doing so
reduces total tax burdens. The estimated positive coefficients on the tax rate variable in the
regressions reported in Table 5 are consistent with these incentives, and indeed, are consistent
with the aggregate country results reported by Clausing (2001). In the regression reported in
column one, ten percent higher local tax rates are associated with 3.7 percent greater parent trade
surpluses, controlling for industry and year fixed effects, three powers of log GDP, and median
employee compensation paid by U.S. multinationals. The estimated tax effect is little changed
by the introduction of capital control measures in the regressions reported in columns 2-3.
Capital controls as measured by the IMF are associated with 3.2 percent greater parent trade
surpluses, though this effect is marginally significant; the Shatz capital control variable is
associated with a larger 7.1 percent impact on parent trade surpluses.

        It is instructive to relate the trade effect of capital controls as captured by the Shatz
variable to the profit shifting results above. The 0.0708 and 0.3793 coefficients in the regression
reported in column three of Table 5 together imply that capital controls have the same trade
surplus impact as would 18.7 percent higher local tax rates. Viewed differently, the 0.0708
coefficient together with the $240 billion of reported 1994 trade between U.S. parent firms and
their foreign affiliates implies that parent trade surpluses with their affiliates would be elevated
by $17 billion if all foreign countries imposed capital controls. The aggregate owner’s equity in
U.S.-owned foreign affiliates was $819 billion in the same year, so the –0.0472 coefficient from

17
  Liberalizing countries include Argentina (1990), Brazil (1992), Chile (1992), Colombia (1992), Ecuador (1993),
Egypt (1992), Greece (1987), Peru (1993), Philippines (1992), Taiwan (1988), and Venezuela (1990).


                                                                                                          17
column three in Table 4 implies that aggregate reported affiliate profits would be reduced by $39
billion if all countries adopted capital controls. Hence the observable effect on trade with parent
companies accounts for slightly less than half of the measured impact of capital controls on
affiliate profitability. Since affiliates are able to use financing devices, trade with related parties
other than parent companies, and other methods to relocate reported profits, the evidence of
capital control effects on profitability and trade surpluses is quite consistent.

4.2.2. Dividend repatriations

           Firms that are restricted in their ability to remit dividends commonly find that the shadow
value of local retained earnings is less than the value of capital deployed elsewhere, so they have
incentives to remove profits if possible. Capital controls typically include repatriation
restrictions that operate on annual bases, thereby indirectly encouraging affiliates to remit
dividends to their parent companies every year, lest low-cost repatriation opportunities otherwise
be lost. For example, Brazilian affiliates in the 1980s were subject to 40 percent or higher tax
rates on repatriations averaging more than 13 percent of registered investment over any three-
year period.18 In order to investigate the extent to which firms respond to this incentive, the
regressions reported in Table 6 are logit specifications in which the dependent variable is a
dummy equal to one if an affiliate pays a dividend to its parent in a particular year, and zero
otherwise. The sample again covers the 1982-1995 period. Country tax rates are included as
independent variables (since higher tax rates generally reduce the cost of paying dividends to
American parent companies), as are parent and year fixed effects, three powers of log GDP, and
median employee compensation paid by U.S. multinationals.

           The regression reported in column one of Table 6 indicates that higher country tax rates
and higher affiliate return on assets are associated with significantly greater likelihoods of paying
dividends. The regressions reported in columns 2-3 of Table 6 indicate that the chances of
paying a dividend are significantly higher in countries with capital controls as measured both by
the IMF and by Shatz. The 0.3589 coefficient in column three implies that the imposition of
capital controls (as measured by Shatz) has the same effect on the likelihood of paying dividends
as does a 7.7 percent higher return on assets, or a 35 percent higher local tax rate. The estimated

18
     See Bentley (1985) for further details.


                                                                                                 18
coefficients imply that an affiliate with mean values of the other independent variables is 9.8
percent more likely to pay a dividend if it is located in a country imposing capital controls than it
would be if located in a country that does not control capital flows,19 a sizable effect given that
such an average affiliate has only a 53.3 percent chance of paying a dividend at all.

        Columns 4-5 of Table 6 report estimated coefficients from regressions in which the
sample is restricted to affiliates in countries that remove capital controls, and the inclusion of
affiliate fixed effects implies that the impact of capital controls is identified on the basis of
changes induced by their removal. The sample size is therefore considerably smaller than the
samples used for the estimation reported in columns 1-3. The estimated tax effects reported in
columns 4-5, which are likewise estimated based on changes, are somewhat larger than those
reported in columns 1-3, while the estimated impact of changes in return on assets is of
comparable size. The –0.5701 coefficient reported in column five indicates that the removal of
capital controls is associated with significantly reduced likelihood of remitting dividends to
parent companies. The estimated impact of capital account liberalization is equal in magnitude
to that of 14 percent lower return on assets or 25 percent lower tax rates and at mean values of
other independent variables implies that the removal of capital controls reduces by 11.6 percent
the chance that an affiliate will pay a dividend.

        Firms with incentives to repatriate funds on a regular basis are likely to have dividend
streams that are less responsive to changing conditions than are remittances by unconstrained
affiliates. In order to test this possibility, it is convenient to estimate a standard Lintner model of
dividend payments by foreign affiliates,20 in which current dividends are regressed on current
after-tax income and lagged dividends. The concept behind the Lintner model is that target
dividend levels are functions of current income, but that actual dividends adjust only slowly to
desired dividends. The estimated adjustment parameter is equal to one minus the coefficient on
lagged dividends, while the estimated steady state dividend payout ratio equals the ratio of the
coefficient on net income and the adjustment parameter.


19
   This implied marginal effect of capital controls is estimated from a model that includes among its independent
variables only one power of GDP, since the inclusion of two additional powers of GDP creates such multicolinearity
that marginal effects become very difficult to estimate.
20
   For an elaboration of the Lintner dividend model, and its application to remittances by foreign affiliates, see
Desai, Foley and Hines (2001, 2002).


                                                                                                          19
        The results indicate that dividend repatriations adjust more slowly to income changes in
capital control countries than they do in other countries. Columns 1-6 of Table 7 report
estimated coefficients from Lintner specifications run on the whole sample with and without
parent and affiliate fixed effects. The results are similar to those in Desai, Foley and Hines
(2001), the estimated 0.2588 coefficient on lagged dividends in column 1 for example implying
an adjustment parameter of 0.74. Columns 3-4 report specifications adding interactions of net
income and lagged dividends with dummy variables indicating capital controls as measured by
the IMF; these interactions permit the effects of net income and lagged dividends to differ
between affiliates located in countries with and without capital controls. The positive estimated
coefficients on the interaction of lagged dividends and the IMF dummy imply that dividend
remittances from affiliates in countries with capital controls adjust more slowly to income
changes than do remittances from affiliates in other countries, though the difference is not
statistically significant.

        Columns 5-6 of Table 7 report estimates using the Shatz measure of capital controls, and
in these specifications, adjustment parameters and implied steady-state payout ratios differ
sharply between affiliates located in capital control countries and affiliates located elsewhere.
The estimates reported in column 5 imply that affiliates in capital control countries have
adjustment parameters of 0.46, while those in countries without capital controls have adjustment
parameters of 0.79. Affiliates in capital control countries have steady-state payout ratios of 65.4
percent, compared with payout ratios of 54 percent for other affiliates. Since countries imposing
capital controls typically limit the size of permitted dividend repatriations, it is not surprising that
there is little difference in implied steady-state payout ratios. What is more telling is that
dividend repatriations respond more sluggishly to income changes in countries with capital
controls, which is consistent with behavior that is driven by a desire to extract profits.

        Columns 7-10 of Table 7 report coefficients from dividend payout equations estimated on
the sample of affiliates located in countries that liberalize their capital account restrictions during
the sample period. The estimated effects of net income and lagged dividends are similar to those
reported in columns 1-6, while the interaction of the post liberalization dummy variable and
lagged dividends is negative, implying that dividends exhibit considerably less persistence in
post-liberalization periods. The results reported in columns 9 and 10 imply much smaller



                                                                                                 20
dividend adjustment parameters in periods without capital controls, which is consistent with the
evidence reported in Table 6 and with the incentives created by repatriation restrictions.
Furthermore, the regularity of dividend payments from affiliates in countries with capital
controls is unlikely to be a function simply of omitted variables responsible for the introduction
of the controls.

4.3.      Investment

          If local borrowing rates were unaffected by capital controls and capital control evasion
technologies were costless, investment by multinational firms need not be affected by capital
controls. As demonstrated above, however, the macroeconomic effects of capital controls
include elevating interest rates to levels that may make local debt finance unattractive. Similarly,
Tables 4-7 indicate that firms engage in avoidance strategies that are comparable to the strategies
they employ in response to significant differences in tax rates. Given the various other tax and
non-tax motivations that would otherwise guide dividend repatriation policies and intercompany
income allocation, these actions are likely to be quite costly. Consequently, it is useful to
measure the extent to which capital controls are accompanied by reduced foreign investment
levels.

          Table 8 presents estimates of the effects of capital controls on one measure of the
magnitude of foreign direct investment by U.S. multinationals, the size of affiliates at first
appearance. The sample consists of affiliates the first time that they appear in the BEA data
between 1983-1995, so each affiliate is included just once. The specifications reported in
columns 1-3 include dummy variables for multinational parents, affiliate industry, and years, as
well as three powers of log GDP and median employee compensation paid by U.S.
multinationals. The –0.3020 coefficient on country tax rates implies that ten percent higher tax
rates are associated with three percent smaller affiliates, an effect and magnitude that is
consistent with the evidence reported in the literature on tax effects on foreign direct investment.
The –0.1590 coefficient in column 2 of Table 8 indicates that affiliate assets, at first appearance,
are 15.9 percent smaller in countries with capital controls as measured by the IMF than they are
in countries without capital controls. Estimates using the Shatz capital control measure, reported
in column 3, imply that affiliates in capital control countries are 12.7 percent smaller.



                                                                                                 21
         Columns 4-5 of Table 8 present estimates of the determinants of asset size changes for
affiliates in countries that liberalize their capital account restrictions. These regressions include
observations of affiliates not just at their first appearances but over the entire sample period,
though the sample is limited to affiliates located in countries that remove capital controls. The
specifications include affiliate fixed effects and year dummies as independent variables, so the
effects of tax rates and capital controls are identified from changes rather than levels. The
estimated tax rate effects are paradoxically positive, though the 0.1562 coefficient on the post
liberalization dummy variable in the regression reported in column five is quite consistent with
the magnitudes of the estimated effects reported in columns 2-3.

         The results reported in Table 8 imply that affiliates located in countries with capital
controls are smaller relative to affiliates located in other countries. As discussed above, it is
possible that this initial size is ultimately offset by higher growth through forced retention of
earnings. In order to examine this possibility it is useful to consider whether affiliates retain
greater earnings in countries with capital controls. While other results indicate that
multinationals respond to capital controls by smoothing dividends and shifting profits, it is
possible that these efforts are incomplete, leaving affiliates in countries with capital controls to
grow ultimately to large sizes.

         Table 9 presents regressions that track this dynamic, using data from the 1982, 1989, and
1994 Benchmark Surveys. The dependent variable in these regressions is the ratio of retained
earnings to total affiliate assets, and the independent variables include local tax rates, dummy
variables for multinational parents, affiliate industries, and years, three powers of log GDP, and
median employee compensation paid by U.S. multinationals. Capital controls are associated
with reduced retained earnings in the specifications reported in columns 2 and 3, the –0.0661
coefficient in column three corresponding to 6.6 percent lower ratios of retained earnings to total
assets. Since the mean ratio of retained earnings to total assets is 17.9 percent, it follows that this
is a sizable effect, and that multinational affiliates in countries with capital controls not only
begin with fewer assets than other affiliates, but also accumulate retained earnings at slower
rates.

5.       Conclusion



                                                                                                22
        This paper offers evidence that the foreign affiliates of American multinational firms
circumvent capital controls by regularizing dividend remittances and relocating profits. Evading
capital controls in this way is costly given the tax and other business considerations that would
otherwise guide dividend repatriations and trade between related parties. Countries imposing
capital controls have significantly higher interest rates than do otherwise-similar countries
without capital controls. Multinational firms contemplating new investments in countries with
capital controls therefore face high costs of local borrowing and significant costs associated with
the actions necessary to avoid the impact of capital controls, and as a result, their investment
levels are significantly reduced. Capital account liberalizations are associated with reversals in
these patterns. While this paper evaluates the activities of foreign affiliates of American
multinational firms, the costs associated with capital controls undoubtedly discourage many
potential investors from establishing affiliates in the first place.

        Since countries imposing capital controls differ in many ways from those that do not, it is
infeasible to control for all the relevant differences in evaluating the impact of capital controls.
As a result, the smaller asset demands of American affiliates in countries imposing capital
controls might stem either from the capital controls themselves or from the economic conditions
that motivate governments to impose the controls. Details of the behavior of multinational firms
offer the prospect of distinguishing these interpretations, since some aspects of this behavior are
unlikely to be a function of the factors that motivate governments to impose the controls.
Evidence of the effects of capital controls on profit reallocation and dividend repatriation implies
that firms behave in a manner that is consistent with higher local costs of capital, suggesting that
the observed effects on assets and retained earnings reflect the impact of policies and not merely
the conditions responsible for the policies.

        In addition to providing a window on the aggregate effects of capital controls and
liberalizations on investment behavior, the evidence on how multinationals employ internal
markets to circumvent these controls suggests that capital controls have distributional
consequences. Firms without access to internal capital markets are likely to be hardest hit by
capital account restrictions. Consequently, capital controls not only raise the costs of capital
faced by smaller domestic firms but also likely disadvantage them relative to larger multinational
firms against which they compete.



                                                                                                23
References

Aitken, Brian J. and Ann E. Harrison (1999). Do domestic firms benefit from direct foreign
       investment? Evidence from Venezuela, American Economic Review,89:605-618.

Aizenman, Joshua (2002). Volatility, employment and the patterns of FDI in emerging markets,
      Journal of Development Economics, forthcoming.

Alesina, Alberto, Vittorio Grilli and Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti (1994). The political economy of
       capital controls, in Leonardo Leiderman and Assaf Razin (eds.), Capital Mobility: The
       Impact on Consumption, Investment and Growth. Cambridge: Cambridge University
       Press, 289-328.

Allayannis, George, Gregory W. Brown, and Leora F. Klapper (2003). Capital structure and
       financial risk: Evidence from foreign debt use in East Asia, Journal of Finance, 58:2667-
       2710.

Arteta, Carlos, Barry Eichengreen and Charles Wyplosz (2001). When does capital account
        liberalization help more than it hurts? NBER Working Paper No. 8414.

Auguste, Sebastian, Kathryn M. E. Dominguez, Herman Kamil and Linda Tesar (2003). Cross-
      border trading as a mechanism for capital flight: ADRs and the Argentine crisis, NBER
      Working Paper No. 9343.

Beck, Thorsten, Asli Demirguc-Kunt, and Ross Levine (2000). A new database on financial
       development and structure, World Bank Economic Review, 14:597-605.

Bekaert, Geert and Campbell Harvey (2000). Foreign speculators and emerging equity markets,
       Journal of Finance, 55:565-613.

Bekaert, Geert, Campbell Harvey and Christian Lundblad (2002). Does financial liberalization
       spur growth? NBER Working Paper No. 8245.

Bentley, Philip (1985). A World Guide to Exchange Control Regulations. London: Euromoney
       Publications.

Bhagwati, Jagdish (1998). The capital myth: The difference between trade in widgets and
     dollars, Foreign Affairs, 77:7-12.

Chari, Anusha and Peter Blair Henry (2002). Capital account liberalization: Allocative efficiency
       or animal spirits? NBER Working Paper No. 8908.

Chinn, Menzie D. and Hiro Ito (2002). Capital account liberalization, institutions and financial
       development: Cross-country evidence, NBER Working Paper No. 8967.

Clausing, Kimberly A. (2001). The impact of transfer pricing on intrafirm trade, in James R.
       Hines (ed.), International Taxation and Multinational Activity. Chicago: University of
       Chicago Press, 173-194.


                                                                                            24
Desai, Mihir A., C. Fritz Foley and Kristin J. Forbes (2003). Shelters from the storm:
       Multinational and local firm responses to currency crises, Harvard Business School
       Working Paper.

Desai, Mihir A., C. Fritz Foley and James R. Hines Jr. (2001). Repatriation taxes and dividend
       distortions, National Tax Journal, 54:829-851.

Desai, Mihir A., C. Fritz Foley and James R. Hines Jr. (2002). Dividend policy inside the firm,
       NBER Working Paper No. 8698.

Desai, Mihir A., C. Fritz Foley and James R. Hines Jr. (2003). A multinational perspective on
       capital structure choice and internal capital markets, Journal of Finance, forthcoming.

Desai, Mihir A., and James R. Hines Jr. (1999). ‘Basket’ cases: Tax incentives and international
       joint venture participation by American multinational firms, Journal of Public
       Economics, 71:379-402.

Dooley, Michael and Peter Isard (1980). Capital controls, political risk and interest-rate parity,
      Journal of Political Economy, 88:370-384.

Duffee, Gregory R. (2002). Term premia and interest rate forecasts in affine models, Journal of
       Finance, 57:405-443.

Edison, Hali J., Michael W. Klein, Luca Ricci and Torsten Sloek (2002). Capital account
       liberalization and economic performance: Survey and synthesis, NBER Working Paper
       No. 9100.

Edwards, Sebastian (2001). Capital flows and economic performance: Are emerging economies
      different? NBER Working Paper No. 8076.

Eichengreen, Barry (2001). Capital account liberalization: What do the cross-country studies tell
      us? World Bank Economic Review, 15:341-365.

Eichengreen, Barry and Ashoka Mody (2000a). What explains spreads on emerging market debt?
      in Sebastian Edwards (ed.), Capital Flows and The Emerging Economies: Theory,
      Evidence, and Controversies. Chicago: The University of Chicago Press, 107-136.
Eichengreen, Barry and Ashoka Mody (2000b). Would collective action clauses raise borrowing
      costs? NBER Working Paper No. 7458.
Fischer, Stanley (1998). Capital account liberalization and the role of the IMF, Princeton Essays
       in International Finance, 207:1-10.

Forbes, Kristin J. (2003). One cost of the Chilean capital controls: Increased financial constraints
       for smaller trade firms, NBER Working Paper No. 9777.

Grilli, Vittorio and Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti (1995). Economic effects and structural
        determinants of capital controls, IMF Staff Papers, 42:517-551.




                                                                                              25
Grubert, Harry and John Mutti (1991). Taxes, tariffs and transfer pricing in multinational
       corporate decision making, Review of Economics and Statistics, 73:285-293.

Henry, Peter Blair (2000). Do stock market liberalizations cause investment booms? Journal of
       Financial Economics, 58:301-334.

Hines, James R., Jr. (1999). Lessons from behavioral responses to international taxation,
       National Tax Journal, 52:305-322.

Hines, James R., Jr., and Eric M. Rice (1994). Fiscal paradise: Foreign tax havens and American
       business, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 109:149-182.

Johnson, Simon and Todd Mitton (2003). Cronyism and capital controls: Evidence from
      Malaysia, Journal of Financial Economics, 67:351-382.

Johnson, Simon, Peter Boone, Alasdair Breach and Eric Friedman (2000). Corporate governance
      in the Asian financial crisis, Journal of Financial Economics, 58:141-186.

Kedia, Simi, and Abon Mozumdar (2003). Foreign currency denominated debt: An empirical
       examination, Journal of Business, 76:521-546.

Mitton, Todd (2002). A cross-firm analysis of the impact of corporate governance on the East
       Asian financial crisis, Journal of Financial Economics, 64:215-241.

Morck, Randall K., David A. Strangeland, and Bernard Yeung (1998). Inherited wealth,
      corporate control and economic growth: The Canadian disease, NBER Working Paper
      No. 6814.

Quinn, Dennis P. (1997). The correlates of changes in international financial regulation,
       American Political Science Review, 91:531-551.

Quinn, Dennis P., Carla Inclan, and A. Maria Toyoda (2001). How and where capital account
       liberalization leads to economic growth, Georgetown University Working Paper.

Rajan, Raghuram G. and Luigi Zingales (2003). The great reversals: The politics of financial
       development in the Twentieth century. Journal of Financial Economics, 69:5-50.

Rodrik, Dani (1998). Who needs capital account convertibility? Princeton Essays in
       International Finance, 207:55-65.

Shatz, Howard (2000). The location of U.S. multinational affiliates, Harvard University Ph.D.
       Thesis.

Stulz, Rene (1995). The cost of capital in internationally integrated markets: The case of Nestle,
        Journal of Applied Corporate Finance, 8:30-39.

Stulz, Rene (1999). International portfolio flows and security markets, in Martin Feldstein (ed.)
        International Capital Flows. Chicago, University of Chicago Press, 257-293.



                                                                                             26
                                                                      Table 1
                                              Descriptive Statistics of U.S. Multinational Affiliates

                                                                                                                Benchmark Years
                                                                                            1982                          1989                          1994
Number of Affiliates                                                                               18,579                        18,899                        20,898
Median Sales                                                                                       10,875                        12,788                        14,079
Median Assets                                                                                       9,823                        13,120                        14,385
Median Employees                                                                                       79                            64                            68
Share of Activity in Countries with
Capital Controls                                            Measured by:
                                                                IMF                                  46.9%                         40.4%                         21.0%
               Number of Affiliates
                                                               Shatz                                 11.3%                          9.8%                          3.1%
                                                                  IMF                                38.2%                         28.4%                         11.6%
                         Assets
                                                                  Shatz                               6.4%                          4.7%                          1.1%
                                                                  IMF                                35.9%                         30.0%                         13.5%
                          Sales
                                                                  Shatz                               6.3%                          6.4%                          1.2%
                                                                  IMF                                47.8%                         40.8%                         28.7%
                      Employees
                                                                  Shatz                              14.2%                         13.1%                          3.8%
Descriptive Statistics for Variables
                                                                                           Mean                         Median                        St. Dev
Parent Trade Surplus                                                                               0.5133                        0.9762                         0.6976
Net Income/Owners' Equity                                                                          0.1655                        0.1456                         0.2704
Dividend Dummy                                                                                     0.2946                        0.0000                         0.4559
Dividends                                                                                          5,024                            -                          32,445
Net Income                                                                                         6,222                         1,501                         21,614
Return on Assets                                                                                   0.0565                        0.0519                         0.1985
Log of Assets                                                                                     10.1245                       10.0236                         1.4741
Country Tax Rate                                                                                   0.3367                        0.3487                         0.1266
IMF Capital Control Dummy                                                                          0.3441                        0.0000                         0.4751
Shatz Capital Control Dummy                                                                        0.0845                        0.0000                         0.2781
Retained Earnings/Total Assets                                                                     0.1794                        0.1227                         0.3367
Interest Rate on External Borrowing                                                                0.0493                        0.0163                         0.0922
Interest Rate on Non-Trade Account Borrowing                                                       0.0765                        0.0299                         0.1322
Share of Debt from Non-Parent Sources                                                              0.8148                        0.9705                         0.2796
Private Credit                                                                                     0.7927                        0.7945                         0.4478
Political Risk                                                                                     0.2359                        0.2050                         0.1215
Rate of Inflation                                                                                  0.5572                        0.0571                         3.1066
Notes: The top panel provides the number count, median sales, median assets and median employees for all affiliates of U.S. multinationals in the sample for 1982,
1989, 1994. In 1982, 1989, and 1994, Benchmark Surveys were conducted and, consequently, the cutoff for inclusion in the sample is lower than other years as
discussed in the text. The top panel also provides the share of affiliates, assets, sales and employees in countries with capital controls as characterized by the IMF and
Shatz measures discussed in the text. The bottom panel reports descriptive statistics for the variables employed in the regression analysis. Parent trade surplus is equal
to the difference between parent exports to the affiliate and parent imports from the affiliate divided by the sum of these two values. Net income, owners' equity,
dividends, assets, and retained earnings are all measured in thousands of nominal U.S. dollars. The mean and standard deviation of Net Income/Owners' Equity are
calculated using analytical weights where weights are set equal to owners' equity. Dividend Dummy is equal to one if an affiliate pays a dividend in a particular year
and zero otherwise. Return on Assets is the ratio of net income to assets. Country Tax Rate is the median tax rate in an affiliate's host country. The IMF Capital
Control Dummy and the Shatz Capital Control Dummy are dummies equal to one if a country imposes capital controls and zero otherwise. The Interest Rate on
External Borrowing is the ratio of the affiliate interest payments to non-parents to current liabilities and long-term debt borrowed from non-parent sources. The Interest
Rate on Non-Trade Account Borrowing is the ratio of total affiliate interest payments to current liabilities and long-term debt, excluding trade accounts and trade notes
payable. Share of Debt from Non-Parent Sources is the share of affiliate current liabilities and long-term debt owed to lenders other than the affiliate's parent. Private
Credit is the ratio of private credit lent by deposit money banks to GDP, as provided in Beck, Demirguc-Kunt, and Levine (2000). Political Risk is the annual average
of the monthly index of political risk presented in the International Country Risk Guide, rescaled to lie between 0 and 1 with higher numbers indicating higher risks.
Rate of Inflation is the contemporaneous percentage change in the GDP deflator of an affiliate's host country.
                                                                                        Table 2
                                 Descriptive Statistics of Capital Control Measures, for those countries measured by Shatz

                                              Capital Control Measure                                                                          Capital Control Measure
                                       IMF Measure              Shatz Measure                                                             IMF Measure          Shatz Measure
                                    (covers 1982-1995)        (covers 1982-1995)                                                       (covers 1982-1995)    (covers 1982-1995)
Argentina                               1982-1992                       1982-1989                    Italy                                 1982-1989
Australia                               1982-1984                                                    Jamaica                               1982-1995
Austria                                 1982-1990                                                    Japan
Bahamas                                 1982-1995                                                    Korea                                 1982-1995
Barbados                                1982-1995                                                    Malaysia
Belgium-Luxembourg                                                                                   Mexico                                1982-1995
Brazil                                  1982-1995                       1982-1991                    Netherlands
Canada                                                                                               Netherlands Antilles                  1982-1995
Chile                                 1982-1995                         1982-1991                    New Zealand                           1982-1983
China                                 1982-1995                         1982-1995                    Nigeria                               1982-1995                   1982-1995
Colombia                              1982-1995                         1982-1991                    Norway                                1982-1994
Costa Rica                            1982-1994                                                      Panama
Denmark                               1982-1987                                                      Peru                                  1984-1992                   1982-1992
Dominican Republic                    1982-1995                         1982-1995                    Philippines                           1982-1995                   1982-1991
Ecuador                          1986-1987, 1993-1994                   1982-1992                    Portugal                              1982-1992
Egypt                                 1982-1995                         1982-1991                    Saudi Arabia
Finland                               1982-1990                                                      Singapore
France                                1982-1989                                                      South Africa                         1982-1995
Germany                                                                                              Spain                                1982-1993
Greece                                  1982-1995                       1982-1986                    Sweden                               1982-1992
                                                                                                                                      none in 1992-1995,
Guatemala                               1982-1988                                                    Switzerland
                                                                                                                                        other years NA
Honduras                                1982-1992                                                    Thailand                             1982-1995
Hong Kong                                                                                            Trinidad and Tobago                  1982-1993
India                                   1982-1995                       1982-1995                    Turkey                               1982-1995
Indonesia                                                                                            United Arab Emirates
Ireland                                 1982-1991                                                    United Kingdom
Israel                                  1982-1995                                                    Venezuela                             1984-1995                   1982-1989

Notes: The table provides the years for which the IMF and Shatz characterize countries as having capital controls, as discussed in the text, for those countries studied by Shatz.
                                                                                Table 3
                                                      Capital Controls and Local Borrowing Rates
                                                                                                                   Interest Rate on Non-Trade Account
      Dependent Variable:                        Interest Rate on External Borrowing
                                                                                                                       Borrowing (from all sources)

                                                 (1)            (2)             (3)            (4)                 (5)             (6)             (7)             (8)

Constant                                        3.5830 12.2232    0.7601   8.8616                                 6.2761         17.3656          5.4139         16.6440
                                              (3.2431) (5.3339) (4.4529) (5.9529)                               (4.2771)        (6.5060)        (4.3553)        (6.4980)

Country tax rate                                                              -0.0719 -0.0461                    -0.0570         -0.0227         -0.0600         -0.0262
                                                                             (0.0611) (0.0499)                  (0.0519)        (0.0427)        (0.0539)        (0.0443)

Private Credit                                                                -0.0084 -0.0068                    -0.0042         -0.0010         -0.0052         -0.0023
                                                                             (0.0083) (0.0084)                  (0.0094)        (0.0102)        (0.0094)        (0.0100)

Political Risk                                                                 0.1189   0.0655                    0.1641          0.1255          0.1746          0.1284
                                                                             (0.0469) (0.0342)                  (0.0502)        (0.0420)        (0.0516)        (0.0428)

Rate of inflation                                                              0.0056   0.0050                    0.0050          0.0045          0.0050          0.0044
                                                                             (0.0017) (0.0013)                  (0.0015)        (0.0014)        (0.0016)        (0.0014)

IMF Capital Control Dummy                       0.0229                         0.0117                             0.0160                         -0.0104
                                              (0.0076)                       (0.0053)                           (0.0058)                        (0.0078)

Shatz Captial Control Dummy                                     0.0785                         0.0544                             0.0542                          0.0073
                                                              (0.0227)                       (0.0197)                           (0.0190)                        (0.0168)

Share of Debt from Non-                                                                                                                          -0.0046          0.0016
Parent Sources                                                                                                                                  (0.0046)        (0.0049)

Share of Debt from Non-                                                                                                                           0.0314
Parent Sources Interacted with                                                                                                                  (0.0099)
IMF Capital Control Dummy

Share of Debt from Non-                                                                                                                                           0.0619
Parent Sources Interacted with                                                                                                                                  (0.0280)
Shatz Capital Control Dummy
Parent, industry, and year
fixed effects?                                    Y              Y               Y              Y                   Y               Y               Y               Y
GDP and wage controls?                            Y              Y               Y              Y                   Y               Y               Y               Y
No. of Obs.                                    20,378          20,357         18,413          18,553             18,473          18,549          17,982          18,081

R-Squared                                       0.2053          0.2382         0.2531          0.2671             0.2699           0.2729          0.2721          0.2763
Notes: The dependent variable in columns 1-4 is the ratio of the value of affiliate interest payments to non-parents to current liabilities and long-term debt borrowed
from non-parent sources; in columns 5-8, the dependent variable is the ratio of total affiliate interest payments to current liabilities and long-term debt, excluding trade
accounts and trade notes payable. All regressions are estimated by ordinary least squares and include parent, industry, and year fixed effects. Country Tax Rate is the
median tax rate in an affiliate's host country. Private Credit is the ratio of private credit lent by deposit money banks to GDP, as provided in Beck, Demirguc-Kunt, and
Levine (2000). Political Risk is the annual average of the monthly index of political risk presented in the International Country Risk Guide, rescaled to lie between 0
and 1 with higher numbers indicating higher risks. Rate of Inflation is the contemporaneous percentage change in the GDP deflator of an affiliate's host country. The
IMF Capital Control Dummy and the Shatz Capital Control Dummy are dummies equal to one if a country imposes capital controls and zero otherwise. Standard errors
that correct for clustering of errors across observations in country/year cells are presented in parentheses.
                                                                             Table 4

                             Capital Controls and Transfer Pricing Activities of U.S. Multinationals

           Dependent Variable: Net
                                                                               Full Sample                                    Liberalizing Countries
           Income/Owners' Equity

                                                                  (1)                 (2)                (3)                      (4)                 (5)

Constant                                                         -35.4662           -18.6025            -45.2557                   0.1511              0.1237
                                                                 (8.4114)           (8.0517)           (11.6224)                 (0.0340)            (0.0368)

Country Tax Rate                                                  -0.2075             -0.1598             -0.1959                 -0.2173             -0.1341
                                                                 (0.0457)            (0.0435)            (0.0470)                (0.0970)            (0.1051)

IMF Capital Control Dummy                                                              0.0050
                                                                                     (0.0109)

Shatz Capital Control Dummy                                                                               -0.0472
                                                                                                         (0.0202)

Post Liberalization Dummy                                                                                                                              0.0823
                                                                                                                                                     (0.0482)

Parent, Industry, and Year Fixed
Effects?                                                           Y                  Y                   Y                        N                   N
GDP and Wage Controls?                                             Y                  Y                   Y                        N                   N
Affiliate and Year Fixed Effects?                                  N                  N                   N                        Y                   Y

No. of Obs.                                                     128,368             108,942             108,657                   12,867              12,867
R-Squared                                                         0.2286              0.2104              0.2150                   0.6502              0.6520
Notes: The dependent variable in each specification is the ratio of net income to owners' equity. The analysis uses analytic weights equal to owners equity to
transform the specifications in a way that is equivalent to multiplying through by owners' equity. Country Tax Rate is the median tax rate in an affiliate's host
country. The IMF Capital Control Dummy and the Shatz Capital Control Dummy are dummies equal to one if a country imposes capital controls and zero
otherwise. Specification (1)-(3) include parent, industry, and year fixed effects and observations for all affiliate years, and as well as three powers of log GDP
and the log of the median annual compensation per employee paid by affiliates in a particular country and year. Specifications (4) and (5) include affiliate
and year fixed effects and observations from countries that undergo capital control liberalizations. The post liberalization dummy is equal to one in the year
of and each of the years following liberalizations. Heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors that correct for clustering across country/year cells are
presented in parentheses.
                                                         Table 5

 Capital Controls and Transfer Pricing Activity by U.S. Multinationals, as Measured by Trade
                                         Surpluses

                                  Dependent Variable: Parent Trade Surplus

                                                          (1)                      (2)                      (3)

Constant                                                    -30.3515                 -36.9926                  -53.5913
                                                            (8.5616)                 (8.9050)                 (16.5557)

Country Tax Rate                                               0.3684                    0.3776                    0.3793
                                                             (0.0630)                  (0.0711)                  (0.0757)

IMF Capital Control Dummy                                                                0.0322
                                                                                       (0.0175)

Shatz Capital Control Dummy                                                                                        0.0708
                                                                                                                 (0.0331)


Industry, and Year Fixed Effects?                          Y                       Y                         Y
GDP and Wage Controls?                                     Y                       Y                         Y

No. of Obs.                                                     24,162                   20,446                   19,937
R-Squared                                                        0.2023                   0.2066                   0.2039
The dependent variable in each specification is the difference between parent exports to the affiliate and parent imports
from the affiliate divided by the sum of these two values, calculated using data for each industry in each country and
year. Country Tax Rate is the median tax rate in an affiliate's host country. The IMF Capital Control Dummy and the
Shatz Capital Control Dummy are dummies equal to one if a country imposes capital controls and zero otherwise. Each
specification includes industry and year fixed effects as well as three powers of log GDP and the log of the median
annual compensation per employee paid by affiliates in a particular country and year. Heteroskedasticity-consistent
standard errors that correct for clustering across country/year cells are presented in parentheses.
                                                                       Table 6

                 The Impact of Capital Controls on the Propensity of U.S. Multinationals to Pay Dividends

Dependent Variable: Dummy Equal to
                                                                      Full Sample                                      Liberalizing Countries
  One if Dividend Payment Made
                                                        (1)                 (2)                 (3)                     (4)                  (5)

Country Tax Rate                                           0.9505              1.1526             1.0245                   2.5956               2.2556
                                                         (0.0817)            (0.0898)           (0.0940)                 (0.3990)             (0.4089)

IMF Capital Control Dummy                                                      0.0890
                                                                             (0.0196)

Shatz Capital Control Dummy                                                                       0.3589
                                                                                                (0.0323)

Post Liberalization Dummy                                                                                                                      -0.5701
                                                                                                                                              (0.1483)

Return on Assets                                           4.5648              4.5676             4.6543                   3.9830               4.0272
                                                         (0.0641)            (0.0676)           (0.0686)                 (0.2431)             (0.2441)


Parent/Year Fixed Effects?                               Y                   Y                   Y                       N                    N
GDP and Wage Controls?                                   Y                   Y                   Y                       N                    N
Affiliate and Year Fixed Effects?                        N                   N                   N                       Y                    Y

No. of Obs.                                               97,061              86,458             85,985                      7,556                 7,556
Log Likelihood                                            -43,235             -38,390            -38,022                     -2,854                -2,847

Notes: The dependent variable in each specification is a dummy that is equal to one if an affiliate makes a dividend payment in a particular year and
zero if it does not. Country Tax Rate is the median tax rate in an affiliate's host country. The IMF Capital Control Dummy and the Shatz Capital
Control Dummy are dummies equal to one if a country imposes capital controls and zero otherwise. Return on assets is the ratio of affiliate net
income to assets. Specification (1)-(3) include Parent/Year fixed effects and observations for all affiliate years, and as well as three powers of log
GDP and the log of the median annual compensation per employee paid by affiliates in a particular country and year. Specifications (4) and (5)
include affiliate and year fixed effects and observations from countries that undergo capital control liberalizations. The post liberalization dummy is
equal to one in the year of and each of the years following liberalizations. Standard errors are presented in parenthesess.
                                                                                                         Table 7
                                                     The Impact of Capital Controls on the Dividend Policy of U.S. Multinationals

 Dependent Variable: Dividend Paid                                                            Full Sample                                                                    Liberalizing Countries

                                                           (1)              (2)              (3)              (4)             (5)              (6)                   (7)            (8)             (9)            (10)
Constant                                                     364.5           1337.3            417.8          1371.2             429.9          1842.8                747.8         1743.8           562.0          1502.6
                                                            (94.1)          (146.2)           (74.6)         (122.2)            (94.0)         (171.3)              (196.8)        (250.4)         (172.1)         (289.1)
Net Income                                                 0.4122           0.3567           0.3969          0.3385           0.4244           0.3174               0.2980          0.2023          0.2615         0.1446
                                                         (0.0209)         (0.0233)         (0.0215)        (0.0250)         (0.0232)         (0.0259)             (0.0471)        (0.0369)        (0.0442)       (0.0589)
Lagged Dividends                                           0.2588           0.0822           0.2382          0.0280           0.2141           0.0047               0.2590          0.1195          0.5133         0.3449
                                                         (0.0277)         (0.0240)         (0.0325)        (0.0311)         (0.0307)         (0.0268)             (0.0898)        (0.0569)        (0.0795)       (0.0892)
IMF Capital Control Dummy                                                                   -0.0222         -0.0545
Interacted with Net Income                                                                 (0.0420)        (0.0421)
IMF Capital Control Dummy                                                                    0.0621          0.1118
Interacted with Lagged Dividends                                                           (0.0800)        (0.0582)
Shatz Capital Control Dummy                                                                                                  -0.1228          -0.1216
Interacted with Net Income                                                                                                  (0.0544)         (0.0679)
Shatz Capital Control Dummy                                                                                                   0.3247           0.2799
Interacted with Lagged Dividend                                                                                             (0.0735)         (0.1403)
Post Liberalization Dummy                                                                                                                                                                           0.0367         0.0851
Interacted with Net Income                                                                                                                                                                        (0.0671)       (0.0620)
Post Liberalization Dummy                                                                                                                                                                          -0.3186        -0.2664
Interacted with Lagged Dividend                                                                                                                                                                   (0.1072)       (0.0908)
Parent Fixed Effects?                                      Y                N                Y                N               Y                N                     Y               N               Y               N
Affiliate Fixed Effects?                                   N                Y                N                Y               N                Y                     N               Y               N               Y
No. of Obs.                                               87,339           87,339           74,482           74,482          56,689           56,689                8,552           8,552           8,552           8,552
R-Squared                                                  0.3836           0.5157           0.3702           0.5005          0.3735           0.5430               0.4885          0.6088          0.5159          0.6212

                                                     Without Controls                     0.5210           0.3483           0.5400           0.3189               0.4022          0.2298          0.3702         0.2492
                  Payout ratio
                                                     With Controls                        0.5354           0.3302           0.6539           0.2737                                               0.5372         0.2207
                                                     Without Controls                     0.7618           0.9720           0.7859           0.9953               0.7410          0.8805          0.8053         0.9216
          Adjustment Parameter
                                                     With Controls                        0.6997           0.8602           0.4612           0.7153                                               0.4867         0.6551
Notes: The dependent variable in all specifications is the dollar value of dividend payments by majority-owned affiliates to parents. Net Income is the after-foreign tax net income of the affiliate. Lagged Dividends is the
dollar value of dividend payments by the affiliate in the previous year. The IMF Capital Control Dummy and the Shatz Capital Control Dummy are dummies equal to one if a country imposes capital controls and zero
otherwise. Columns 1, 3, 5, 7, and 9 present OLS specifications with parent fixed effects. Columns 2, 4, 6, 8, and 10 present OLS specifications with affiliate fixed effects. The sample used in specifications 1-6
includes all affiliates and the sample in specifications 7-10 includes only affiliates in countries that liberalize their capital controls. Heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors are presented in parentheses.
                                                                        Table 8

                                The Impact of Capital Controls on Multinational Affiliate Size
  Dependent Variable: Log of Affiliate
                                                                       First Appearance                                   Liberalizing Countries
               Assets
                                                            (1)                 (2)                 (3)                     (4)                 (5)
Constant                                                    107.7197            106.5692            131.5939                   9.6327              9.6018
                                                           (24.2568)           (25.2007)           (34.8195)                 (0.0659)            (0.0710)
Country Tax Rate                                             -0.3020             -0.3558             -0.4689                   0.3926              0.4896
                                                            (0.1405)            (0.1457)            (0.1670)                 (0.2005)            (0.2189)
IMF Capital Control Dummy                                                        -0.1590
                                                                                (0.0314)
Shatz Capital Control Dummy                                                                          -0.1269
                                                                                                    (0.0655)
Post Liberalization Dummy                                                                                                                          0.1562
                                                                                                                                                 (0.0607)

Parent, Industry, and Year Fixed
Effects?                                                     Y                   Y                   Y                       N                   N
GNP Controls?                                                Y                   Y                   Y                       N                   N
Affiliate and Year Fixed Effects?                            N                   N                   N                       Y                   Y

No. of Obs.                                                   22,015             18,623              18,507                   17,810              17,810

R-Squared                                                      0.4959              0.4819             0.4847                   0.8700              0.8703

Notes: The dependent variable in each specification is the log of affiliate assets. Country Tax Rate is the median tax rate in an affiliate's host country.
The IMF Capital Control Dummy and the Shatz Capital Control Dummy are dummies equal to one if a country imposes capital controls and zero
otherwise. Specification (1)-(3) include parent, industry, and year fixed effects and observations for the first appearce of all affiliates subsequent to
1982, as well as three powers of log GDP and the log of the median annual compensation per employee paid by affiliates in a particular country and
year. Specifications (4) and (5) include affiliate and year fixed effects and observations from countries that undergo capital control liberalizations. The
post liberalization dummy is equal to one in the year of and each of the years following liberalizations. Heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors
that correct for clustering across country/year cells are presented in parentheses.
                                                        Table 9

      The Impact of Capital Controls on the Retained Earnings of Multinational Affiliates


                            Dependent Variable: Retained Earnings/Total Assets

                                                                       (1)                 (2)                 (3)

Constant                                                                 10.4160             8.8870             2.9613
                                                                        (8.4270)           (8.0428)          (13.2301)
Country Tax Rate                                                         -0.0926            -0.0376             -0.1310
                                                                        (0.0676)           (0.0593)            (0.0769)
IMF Capital Control Dummy                                                                   -0.0626
                                                                                           (0.0165)
Shatz Capital Control Dummy                                                                                     -0.0661
                                                                                                               (0.0184)

Parent, Industry, and Year Fixed Effects?                               Y                   Y                  Y
GDP and Wage Controls?                                                  Y                   Y                  Y

No. of Obs.                                                              52,388             49,979              49,695

R-Squared                                                                 0.2128             0.2160              0.2170

Notes: The dependent variable in each specification is the ratio of retained earnings to assets. Country Tax Rate is the
median tax rate in an affiliate's host country. The IMF Capital Control Dummy and the Shatz Capital Control Dummy are
dummies equal to one if a country imposes capital controls and zero otherwise. All specification include parent, industry,
and year fixed effects and observations for all benchmark years, as well as three powers of log GDP and the log of the
median annual compensation per employee paid by affiliates in a particular country and year. Heteroskedasticity-
consistent standard errors that correct for clustering across country/year cells are presented in parentheses.
