                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        THE REVIVED BRETTON WOODS SYSTEM:
                     THE EFFECTS OF PERIPHERY INTERVENTION AND
                      RESERVE MANAGEMENT ON INTEREST RATES
                      AND EXCHANGE RATES IN CENTER COUNTRIES

                                         Michael P. Dooley
                                        David Folkerts-Landau
                                            Peter Garber

                                         Working Paper 10332
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w10331


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      March 2004




The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

©2004 by Michael P. Dooley, David Folkerts-Landau, and Peter Garber. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
The Revived Bretton Woods System: The Effects of Periphery Intervention and Reserve
Management on Interest Rates and Exchange Rates in Center Countries
Michael P. Dooley David Folkerts-Landau, and Peter Garber
NBER Working Paper No. 10332
March 2004
JEL No. F02, F32, F33

                                           ABSTRACT

In this paper we explore some implications of the "revived" Bretton Woods system for exchange

market intervention and reserve management in periphery countries. Financial policies in these

countries are seen as a component of a more general portfolio management policy in which the

formation of an efficient domestic capital stock is a key objective. Because intervention in financial

markets is an important part of their development strategy, intervention in exchange and financial

markets has, and we argue will continue to be, large and persistent enough to generate predictable

deviations of exchange rates and relative yields in industrial country financial markets from normal

cyclical patterns. We argue that management of the currency composition of international reserves

by emerging market governments and central banks is unlikely to alter these conclusions.

Michael P. Dooley
Department of Economics
University of California, Santa Cruz
Santa Cruz, CA 95064
and NBER
mpd@ucsc.edu

David Folkerts Landau
1331 21 Street, NW
Washington, DC 20036

Peter Garber
7 Seaview Drive
Barrington, RI
and NBER
vic2eroy@aol.com
In a recent paper (Dooley, Folkerts-Landau, and Garber, 2004) we argued that a sensible
development policy might involve creating a distortion in the real exchange rate in order
to bias domestic investment toward export industries. Sensible here means that the
resulting capital stock will be superior to that generated by a badly distorted domestic
financial system and other relative price distortions typical of emerging market countries.

In this paper we explore two related implications of this idea for portfolio choices of
emerging market governments. The key to understanding such choices is that, for these
governments, the domestic capital stock is an important component of the asset portfolio.
Thus accumulations of financial assets and liabilities, in particular international reserve
assets and domestic currency liabilities, that appear to be suboptimal when viewed in
isolation, make sense when viewed as a part of a development strategy based on
channeling investment to export industries1.

In the next section we argue that portfolio choices by periphery central banks and
governments have two important effects on the center. First reserve accumulations are a
quantitatively important source of finance for the center’s current account deficit. It
follows that real interest rates in the center are lower than they would otherwise be.
Second, because reserve accumulations are concentrated in short-term US Treasury
obligations, yields on Treasuries are depressed relative to other instruments.

We then turn to the likelihood and effects of reserve diversification by periphery
countries away from US dollars. Our conclusion is that diversification is inconsistent
with a development policy based on export led growth. An attempt to diversify and
maintain dollar cross rates would generate an increase in gross reserve assets and the
gross domestic assets required to sterilize the reserve increase.


I Global Imbalances and Treasuries

Accelerating global imbalances are creating an important confrontation between
governments and private international investors. This confrontation takes the form of
official intervention in foreign exchange and US treasury markets. The clash between
investors and governments is driving a menu of market anomalies, from exchange rates,
to interest rates, to spreads.

Our usual presumption would be that the private side would win this contest quickly and
decisively. The idea that it is profitable to position against central banks is deeply
ingrained in the memories of those who lived through the demise of the old Bretton
Woods System. But that system did last for twenty years, and we see very strong
incentives for governments to commit vast resources to the battle to maintain what we
have called the revived Bretton Woods System.


1
 See, Feldstein (1999), Greenspan (1999) and Aizenman and Marion (2002) for alternative interpretations
and motives for accumulation of international reserves in emerging market countries.


                                                   2
The rapidly increasing domination of the official sector on the buy side of treasury
markets is creating a technical factor that is separating benchmark yield curves from
standard fundamental analysis. Current one-sided private sector positioning on future
yield curve movements based on fundamentals are in fact gigantic risks taken against a
phalanx of central banks and finance ministries engaged in a historically unprecedented
intervention in foreign exchange and financial markets. These interventions serve the
purposes of the foreign official sector, and there is no reason for them to stop in the near
term—we believe that the official sector will continue to intervene heavily.

Continued foreign exchange intervention by Asian central banks and governments will
have two important effects on financial markets. First, by supplying a substantial fraction
of US GDP to US credit markets, real interest rates in general will, we believe, remain
below their historical norm perhaps by as much as one percentage point. Since real
interest rates in the US have averaged about 2.8% in post war data this is an important
affect. Put another way, regardless of what the Federal Reserve needs to do in managing
inflationary pressures, a withdrawal of Asian support would require a narrowing of the
US current account deficit and long rates would rise.

Continued intervention by official Asia would also tend to depress short treasury rates
relative to other short rates because of intense appetite for these securities. Of course, the
Federal Reserve can always sell enough treasuries to hit whatever fed funds target it
wants. If inflation begins to return, the Federal Reserve would raise the fed funds rate,
which would also raise the short treasury rates. Heavy Asian buying of short treasuries
may push the bill rate down significantly relative to commercial paper but a wide enough
spread would at some point lead to a switch to different securities.
.

Poised at the rapid growth phase of the US business cycle, the US economy displays
massive imbalances in its current and fiscal accounts. A strong recovery would reduce
the fiscal imbalance but would make the current account deficit much larger.
Conventional analysis suggests that the deficits are inconsistent with low yields
compared with euro rates and what still appears to many observers to be an overvalued
dollar.

Similarly, any undergraduate macro textbook discussion on the business cycle and the
Taylor rule for monetary policy would foresee an eventual rise in short term interest rates
to about 5% (3% real growth plus 2% inflation), with similar though lesser rises in long
rates. The yield curve might rise even more than usual because of the large supply of
marketable paper falling on the market with a 5.5% of GDP on-budget fiscal deficit.
Also, the USD would depreciate against undervalued Asia as well as the euro to bring the
current account deficit to below a manageable 3% of GDP. The only question seems to
be about timing, will this adjustment start mid-year or in the autumn?

Most private sector players have read the textbooks and currently are underweighting
both the dollar and duration, counting on the business cycle to grind out the usual result.
Others, perplexed by the persistence of low yields in the face of the fundamentals, have
thrown in the towel and simply gone back to a neutral position.

But the private sector as a whole can become seriously one-sided in these positions only
because of the eruption of the global official sectors as major buyers in the low-risk


                                              3
dollar asset sectors. An array of central banks and finance ministries has emerged to
resist, for their own local reasons, the adjustment that the cyclical fundamentals seem to
require. These are mainly the Asian central banks and ministries of finance, but the
Federal Reserve is also a major buyer with the fed funds rate set for now at 1%. Even the
ECB, if it acts to stem the rise of the euro through direct intervention, may join this
group. That this is not a concerted or organized intervention in US treasury markets does
not diminish its power. It has created both a large fundamental and a very large technical
factor that is bolted onto the normal cyclical adjustment with such weight that it can
muffle its normal response.

Since the private sector as a whole seems to be taking a one-sided position, there is a vast
risk position outstanding against mainly the Asian official sector. A few facts and a little
arithmetic highlight the size of the risk:

a. Supply of US Treasuries2

Stock, End-December, 2003
Marketable debt held by "public"                               $3.50 trillion
Less Fed holdings                                              $0.66 trillion
Less securities held by Fed for foreign official               $0.85 trillion
Leaves less than                                                $2 trillion in private hands


New Supply, Fiscal 2004
The CBO estimates a $631 billion on-budget deficit and a $154 billion off-budget
surplus. So new supply of debt in the hands of the public for fiscal 2004 is about $477
billion. If the ratio of non-marketable to marketable debt stays constant, the increment in
marketable securities would be about $420 billion.


b. New Official Sector Demand for Treasuries

The Federal Reserve acquired about $64 billion of Treasuries in 2002 and $37 billion in
2003. Let’s assume it will acquire $40 billion in 2004, especially if there is no interest
rate increase before summer. In Japan, the Ministry of Finance is asking for
authorization to sell ¥61 trillion (about $575 billion) for exchange market intervention in
the next year.3 If this is not a bluff and if the buying-in attack on the yen continues, that
is a potential $575 billion of purchases of US treasuries at current exchange rates.
Intervention by Japan so far this year through the first week of February has totaled $78
2
   The debt held by the public includes Federal Reserve holdings. It also includes non-marketable debt like
savings bonds, special series for state and local governments, and other issues. The Federal Reserve
reports Treasury ($0.85 trillion) and Agency ($0.21 trillion) securities directly held on behalf of foreign
official claimants. The foreign official sector also holds Treasury securities indirectly through bank
custodians, which are not captured here. The Asian official sector, which is the source of the growth, holds
its treasuries through the Federal Reserve, while some European central banks do not.
3
  The limit for foreign exchange intervention was ¥79 trillion for fiscal 2003. At the end of December
2003, the amount outstanding was about ¥70 trillion. In the fiscal 2004 budget plan, the Ministry of
Finance intends to increase the limit to ¥140 trillion, including ¥20 trillion for a 2003 supplementary
budget. The plan has to be approved by the Diet within the next few weeks. Note that the earmarking of
the amounts seems to indicate an anticipation of yet another ¥20 trillion intervention in the last months of
fiscal 2003, added on to the ¥21 trillion of calendar 2003, and a potentially matching ¥41 trillion in fiscal
2004.


                                                     4
billion, an annual rate of around $800 billion. Add intervention from China and the rest
of Asia for perhaps $150 billion more.4 Adding up, we find a potential official sector
buy-in of some $750+ billion in the treasury market.

c. Supply vs. Demand

Suppose the buying-in attacks on Asian currencies and the euro continue from the private
sector and the potential intervention actually occurs. Suppose also that the Fed continues
its expansionary policy. Then the global official sector would absorb the entire new
supply of treasuries and reduce the existing stock by $330 billion, i.e. by just about 17%
of the stock.

The global official sector—with its preferences slanted to US treasuries at the short
end—would then have engineered a significant shortage of treasuries, rather than the glut
that fundamentals would cause us to expect. So we would expect forceful downward
pressure on benchmark rates as these official-sector-technical factor hits, enough partly to
counterbalance rising credit demand due to the recovery.

A belief that the large buying-in attack on Asian currencies will continue this year and
that official Asia will continue the defense is a belief that there will be a supply shortage
in the US treasury market. Then the situation to compare to the present is not the run up
in rates from 1993 to 1994 as the macro textbook would imply. Rather, it is the supply
shortage of the 2000 buybacks, when technical factors persistently drove swap spreads
vs. treasuries up by 50 basis points or more. In a low inflation environment with real
yields around 2.5%, this would be a significant differential.

Private sector players are now inviting the Asian central banks to be the first to blink and
unwind their positions by appreciating their currencies or diversifying their reserves,
using the macro textbook as their rhetorical device. Yet, in deflationary Asian countries,
notably Japan, it is difficult to understand why external players think there is some limit
on the ability or motivation of the authorities to create yen in stemming a buying-in
attack on the currency.

With interest rates at zero, it is costless to create as much yen cash as is demanded, while
dollar reserves produce a positive yield. Normally, a limit on foreign exchange
acquisition is reached when the resulting monetary expansion causes excessive
overheating and inflation. But this is still not in sight for Japan, and would, in any case,
be the monetary policy that economists have begged for to end their economic stagnation.

The lessons of attacks on fixed exchange, weak currency countries seem to be the ones
being applied by the global private financial sector here. For such countries, there is a
limit on reserves or credit or the amount of pain they are willing to put the economy
through, so more attacks against such currencies are simultaneously a ratcheting up of the
probability that the currency will indeed collapse. Speculators against the yen seem to be
holding a case study of the peso against a mirror and thinking that the more yen they buy,
4
  China increased reserves by $117 billion in 2003, but this number results after subtracting the $45 billion
in reserves transferred in the recent bank recapitalization. These funds will apparently remain in USD
assets. South Korea, Taiwan, and Singapore increased reserves by $34 billion, $44 billion, and $14 billion,
respectively. This totals to about $255 billion. Even allowing for some tinkering with exchange rates, we
expect Asian currency interventions on a similar magnitude to maintain the export driven development
strategy. Setting aside some allocations for other currencies and securities such as agencies or corporates,
we guess about $150 billion for treasuries for this exercise.



                                                      5
the more they ratchet up the pain in Japan. Yet quite the opposite is true in deflationary
Japan. The more yen the Bank of Japan creates to counter this, the less the economic
pain. If the Ministry of Finance wins and the yen depreciates, it even gets a financial
gain. We will look at this end-game scenario in a subsequent essay.

What limits yen creation in defense against a strengthening yen? Nothing. The other
side of the coin of unlimited yen intervention in FX markets is unlimited buying of US
treasuries. An ever greater Ministry of Finance intervention is an ever greater support of
US treasuries. That is why this is a fundamental confrontation. Who can stand the most
pain from their unbalanced positions this year—the central banks or the private sector?
Who is likely to blink first?

If official Asia does blink, we expect two things to happen. First, the Federal Reserve
would be more likely to see higher interest rates as necessary to control inflation in the
face of a smaller supply of cheap Asian goods and cheap Asian savings. Second, long
rates would rise more steeply because of the higher fed funds rate and because treasuries
would not be scarce.

If Asia does not blink and inflation stays low, perhaps because of the supply of cheap
foreign savings, we expect to see lower short and long interest rates, with short treasuries
well below other short rates. Suppose that, in spite of continued Asian intervention, labor
market tightness and incipient inflation triggers Fed action anyway. Then the rise in US
rates would be less than normal business cycle history would suggest, mitigated by Asian
intervention

.



II Is Asian Reserve Diversification a Threat to the Dollar Pegs?

Asian central bankers have been incessantly peppered with advice to diversify their
foreign exchange reserves5. Early on, such advice was based on the soundest of textbook
risk-return optimization concepts, notably to diversify from the predominant USD share.
As if this were not enough, in recent months the obvious trend strengthening of the euro
and the lack of sufficient yield spread vs. the dollar has intensified such advice. As a last
straw, international financial experts, eyeing the huge U.S. imbalances on current and
fiscal accounts, are nearly screaming at the Asian central banks to sell off dollar reserves,
before they have to absorb what the experts forecast as an ever larger disaster. Even if
they may be talking their own book, such advice follows from conventional analysis of
international macroeconomics, especially as it has been applied to small emerging market
economies in recent years.

It is useful, therefore, to evaluate the likely effects of a rebalancing of these important
asset portfolios away from USD and toward the euro or other currencies. The problem is
5
 See Dooley et al (1989) for a statistical analysis of the currency composition of international reserves and
Eichengreen and Mathieson (1999) for an update of the facts and a discussion of the choice between the
dollar and the euro.


                                                      6
that these official sector investors are much too large now to be price takers in foreign
exchange and fixed income markets6. Moreover, changes in the allocation of existing
holdings will clearly influence market expectations about future flows of investments by
these central banks and governments.

Our bottom line is that any important change in the investment choices across currencies
would likely:

    -    Threaten their USD peg.
    -    Require an even higher rate of accumulation of total gross reserves in the future.
    -    Increase pressure on the ECB to intervene to support the USD against the euro.

The first two seem inconsistent with the revealed interests of the Asian governments. So
an application of the most basic principles of portfolio management would require a
fundamental change in basic macro and development policy. The third cannot be ruled
out: it would represent a major shift in ECB policy, but it is now being widely signaled
by statements from EU finance ministries and by ECB board members.

Analysis.

First, let us note what amounts to an accounting identity. Suppose Asia significantly
reallocates existing reserve portfolios away from USD to euros. This is equivalent in
impact on private holdings of base currencies and securities to sterilized intervention in
support of the euro by either the US or Europe. That is, there is no change in monetary
conditions, i.e. monetary base, in any of the three countries due to the reallocation alone.
It follows that private investors will have to adjust to the mirror image change in their
asset allocation, that is more USD-denominated assets and fewer euro-denominated
assets. For private investors to accept this portfolio shift, the USD should weaken against
the euro, a result of the standard portfolio balance view.

The less transparent issue is what happens next? Intuition suggests that the dollar should
weaken against the Asian currencies while the Euro firms against Asia. Indeed, both
standard portfolio theory and historical evidence suggest this is the case. Starting from a
mix of Asian currencies, USD, and euros in their portfolios, global private investors are
suddenly confronted with fewer euros and more USD. At old exchange rates, they would
want to get rid of USD and get more euros. This would tend to bid up the price of Asian
currencies and the euro vs. USD, with the euro rising more. The case study on European
interventions during the 1970s described in the included box provides the historical color.




6
 Eichengreen (2004) argues that smaller emerging market countries might free ride on their larger
neighbors by quietly diversifying their reserve portfolios. This is clearly a possibility but we have as yet
seen no evidence to suggest this is a serious problem.


                                                      7
   The Snake in the Tunnel
     The evidence comes from the common practice in the 1970s of European central
   banks buying and selling dollars to influence their cross exchange rates during the
   “snake in the tunnel” period. The European cross-currency bilateral rates were
   supposed to be maintained in a band by the individual central banks, and the whole
   array was to be maintained in a band against the USD. But interventions to maintain
   cross rates within the snake were often done with the USD. For example, to support
   the franc against the DM, the Bank of France would sell USD to buy francs. Private
   investors, who for the usual portfolio reasons desired a mix of USD and DM but
   who received only dollars from the Bank of France, would then offer USD for DM.
   The DM then tended to appreciate against USD. When the DM was pushed to its
   intervention limit against the dollar the Bundesbank would then buy USD against
   DM. The net effect was an appreciation of the franc against the DM with both
   currencies moving up relative to USD. See Michael Dooley “Note on Key Currency
   Intervention Systems,” Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve, IFDP #79
   (February, 1976).




The important lesson from the 1970’s is that portfolio diversification will have first order
implications for exchange market intervention by both the ECB and Asian central banks.
If Asian central banks rebalance their portfolios away from dollars, private investors will
require a fall in the dollar against the euro and the ECB may be politically forced to
stabilize the dollar euro rate. In effect the ECB would play the same roll as the
Bundesbank in the 1970s except that there is no formal obligation to limit the euro’s
appreciation against the dollar. Statements currently coming from European finance
ministries and ECB board members indicate the potential for intervention in order to
preserve cyclical recovery even without the added pressure of Asian buying of euros.

Perhaps more important, pressure from portfolio diversification on the USD/Asian
currency cross rate would generate new intervention by Asian central banks to preserve
the current dollar rate. Even if this new intervention is less concentrated in dollars than
in the past, it can still eventually stabilize the dollar/Asian currency cross rate. But this
implies even more rapid growth of gross reserve assets in Asian central banks and larger
gross private capital inflow to these countries.

It is most likely that, in trying to keep the old peg against dollar rate, Asian central banks
would invest all the new intervention proceeds in dollars. This would avoid the juggling
among the currencies and the large gross acquisition of reserves. It would thereby largely
offset the initial portfolio adjustment, leaving only an additional acquisition of euros, the
same amount of dollars, and more monetary base to sterilize.

In the end it comes back to the question we explored at length in Dooley, Folkerts-
Landau and Garber, 2004. If the dollar peg and export led growth are the dominant


                                              8
policy considerations for Asia, it makes little sense to threaten the peg with a portfolio
adjustment that may have solid micro-finance grounds, but undermines the broader policy
framework.

Our guess is that even if such a portfolio adjustment is attempted it will be cautious,
small and quickly reversed. Even this could initially shake the market badly given the
strong weight of opinion that it is only a matter of time before Asian governments
abandon their basic policy stance of export led growth. By jarring expectations, it might
even trigger a buying-in attack on Asian currencies that would be counter-productive if
Asian governments really intend to maintain their pegs to the dollar.

Adoption of a basket peg would certainly allow diversification away from dollars without
requiring intervention since the decline of the dollar against the domestic currency would
be (depending of weights assigned to different currencies) offset by appreciation against
the Euro. This of course does not eliminate the problem faced by central banks and
governments that want to underwrite their access to US import markets. If basket pegs
are in the works it is more likely to signal a cautious and gradual move away from strict
dollar pegs than a move to facilitate reserve diversification.


Conclusions

We are witnessing now a shift in global flows of historic proportions. The unwillingness
to accept the inevitable downward slide of the USD, due to a massive labor surplus in
much of Asia and cyclical fears in Japan, is leading to intervention flows that are
unprecedented. Now even the ECB has begun to publicly express concern about
appreciation of the euro. We are experiencing an official sector effort to reverse global
private capital flows on a scale that we have never seen, even at the end of Bretton
Woods. The emerging institutional arrangement, yet to be formalized, is a reconstitution
of the Bretton Woods system that we have discussed in an earlier paper.


References

Aizenman, Joshua and Nancy Marion (2002), “The High Demand for International
Reserves in the Far East: What is Going on Here?” NBER WP #9266 (October).

Alogoskoufis, George, and Richard Portes (1997), “The Euro, the Dollar, and the
International Monetary System,” in Paul R. Masson, Thomas H. Krueger and Bart G.
Turtelboom (eds), EMU and the International Monetary System, Washington, D.C.:
International Monetary Fund.

Bergsten, C. Fred (1997), “The Impact of the Euro on Exchange Rates and International
Policy Coordination,” in Paul R. Masson, Thomas H. Krueger and Bart G. Turtelboom
(eds), EMU and the International Monetary System, Washington, D.C.: International
Monetary Fund.




                                            9
Bordo, Michael and Barry Eichengreen (1998), “The Rise and Fall of a Barbarous Relic:
The Role of Gold in the International Monetary System,” NBER Working Paper no. 6436
(March).

Dooley, Michael P. (1976), “Note on Key Currency Intervention Systems,” Board of
Governors of the Federal Reserve, IFDP #79 (February).

Dooley, Michael P., J. Saul Lizondo and Donald J. Mathieson (1989), “The Currency
Composition of Foreign Exchange Reserves,” IMF Staff Papers 36, pp.385-434.

Dooley, Michael P., David Folkerts-Landau, and Peter Garber (2003), “An Essay on the
Revived Bretton Woods System,” NBER Working Paper no. 9971 (September).

Eichengreen, Barry (1998), “The Euro as a Reserve Currency,” Journal of the Japanese
and International Economies 12, pp.483-506.

Eichengreen, Barry (2004),”Global Imbalances and the Lessons of Bretton Woods,”
mimeo (February).

Eichengreen, Barry and Donald J. Mathieson (1999), “The Currency Composition of
Foreign Exchange Reserves: Retrospect and Prospect,” Paper prepared for the
UNU/WIDER Conference on the Future of the International Monetary and Financial
System, Helsinki, 11-12 (November).

Eichengreen, Barry and Jeffrey Frankel (1996), “The SDR, Reserve Currencies, and the
Future of the International Monetary System,” in Michael Mussa, James Boughton and
Peter Isard (eds), The Future of the SDR in Light of Changes in the International
Financial System, Washington, D.C.: IMF, pp.337-377.

Feldstein, Martin (1999), “Self-Protection for Emerging Market Economies,” NBER
Working Paper no. 6907 (January).

Greenspan, Alan (1999), “Remarks by the Chairman of the Board of Governors of the
Federal Reserve System before The World Bank Conference on Recent Trends in
Reserve Management,” Washington, D.C. (29 April).

Grenville, Stephen (1999), “Financial Crises and Globalisation,” Reserve Bank of
Australia, http://www.rba.gov.au/speech/sp_dg_150799.pdf .

Portes, Richard and Helene Rey (1998), “The Emergence of the Euro as an International
Currency,” NBER Working Paper no. 6424 (February).

Roger, Scott (1993), “The Management of Foreign Exchange Reserves,” BIS Economic
Paper no. 38, Basle: BIS (July).




                                          10
