                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




           ARE POLICY PLATFORMS CAPITALIZED INTO EQUITY PRICES?
          EVIDENCE FROM THE BUSH/GORE 2000 PRESIDENTIAL ELECTION

                                             Brian Knight

                                        Working Paper 10333
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w10333


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     March 2004




Thanks to Forrest Nelson at the Iowa Electronic Market for providing data used in this study. Thanks also
to Gregory Besharov and Howard Rosenthal for helpful comments and to participants at the Public Choice
Society, Econometric Society, and the Harvard University public economics seminar. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2004 by Brian Knight. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Are Policy Platforms Capitalized into Equity Prices? Evidence from the Bush/Gore 2000
Presidential Election
Brian Knight
NBER Working Paper No. 10333
March 2004
JEL No. D7, H0

                                            ABSTRACT

This paper tests for the capitalization of policy platforms into equity prices using a sample of 70

firms favored under Bush or Gore platforms during the 2000 U.S. Presidential Election. Two sources

of daily data during the six months leading up to the election are incorporated: firm-specific equity

returns and the probability of a Bush victory as implied by prices from the Iowa electronic market.

For this group of politically-sensitive firms, the daily baseline estimates demonstrate that platforms

are capitalized into equity prices: under a Bush administration, relative to a counterfactual Gore

administration, Bush-favored firms are worth 3 percent more and Gore-favored firms are worth 6

percent less, implying a statistically significant differential return of 9 percent. The most sensitive

sectors include tobacco, worth 13 percent more under a favorable Bush administration, Microsoft

competitors, worth 15 percent less under an unfavorable Bush administration, and alternative energy

companies, worth 16 percent less under an unfavorable Bush administration. A corresponding

analysis of campaign contributions, which allows for heterogeneity in the importance of policy

platforms to the firms, supports the baseline estimates. These results are then compared with results

from a more traditional event study based upon the Florida recount.

Brian Knight
Brown University
Department of Economics, Box B
64 Waterman Street
Providence, RI 02912
and NBER
brian_knight@brown.edu
1        Introduction

On the day following the U.S. Supreme Court ruling that guaranteed a victory for George Bush
in the 2000 Presidential Election, several media reports noted the increase in prices of equities
favored under Bush’s campaign platforms.1              Among these so-called Bush stocks, Pfizer rose
4.1 percent, Exxon rose 1.3 percent, and Philip Morris rose 6.5 percent. While this anecdotal
evidence is suggestive of the capitalization of campaign platforms into equity prices, other Bush
stocks, such as Microsoft, fell in value on that day.              Moreover, it is diﬃcult to separate the
reaction of equity prices to this political event from other economic and financial developments.
A final complication of interpretation involves investor expectations; in particular, these returns
can only be interpreted as a lower bound on the total value of favorable policies to these firms
given that markets may have largely factored in a Bush victory prior to the Supreme Court’s
ruling.
        Using evidence from the period preceding the 2000 U.S. Presidential Election, this paper
attempts to overcome these complications in a test for the capitalization of public policies into
equity prices using evidence from a sample of 70 firms favored under either Bush (41 firms)
or Gore (29 firms) policy platforms.            Two sources of daily data are incorporated: private
equity returns and candidate electoral prospects as implied by prices of political future con-
tracts from the Iowa Electronic Market. The daily baseline estimates provide strong evidence
that platforms are capitalized into equity prices: under the Bush administration, relative to a
counterfactual Gore administration, Bush-favored firms are worth 3 percent more and Gore-
favored firms are worth 6 percent less. The most sensitive sectors include tobacco, worth 13
percent more under a favorable Bush administration, Microsoft competitors, worth 15 percent
less under an unfavorable Bush administration, and alternative energy companies, worth 16
percent less under an unfavorable Bush administration. A corresponding analysis of campaign
contributions, which allows for heterogeneity in the importance of policy platforms to these
firms, supports the baseline estimates. These results are then compared with results from a
more traditional event study based upon the Florida recount.
        These results provide evidence for the existence of election-contingent security markets,
    1
        See, for example, The New York Times, December 14, 2000.




                                                       2
as hypothesized by Musto and Yilmaz (2003); the authors demonstrate that, if such markets
exist, consumers will purchase these securities as a hedge against wealth risk induced by diﬀering
candidate platforms over redistribution. In equilibrium, wealth considerations have no eﬀect
on voting but redistribution is the same regardless of the outcome of the election.        In the
context of the 2000 election, wealthy individuals could have purchased Gore-favored equities as
a hedge against a loss by Bush, who proposed to significantly reduce federal income tax rates
at the top end of the wealth and income distribution. Of course, this evidence does not prove
that voters adopted such strategies but rather merely provides evidence on the feasibility of
such strategies.


2    Related empirical literature

Several studies have tested for the capitalization of federal tax policies into equity prices by
studying the response of equity prices to political developments during negotiations over tax
legislation. Cutler (1988), in a study of the stock market’s reaction to the passage of the Tax
Reform Act of 1986, finds that the legislation’s diﬀerential treatment of old and new capital is
reflected in equity returns. However, the author finds no evidence of an overall market response
to the passage of this legislation, suggesting that the news was not eﬃciently incorporated
into equity prices. Lang and Shackelford (2000) find that stock prices moved inversely with
dividend yields following a 1997 budget accord that reduced capital gains tax rates; this finding
is consistent with the capitalization of capital gains taxes into equity prices. Sinai and Gyourko
(2003) use the same natural experiment in a study of corporate-level investment subsidies and
also conclude that the tax changes were capitalized into equity prices.
    A related literature studies the eﬀects of broader political events, such as elections and
changes in the ruling party, on equity prices. Using evidence from the Iowa Electronic Market,
Slemrod and Greimel (1999) demonstrate that the flat tax proposal put forth by candidate Steve
Forbes during the 1996 Presidential primaries had predictable eﬀects on the U.S. municipal bond
market. Fisman’s (2001) study of Indonesia reports that equity prices of firms closely connected
to President Suharato experienced large declines, relative to prices of lesser-connected firms, in
reaction to news of Suharato’s deteriorating health. One limitation of this study is that none


                                                3
of these health episodes forced Suharato from oﬃce, and one must thus interpret these results
as a lower bound on the value of political connections.2                   Jayachandran (2002) studies the
case of Senator James Jeﬀord’s party switch, which ended the Republican control of the U.S.
Senate in 2001. She finds that firms that made campaign contributions to Republicans during
the 2000 election cycle declined in value, although no corresponding increase was detected for
firms that contributed to the Democratic party.                Regarding the magnitude, the defection of
Jeﬀords caused firms to lose or gain 0.8 percent of their market value in aggregate. A closely
related study to my paper is Herron et. al (1999), who use measures of candidate electoral
prospects based upon the Iowa electronic market during the 1992 Presidential election. While
using similar sources of variation, there are several diﬀerences between Herron et al. and my
paper.       Most importantly, in their analysis of 74 economic sectors, the main focus of the
paper, they attempt to measure sector-specific political sensitivity by regressing rates of return
in equity markets on changes in electoral prospects separately for each of the sectors.3                      My
study, by contrast, incorporates independent information on firms favored under Bush and Gore
campaign platforms and uses this information to uncover the significance of these platforms.
Note that this type of independent information is required in order to provide evidence for
the existence of election-contingent securities as hypothesized in Musto and Yilmaz (2003).
In a theoretically-focused paper of which I became aware after writing the first draft of my
paper, Mattozzi (2003) independently constructs an index of equity prices for firms making
significant campaign contributions to Bush and Gore; he finds that Bush stocks rose in value
as the probability of a Bush victory increases, as implied by the Iowa Electronic Market, while
firms contributing to Gore experienced corresponding decreases.
   2
       Fisman does attempt to quantify the value of political connections by using the return on the Jakarta Stock
Exchange Composite Index as a measure of the severity of the rumor.           Based upon responses of investment
bankers in Indonesia to the question “how much would the Index had dropped if Suharto had died suddenly?”,
the author attempts to estimate the value of political connections. While suggestive, this exercise rests on the
subjective views of investment bankers and, as the author notes, involves an inference that is quite far out of
sample.
   3
     In a separate analysis, which is not the main focus of their paper, they do incorporate information from a
First-Boston list of pro-Clinton sectors. This analysis, however, does not incorporate pro-Bush sectors and is
limited to 16 sectors, only two of which are found to be statistically significant.




                                                         4
        This paper is also related to a broader literature on whether or not the release of new in-
formation moves stock market prices. Cutler, Poterba, and Summers (1988) find that neither
news associated with macroeconomic developments nor major world events fully explain move-
ments in the S&P 500. Elmendorf, Hirschfeld, and Weil (1996) examine movements in bond
prices in Britain resulting from events leading up to and including World War I; they find that
the variance of returns is higher in weeks with important news than in other weeks.                 Leigh,
Wolfers, and Zitzewitz (2003) predict the economic consequences of war in Iraq by correlating
data from financial markets with the price from a futures contract that pays only if Saddam
Hussein is ousted by a certain date. They conclude that a war raises oil prices $10 per barrel
and lowers the value of U.S. equities 15 percent.
        While this paper focuses on the electoral-induced redistribution of resources across indus-
tries, a much larger literature examines the aggregate macroeconomic implications of elections.
With forward-looking voters, uncertain election outcomes, and Democrats, relative to Repub-
licans, preferring higher inflation rates in return for lower unemployment rates, the resolution
of electoral outcomes has macroeconomic implications.                   In particular, Democratic adminis-
trations should be associated with decreases in unemployment rates and increases in inflation
rates, while the reverse should hold for Republican administrations.4 Historical evidence from
the U.S. generally supports these predictions; see Mueller (2003) for further information.


3        Sources of Daily Data

3.1        Probability of Bush victory

The first data source provides information on the relative electoral prospects of the two candi-
dates. Beginning May 1, 2000, the Iowa Electronic Market was open for trading in the 2000
U.S. Presidential Market.            Market participants traded futures contracts on the candidates;
those purchasing the Republican contract, for example, were paid $1 in the event of a Bush
victory in the popular vote.            Given the structure of this contract, the market price can be
interpreted as the probability of a Bush victory. I have obtained closing prices from the Iowa
Electronic Market as of 4 p.m. Eastern time, allowing for synchronization with the closing price
    4
        See Alesina (1987), Alesina (1988), and Alesina and Rosenthal (1995).


                                                          5
data on equities from financial markets.
       As shown in Figure 1, the Iowa Electronic Market data demonstrate that the 2000 race was
extremely close throughout the six months preceding the election, with Gore taking the lead
following the Republican National Convention (labeled RNC) and the Democratic National
Convention (labeled DNC), both held in August, before Bush pulled ahead during the three
Presidential debates (labeled D1, D2, and D3), which were held during October. Bush extended
this lead in early November, and, by November 6, the eve of the election and final day of the
sample, the implied probability of a Bush victory had risen to just over 75 percent.
       While contracts based upon the electoral college, rather than the popular vote, would be
preferable, I believe that the ex-post divergence between electoral college and popular vote
outcomes in the 2000 election was largely unexpected and thus electoral college contract prices
would have been similar to those of the popular vote contracts. Such divergences are historically
rare; the previous divergence occurred in 1888. In the 2000 election, neither candidate had a
significant ex-ante electoral college advantage. Analysts expected, if anything, Gore to have a
slight electoral college advantage.5
       For several reasons, the Iowa Electronic Market data are preferred to tracking poll data.
First, the latter data provide expected vote shares while the former data provide probabilities
of victory.        Such probabilities, as will be shown below, are required in order to quantify
the value of favorable policies.6           The second advantage of the Iowa Electronic Market data
involves eﬃciency.          According to an analysis of 15 elections, the market worked extremely
well, dominating opinion polls on average in forecasting the outcome of the election (Berg et
al, 2000).7 Even given these limitations associated with polling data, Figure 2 demonstrates
that Gallup tracking poll data, which are available on a daily basis beginning September 7,
2000, move in tandem with prices from the Iowa Electronic Market. As shown in Table 1, a
regression of Bush’s share of the two-party support in the Gallup poll on the IEM Bush contract
   5
       New York Times, October 27, 2000.
   6
       Of course, one could attempt to map vote shares into probabilities, but this relationship is likely to be non-
linear and time dependent; movements in vote shares imply small swings in probabilities early in the campaign
but the magnitude of such swings increases as election day approaches.
   7
     See also Forsythe et al (1992) and Rhode and Strumpf (2003) for a historical analysis of Presidential election
betting markets.



                                                           6
price demonstrates that this relationship is statistically significant, and this result is robust to
a specification in first diﬀerences.


3.2   Equity Returns

Equity prices are taken from the Dow Jones Interactive Service and are adjusted for dividends
and stock splits. To account for broader trends in equity markets during the sample period, I
follow event study methodology outlined by MacKinlay (1997) and use abnormal returns in the
analysis.   In order to calculate these abnormal returns, I first estimate the following market
model:


                                        rit = αi + β i rmt + εit                                (1)

where rit is the daily rate of return of firm i on day t. As a measure of broad market returns
(rmt ), I use the Wilshire 5000.       The market model is estimated between May 1, 1999 and
April 30, 2000, the one-year period preceding the opening of the Iowa Electronic Market on
                                                     b ) from firm-specific regressions, I then
                                                αi , β
May 1, 2000. Based on the estimated parameters (b      i

                                  rit ), which are net of market returns, as follows for the period
calculate daily abnormal returns (e
May 1, 2000 through November 6, 2000 as follows:


                                        reit = rit − (b    b rmt )
                                                      αi + β                                    (2)
                                                             i


These abnormal returns are then used in the empirical analysis below.


4     Analysis of campaign platforms

As measures of Bush and Gore platforms, I use reports from financial analysts associated with
Lehman Brothers, Prudential Securities, and International Strategy and Investment.           These
reports were produced during the campaign and identified firms likely to fare well under Bush
and Gore administrations. As shown in Table 2, these three reports list 41 firms in total favored
under Bush campaign platforms and 29 firms favored under Gore platforms. Key diﬀerences in
these campaign platforms are listed below. Supporting evidence for these diﬀerences, including



                                                    7
candidate press releases and quotes from the three Presidential debates, is provided in Appendix
A.
     1) Pharmaceuticals: Gore favored price controls and promoted generic pharmaceuticals,
while Bush defended large pharmaceuticals and opposed price controls.
     2) Defense: Bush favored large spending increases, while Gore focused on improving tech-
nology.
     3) Energy: Bush favored an expansion of domestic exploration of conventional energy
sources, such as oil in the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge (ANWR), while Gore promoted
the development of alternative energy sources.
     4) Microsoft case: While neither candidate committed to a specific policy regarding Mi-
crosoft, Bush was seen by most analysts as more pro-Microsoft than was Gore. In September
2001, following Bush’s inauguration, the Justice Department dropped eﬀorts initiated by the
Clinton Administration to break up Microsoft.
     5) Tobacco: Gore favored allowing the FDA to regulate nicotine as an addictive substance,
while Bush did not commit to a specific platform on this issue.
     While these 70 firms represent a small fraction of the roughly 6000 publicly traded firms
in the United States, these are some of the largest firms.    As of May 1, 2000, the first day
of the sample period, the aggregate market capitalization of these 70 firms totaled almost $3
trillion, representing almost one-fifth of the $16 trillion market capitalization of the Wilshire
5000, which includes nearly all publicly traded equities.
     As shown in Figure 3, the probability of Bush victory is positively correlated with the log
diﬀerence between Bush and Gore equity prices, especially in the three months preceding the
election, suggesting that policy platforms matter for firm profitability.    Perhaps somewhat
surprisingly, equity market returns appear to be a leading indicator of the price of a Bush
contract in the Iowa Electronic Market. The empirical analysis below will attempt to address
this issue by estimating specifications that include both leads and lags of the probability of a
Bush victory.


4.1    Empirical Model



                                                 8
Consider the following empirical model of firm i’s rate of return at time t:

              rit = αi + β 1 Bush-favoredi ∆ Pr(Bush)t + β 2 Gore-favoredi ∆ Pr(Bush)t + uit                   (3)

where Bush-favoredi indicates whether the firm is favored under the Bush platform, ∆ Pr(Bush)t
indicates the daily change in the probability of a Bush victory, uit captures unobserved factors
aﬀecting returns, and αi , β 1 , and β 2 represent parameters to be estimated. The fixed eﬀects
(αi ) allow for firm-specific trends in equity prices during the sample period, while β 1 and β 2
are the key parameters in the test for capitalization; these parameters can be interpreted as
follows:


                                                                          
                                                                           β              if Bush-favoredi = 1
                                                                              1
E[rit | Pr(Bush)t = 1, Pr(Bush)t−1         = 0]−E[rit |∆ Pr(Bush)t = 0] =
                                                                           β              if Bush-favoredi = 0
                                                                                       2
                                                                                                            (4)
Thus, the parameter β 1 can be interpreted as the percentage diﬀerence in a Bush-favored firm’s
market value under a Bush administration, relative to a counterfactual Gore administration,
while β 2 captures a similar percentage diﬀerence for Gore-favored firms.                       The capitalization
hypothesis predicts β 1 > 0 and β 2 < 0.



4.2       Baseline Results

As shown in column 1 of Table 3, the preliminary results demonstrate that, for this group of
politically-sensitive firms, campaign platforms matter for firm profitability, and this relationship
is both economically and statistically significant. Gore-favored firms are worth 6 percent less
under a Bush administration, relative to a friendlier Gore administration. Bush-favored firms,
by contrast, are worth 3 percent more under a friendlier Bush Administration. In monetary
terms, Bush’s victory over Gore transferred over $100 billion in market capitalization from
the 29 Gore-favored firms to the 41 Bush-favored firms.8 The diﬀerential return (β 1 − β 2 ),
as shown at the bottom of Table 3, is 9 percent and is statistically significant at conventional
   8
       As of May 1, 2000, the first day of the sample period, the 29 Gore-favored firms had a total market capital-
ization of $1.1 trillion, while the 41 Bush-favored firms had a $1.9 trillion capitalization.



                                                          9
levels; this statistic provides a somewhat weaker test of the capitalization hypothesis and is
more consistent with the evidence in Figure 3, which depicts returns for Bush-favored equities
relative to Gore-favored equities.
   As shown, the political measures have limited explanatory power as the R-squared is only
0.0196.     While each of the 133 events has only limited explanatory power, this limitation
must be balanced against two benefits.       First, as noted above, event studies in the existing
literature often measure only a lower bound on the value of favorable policies, while, by utilizing
probability-based measures, my study provides a point estimate. Second, the large number of
events provides additional statistical power.     The relative strengths and weaknesses of these
two approaches will be examined in more detail in Section 6, which, for comparison purposes,
provides a companion event study based upon the Florida recount.
   As was shown in Figure 3, daily movements in stock prices and candidate electoral prospects
tend to exhibit high levels of variance. In an attempt to smooth through some of this daily
variance, column 2 of Table 3 presents estimates using weekly data (Friday close to Friday
close).     As shown, the R-squared rises significantly from 0.02 to 0.13, and the estimated
value of favorable policies for Gore-favored firms rises substantially from 6 to 12 percent, and
this result is statistically significant at conventional levels. The estimated value of favorable
policies for Bush-favored firms also rises from 3 to 4 percent, although this result is statistically
insignificant, perhaps reflecting the loss in power from the reduced sample size. The diﬀerential
return also rises from 9 to 16 percent, a statistically significant result.


4.3       Robustness Checks

As a first robustness check, Table 4 splits the daily sample in a variety of ways according to
Iowa Electronic Market institutional details. The first institutional detail involves the size of
price changes. Large changes in prices of futures contracts may represent real political news,
while smaller changes may simply reflect noisy trading patterns. The first two columns support
this hypothesis: the sample of days with large changes (greater than one percentage point in
absolute value) in the price of a Bush contract supports a statistically significant result, while
the sample of days with small changes (less than or equal to one percentage point), by contrast,
provides statistically insignificant results for the Bush-favored firms. The second split of the

                                                 10
data involves trading volume. On thinly traded days, market prices may not incorporate all
relevant information from the campaign, and columns 3 and 4 partially support this hypothesis.
The high volume (at least 229 trades in Bush contracts) sample, unlike the low volume (less
than 229 trades in Bush contracts) sample, supports a statistically significant estimated value
of favorable policies for Gore-favored firms. For Bush-favored firms, by contrast, the result is
statistically insignificant in the high-volume sample but significant in the low-volume sample.
   As an additional robustness check, Table 5 presents the coeﬃcients on the contemporaneous
change in the probability of a Bush victory after controlling leads and lags in the change in the
probability of a Bush victory. As shown in column 1, after controlling for 4 lags in the change
in the probability of a Bush victory (coeﬃcients not reported), the contemporaneous results
are similar to those in the baseline results of Table 3. Incorporating a one-week lag into the
weekly specification (column 2) again produces results similar to those in the baseline analysis.
Columns 3 and 4 present results incorporating leads of changes in the probability of a Bush
victory. Again, the coeﬃcients on the contemporaneous change in the probability of a Bush
victory are similar to those in the baseline analysis.


4.4   Sector Analysis

The above analysis incorporated the implicit assumption that policy platforms were equally
important to all firms in the sample.      This section relaxes that assumption in a sector-by-
sector analysis. As shown in column 1 of Table 6, three out of the five sectors demonstrate
statistically significant results using daily data.   Alternative energy companies, which were
favored under Gore’s energy platforms, are worth 16 percent less under Bush, while conventional
energy companies appear to be politically insensitive.       Microsoft competitors are worth 15
percent more under a Bush administration; no relationship is detected for Microsoft itself,
perhaps reflecting the sample size of a single firm. Finally, tobacco firms are worth 13 percent
more under Bush, relative to Gore, who favored FDA regulation of nicotine as an addictive
drug. Column 2 presents results using weekly data. As shown, only one sector, Gore-favored
pharmaceuticals, is statistically significant, perhaps reflecting the loss in statistical power from
the reduced sample size.



                                                11
5        Campaign contribution analysis

I next provide an analysis of campaign contributions for this group of 70 politically sensitive
firms. During the 2000 campaign, corporations made both hard money contributions to candi-
dates, through their political action committees (PACs), and soft money contributions directly
from their treasuries to political parties. In the results presented below, I simply sum together
hard and soft money contributions.9                The remainder of this section describes in more detail
data on hard and soft money campaign contributions.


5.1        Hard money contributions

During the 2000 election cycle, corporate PACs were permitted to contribute up to $10,000 to
a given candidate. According to data from the Center For Responsive Politics (CRP), 17 out
of these 70 firms had political action committees that donated to the Bush campaign during
the 2000 election cycle.            As shown in Table 7, the average contribution across all firms was
around $1,000 with Bush-favored firms contributing slightly more.                        The Gore campaign, by
contrast, did not accept contributions from corporate political action committees.


5.2        Soft money contributions

While hard money contributions were capped at $10,000 per candidate during the 2000 election
cycle, corporations could make unlimited soft money contributions directly to political parties,
and these contributions have played an increasingly important role in recent Presidential elec-
tions.10       As shown in Table 7, contributions, as measured by the CRP, from these firms to
the RNC exceeded contributions to the DNC, and this eﬀect is particularly noticeable among
Bush-favored firms. Gore-favored firms, by contrast, gave similar amounts on average to the
RNC and DNC.
    9
        I have also estimated specifications that allow the coeﬃcient to vary across hard and soft money contributions.
The results were strongest for soft money contributions, an unsurprising result given their large magnitude,
relative to hard money contributions, as shown in Table 7.
  10
     According to an analysis of political television advertisements in the 75 largest markets in the United States
during the 2000 campaign season, the Republican party sponsored 52 percent of pro-Bush advertisements while
the Democratic Party sponsored 48 percent of pro-Gore advertisements (Wisconsin Advertising Project, 2002).



                                                           12
       While political parties are restricted by law from sponsoring “express advocacy” adver-
tisements, those designed to promote specific candidates, they may sponsor “issue advocacy”
advertisements.        In principle, issue advocacy is designed to promote specific policies but, in
practice, such advertisements can promote specific candidates.11              As shown in Appendix B,
the text of two “issue advocacy” advertisements from the 2000 campaign clearly demonstrates
that advertisements sponsored by political parties can promote specific candidates.
       The primary drawback of using soft money contributions to political parties is that not all
contributions to political parties were used to promote the two Presidential candidates.                  To
address, at least in part, this data limitation, I exclude those contributions to parties designed
to explicitly fund Congressional candidates.12


5.3       Empirical Model


Consider the following empirical model of firm i’s rate of return at time t:
                                       µ Bush ¶                     µ Gore ¶
                                        Ci                            Ci
            rit = αi + β 1 ∆ Pr(Bush)t           + β 2 ∆ Pr(Bush)t           + uit                       (5)
                                        Vit−1                         Vit−1

where CiBush and CiGore represent firm i’s campaign contribution to the two candidates and Vit−1

represents yesterday’s market capitalization and scales campaign contributions according to firm
size. Multiplying both sides of this expression by Vit−1 and noting that rit = (Vit −Vit−1 )/Vit−1 ,
one can derive the following expressions:


                          ∂E[Vit − Vit−1 | Pr(Bush)t = 1, Pr(Bush)t−1 = 0]
                                                                           = β1                          (6)
                                               ∂CiBush

                          ∂E[Vit − Vit−1 | Pr(Bush)t = 1, Pr(Bush)t−1 = 0]
                                                                           = β2                          (7)
                                               ∂CiGore
  11
       Advertisements are considered issue advocacy so long as they do not contain what have become known as
magic words, which include “vote for”, “vote against”, “support” or “defeat”.
 12
    More specifically, I include only contributions from corporations to the Democratic National Committee
(DNC) and the Republican National Committee (RNC). I thus exclude soft money contributions to party com-
mittees established to fund campaigns of Congressional candidates, including the National Republican Congres-
sional Committee (NRCC), National Republican Senatorial Committee (NRSC), Democratic Senatorial Cam-
paign Committee (DSCC), and the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee (DCCC).


                                                      13
Thus, the parameter β 1 captures the increase in market capitalization associated with an extra

dollar in contributions to Bush in the event of a Bush victory.      The parameter β 2 captures
a similar relationship associated with contributions to Gore.      The capitalization hypothesis
predicts β 1 > 0 and β 2 < 0.
    One caveat of this analysis involves motives for contributing to candidates. In particular,
this analysis cannot distinguish between the two motives identified by Grossman and Help-
man (1996): electoral motives (contributing in order to alter election outcomes) and influence
motives (contributing in order to influence campaign platforms).        The latter motive would
be associated with a causal interpretation of campaign contributions, while, under the former
motive, firms contribute to candidates with platforms favorable to their business interests, and
the relationship is not necessarily causal.    Under either motive, however, campaign contri-
butions are positively correlated with the benefits of favorable policy platforms.      Campaign
contributions can thus be considered an alternative measure of the benefits firms receive from
policy platforms. These contributions, although a less direct measure of policy platforms than
that used in the baseline analysis, are a continuous measure and thus allow for heterogeneity
in political sensitivity across firms.
    As shown in column 1 of Table 8, contributions to Gore, conditional on contributions to
Bush, are associated with a reduction in market value under a Bush administration in a statis-
tically and economically significant manner. Conversely, contributions to Bush are associated
with a significant increase in market value under a Bush administration. The weekly results, as
shown in column 2, are statistically insignificant, perhaps reflecting the loss in power associated
with the reduced sample size.


6    Florida recount analysis

This section provides a companion event study based upon the Florida recount. This analysis
serves two purposes.     First, it provides a cross validation of the baseline results, which used
probabilities of candidate electoral success as implied by prices from the Iowa electronic market.
Second, it allows for a comparison with event studies in the existing literature by highlighting


                                                14
the relative advantages and disadvantages of the two approaches.
       Following the November 7 election, the state of Florida, which was pivotal in the electoral
college, was required by state law to conduct a recount of its initial results, which had provided
Bush with a slim lead.           On November 26, after several weeks of legal wrangling over the
appropriate scope of the recount, Florida’s Secretary of State Katherine Harris certified Bush
the winner by a margin of 537 votes.               On the following day, Gore oﬃcially contested the
election results. On December 8, after several more weeks of legal and political developments,
the Florida Supreme Court ordered further recounts.                 However, on the next day, Saturday,
December 9, the U.S. Supreme Court halted further recounting and over-ruled the Florida
Supreme Court’s decision on December 12.                  The following evening, December 13, witnessed
the concession of Gore and the declaration of victory by Bush.
       For the purposes of this analysis, the Florida recount is considered as a single event, which
is assumed to begin on November 8, the day after the election, and to end on December 14, the
day following Gore’s concession, which occurred after the close of markets on December 13.13
Using the sample of 70 firms described in the baseline analysis above, a policy platform-based
model, given below, is estimated:

                               ri = β 1 Bush-favoredi + β 2 Gore-favoredi + ui                               (8)

       As shown in Table 9, rates of returns for Bush-favored firms exceeded those of Gore-favored
firms by about 4 percent, although this result is statistically insignificant.                 Regarding the
magnitude, this estimate of the value of favorable policy platforms is smaller than are those in
the baseline estimates, suggesting that markets had already factored in a Bush victory.
       In addition, an event study using campaign contributions to the candidates is provided.
The following model is estimated:


                                                         CiBush     C Gore
                                       rit = γ 0 + γ 1          + γ2 i                                       (9)
                                                         Vit−1      Vit−1
  13
       Of course, one could analyze legal and developments during the recount as separate events. Unfortunately,
it is diﬃcult to identify days which were favorable for Gore. The most promising announcement for Gore, the
Friday, December 8 order for further recounts, was issued after the close of equity markets, and the U.S. Supreme
Court halted further recounting before markets opened again on Monday, December 11.



                                                          15
As shown in the second column of Table 9, contributions to Gore were associated with lower re-
turns, a statistically significant relationship. No statistically significant relationship is detected
for contributions to Bush. Again, these relationships are somewhat weaker in magnitude than
are those in the baseline analysis.


7    Conclusion

Using evidence from the Bush / Gore 2000 Presidential Election, this paper has demonstrated
that policy platforms are capitalized into equity prices for a sample of 70 politically sensitive
firms in the United States. According to the daily platform-based estimates, favorable public
policies account for 3-6 percent of a firm’s total value.      The most sensitive sectors include
tobacco, worth 13 percent more under Bush, Microsoft competitors, worth 15 percent less
under Bush, and alternative energy companies, worth 16 percent less under Bush. An analysis
of campaign contributions supports the baseline results. These results are then compared with
results from a more traditional event study based upon the Florida recount.
    These results have several implications for the empirical literatures discussed above. While
several studies have found that political developments during negotiations over tax legislation
have expected eﬀects on equity prices, my findings suggest that policies may be reflected in
equity prices during the electoral process, which occurs long before the legislative enactment
of policies.   The second literature discussed above examines the response of equity prices to
broader political events; my study demonstrates that such event analyses may only measure
a lower bound on the value of favorable policies to firms and thus tend to understate the
relationship between economic and political factors. Regarding the literature on the reflection
of news in equity prices, while the electoral measures do not fully explain the variation in equity
returns, my results demonstrate that news is eﬃciently incorporated into equity prices, and this
relationship is economically and statistically significant. Finally, these results suggest that the
most significant economic impact of elections may be on the distribution of resources across
industries rather than upon aggregate measures of inflation and unemployment.




                                                 16
A        Evidence on Campaign platforms14

A.1        Pharmaceuticals

         Q: What about expensive prescription drugs?

         BUSH: Step one is to reform the Medicare system. I want to call upon Republicans and

         Democrats to take care of a senior prescription drug program. I think it’s important to

         have what’s called Immediate Helping Hand, which is direct money to states so seniors

         don’t have to chose between food and medicine.

         GORE: I have never been afraid to take on the big drug companies. They are now spending

         more money on advertising than they are on research. They’re trying to artificially extend

         the monopoly so they can keep charging high prices. I want to streamline the approval of

         generic drugs so that we bring the price down. I proposed a prescription drug benefit under

         Medicare. You pick your own doctor and the doctor chooses the prescription and nobody

         can overrule your doctor. You go to your own pharmacy and Medicare pays half. If you’re

         poor, they pay all of it. If you have extraordinarily high costs, then they pay all over $4,000

         out of pocket.

         Source: St. Louis debate Oct 17, 2000


         As a Congressman, Al Gore fought the pharmaceutical industry to bring lower-cost generic

         drugs to market faster. Now, he has issued a new plan to make high-cost prescription drugs

         more aﬀordable for those who rely on them. As President, Gore will oppose all unwar-

         ranted patent extensions [that keep generics oﬀ the market]. He would vigorously enforce

         laws against collusion to prop up artificially high prices for drugs; and push legislation to

         discourage delaying the approval of generic drugs.

         Source: Press Release Mar 31, 2000


A.2        Defense

         Saying we have “asked our servicemen and women to do too much with too little,” Bush
  14
       All of the information in Appendix A was taken from the website www.issues-2002.org (accessed January
26, 2003).


                                                       17
      today promoted his agenda for rebuilding America’s military by improving troop morale and

      investing in research and development. “Even the highest morale is eventually undermined

      by back-to-back deployments, poor pay, shortages of spare parts and equipment, and rapidly

      declining readiness. I make this pledge to our men and women in arms: As President, I

      will preserve American power for American interests. And I will treat American soldiers

      with the dignity and respect they have earned.” To improve America’s military, Governor

      Bush will: Improve troop morale [via] better pay, better treatment and better training.

      [Bush would add] a billion dollars in salary increases, and renovate military housing that is

      sub-standard. Invest in research and development by at least $20 billion over the next five

      years, 20% [of which] must be spent for purchasing next generation weapons.

      Source: Press Release, “Improving Troop Morale” May 31, 2000

      Since World War II, there have been several build-downs that have strained America military

      readiness. In contrast, the current Administration’s handling of the post-Cold War build-

      down has yielded a force that while smaller, is more agile, more powerful, and more eﬀective

      at countering new strategic threats. The build-down can now be matched by a careful

      investment in further transforming the forces and endowing them with the cutting edge

      technology they will need to succeed in their missions.

      Source: AlGore2000.com Press Release, “Strengthening” May 27, 2000


A.3    Energy

      GORE: Governor Bush is proposing to open up some of our most precious environmental

      treasures, like the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge, to the big oil companies to go in and

      start producing oil there. I think that is the wrong choice. It would only give us a few

      months worth of oil, and the oil wouldn’t start flowing for many years into the future. And

      I don’t think it’s a fair price to pay, to destroy precious parts of America’s environment.

      BUSH: We need an active exploration program in America. The only way to become less

      dependent on foreign sources of crude oil is to explore at home. And you bet I want to

      open up a small part of Alaska because when that field is online, it will produce a million

      barrels a day. Today we import a million barrels from Saddam Hussein. I would rather


                                                   18
      that a million come from our own hemisphere, our own country, as opposed from Saddam

      Hussein.

      Source: Presidential debate, Boston MA Oct 3, 2000




      Q: What is your energy policy?

      GORE [to Bush]: We have to free ourselves from big oil, from OPEC. We have to give

      new incentives for the development of resources, like deep gas in the western Gulf, but also

      renewable sources of energy and domestic sources that are cleaner and better. I’m proposing

      a plan that will give tax incentives for the rapid development of new kinds of cars, trucks,

      buses, factories, boilers, and furnaces that don’t have as much pollution.

      BUSH: I want to build pipelines to move natural gas. I want to develop coal resources. It’s

      an issue I know a lot about. I was a small oil person for a while. This is an administration

      that’s had no plan. And now, the results of having no plan have caught up with America.

      We’ve got abundant supplies of energy here, and we better start exploring it. There’s an

      interesting issue up in the Northwest, as well. And that is whether or not we remove dams

      that propose hydroelectric energy. I’m against removing dams in the Northwest.

      Source: Presidential debate, Boston MA Oct 3, 2000


A.4    Microsoft Case


      While Gore has broken ranks with the president on several recent occasions, he and President

      Clinton have remained quiet on Microsoft. In November, at Microsoft headquarters, Gore

      said stern antitrust action sometimes is needed to break up “unhealthy concentrations of

      power” that snuﬀs out competition. Gore stressed, however, that he was speaking only of

      his belief in the “fundamental American value” of making sure that neither heavy-handed

      government for unfair business practices quash competition.

      Source: Associated Press Apr 9, 2000




                                                  19
      The government won the first round of the antitrust case against Microsoft, but with years

      of legal appeals anticipated, who the new president is could change how the case is resolved.

      Bush has signaled he would be more friendly to the company.

      A law professor said, “Could the outcome of the election have an impact on the case? Yes.

      But less because of control over the Justice Dept. and more because of control over the

      Supreme Court.” Judge Jackson could send the case directly to the Supreme Court.

      Source: Associated Press Apr 9, 2000


A.5    Tobacco

      There is no greater threat to the health and safety of our children than tobacco. Tobacco

      hooks 3,000 teens every day, and more than 1,000 will die from it. If our children don’t start

      smoking by the time they turn 19, they’re unlikely to start at all. The President’s anti-

      tobacco plan will reduce teen smoking by 42% over the next five years. I call on Congress

      to pass comprehensive, bipartisan anti-tobacco legislation — and to do it now.

      Source: Al Gore speech to National PTA, Jun 14, 1999


      Gore said Congress should give the FDA power to regulate nicotine as an addictive drug.

      Gore has become a passionate opponent of the tobacco industry, but once bragged of working

      in tobacco fields on his family’s farm and until 1990 accepted tobacco [PAC money]. In 1996,

      he moved many with an account of the death of his sister from lung cancer. Today Gore

      accused the cigarette companies of recruiting teenagers as “replacement smokers” for the

      400,000 people who die each year of smoking-related illnesses.

      Source: NyTimes.com Mar 22, 2000


      Bush, in a statement issued by his campaign headquarters, called on Congress and state

      legislatures to pass laws to restrict access to tobacco by minors. Texas, he said, had already

      passed some of the toughest such laws in the nation.

      Bush did not address the question that faced the Supreme Court today, whether the FDA

      should be empowered to regulate tobacco as a harmful and addictive drug. A spokeswoman

      said the governor had never answered that question and was not prepared to do so today.

                                                   20
The Bush statement said the governor “believes Congress should pass tough laws to keep

tobacco out of the hands of kids similar to strict anti-teen smoking laws he advocated and

signed in Texas.”

Texas imposes fines on retailers who sell cigarettes to minors, prohibits cigarette vending

machines in areas accessible to children and restricts tobacco advertising within 1,000 feet

of schools and churches.

Source: NyTimes.com Mar 22, 2000




                                            21
B        Text of advertisements sponsored by political parties

Below is the text of “Really”, a television advertisement produced by the Republican National Commit-

tee.


         Woman: “There’s Al Gore reinventing himself on television again. Like I’m not going to

         notice. Who’s he gonna be today? The Al Gore who raises campaign money at a Buddhist

         temple? Or the one who now promises campaign finance reform? Really. Al Gore . . .

         claiming credit for things he didn’t even do.”

         Gore: “I took the initiative in creating the Internet.”

         Woman: “Yeah and I invented the remote control, too. Another round of this, and I’ll sell

         my television.”15




       Below is the text of “Oil and Water”, a television advertisement produced by the Democratic National

Committee:


         Narrator: “They say oil and water don’t mix. Nowhere is that more true than in Texas.

         After 17 years in the oil business, George W. Bush ran for governor, then passed laws to

         let big polluters regulate themselves.     Today, Texas is number three in water pollution;

         number one in air pollution. For over 20 years, Al Gore has fought against polluters; and

         helped pass laws to clean up our air and water. America’s environment is cleaner now. Do

         we really want it to look like Texas?”16




  15
       Washington Post, August 31, 2000.
  16
       Washington Post, October 10, 2000.

                                                       22
References

 [1] Alberto Alesina. Macroeconomic policy in a two-party system as a repeated game. Quar-
    terly Journal of Economics, 102:651—678, 1987.

 [2] Alberto Alesina. Credibility and political convergence in a two-party system with rational
    voters. American Economic Review, 78:796—805, 1988.

 [3] Alberto Alesina and Howard Rosenthal. Partisan Politics, Divided Government, and the
    Economy. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1995.

 [4] Joyce Berg, Robert Forsythe, Forrest Nelson, and Thomas Rietz. Results from a dozen
    years of election futures markets research. In Charlie Plott and Vernon Smith, editors,
    Handbook of Experimental Economics Results. 2001.

 [5] David Cutler. Tax reform and the stock market: An asset price approach. American
    Economic Review, 78, 1988.

 [6] David Cutler, James Poterba, and Lawrence Summers. What moves stock prices. Journal
    of Portfolio Management, 15, 1988.

 [7] Douglas Elmendorf, Mary Hirschfeld, and David Weil. The eﬀect of news on bond prices:
    Evidence from the united kingdom, 1900-1920. Review of Economics and Statistics, 78,
    1996.

 [8] Raymond Fisman. Estimating the value of political connections. American Economic
    Review, 91, 2001.

 [9] Robert Forsythe, Forrest Nelson, George Neumann, and Janck Wright. Anatomy of an
    experimental stock market. American Economic Review, 82, 1992.

[10] Gene Grossman and Elhanan Helpman. Electoral competition and special interest politics.
    Review of Economic Studies, 63:265—286, 1996.

[11] Michael Herron, James Lavin, Donald Cram, and Jay Silver. Measurement of political
    eﬀects in the united states economy: A study of the 1992 presidential election. Economics
    and Politics, 31, 1999.

                                              23
[12] Seema Jayachandran. The jeﬀords eﬀect. working paper. 2002.

[13] Mark Lang and Douglas Shackleford. Capitalization of capital gains taxes: Evidence from
    stock price reactions to the 1997 rate reduction. Journal of Public Economics, 69, 2000.

[14] Andrew Leigh, Justin Wolfers, and Eric Zitzewitz. What do financial markets think of war
    in iraq. nber working paper 9587. 2003.

[15] A. Craig MacKinlay. Event studies in economics and finance. Journal of Economic Liter-
    ature, 35, 1997.

[16] Andrea Mattozzi. Policy uncertainty, electoral securities, and redistribution. 2003.

[17] Dennis Mueller. Public Choice III. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 2003.

[18] David Musto and Bilge Yilmaz. Trading and voting. Journal of Political Economy, 111,
    2003.

[19] Wisconsin Advertising Project. Analysis of the 2000 Elections. 2002.

[20] Paul Rhode and Koleman Strumpf. Historical presidential betting markets. working paper.
    2003.

[21] Todd Sinai and Joseph Gyourko. The asset price incidence of capital gains taxes: Evidence
    from the taxpayer relief act of 1997 and publicly-traded real estate firms. Journal of Public
    Economics, forthcoming, 2003.

[22] Joel Slemrod and Timothy Greimel. Did steve forbes scare the us municipal bond market.
    Journal of Public Economics, 74:81—96, 1999.




                                              24
                                  Pr(Gore)                                                           Pr(Bush)

                 .8
                                                                                                                                                         .
                                                                                                                                                          .
                                                                                                                                                    .
                                                                                                                                                     .
                                                                                                                                                  ..
                .65                                                                                                                        .
                                                                                                                                                  .
                                                                                                                                             ..
                                                                                              .                                               .
                                   . .                                                    DNC. .
                                                                                                                                             .
Daily Data




                                                               . ... ...       .     .. .  ..   . .. .                                     .
                                  . .. .                    ..                   ... . ..        . ..                                   ..
                                                                                                                                        D3
                 .5   ... .... ... . .... ..... .. .. .. ...            .. .... ..RNC...               .. .
                         ..                       ... .
                                                                                                           .                           . .
                                                                                                                                      .
                                                                                                            .. .           ..
                                                                                                                ...      .. . . D2 ..
                                                                                                                        . D1
                                                                                                                   . .         .
                .35                                                                                                  ..
                                                                                                                    .            .
                                                                                                                                .



                 .2
                 01may2000                             01jul2000                               01sep2000                               01nov2000
                                                                                  date

                                  Pr(Gore)                                                           Pr(Bush)

                 .8




                .65
Weekly Data




                 .5




                .35




                 .2
                 01may2000                              01jul2000                                01sep2000                             01nov2000
                                                                                  date
              Figure 1: Electoral Probabilities from the Iowa Electronic Market
             iem(bush)                      gallup(bush)

 .8




.65




 .5




.35




 .2
 07sep2000               01oct2000                         01nov2000
                                     date
Figure 2: Gallup tracking poll versus Iowa Electronic Market
                                Log difference in price              Pr(Bus h)

Daily Data     .19422                                                                        .759




              .062432                                                                        .301
                   01may2 000             01jul2000              01sep2000       01nov2000
                                                          date

                                Log difference in price              Pr(Bus h)

              .185219                                                                        .681
Weekly Data




              .078167                                                                        .322
                   01may2 000             01jul2 000             01sep2000       01nov2000
                                                          date
                        Figure 3: Bush and Gore average stock prices
                                                                    Table 1
                                      Iowa Electronic Market and Gallup Tracking Poll


                                                                      (1)                                               (2)
Specification                                                       Levels                                      First differences
constant                                                     -0.7788**                                         0.0043
                                                             (0.1835)                                          (0.0041)
Bush share of two-party vote                                 2.4958**                                          0.5662**
in Gallup poll                                               (0.3629)                                          (0.2221)
Obs                                                          61                                                60
R-squared                                                    0.4450                                            0.1008


Notes: dependent variable is price of IEM Bush contract, standard errors in parentheses, ** denotes significance at 95% level, * at 90% level
                              Table 2a: Firms Favored Under Bush Platform

Firm                                  Ticker   Lehman     Prudential   ISI Group   Sector
Aetna                                 AET                              yes
Alliance Capital Management           AC                  yes
Ambac Financial Group                 ABK                 yes
Baker Hughes                          BHI                 yes                      Energy
Boeing                                BA                               yes         Defense
BP Amoco                              BP                  yes          yes         Energy
Bristol Meyers Squibb                 BMY      yes                     yes         Pharmaceuticals
Charles Schwab                        SCH                 yes
Chevron                               CVX      yes                                 Energy
El Paso Energy                        EPG                 yes                      Energy
Eli Lilly                             LLY      yes                     yes         Pharmaceuticals
Enron                                 ENRN     yes                                 Energy
Genentech                             DNA      yes
General Dynamics                      GD                  yes          yes         Defense
Georgia-Pacific Group                 GP                  yes                      Energy
Goldman Sachs Group                   GS                  yes
Household International               HI                  yes
Lockheed Martin                       LMT      yes        yes          yes         Defense
Loews                                 LTR                              yes         Tobacco
MBIA                                  MBI                 yes
Merck                                 MRK                 yes                      Pharmaceuticals
Microsoft                             MSFT     yes        yes          yes         Microsoft case
Nabors Industry                       NBR                 yes                      Energy
Nationwide Financial                  NFS                 yes
Northrop Grumman                      NOC                 yes                      Defense
Pfizer                                PFE                 yes          yes         Pharmaceuticals
Pharmacia                             PHA                              yes         Pharmaceuticals
Philip Morris                         MO                  yes          yes         Tobacco
Providian Financial                   PVN                 yes
Raytheon                              RTN                              yes         Defense
RJR Tobacco Holdings                  RJR                              yes         Tobacco
SBC Communications                    SBC      yes
Schering Plough                       SGP                              yes         Pharmaceuticals
SLM Holding                           SLM                 yes          yes
State Street                          STT                 yes
T.Rowe Price Associates               TROW                yes          yes
United Health Group                   UNH                 yes          yes
Verizon                               VZ       yes
WebMD                                 HLTH     yes
Wellpoint Health Networks             WLP                 yes
Weyerhaeuser                          WY                  yes          yes         Energy
                             Table 2b: Firms Favored Under Gore Platform

Firm                                    Ticker   Lehman   Prudential   ISI Group   Sector
America Online                          AOL               yes          yes         Microsoft case
American General Corporation            AGC               yes
American International Group            AIG               yes
Archer Daniels Midland                  ADM               yes
AT&T                                    T        yes
AXA Financial                           AXF               yes
Bank One                                ONE               yes
Caremark RX                             CMX                            yes         Pharmaceuticals
Deere                                   DE                yes
Exodus Communications                   EXDSQ    yes
Express Scripts                         ESRX                           yes         Pharmaceuticals
Fannie Mae                              FNM      yes      yes          yes
Fleet Boston Financial                  FBF               yes
Freddie Mac                             FRE      yes      yes          yes
H&R Block                               HRB               yes
Lincoln National                        LNC               yes
Linux                                   LNUX                           yes         Microsoft case
Marsh & Mclennan                        MMC               yes
Oracle                                  ORCL     yes                               Microsoft case
Plug Power                              PLUG     yes                               Energy
Roy F. Weston                           WSTNA             yes                      Energy
Sevenson Environmental                  SEVN              yes          yes         Energy
Sun Microsystems                        SUNW     yes      yes          yes         Microsoft case
Syntroleum                              SYNM                           yes         Energy
TEVA Pharmaceutical                     TEVA     yes                               Pharmaceuticals
The Chubb Corporation                   CB                yes
The Hartford Financial Services Group   HIG               yes
Watson Phamaceutical                    WPI      yes                               Pharmaceuticals
                                                                   Table 3
                                  Capitalization of Policy Platforms: Baseline Estimates


                                                                     (1)                                              (2)
Specification                                                      Daily                                           Weekly
∆Pr(Bush)*Gore-favored                                    -0.0554**                                        -0.1197**
                                                          (0.0210)                                         (0.0468)
∆Pr(Bush)*Bush-favored                                    0.0308*                                          0.0410
                                                          (0.0177)                                         (0.0394)
Obs                                                       9310                                             1820
R-squared                                                 0.0196                                           0.1320
Equity fixed effects                                      yes                                              yes
Differential return                                       0.0862**                                         0.1607**


Notes: dependent variable is abnormal rate of return, standard errors in parentheses, ** denotes significance at 95% level, * at 90% level
The coefficient reported in the specification with lags is the cumulative effect of change in Pr(Bush).
                                                                   Table 4
                      Capitalization of Policy Platforms: Robustness Checks with Daily Data


                                                    (1)                       (2)                       (3)                        (4)
Subsample                                  ∆Pr(Bush) large           ∆Pr(Bush) small             High volume                Low volume
∆Pr(Bush)*Gore-favored                     -0.0569**                 -0.2515*                   -0.0532**                 -0.0805
                                           (0.0220)                  (0.1481)                   (0.0214)                  (0.0648)
∆Pr(Bush)*Bush-favored                     0.0328*                   -0.1249                    0.0184                    0.1134**
                                           (0.0185)                  (0.1246)                   (0.0180)                  (0.0545)
∆Gallup(Bush)*Gore-favored


∆Gallup(Bush)*Bush-favored


Obs                                        4690                      4620                       4690                      4620
R-squared                                  0.0190                    0.0315                     0.0272                    0.0190
Equity fixed effects                       yes                       yes                        yes                       yes
Differential return                        0.0897**                  0.1266                     0.0715**                  0.1939**


Notes: dependent variable is abnormal rate of return, standard errors in parentheses, ** denotes significance at 95% level, * at 90% level
                                                                    Table 5
        Capitalization of Policy Platforms: Robustness Checks Controlling for IEM Leads and Lags


                                                        (1)                       (2)                       (3)                       (4)
Specification                                    Daily (4 lags)           Weekly (1 lag)            Daily (4 leads)          Weekly (1 lead)
∆Pr(Bush)*Gore-favored                            -0.0586**                 -0.1255**                 -0.0550**                 -0.0889*
                                                  (0.0210)                  (0.0472)                  (0.0222)                  (0.0502)
∆Pr(Bush)*Bush-favored                            0.0351**                  0.0401                    0.0297                    0.0490
                                                  (0.0177)                  (0.0397)                  (0.0186)                  (0.0422)
Obs                                               9030                      1750                      9030                      1750
R-squared                                         0.0242                    0.1330                    0.0229                    0.1295
Equity fixed effects                              yes                       yes                       yes                       yes
Differential return                               0.0938**                  0.1656**                  0.0848**                  0.1379**


Notes: dependent variable is abnormal rate of return, standard errors in parentheses, ** denotes significance at 95% level, * at 90% level
The coefficient reported is the contemporaneous effect of change in Pr(Bush).
            Table 6: Capitalization of Policy Platforms: Sector Analysis

                                             (1)                      (2)
Specification                               Daily                   Weekly

                              Panel A: Pharmaceutical
∆Pr(Bush)*Gore-favored                 0.0145                   -0.2818**
                                       (0.0536)                 (0.1160)
∆Pr(Bush)*Bush-favored                 0.0303                   0.0861
                                       (0.0438)                 (0.0947)
Differential return                    0.0159                   0.3679**

                                 Panel B: Defense
∆Pr(Bush)*Bush-favored                 0.0526                   0.0184
                                       (0.0357)                 (0.0873)

                                  Panel C: Energy
∆Pr(Bush)*Gore-favored                 -0.1641**                -0.0756
                                       (0.0594)                 (0.1196)
∆Pr(Bush)*Bush-favored                 0.0094                   0.0734
                                       (0.0470)                 (0.0945)
Differential return                    0.1736**                 0.1490

                       Panel D: Microsoft versus Competitors
∆Pr(Bush)*Gore-favored                 -0.1480*                 0.0427
                                       (0.0782)                 (0.1761)
∆Pr(Bush)*Bush-favored                 -0.0114                  0.2192
                                       (0.1564)                 (0.3523)
Differential return                    0.1366                   0.1765

                                 Panel E: Tobacco
∆Pr(Bush)*Bush-favored                 0.1310**                 0.0731
                                       (0.0576)                 (0.1465)
               Table 7: Average Campaign Contributions by Favored Candidate

          Variable                       Description               Bush-favored   Gore-favored


                             Firm Contributions to RNC plus PAC
Contributions to Bush                                                 $163,667        $69,480
                             contributions to candidate




Contributions to Gore        Firm Contributions to DNC                 $56,659        $56,345




Soft Contributions to Bush   Firm Contributions to RNC                $162,549        $68,628




Soft Contributions to Gore   Firm Contributions to DNC                 $56,659        $56,344




Hard Contributions to Bush   Firm PAC contributions to candidate        $1,118           $852




Hard Contributions to Gore   Firm PAC contributions to candidate            $0             $0
                                                                    Table 8
                                                 Campaign Contribution Analysis


                                                                    (1)                                               (2)
Frequency                                                         Daily                                            Weekly
∆Pr(Bush)*CGore / Vt-1                                  -2099.03**                                         975.82
                                                        (815.58)                                           (1801.65)
                  Bush
∆Pr(Bush)*C              / Vt-1                         1934.97*                                           1778.58
                                                        (1110.26)                                          (2447.30)
Obs                                                     9310                                               1820
R-squared                                               0.0192                                             0.1294
Equity fixed effects                                    yes                                                yes
Differential return                                     4034.00**                                          802.76


Notes: dependent variable is abnormal rate of return, standard errors in parentheses, ** denotes significance at 95% level, * at 90% level

The coefficient reported in the specification with lags is the cumulative effect of change in Pr(Bush).
                                                                         Table 9
                                 Florida Recount Event Study: November 8 through December 14, 2000


                                                                              (1)                                        (2)
                                                                            OLS                                         OLS
             Gore-favored                                             -0.0152
                                                                      (0.0255)
             Bush-favored                                             0.0235
                                                                      (0.0214)
                 Gore
             C          / Vt-1                                                                                   -1980.43*
                                                                                                                 (1168.58)
             CBush / Vt-1                                                                                        1019.25
                                                                                                                 (1563.11)
             Obs                                                      70                                         70
             R-squared                                                0.0225                                     0.0444
             Equity fixed effects                                     no                                         no
             Differential return                                      0.0387                                     2999.68


Notes: dependent variable is abnormal rate of return, standard errors in parentheses, ** denotes significance at 95% level, * at 90% level
