                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         MINIMUM ASSET REQUIREMENTS AND
                         COMPULSORY LIABILITY INSURANCE
                   AS SOLUTIONS TO THE JUDGMENT-PROOF PROBLEM

                                            Steven Shavell

                                         Working Paper 10341
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w10341


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      March 2004




Samuel R. Rosenthal Professor of Law and Economics, Harvard Law School, and Research Associate,
National Bureau of Economic Research. I thank Louis Kaplow for comments, Sergey Lagodinsky, Frederick
Pollock III, and Ziv Preis for research assistance, and the John M. Olin Center for Law, Economics, and
Business at Harvard Law School for research support. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2004 by Steven Shavell. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Minimum Asset Requirements and Compulsory Liability Insurance As Solutions to the
Judgment-Proof Problem
Steven Shavell
NBER Working Paper No. 10341
March 2004
JEL No. D00, K13, K20, L5

                                            ABSTRACT

Minimum asset and liability insurance requirements must often be met in order for parties to

participate in potentially harmful activities. Such financial responsibility requirements may improve

parties’ decisions whether to engage in harmful activities and, if so, their efforts to reduce risk.

However, the requirements may undesirably prevent some parties with low assets from engaging

in activities. Liability insurance requirements tend to improve parties’ incentives to reduce risk when

insurers can observe levels of care, but dilute incentives to reduce risk when insurers cannot observe

levels of care. In the latter case, compulsory liability insurance may be inferior to minimum asset

requirements.

Steven Shavell
Harvard Law School
1575 Massachusetts Avenue
Hauser Hall 508
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
shavell@law.harvard.edu
                 Minimum Asset Requirements and Compulsory Liability Insurance
                         As Solutions to the Judgment-Proof Problem

                                                     Steven Shavell

                                       © 2004. Steven Shavell. All rights reserved.

1. Introduction

           Requirements that parties have assets or liability insurance coverage of at least a

prescribed magnitude in order to participate in an activity are frequently imposed. Individuals

must sometimes satisfy such financial responsibility requirements, a notable example concerning

driving, and business entities often face these requirements, for instance concerning

transportation of hazardous wastes, construction, and banking operations.1

           In this article, a principal rationale for minimum asset and liability insurance

requirements is considered: Potential injurers may make superior decisions whether to engage in

an activity and, if they do so, may have stronger incentives to reduce risk, when they have at

stake at least the required level of assets and/or liability insurance coverage if they are sued for

causing harm.2

           In section 2 of the article, asset requirements are investigated in the absence of liability

insurance. A standard model is studied in which individuals make two choices: whether to

engage in a potentially harmful activity; and if so, how much care to exercise to reduce the risk

of harm. 3 Individuals are assumed to be held liable for harm caused. If they have assets at least


1
 On driving, see Jerry 1996, pp. 859-63; on hazardous wastes, see for example FLA. STAT. Ch. 403.724 (2002); on
construction, see for example WIS. ADMIN. CODE §5.31 (2002); and on banking, see Jackson and Symons 1999, pp.
184-207.
2
  Another rationale for asset and liability insurance requirements is to increase victims’ ability to obtain compensation
through suit for their losses; this rationale is mentioned in the concluding section.
3
    The parties in the model are individuals, as opposed to firms, but many (not all) of the conclusions should carry

                                                              1
equal to the harm that they might create, both of their incentives will be optimal. They will

engage in the activity if and only if their benefits would exceed the expected harm caused; and if

they engage in the activity, they will choose the optimal level of care. If individuals’ assets are

less than the potential harm, however, they will engage too often in the harmful activity, as they

will not then face (effective) expected liability equal to the expected harm, and they will

similarly lack incentives to take optimal care.

           A minimum asset requirement alleviates the problem that individuals might engage in the

activity too often. However, an asset requirement has a disadvantageous effect: Some of the

individuals with assets below the required level ought to engage in the activity, because the

benefits they would obtain exceed the expected harm they would cause, even though this

expected harm is higher than is optimal due to their dulled incentives to take care. The optimal

asset requirement reflects the tradeoff between this disadvantageous effect and its advantages.

           In section 3 of the article, compulsory liability insurance is added to the analysis. The

usual rule of compulsory liability insurance is studied: in order to engage in an activity, parties

must purchase liability insurance coverage in a stipulated amount or else have assets sufficient to

make up any shortfall between their coverage and that amount.4 The optimal liability insurance

requirement is considered, and liability insurance requirements are compared to pure asset

requirements.

           Liability insurance requirements affect individuals’ decisions about engaging in the

potentially harmful activity. A party with assets less than the possible harm can pay at most his


over to a model with firms, as discussed in the concluding section.
4
    Most of the statutes that I have examined follow essentially this rule; see, for example, FLA. STAT. Ch. 403.724

                                                            2
assets and thus faces a commensurately low expected liability. But if the party must purchase

liability insurance in order to engage in the activity, he will bear a higher expected liability. A

person with assets of $100,000 who might cause harm of $1,000,000 with a probability of 1%

faces an expected liability of only $1,000 if he has no liability insurance, whereas if he is led to

purchase coverage of, say, $500,000, he will have to pay (and can afford to pay) a premium of

$5,000. That liability insurance requirements result in individuals with low assets paying for a

higher fraction of the expected harm, in the form of insurance premiums, than they otherwise

would bear may improve their decisions whether to participate in the activity. However, some

individuals may not have sufficient assets to pay the premium for the required coverage even

though they would obtain benefits exceeding the expected harm.5 For this reason (and another to

be noted below, when insurers cannot observe care) the optimal required level of liability

insurance coverage may well be less than full.

         Liability insurance requirements also influence the level of care exercised by individuals.

If insurers can observe care levels, then when individuals buy coverage, their premiums reflect

the care they exercise, and therefore they have a reason to take care in addition to that due to the

liability they might otherwise bear. The motive to reduce risk by .1% of a person who has assets

of $100,000 and no liability insurance is $100, whereas if he has a liability coverage of

$500,000, his premium-related incentive to reduce risk by .1% is $500. This suggests two of the


(2002).
5
 In the example of this paragraph, if a person’s benefit from the activity would exceed the $10,000 expected harm,
but his assets were less than $10,000, it would be desirable for him to engage in the activity, yet he would not be
able to do so under a liability insurance requirement of coverage equal to the full harm of $1,000,000. There are two
reasons that a party might have benefits exceeding the expected harm but lower assets: the benefits might be
nonmonetary (such as the benefits from driving a car often are); the benefits might be monetary but only be received
after engaging in the activity, so would be unavailable to use to purchase insurance beforehand. See also notes 15
and 24 and section 4(a).

                                                          3
results to be shown: that when insurers can observe care, liability insurance requirements tend to

be socially desirable; and social welfare under the optimal liability insurance requirement is

superior to that under the optimal pure asset requirement, which, note, does not affect the

incentives to take care of individuals who do engage in the activity.

       If insurers cannot observe care levels, so that insurance premiums cannot be linked to

care levels, then the purchase of liability insurance coverage generally dulls, rather than

increases, incentives to take care, for two possible reasons: the usual moral hazard -- that

coverage lowers an individual’s exposure to liability; and a premium-related moral hazard -- that

the payment of the premium itself reduces the magnitude of assets that a person has at stake (a

person with assets of $100,000 who pays $10,000 as a premium for insurance coverage will have

at most $90,000 at stake rather than $100,000). The dilution of incentives due to insurance

coverage implies that when insurers cannot observe care, required liability insurance coverage

may be socially undesirable and inferior to a pure asset requirement, for the latter does not dilute

incentives of individuals who engage in the activity.

       In section 4 of the article, concluding comments are made on several issues: firms as

injurers; the endogeneity of assets (for example, assets can be shielded from liability);

alternatives to asset and liability insurance requirements (such as vicarious liability, barring

purchase of liability insurance, and direct safety regulation); and the goal of victim

compensation.

       Regarding previous literature, the point of departure for this article is study of the

judgment-proof problem -- the incentive problem that arises when parties’ assets are not

sufficient to pay liability judgments equal to the entire harm that might be caused; see Summers

                                                  4
(1983) and Shavell (1986).

         Asset requirements as a general remedy for the judgment-proof problem do not appear to

have been investigated before; thus the tradeoff between the advantages of asset requirements

and the drawback of preventing parties who ought to engage in an activity from doing so

apparently has not previously been examined. However, Pitchford (1995) briefly considers asset

requirements as a means of inducing investors to increase equity in firms.6 Also, bank solvency

regulation (typically in the form of capital-to-asset ratios) has been studied as a device for

lowering the risk of bank failure; see generally Freixas and Rochet (1997).7 In that literature it is

often assumed that banks carry government insurance protecting depositors and that the

insurance is not risk-priced; this creates an incentive for banks to make risky loans, and thus a

possible need for solvency regulation.8

         Compulsory liability insurance as a method of alleviating the judgment-proof problem

has been addressed in a number of articles, including Shavell (1986, 2000), Jost (1996), and

Polborn (1998). This literature points out that liability insurance requirements can improve the

decision whether to engage in an activity and that, if insurers can observe care, also increases


6
  In his model, asset requirements cause owners of potentially judgment proof firms to invest more capital in them
(see his Proposition 4), which then leads firms to exercise more care (see section 4(b) below for further remarks on
this subject). By contrast, in the model here, as has been emphasized, asset requirements prevent parties with low
assets from engaging in harmful activities.
7
 Section 9.5 of their book reviews the literature on bank solvency regulations, including Kahane (1977), Kim and
Santoremo (1988), and Rochet (1992).
8
 Another reason for solvency regulation in the banking context is that depositors are usually presumed not to know
bankruptcy risk; this implies that even if depositors were not insured by the government, the rates that a bank would
have to pay to depositors would not increase if the bank’s risk of bankruptcy increased. A further reason for
solvency regulation is that one bank’s failure might to lead to other bank failures, a type of negative externality.
Again see the review of the literature in section 9.5 in Freixas and Rochet (1997) for details.


                                                          5
levels of care; but it does not consider that liability insurance requirements can worsen the

decision to engage in an activity, it does not fully analyze the moral hazard created by insurance

when insurers cannot observe care, and it does not compare liability insurance requirements to

pure asset requirements.

          Finally, there is literature on other policies that are employed to combat the judgment-

proof problem, the most closely-related being articles on the imposition of vicarious liability on

parties who have a contractual relationship with the injurer; see, for example, Sykes (1984),

Shavell (1987), Pitchford (1995), Boyer and Laffont (1997), Boyd and Ingberman (1997), and

Hiriart and Martimort (2003). In particular, Pitchford (1995) emphasizes an effect of lender

liability that is equivalent to the premium-related moral hazard mentioned above; this literature

on alternative policies will be mentioned in the concluding section.



2. Asset Requirements

          Assume that injurers are risk-neutral individuals who may choose to engage in an activity

from which they would obtain a gain but that might also result in harm, with a probability

depending on their level of care. Define the following notation.

              g = gain to an individual from engaging in the activity; g $ 0;

          f(g) = probability density of g across individuals; f(g) > 0;9

              x = level of care exercised by an individual; x $ 0;

          p(x) = probability of harm; 0 < p(x) < 1; pN(x) < 0 and pN(x) → !4 as x → 0; pO(x) > 0;

              h = level of harm; h > 0.

9
 A particular individual’s gain is certain; different individuals obtain different gains.

                                                                6
Social welfare S is the gains that individuals obtain from engaging in the activity minus the cost

of care10 exercised by them and expected harm caused; that is, social welfare is the integral of g

! (x + p(x)h) over all individuals who engage in the activity. The state is assumed to know the

density f, the function p, and the harm h, but not to observe the gain g or care x.

         Socially optimal behavior is easily described: If an individual engages in the activity, he

should choose x to minimize social costs -- the disutility cost of care plus expected harm -- or

(1)       x + p(x)h,

so that x should satisfy the first-order condition

(2)       1 = !pN(x)h;

that is, the marginal cost of care should equal the marginal expected reduction in harm. Denote

the optimal x by x* and observe that it is positive for any positive h.11 A person should engage

in the activity if and only if12

(3)       g $ x* + p(x*)h.

         Suppose that individuals are held strictly liable13 for causing harm: A person who causes

harm h is supposed to pay h to the victim. However, an individual may not have assets sufficient

to pay for the harm he caused. Specifically, assume that individuals differ in their holdings of

assets; let

              y = level of assets of an individual;

          w(y) = probability density of assets across individuals, where y $ 0, w(y) > 0,

10
   “Cost” of care will be used interchangeably with “level” of care.
11
   This is guaranteed by the assumption that pN(x) → !4 as x → 0.
12
   If (3) holds with equality, social welfare is of course unaffected by whether the person engages in the activity, but for
concreteness let us make the assumption that he ought to engage in it in this case. (Similar assumptions will be made
below without further comment.)


                                                               7
and where, for simplicity, it is assumed that the distributions of assets y and of gains g are

independent. The state is assumed to be able to observe y and to know the density w. If a person

causes harm h, he can pay only y if his assets are lower than h. Hence, a person’s cost of care

plus expected liability payments if he engages in the activity equal

(4)      x + p(x)min(y, h),

and let the person=s choice of x that minimizes (4) be written x(y). Note that the fact that a

person can pay a liability judgment fully equal to his assets y reflects the assumption that his cost

of care is a utility cost; for if care involves a monetary expenditure, the assets that a person

would have available to pay in a judgment would be only y – x.14 Similarly, the fact that a

person can pay a judgment of only y reflects the implicit simplifying assumption that g cannot

also be paid (otherwise the available assets would be y + g). This assumption holds when g is a

utility benefit.15

         We have,16

PROPOSITION 1. If an individual’s assets y are less than the harm h that he might cause, he may

engage in the harmful activity when that is socially undesirable (that is, when g < x(y) +

p(x(y))h) and, if so, will exercise inadequate care (that is, x(y) < x*). Also, the lower is y, the

13
   If liability were instead based on the negligence rule, the character of the conclusions would not be altered.
14
   If x is monetary, complications that are distracting for the purposes of this article would be introduced into the
analysis. Namely, because expenditures on care would be expenditures of money that might otherwise be paid as
liability judgments, care effectively becomes cheaper (even raising the theoretical possibility that a person with low
assets would exercise excessive care); this effect is less important the lower the probability of harm. On these
issues, see Beard 1990.
15
   An individual’s gain from an activity is frequently nonmonetary; as noted, an example concerns driving (say, to
see a movie). Of course, in many contexts, and generally for firms, gains are monetary. If gains are monetary and
would be available to be paid in the event of an accident, the thrust of the conclusions would not change as long as y
+ g < h, but the level of care would generally be higher since it would be chosen to minimize x + p(x)(y + g) rather
than x + p(x)y.



                                                          8
lower is x(y) and the higher are social costs (that is, x(y) + p(x(y))h).

            Notes. This proposition (and others below) is proved in the appendix to the paper. The

reason for it is clear: If a person’s assets are less than harm, the (effective) expected liability is

less than expected harm, so a person will not bear the full social cost of his activity; hence he

may decide to engage in it when his gain g is less than x(y) + p(x(y))h. Relatedly, because his

expected liability is less than expected harm, the marginal benefit to him of taking more care is

less than the social marginal benefit, implying that x(y) is less than x*, and this effect is

accentuated the lower are his assets.

            Now suppose that the state can regulate entry into the activity by use of an asset

requirement: Individuals cannot engage in the activity unless their assets are at least y.17 Social

welfare S as a function of the asset requirement y is

                   4 4
(5)         S(y) = I{I[g – (x(y) + p(x(y))h)]f(g)dg}w(y)dy
                     y x(y) + p(x(y))min(y, h)



because, for every permitted y, an individual will engage in the activity if his gain is at least

equal to (4). Denote the optimal y by y*. We then have the following.

PROPOSITION 2. It may be desirable to impose a positive asset requirement. A necessary and

sufficient condition for this to be true, for y* > 0, is that the mean gain that individuals would

obtain from the activity is less than the expected harm when no care is exercised, that is, E(g) <

p(0)h. Also, the optimal requirement y* is less than the harm h.

            Notes. Imposing an asset requirement y has the advantage that it prevents individuals

16
     This result is developed in Shavell 1986.
17
     Direct regulation of safety is not possible because the state cannot observe x.

                                                              9
with the least wealth from engaging in the activity, and there is a double reason why it may be

desirable to do so: These individuals would exercise the least care, meaning that they would

create the most risk, if they engaged in the activity; and they would have the weakest liability-

related incentives to take the expected harm they create into account in deciding whether to

engage in the activity because their assets are lowest. In particular, the social welfare benefit

from use of y derives from preventing individuals from engaging in the activity who would

otherwise have done so but should not have, that is, those for whom x(y) + p(x(y))y < g < x(y) +

p(x(y))h. There is also a social welfare disadvantage from use of y, due to its preventing

individuals from engaging in the activity who would otherwise have done so and should have,

that is, those for whom x(y) + p(x(y))h < g.

       If E(g) < p(0)h, then the group with no assets are on average desirable to prevent from

engaging in the activity, which suggests why this condition implies that a positive asset

requirement is advantageous. Also, observe that the social welfare benefit from use of y exists

only for y < h, explaining why y* cannot exceed h. To understand why y* must be strictly less

than h, note that if y is lowered marginally from h, those individuals who are led to engage in the

activity who should not do so cause no first-order loss in social welfare (since their assets are

essentially equal to h, their expected liability is essentially equal to expected harm, so their

incentives are essentially optimal), but the individuals who are now permitted to engage in the

activity who ought to do so generate a positive first-order gain in social welfare.



3. Liability Insurance and Asset Requirements




                                                  10
         Let us now examine a financial responsibility rule under which, in order to engage in the

harmful activity, parties must purchase enough liability insurance so that their coverage plus

available assets meet the required amount. Let

         z = financial responsibility requirement; z $ 0;

         c = insurance coverage in the event of harm; c $ 0; and

         B = insurance premium.

Thus, the rule under study is that, in order to engage in the activity, y !B + c must be at least z.

As mentioned in the Introduction, this rule is typical, and we will call it a liability insurance and

asset requirement.18

         We will now describe behavior under liability insurance and asset requirements. We will

also compare social welfare under the optimal z, denoted z*, to that under the optimal pure asset

requirement y*. We will also consider social welfare under z = h – a requirement that a person

have assets plus liability coverage equal to the full harm – because this is a natural and

intuitively appealing rule (even though, as will be seen, it is not generally optimal; z* may well

be less than h).

         We will assume that liability insurance is sold by a competitive insurance industry facing

no administrative costs, so that premiums are actuarially fair, and we will consider two cases:

where insurers can observe the level of care x and link insurance policy terms to it;19 and where


18
  Under a pure liability insurance requirement, which the parties cannot use any assets to satisfy, the conclusions
reached would be similar, but the optimal level of the requirement would generally differ (a pure liability
requirement of a particular level of coverage is a rough equivalent of a higher requirement which can be satisfied
with coverage or assets).
19
  It is assumed that, even when insurers can observe care x and contract on it, the state (which might have less
expertise than insurers in monitoring x) does not observe x and directly regulate it.

                                                          11
insurers cannot observe the level of care. Also, we will continue to assume that individuals are

risk neutral.

         3.1 Insurers are able to observe the level of care. In this case, since insurers can

observe care x and thus know p(x), the premium B that they will charge is p(x)c. Let us state

several claims about insurance purchases given any z # h before proceeding with the analysis.20

         (a) If y$ z, so that individuals do not need to purchase insurance coverage to engage in

the activity, individuals will not buy insurance coverage. A person with such a y will be worse

off if y < h and he buys coverage, for without coverage his liability payment will be y, whereas if

he buys coverage, he will be effectively paying for positive liability above y, that is, for liability

that he would not otherwise have to bear.21 If y $ h and he buys coverage, he will not effectively

be increasing his liability, as he already has the assets to pay h; thus, he will be indifferent

between buying coverage and not, and we can assume he will not buy coverage.

         (b) If y < z, so that individuals must purchase coverage in order to engage in the

activity, individuals will buy the minimum necessary coverage – such that y - B + c = z. The

explanation is that, were an individual to purchase enough coverage so that he could pay more

than z, he would be implicitly paying for liability that he does not need to bear, so would be

made worse off.


20
  The reasons for the points are sketched; they are proved in the appendix (where the case of z > h is also
addressed).
21
  Consider for example a person with assets of $10,000 and assume that harm is $50,000 and that the probability of
harm is 10% (in fact the probability is endogenous, but this can be ignored for present purposes). Suppose the
person purchases coverage of $1,000. Then his premium would be $100, and his remaining wealth would be $9,900.
 Consequently, his expected liability-related expenses would be $100 + .10($9,900) = $1,090, whereas if he does not
buy coverage, his expected liability-related expenses are lower, .10($10,000) = $1,000.


                                                         12
       (c) If y < z, individuals who engage in the activity choose care of x(z) and bear expected

costs of x(z) + p(x(z))z. From (b), we know that an individual’s available assets y - B plus

coverage c equal z. Because the probability of losing one’s available assets and the premium B =

p(x)c depend on x, an individual will choose x to minimize x + p(x)z, that is, he will choose x(z).

       It follows from the above that if y < p(x(z))z, a person will be unable to meet the

requirement z by paying the insurance premium B for coverage of z; at y = p(x(z))z, a person can

just meet the requirement by paying all his assets for the premium for coverage of z; and above

this asset level he will purchase less coverage than z, but such that his available assets y – B plus

coverage equal z; and at y of z and above, coverage will not be purchased. Hence, social welfare

may be written as

               z           4
(6)    S(z) = I           {I[g – (x(z) + p(x(z))h)]f(g)dg}w(y)dy
               p(x(z))z    x(z) + p(x(z))z

         4 4
       + I {I[g – (x(y) + p(x(y))h)]f(g)dg}w(y)dy.
          z   x(y) + p(x(y))min(y, h)



Now let us state

PROPOSITION 3. Assume that liability insurers can observe an individual’s level of care. Then

the optimal liability insurance and asset requirement z* is in [0, h]. In particular, a sufficient

condition for z* > 0 is that E(g) < p(0)h.

       Notes. That z* will be positive if E(g) < p(0)h is explained essentially as before in

Proposition 2: if this condition holds, then it is undesirable for individuals with no assets, who

will not take any care, to engage in the activity, since their mean gain E(g) is less than the



                                                   13
expected harm p(0)h that they generate. The reason that z* may be less than h is that, if z* = h,

then parties with assets too low to pay the premium for coverage of h will be unable to engage in

the activity, even though that may be undesirable;22 this possibility is further discussed below in

regard to the Remark of this section. That z* cannot exceed h follows because this could lead

parties to take excessive care; if a person has to purchase insurance coverage above h in order to

comply, his incentive to take care will be socially excessive. Moreover, his expected expenses

will be excessive so his decision whether to engage in the activity may be suboptimal. Hence, a

requirement of z = h must be superior to a higher one.

            Next, let us show that social welfare under z* exceeds social welfare under the pure asset

requirement y*. This is not surprising, for in the absence of liability insurance purchases, an

individual with assets of y < h will choose care of only x(y) and bear costs of only x(y) +

p(x(y))y. But when the individual is induced to purchase liability insurance by a requirement z

exceeding his assets y, he will be led to choose higher care, of x(z), which is desirable; and he

also will bear higher costs, of x(z) + p(x(z))z, which may be desirable as well.

PROPOSITION 4. Assume that liability insurers can observe an individual’s level of care. Then

social welfare under the optimal liability insurance and asset requirement z* exceeds social

welfare under the optimal pure asset requirement y*.

            Notes. An outline of the proof is as follows. Consider y* and find the higher

requirement, say zN, such that the insurance premium for coverage of zN equals y*.23 Hence,


22
  By contrast, in Shavell (1986, 2000) and Jost (1996), the optimal liability insurance requirement is full coverage h
when insurers can observe care. The reason for the difference in result is that in those articles the possibility that
individuals are unable to pay the premium for full coverage is not taken into account.
23
     Such a zN may not exist, but in that case an argument similar to that about to be sketched still applies, as shown in

                                                              14
individuals with assets y below y* cannot engage in the activity; otherwise they can engage in

the activity, but only by buying insurance if their assets are in [y*, zN]. It can be shown that

social welfare is higher under zN than under y*. In particular, individuals with y < y* will be in

the same situation under both regimes, namely, unable to engage in the activity. However, under

zN individuals with assets y in [y*, zN] who engage in the activity all take care of x(zN) and bear

expected expenses of x(zN) + p(x(zN)) zN, by claim (c) above; but under y*, such individuals take

lesser care of only x(y) and bear expected expenses of only x(y) + p(x(y))y. Thus, under y*,

individuals with y in [y*, zN] who engage in the activity behave less desirably, and they decide to

engage in the activity more often when that is undesirable. Finally, individuals whose assets

exceed zN behave identically under the two regimes.

         Next, let us compare social welfare under z = h to that under y*.

REMARK. Assume that liability insurers can observe an individual’s level of care. Then social

welfare under the full liability insurance and asset requirement z = h – liability insurance

coverage plus assets must equal the harm – may or may not exceed social welfare under the

optimal pure asset requirement y*.

         Notes. If z = h , then we know from claim (c) that all individuals who engage in the

activity exercise care of x(h) and bear expected costs of x(h) + p(x(h))h. Hence, individuals who

can pay the premium p(x(h))h will decide in a first-best way whether to engage in the activity

and, if so, exercise first-best care. However, individuals with y < p(x(h))h are not able to pay the

premium for coverage of h and to engage in the activity, even though for some of these

individuals g > x(h) + p(x(h))h, and it would thus be socially desirable them to engage in the


the proof in the appendix.

                                                  15
activity.24 Hence, if there are enough such individuals, z = h may be dominated by a low y* that

would allow many low asset individuals to engage in the activity who ought to do so.25

Otherwise, if enough individuals have assets above p(x(h))h, then z = h will be superior to y*.

         3.2 Insurers are not able to observe levels of care. Since insurers cannot observe care

x in this case, the premium B for coverage c cannot be a function of an individual’s choice of x;

however, it must be that B = p(x)c for the x that individuals choose. We assume that insurers can

observe an individual’s level of assets, so that B can depend on y.26

         Because the premium does not depend directly on care, a situation of moral hazard exists,

which bears comment because the character of the moral hazard may be different from the

familiar one. The usual moral hazard is that insurance coverage dulls the incentive to take care

because it directly lowers the amount that the person would otherwise pay in liability. For

instance, if a person with assets of $200,000 faces possible liability of $100,000, he would pay

$100,000 without insurance coverage, whereas if he has coverage of, say, $80,000, he only pays

$20,000 out of pocket, so his incentive to take care is reduced. This standard moral hazard

would not apply, however, if the person would be bankrupted by liability in the absence of

coverage as well as in its presence. For example, if the person with assets of $200,000 faces

possible liability of $1,000,000, he will lose his entire wealth if held liable, just as he will lose



24
  That g may exceed x(h) + p(x(h))h yet not be available to pay the insurance premium is possible if g is
nonmonetary or monetary but earned only by engaging in the activity.
25
   In this case, though, presumably the optimal z* would be low, for we know from the previous proposition that
welfare under the optimal requirement allowing insurance is higher than under y*.
26
   Since y is observable by the state (otherwise asset requirements could not be enforced), it is consistent to assume
that y is observable by insurers. It will be evident that this assumption is implicit in the analysis, since the choice of
x and thus p(x) will depend on y.

                                                            16
his entire wealth if his insurance coverage is, say, $500,000. However, in this situation, the

person’s payment of the insurance premium – say it is $30,000 – reduces the person’s incentive

to take care; for if he does not have coverage, he loses his entire $200,000 if found liable,

whereas if he does have coverage, his wealth after paying the premium will be only $170,000, so

he has less to lose if found liable and will therefore take less care. This premium-related moral

hazard is, as noted earlier, essentially identical to the interest payment-related moral hazard

emphasized by Pitchford (1995). One or the other of these moral hazards applies in the present

context when individuals purchase insurance coverage.

            Let us now discuss a number of claims about insurance and individuals’ behavior

assuming that z # h.27

            (a) If an individual buys positive coverage c, he will take less care, resulting in lower

social welfare, than if he did not buy coverage. To explain, consider the case in which an

individual purchases positive coverage c # h.28 His expected utility is

(7)                  y – B – x – p(x)min(y – B, h – c),

since if an accident occurs, he owes h – c after using his coverage c to pay liability, and his

remaining assets are y – B. Note that since min(y – B, h – c) < h, care is less than the socially

optimal level x(h). By contrast, the person would choose x to minimize x + p(x)min(y, h) if he

did not have insurance coverage; and as min(y, h) > min(y – B, h – c), he will take greater care if

he does not have coverage. Since social costs are decreasing in x when x < x(h), social welfare is

increasing in x; thus social welfare is lower on account of insurance coverage.


27
     Again, the case of z > h is discussed in the appendix.
28
     The case in which c > h is discussed in the appendix.

                                                              17
        (b) If y$ z, so that individuals do not need to purchase insurance coverage to engage in

the activity, individuals will not buy insurance coverage. The explanation for this claim is

similar to that for the same one in the previous section, involving the point that, if assets y are

less than h, purchasing coverage is effectively spending on liability that one would not otherwise

have to bear. Another reason why an individual would not want to buy coverage (applying even

if y exceeds h) is the moral hazard, that coverage leads to reduced care levels, which raises

premium rates.

        (c) If y < z, so that individuals must purchase coverage in order to engage in the activity,

individuals will buy the minimum necessary coverage – such that y - B + c = z. Again, the

explanation for this is similar to that for the same conclusion in the previous section, involving

the point that purchasing coverage may be effectively spending on liability that one would not

otherwise have to bear, and also now the additional point that the purchase of coverage leads to

reduced care levels.

        (d) If y < z, individuals who engage in the activity purchase coverage and exercise less

care than if they did not purchase coverage; they bear expected costs of x + p(x)z. Because

individuals must purchase coverage, we know from (a) that their care x is lower than if they do

not buy insurance coverage. From (c), we know that y – B + c = z . Hence, if z # h, they have no

assets left if an accident occurs, so their expected utility is y – B – p(x)(y – B) – x; and since B

= p(x)c, for the chosen x, this reduces to y – p(x)c – p(x)(z – c) – x = y – p(x)z – x, so that

expected costs are x + p(x)z as claimed.

        These claims imply that social welfare has a similar form to (6), and it is readily shown

that z* is in [0, h], but E(g) < p(0)h is not a sufficient condition for z* > 0. The reason is that,

                                                   18
when z is raised from 0, although there is a social benefit from preventing individuals with y = 0

from engaging in the activity, the level of care of individuals with positive y < z is reduced

because of their purchase of insurance coverage, as noted in claim (a).

         Now let us again compare social welfare under z* to that under the optimal pure asset

requirement. There is no necessary relationship. The reason is that liability insurance as a way

of satisfying a requirement z has both a social disadvantage and an advantage relative to a pure

asset requirement. The disadvantage is that an individual with assets y who purchases insurance

coverage exercises less care than x(y), the care he would exercise if he did not purchase

coverage. The advantage is that if individuals with y < z engage in the activity, they bear

expected costs reflecting z (see claim (d)) rather than just y, which may improve their decision

whether or not to engage in the activity.29 In particular, we have

PROPOSITION 5. Assume that liability insurers cannot observe the level of care. Then social

welfare under the optimal liability insurance and asset requirement z* may or may not exceed

social welfare under the optimal pure asset requirement y*.

         Notes. First, to explain why z* may be superior to y*, we consider a situation in which

the exercise of care has little effect on the probability p, so that the dilution of care due to the

purchase of insurance coverage is of small importance. Then the advantage of liability insurance

in improving decisions whether or not to engage in the activity may lead to greater welfare under

z*.

29
   Pitchford (1995) makes an an analogous comparison, between social welfare under optimal lender liability (lender
liability in his model is similar to required liability insurance) and optimal asset requirements. He finds that optimal
lender liability is equivalent to optimal asset requirements. The reason is essentially that in his model the only
beneficial role of lender liability is to induce owners to invest more capital in firms, and this can be done directly by
requiring that capital be invested.


                                                           19
       Consider a discrete example.30 Let h = 100 and the probability of harm be p = .1

regardless of care; let g = 5 with probability 2/3 and g = 15 with probability 1/3. Since ph = 10,

it is first-best for all individuals with g = 15 to engage in the activity and for none with g = 5 to

do so. Moreover, since those with g = 5 are a majority, it is socially undesirable for all to engage

in the activity rather than none to do so. Hence, y* = 50, for if y is below 50, the expected

liability of individuals is less than 5, so they all would engage in the activity. At y* and above,

first-best behavior is obtained, for just individuals with g = 15 engage in the activity. Now

consider z = 100. Then in order to engage in the activity, individuals with y < 100 will buy

insurance, and their insurance costs plus expected liability will be 10 (see claim (d)).

Consequently, all individuals with y $ 10 are able to engage in the activity and for these levels of

assets, only individuals with g = 15 will decide to engage in the activity. Hence z = 100 is

superior to y* -- because under this z but not y*, individuals with g = 15 and assets between 10

and 50 engage in the activity, as is first-best. Thus z*, which may be different from z = 100, is

superior to y*.

       Second, to show that y* may be superior to z*, we can construct a kind of converse

situation, in which there is no social need to control the decision whether to engage in the

activity of some individuals – because for them engaging in the activity is socially desirable –

yet use of required insurance coverage would dilute their incentives to take care. In this case,

use of a pure asset requirement would be advantageous, since it does not dilute incentives to take

care of those who engage in the activity, yet can still prevent those with assets below the

requirement from engaging in the activity.




                                                  20
            In particular, consider the following example. Let y = 20 or 50, with equal probability

and let g = 5 or 13 with equal probability, so that for .25 of the population, y = 20 and g = 5, for

another .25 of the population, y = 20 and g = 13, and so forth. Assume also that h = 100 and that

x is 0 or 2.49, where p(0) = .15 and p(2.49) = .1. Notice that x = 2.49 is optimal if an individual

engages in the activity, as spending 2.49 reduces expected harm from 15 to 10. Consequently,

the optimal probability of harm is .1, expected harm is 10, and engaging in the activity leads to

expected costs of 12.49, so that the first-best outcome is for all individuals with g = 13 to engage

in the activity and take care but not for individuals with g = 5 to engage in the activity.

            Suppose that y = 50. Then only individuals with y = 50 can engage in the activity. Such

individuals who engage in the activity choose x = 2.49, for they will reduce their expected

liability by (.05)(50) = 2.5 by doing this. Hence, the expected expenses of such individuals will

be 7.49. Thus, among individuals with y = 50, those with g of 13 will engage in the activity but

not those with g of 5. In other words, behavior of individuals with y = 50 is first-best. Social

welfare will be (.25)(13 – 12.49) = .13.

            It will be shown that social welfare is lower under any z than under y = 50. That will

clearly imply that social welfare is lower under z* than under y = 50 and thus than under y*.31

The nature of the demonstration is that, if z is not sufficiently high, then individuals with y = 20

will be able to engage in the activity, will not take care, and lower social welfare. If, though, z is

high enough to prevent those with y = 20 from engaging in the activity, then those with y = 50

will have diluted incentives to take care due to their required purchase of insurance coverage.


30
     See the appendix for a continuous version of the example that conforms to the assumptions of this article.
31
     In fact y* can be demonstrated to be any y in the interval (20, 50].

                                                            21
The details of this argument are given in the appendix.

        Last, we have a

REMARK. Assume that liability insurers cannot observe the level of care. Then social welfare

under the full liability insurance asset requirement z = h – liability insurance coverage plus assets

must equal the harm – may or may not exceed social welfare under the optimal pure asset

requirement y*.

        Notes. That z = h may be superior to y* was demonstrated in the example given in the

previous proposition, where the dilution of care due to the purchase of insurance is not as

important to social welfare as the beneficial effect of the insurance requirement on the decision

about engaging in the activity. That z = h may be inferior to y* is also implied by the previous

proposition, since z* may be inferior to y*. The possible inferiority of z = h to y* may be seen

directly as well. Consider a family of distributions of g parameterized by 8 such that, as 8 → 4,

the probability that g > p(0)h tends to 1. Then, as 8 → 4, the probability that it is socially

desirable for an individual to engage in the activity tends to 1; also, for high 8, E(g) > p(0)h, and

thus y* = 0. For high 8, let us compare y* = 0 to z = h. Consider an individual for whom g >

p(0)h. Under y* = 0, this individual will always engage in the activity,32 which is socially

beneficial, and will take care of x(y). Under z = h, the outcome for any individual for whom g >

p(0)h and y < h will lower social welfare: either the individual will not be able to buy the

insurance necessary to comply with z = h (this will be so for low y), or else he will be able to buy

the insurance but will then take less care than x(y). Since the probability that g > p(0)h tends to 1

as 8 → 4, it is thus clear that y* is superior to z = h for 8 sufficiently high.



                                                   22
4. Concluding Comments

           In conclusion, let me note several issues of relevance to the analysis.

           (a) Firms as injurers. It was assumed above that potential injurers are individuals, and I

sketch here how the analysis would change were they firms. (An earlier version of this article

considered firms as injurers.33) An important point in this regard is that when the parties harmed

by firms are their own customers, financial responsibility requirements tend to be socially

undesirable. The reason is that customers will factor the expected harm that they would suffer

into their purchase decisions. Hence, their purchase decisions will be desirable, given their

information about product risk; and firms will have a motive to reduce risk, since this may allow

them to charge higher prices.34

           When the parties harmed by firms are not their customers, the analysis of financial

responsibility requirements would be similar to that here, but with a potential difference of

significance. Recall that it was assumed above that the gain g to an individual from engaging in

the activity could not be used to pay liability insurance premiums; a justification was that the

gain is nonmonetary (such as the utility from driving often is). Thus, a liability insurance

requirement might undesirably prevent an individual with low assets from engaging in the

activity even though his gain g would exceed the expected harm (an individual might not be able

to pay the liability insurance premium to drive despite large utility gains from doing so). If firms

32
     For his expected expenses are minx x + p(x)min(y, h) # minx x + p(x)h < p(0)h < g.
33
     See Shavell (2002).

34
  The details of this argument, and whether the first-best outcome is obtained, depend on whether product risk is
observable and on whether the assets of firms are observable or can be credibly revealed; see Shavell (2002).

                                                            23
are able to borrow against their gains (which are monetary by their nature), then they cannot be

undesirably discouraged from a business activity by having to pay liability insurance premiums.

Hence, full compulsory liability insurance coverage will be desirable if insurers can observe

care. But full liability insurance coverage still may be undesirable if insurers cannot observe

care, due to moral hazard, and a pure asset requirement may again be superior to a liability

insurance requirement.

         (b) Endogeneity of assets. It was assumed in the analysis that the assets of parties are

fixed, but in fact assets subject to liability are to some degree variable; individuals may earn or

save, firms may raise capital, and both sometimes are able to shield assets from liability. The

major effect of allowing for these factors on the conclusions would be to increase optimal

minimal asset requirements, because the ability of parties to raise their level of assets diminishes

the efficiency losses associated with asset requirements.35 Of course, optimal asset and liability

insurance requirements would still tend to be less than harm because the cost of increasing assets

would be positive (otherwise simply setting the requirement equal to harm would result in the

first-best outcome, as all parties would costlessly be induced to comply and then would behave

optimally).

         (c) Alternative policies. There are a number of alternatives to asset and liability

insurance requirements that may serve to ameliorate judgment-proof induced incentive problems.

One is the use of vicarious liability: the extension of liability from the injurer to another party

with whom the injurer has a relationship, for example, the extension of liability from a child to a


35
 As noted earlier, in Pitchford (1995) the (only) beneficial role of asset requirements is to induce owners to invest
more capital in firms (and the optimal asset requirement is equal to the maximum amount that owners can invest).

                                                          24
parent, from a small company working on a project to the general contractor, or from a

corporation to a holding company or to a lender. Because under vicarious liability the joint

assets of the two parties are at risk, vicarious liability tends to improve the injurer’s decision

about engaging in the activity. When the vicariously liable party is able to observe the level of

care of the injurer, vicarious liability also tends to result in the exercise of better care, because

the vicariously liable party will insist (or contract) on it; but when the vicariously liable party is

not able to observe the level of care, the care decision will not be improved in a direct way, and

possible disadvantages of vicarious liability may make partial vicarious liability desirable.36 (Not

surprisingly, these conclusions resemble those concerning required liability insurance coverage,

since the liability insurer is, by definition, liable for the harms caused by the insured.) Another

policy alternative is, paradoxically, the opposite of requiring liability insurance: prohibiting the

purchase of liability insurance. Risk averse injurers might well want to purchase some liability

insurance coverage even though their assets are less than the potential harm they might cause.

Hence, barring them from purchasing any liability insurance coverage might increase their level

of care, due to their risk aversion. This policy is in fact sometimes employed, in that liability




36
  Sykes (1984) makes these general points and they are also contained in Shavell (1987). Pitchford (1995) focuses
on vicarious liability on lenders when they cannot observe the level of care of firms and he analyzes two factors:
vicarious liability may raise care, as it will make lenders want to reduce risk, which can be implicitly accomplished
by owners putting up more capital, giving firms a greater reason to increase care; but vicarious liability may also
lower care, as the price charged by lenders to cover their residual liability exposure reduces the assets of injurers;
thus partial vicarious liability is generally optimal. Boyer and Laffont (1997) also examine vicarious liability on
lenders and reach similar conclusions. Boyd and Ingberman (1997) emphasize that vicarious liability may lead
vicariously liable parties to reduce their capital so as to avoid their exposure to liability, which may compromise the
efficiency of their own production; hence partial vicarious liability may be desirable. Hiriart and Martimort (2003)
present a general analysis of vicarious liability taking into account the relationship between firms that generate risks
and buyers of their goods.


                                                           25
insurance cannot be purchased against criminal fines and certain civil penalties.37 More general

policies that can be used to combat the judgment-proof problem are criminal liability and direct

safety regulation, and a promising avenue of research would be to determine on what grounds

these various tools would hold an advantage over one another and/or can be fruitfully used in

combination.

            (d) Asset and liability insurance requirements as a means of assuring victims

compensation. The explanation for the observed use of asset and liability insurance

requirements may well lie mainly in society’s desire to assure victims compensation through the

legal system. However, the legal system appears to be an unusually costly way of delivering

compensation to victims.38 Thus, asset and liability insurance requirements might find their best

justification in the beneficial incentives that they generate.




37
     See Shavell (1987, 2000) for discussion of the barring of liability insurance.

38
  For example, a recent study, Tillinghast-Towers Perrin 2002, p. 12, reports that victims received only 42 per cent of
payments made by defendant parties in a nationwide survey of the tort system (in other words, over half of all payments
were absorbed by others, notably, by lawyers).


                                                             26
References



Beard, T. Randolph. 1990. Bankruptcy and Care Choice. Rand Journal of Economics 21: 626-

       634.

Boyd, James and Daniel E. Ingberman. 1997. The Search for Deep Pockets: Is “Extended

       Liability” Expensive Liability? Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization 13: 232-

       258.

Boyer, Marcel, and Jean-Jacques Laffont. 1997. Environmental Risks and Bank Liability.

       European Economic Review 41: 1427-1459

Freixas, Xavier, and Jean-Charles Rochet. 1997. Microeconomics of Banking. MIT Press,

       Cambridge.

Hiriart, Yolande, and David Martimort. 2003. The Benefits of Extended Liability. mimeo.

       Department of Economics. University of Toulouse.

Jackson, Howell E., and Edward L. Symons, Jr. 1999. Regulation of Financial Institutions. West

       Group, St. Paul.

Jerry, Robert H. II. 1996. Understanding Insurance Law. 2nd ed. Matthew Bender, New York.

Jost, Peter-J. 1996. Limited Liability and the Requirement to Purchase Insurance. International

       Review of Law and Economics 16: 259-276.

Kahane, Y. 1977. Capital Adequacy and the Regulation of Financial Intermediaries. Journal of

       Banking and Finance 1: 207-18.

                                              27
Kim, Daesik, and Anthony M. Santoremo. 1988. Risk in Banking and Capital Regulation.

       Journal of Finance 43: 1219-33.

Pitchford, Rohan. 1995. How Liable Should a Lender Be? The Case of Judgement-Proof Firms

       and Environmental Risk. American Economic Review 85: 1171-1186.

Polborn, Mattias K. 1998. Mandatory Insurance and the Judgment-Proof Problem. International

       Review of Law and Economics 18: 141-146.

Rochet, Jean-Charles. 1992. Capital Requirements and the Behaviour of Commercial Banks.

       European Economic Review 36: 1137-78.

Shavell, Steven. 1986. The Judgment Proof Problem. International Review of Law and

       Economics 6: 45-58.

----- 1987. Economic Analysis of Accident Law. Harvard University Press, Cambridge.

----- 2000. On the Social Function and the Regulation of Liability Insurance. Geneva Papers on

       Risk and Insurance, Issues and Practice 25: 166-179.

----- 2002. Minimum Asset Requirements. Working Paper W9335, National Bureau of

       Economic Research.

Sykes, Alan. 1984. The Economics of Vicarious Liability. Yale Law Journal 91: 168-206.

Tillinghast – Towers Perrin. 2002. U.S. Tort Costs: 2000 Trends and Findings on the Costs of

       the U.S. Tort System. February 2002. Tillinghast-Towers Perrin.




                                              28
                                                 APPENDIX



Proof of Proposition 1. If y < h, then by (4) an individual will choose x to minimize x + p(x)y,

so that

(A1)      1 > !pN(x*)y,

implying that x(y) < x*. Also, if y < h, we know from (4) that an individual will engage in the

activity if and only if

(A2)      g $ x(y) + p(x(y))y.

But since y < h, (A2) may hold even though x(y) + p(x(y))h > g. Additionally, implicit

differentiation of the first-order condition 1 = !pN(x)y with respect to y gives xN(y) =

pN(x)/(!pO(x)y) > 0. Finally, the derivative of social costs x(y) + p(x(y))h with respect to y is

xN(y)(1 + pN(x(y))h) < 0, for 1 = !pN(x)y implies that (1 + pN(x(y))h) < 0.



Proof of Proposition 2. Differentiate (5) to obtain

                          4
(A3)      SN(y) =     {I([x(y) + p(x(y))h] ! g)f(g)dg}w(y),
                       x(y) + p(x(y))min(y, h)



which can be rewritten as

                    x(y) + p(x(y))h                       4
(A4)      SN(y) = {I([x(y) + p(x(y))h] ! g)f(g)dg ! I(g ! [x(y) + p(x(y))h])f(g)dg}w(y).
                    x(y) + p(x(y))min(y, h)              x(y) + p(x(y))h

The first integral is the marginal social gain from preventing those individuals who should not

engage in the activity from doing so, and the second integral is the marginal social loss from

                                                    29
preventing those who should engage in the activity from doing so. At y = 0, since x(0) = 0, (A4)

is

                      p(0)h                 4
(A5)     SN(0) = {I(p(0)h – g)f(g)dg ! I(g ! p(0)h)f(g)dg}w(0) = {p(0)h ! E(g)}w(0).
                      0                    p(0)h



Hence, a sufficient condition for y* > 0 is E(g) < p(0)h. To show that this condition is necessary

for y* > 0, observe that the term in braces in (A3) declines as y rises in [0, h), for the lower limit

of integration rises with y and [x(y) + p(x(y))h] falls with y. Hence, if SN (0) # 0, then SN (y) < 0

for all y in (0, h). Therefore, if y* > 0 holds, then SN(0) > 0, but this implies that E(g) < p(0)h.

       Also, note that, for any y $ h, (A4) reduces to the second term, and since x(y) = x* for

such y, we have

                          4
(A6)      SN(y) = !I(g ! [x* + p(x*)h])f(g)dgw(y) < 0,
                          x*+p(x*)h



so that y* must be less than h.



       Proof of claim(a) of section 3.1. If the individual does not purchase coverage, his

expected utility is

(A7)     y – x – p(x)min(y, h).

       If the individual purchases coverage and c # h, his expected utility is

(A8)     y – x – p(x)c – p(x)min(y – p(x)c, h – c)

because his premium is p(x)c and, if liable, what he owes after coverage is paid to the victim is h



                                                   30
– c, and he pays this unless his remaining assets are lower.39

         We want first to show that if y < h, then (A8) is less than (A7) for any x. In this case,

(A7) is y – x – p(x)y. Now if y – p(x)c # h – c, then (A8) is y – x – p(x)y – p(x)c(1 – p(x)) < y – x

– p(x)y, so the individual is worse off buying coverage. If y – p(x)c > h – c, then (A8) is y – x –

p(x)h < y – x – p(x)y, so the individual is worse off buying coverage. Since (A8) is less than

(A7) for any x and the person can choose x, he must be better off not buying coverage.

         Next let us show that if y $ h, then (A7) equals (A8) for any x. In this case, (A7) is y – x

– p(x)h and (A8) reduces to y – x – p(x)h since y – p(x)c < h – c cannot hold when y $ h.

Consequently, the individual is just as well off not buying coverage as buying it, and we can

assume for convenience that he does not buy coverage.

         The remaining possibility is that the individual purchases coverage and c > h. Then his

expected utility is

(A9)      y – x – p(x)c + p(x)(c – h) = y – x – p(x)h.

Since this exceeds (A7) when y < h and equals (A7) otherwise, we again conclude that the

person is better off not buying coverage when y < h and just as well off when y $ h.



         Proof of claim (b) of section 3.1. Assume first that z # h. Then an individual’s expected

utility if he buys coverage c such that y – B + c = y – p(x)c + c # h, is

(A10) (1 – p(x))(y – p(x)c) – x,


39
  This expression can be derived from the more explicit expression for expected utility, namely, (1 – p(x))(y – p(x)c)
+ p(x)(y – p(x)c + c – min(y – p(x)c + c, h)) – x = y – x – p(x)min(y – p(x)c + c, h). Since min(y – p(x)c + c, h) = c +
min(y – p(x)c, h – c), we obtain (A8). Similar derivations of expressions for expected utility below will not be given
but can be verified by the reader.


                                                           31
which is decreasing in c. If c is high enough that y – p(x)c + c > h, then his expected utility is

(A11) (1 – p(x))(y – p(x)c) – x + p(x)(y – p(x)c + c – h) = y – p(x)h – x,

which is independent of c. Hence, for any x, an individual is best off purchasing the minimum c

necessary to satisfy z. Thus, in particular, when the individual chooses the optimal x, he must be

best off when c is the minimum necessary to satisfy z.

        Now assume that z > h. Then, if an individual buys coverage sufficient to meet z, he can

pay h. Thus, his expected utility as a function of such c is again given by (A11), so that he is

indifferent about c; we can therefore assume that he buys the minimum necessary coverage.



        Proof of claim (c) of section 3.1. If z # h, the individual’s expected utility is given by

(A10), which may be rewritten as

(A12)    y – p(x)(c + y – p(x)c) – x.

Now we know that c + y – p(x)c = z, so that (A12) is y – p(x)z – x, implying that the selected x is

x(z), verifying the claim (c). We note also that, if z > h, then the individual’s expected utility is

given by (A11), so he will choose x(h), which is what he would choose if he did not have

coverage and has assets of z.



        Proof of Proposition 3. The first term of (6) reduces to

                                4
(A13) [W(z) – W(p(x(z))z)]{I[g – (x(z) + p(x(z))h)]f(g)dg},
                                x(z) + p(x(z))z



where W is the cdf of w. The derivative of this at z = 0 is readily verified to be

                         4

                                                  32
(A14)      w(0)(1 – p(0))I[g – p(0))h)]f(g)dg} = –w(0)(1 – p(0))[p(0)h –E(g)].
                        0



The second term of (6) is identical to (5), with z playing the role of y. Hence, the derivative of

the second term of (6) at z = 0 is the derivative of (5) at y = 0, which was shown in (A5) to be

w(0)[p(0)h – E(g)]. Combining the right side of (A14) with this, we conclude that the derivative

of (6) at z = 0 is p(0)w(0)[p(0)h – E(g)], which is positive if E(g) < p(0)h. Hence, z* > 0 if E(g)

< p(0)h.

        To show that z* # h cannot be, it suffices to demonstrate that z > h is inferior to z = h. If

z = h, it follows from claims (a) – (c) that behavior will be first-best for all individuals who have

assets sufficient to pay the premium to engage in the activity. In particular, any individual who

engages in the activity chooses first-best care x(h) and bears expected expenses of x(h) +

p(x(h))h. Thus, individuals will engage in the activity only if g > x(h) + p(x(h))h, which is first-

best. To engage in the activity, however, it must be that assets y $ p(x(h))h; otherwise an

individual will be unable to engage in the activity. Now if z > h, it is immediately apparent that

social welfare must fall, since fewer individuals are able to engage in the activity than under z =

h (and if they do engage in the activity, they cannot behave better than they do under z = h, for

their behavior is first-best when z = h).



        Proof of Proposition 4. Consider y* and, if it exists, let zN be the z # h such that the

premium for coverage of zN equals y*, that is, p(x(zN))zN = y*. If such a zN does not exist, note

that p(x(h))h < y* (since p(x(0))0 = 0).

        If zN exists, then under zN individuals with y < y* cannot engage in the activity, for by


                                                  33
claim (c), were they to engage in the activity, their premium would be p(x(zN))zN = y*, but this

exceeds y. Hence, individuals with y < y* do not engage in the activity under either zN or under

y*. Now consider individuals with y in [y*, z’). Under z’, any such individual who engages in

the activity will, by claim (c), choose x(zN) and bear expenses of x(zN) + p(x(zN))zN, whereas under

y*, any such individual will choose x(y) and bear expenses of x(y) + p(x(y))y. Since x(y) +

p(x(y))y < x(zN) + p(x(zN))zN, some individuals engage in the activity under y* but not under zN,

and some individuals engage in the activity under both y* and zN (but no individuals engage

under zN but not under y*). If an individual engages under y* but not under zN, the individual

must lower social welfare under y*, for g < x(zN) + p(x(zN))zN implies g < x(zN) + p(x(zN))h < x(y)

+ p(x(y))h. If an individual engages under y* and under zN, the individual must also lower social

welfare under y*, for x(zN) + p(x(zN))h < x(y) + p(x(y))h. Last consider individuals with y $ zN.

We know from claim (a) that they do not buy coverage, so their behavior and social welfare in

regard to them is the same under zN and under y*. We have thus shown that for some

individuals, social welfare is the same under zN as under y*, and for other individuals, social

welfare is higher under zN than under y*. Hence, social welfare is higher under zN than under y*,

and consequently higher under z* than under y*.

       If zN does not exist, then consider z = h and let us show that this results in higher social

welfare than y*. Since when zN does not exist, p(x(h))h < y*, we know that individuals in [y*, h]

can afford to pay the premium x(h)h and can engage in the activity under z = h, and that some

individuals with y < y* can also afford to engage in the activity. Furthermore, by claim (c), any

person who engages in the activity chooses x(h) and bears expected expenses of x(h) + p(x(h))h.

Now consider individuals with y < y*. Under y*, such individuals do not engage in the activity.

                                                 34
Under z, some individuals will engage in the activity, and any such individual who does so will

raise social welfare, for if he engages it must be that g > x(h) + p(x(h))h. Next consider

individuals with y in [y*, h). By essentially the argument of the last paragraph applying to [y*,

zN), it follows that if an individual engages in the activity under both y* and z, he will lower

social welfare, and likewise if he engages in the activity only under y*. Individuals with y $ h

behave in the same way under both y* and z = h. Hence, again, social welfare must be higher

under z than under y*, and thus higher under z* than under y*.



        Proof of Remark in section 3.1. To show that z = h may be superior to y*, we can

construct an example as indicated in the Notes. We know that individuals for whom y $ p(x(h))h

will behave in a first-best way, whereas individuals for whom y < h will not act in a first best

way under y*. Consider [p(x(h))h, h – ,] for some positive , and a sequence of distributions of

y such that the probability P that y is in the given interval is 1 in the limit. Then if the

distribution of y is such that P is sufficiently close to 1, z = h will be superior to y*. For behavior

under z = h is first-best in this interval, so social welfare approaches first-best as P approaches 1.

Yet since y in the interval are at least , below h, social welfare under y* must be bounded below

first-best.

        To show that z = h may be inferior to y*, we can again construct an example as suggested

by the Notes. Consider the interval [0, p(x(h)h – ,] for some positive , and a sequence of

distributions of y such that the probability P that y is in the given interval is 1 in the limit. Also,

consider the interval [h + *, 4) for some positive * and a sequence of distributions of g such that

the probability Q that g is in the given interval is 1 in the limit. Then for distributions such that

                                                   35
P and Q are sufficiently close to 1, y* will be superior to z = h. In particular, when g is in the

interval, it is clearly desirable for individuals to participate in the activity, and they can do so

under y = 0, so that as Q tends to 1 with y = 0, social welfare must be positive and bounded

above zero. However, as P tends to 1, social welfare tends to 0 since the probability that an

individual is able to engage in the activity tends to 0. Thus, for P and Q sufficiently high, it must

be that y = 0, and thus y*, is superior to z = h.



        Proof of claim (a) of section 3.2. It remains to consider the case in which c > h. In that

case, an individual’s expected utility is y – B – x + p(x)(c – h), so he chooses x = 0, whereas he

would select a positive x less than or equal to x(h) if he did not have coverage, so that social

welfare would be higher.



        Proof of claim (b) of section 3.2. If the individual does not purchase coverage, his

expected utility is (A7).

        If he does purchase positive coverage and c # h, his expected utility is

(A15) y – B – x – p(x)min(y – B, h – c) = y – p(x)c – x – p(x)min(y – p(x)c, h – c).

This is because B must equal p(x)c for the x that the individual selects, since premium are

actuarially fair.

        We want first to show that if y < h, then the individual is better off not purchasing

coverage. The argument given in the proof of claim (a) of section 3.1 applies to show this.

        Next let us show that if y $ h, then the individual is better off not purchasing coverage.

In this case, (A7) is y – x – p(x)h, and since the person chooses x to minimize this, his expected

                                                    36
utility is y – x(h) – p(x(h))h. Also, since y – B > h – c in this case, the left side of (A15) reduces

to y – B – x – p(x)(h – c). Hence, the person chooses x(h – c). And since B = p(x)c for the

chosen x, (A15) reduces to y – x – p(x)h, or to y – x(h – c) – p(x(h – c))h < y – x(h) – p(x(h))h, for

x(h) minimizes x + p(x)h. Hence, the individual is worse off buying coverage. (In effect, the

moral hazard due to purchase of insurance leads him to take less care than is optimal.)

        The remaining possibility is that the individual purchases insurance and c > h. In this

case if he buys coverage, his expected utility is

(A16) y – x – B + p(x)(c – h) = y – x – p(x)c + p(x)(c – h) = y – x – p(x)h

since B = p(x)c for his chosen x. From the left side, it is clear that x = 0. Hence, his expected

utility is y – p(0)h, which exceeds y – x(h) – p(x(h))h, which is greater than or equal to the

minimized value of (A7). Hence the person is better off not buying coverage.



        Proof of claim (c) of section 3.2. Assume first that z < h. Consider the situation if an

individual buys insurance coverage c such that he can meet z but not enough to leave him with

positive assets after paying what he is able to in liability; that is, c is such that z # y – B + c # h.

Then his expected utility is

(A17) E(c) = maxx (1 – p(x))(y – B(c)) – x,

where B(c) = p(x)c for the selected x, which will be denoted in this proof by xI(c). We claim that

E(c) is decreasing in c. To show this, it suffices to show that B(c) is strictly increasing in c, for

maxx (1 – p(x))(y – B) – x is clearly strictly decreasing in B. Now consider c1 < c2 and suppose

that coverage c1 were offered at the premium B(c2). Then the individual would exercise care of

xI(c2) (since care is determined exclusively by B -- see (A17) -- not by c itself), so that p would

                                                    37
equal p(xI(c2))c1. But this means that the insurer would make profits; since p(xI(c2))c2 = B(c2),

we have p(xI(c2))c1 < B(c2). This in turn means that the premium such that profits are zero for c1

must be lower than B(c2), that is B(c1) < B(c2). Since, then E(c) is decreasing in c, c must be the

minimum such c allowing him to meet z.

         Let us now consider the situation where c is such that y – B + c $ h. Then expected

utility is

(A18) E(c) = maxx (1 – p(x))(y – B(c)) + p(x)(y – B(c) + c – h) – x

              = maxx y – B(c) – p(x)(h – c) – x.

Thus, it is clear that xI(c) is decreasing in c for the c under consideration. Additionally, since

B(c) = p(xI(c))c, E(c) reduces to y – p(xI(c))h – xI(c). Since xI(c) is decreasing in c, it follows that

E(c) is decreasing in c. Thus, E(c) is highest when c is lowest, such that y – B + c = h, but it was

shown above that this c is worse for the individual than c such that y – B + c = z.

         Now assume that z $ h. Thus, the individual’s expected utility as a function of such c is

again given by (A18), and essentially the argument just given shows that c will be chosen such

that y – B + c = z.



         Proof of claim (d) of section 4.2. This is clear from the text. However, in the case where

z > h, the claim is that expected expenses are x + p(x)h. This follows because, if z > h, a person

has assets left if an accident occurs, so his expected utility is (1 – p(x))(y – B) + p(x)(y – B + c –

h) – x = y – B – p(x)(h – c) – x = y – p(x)c – p(x)(h – c) – x = y – p(x)h – x, so his expected costs

are x + p(x)h.



                                                   38
         Proof of Proposition 5. Two examples establish the proposition.

         Example in which welfare is higher under z* than under y*. In the text, an example was

given in which welfare under z = 100 exceeded that under y* = 50, and which differed from the

assumptions of the model in two respects: g was not continuously distributed but was discrete,

with mass points at 5 and 15; and p(x) was not decreasing in x but fixed at .1. If the discrete

distribution of g is replaced with a continuous distribution with mass of nearly 2/3 sufficiently

concentrated about 5 and mass of nearly 1/3 sufficiently concentrated about 15, it is clear that z =

100 will remain superior to y*, which will be close to 50. Now consider functions of the form

p(x; 8) = .1 + 8p(x) for positive 8 < .9 for any p(x) of the type assumed in the model; it is evident

that for any such 8, p(x; 8) is of the type assumed in the model. Now as 8 → 0, it must be that

x(8)→ 0, where x(8) denotes the optimal choice of x given 8;40 and it is obvious that as 8 → 0,

p(x(8))→ .1. Hence, it is clear that if we choose 8 sufficiently small and replace p(x) / .1 with

p(x; 8), then z = 100 will still be superior to y*, which will be close to 50.

         Example in which social welfare is higher under y* than under z*. We complete here the

discrete example described in the Notes to the Proposition, from which it would be

straightforward to construct a continuous example along the lines described above for the other

example.

         If z # 20, individuals will not need to buy liability insurance and will not do so, by claim

(b) of section 3.2. Then all individuals with y = 20 will engage in the activity and will choose x

= 0; for spending 2.49 lowers their expected liability by only (.05)(20) = 1, and their expected

40
  We want to show that for any positive * , x(8) < * for 8 sufficiently low. Consider 8 < */h. Then x $ * is inferior
to x = 0, since the reduction in expected liability from a positive x is bounded by 8h but the x in question is at least *,


                                                            39
expenses are thus (.15)(20) = 3 < 5. Individuals with y = 50 will also engage in the activity and

behave in a first-best way as just described above. Because individuals with y = 20 engage in the

activity and do not take care, social welfare will be lower than under y = 50 (social welfare will

fall by (.25)(15 – 5) + (.25)(15 – 13)). Next, consider z in the interval (20, 50]. It is clear that

individuals with y = 50 will again behave in a first-best way. We will show that the behavior of

individuals with y = 20 will again lower social welfare, and thus that the outcome will be inferior

to that under y = 50. For an individual with y = 20 to engage in the activity, he must purchase

liability insurance. Also, note that if an individual with y = 20 engages in the activity, he will

choose x = 0, for since he pays a positive insurance premium, his available assets will be less

than even 20; thus the probability of harm will be .15. To determine whether individuals with y

= 20 will engage in the activity, recall from claim (d), that if they engage in the activity, their

expected expenses will be x + p(x)z, implying that they will be .15z. Thus, even if z = 50,

expected expenses are 7.5, so that at least individuals with g = 13 will engage in the activity, but

that will lower social welfare, as expected harm is 15. (If individuals with g = 5 engage in the

activity, social welfare will be even lower.) Last, consider z > 50. Such a z will lead to a

decline in social welfare among individuals with y = 20 unless z is high enough to discourage

them from engaging in the activity. For this to be true, .15z must exceed 13, meaning that z must

exceed 86.66. However, when z is at least 86.66, those individuals with y = 50 must buy liability

insurance exceeding 36.66 to meet z, and the premium payment they make will in turn eliminate

their incentive to take care.41 Hence, social welfare also falls when z exceeds 86.66.


and * > 8h. It follows that x(8) < *.
41
     To meet the requirement, coverage c must satisfy 50 – B + c = 86.66, so c = 36.66 + B. Now if individuals do

                                                           40
         Proof of Remark in section 3.2. This is clear from the Notes to the Proposition in the

text.




have an incentive to take care, then p = .1, so B for coverage of 36.66 would be 3.66. This means that their
remaining assets 50 – B are less than 46.34. But taking care would then benefit an individual by less than
(.05)(46.34) = 2.32 < 2.49. This contradicts the assumption that they would take care.

                                                         41
