                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               TRANSACTION STRUCTURES IN THE DEVELOPING WORLD:
                        EVIDENCE FROM PRIVATE EQUITY

                                              Josh Lerner
                                            Antoinette Schoar

                                          Working Paper 10348
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w10348


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      March 2004




We thank many private equity groups for making this study possible by providing the transaction information.
Teresa Barger, Richard Frank, Felda Hardymon, Gustavo Herrero, Mario Mahler, Ken Morse, Bruce Purdue,
Kanako Sekine, and Camille Tang Yeh introduced us to many groups. Zahi Ben-David, Adam Kolasinski,
Jiro Kondo, and especially Yok Nam Ng provided excellent research assistance. We also thank our legal
research team: Arturo Garcia de Leon, May Fong Yue Lo, Alexander Nadmitov, Rahul Singh, Michiel
Vissier, Agata Waclawik, and Feng Wang, as well as Sridhar Gorthi of Trilegal. We thank Erik Bergloff,
Peter Henry, Katharina Lewellen, Roberta Romano, Andrei Shleifer, Per Stromberg, Yishay Yafeh, and
participants at presentations at Harvard University, the London School of Economics, the Stockholm Institute
for Financial Research, and the Western Finance Association annual meeting for helpful comments. Harvard
Business School’s Division of Research provided financial assistance. All errors are our own. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

©2004 by Josh Lerner and Antoinette Schoar. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
Transaction Structures in the Developing World
Josh Lerner and Antoinette Schoar
NBER Working Paper No. 10348
March 2004
JEL No. F3, G2, K2

                                           ABSTRACT

While variations in public securities markets across nations have attracted increasing scrutiny,
private financings have received little attention. But in developing nations, the bulk of financings
are private ones. This paper analyzes 210 private equity transactions in developing countries. We
find that unlike in the U.S., where convertible preferred securities are ubiquitous, in developing
nations a much broader array of securities are employed and private equity investors often have
fewer contractual protections. The choice of security appears to be driven by the legal and economic
circumstances of the nation and the private equity group. Investments in common law nations are
structured similar to those in the U.S., being less likely to employ common stock or straight debt,
and more likely to use preferred stock with a variety of covenants. By way of contrast, in nations
where the rule of law is less established, private equity groups are likely to use common stock and
own the majority of the firm's equity if the investment encounters difficulties. Private equity groups
based in the U.S. and U.K. rely more on preferred securities but also adapt transactions to local
conditions. These contractual differences appear to have real consequences: larger transactions with
higher valuations are seen in common law countries. These findings suggest that the structure of a
country's legal system affects private contracts and cannot easily be undone by (bi-lateral) private
solutions.

Josh Lerner                                           Antoinette Schoar
Harvard Business School                               MIT Sloan School of Management
Rock Center, Room 214                                 Finance Department, Room 52-455
Cambridge, MA 02163                                   50 Memorial Drive
and NBER                                              Cambridge, MA 02142
josh@hbs.edu                                          and NBER
                                                      aschoar@mit.edu
1. Introduction

       The literature on law and finance has highlighted the variation of financial

transactions across countries with different legal regimes and the implications for

economic outcomes.      The majority of these studies, however, have focused on the

structure of the countries’ public markets. Only a handful of works have studied the

effects of legal origins on the functioning of private transactions. But as a growing

literature highlights, public markets in developing countries play only a very limited role

relative to private transactions in the financing of investments. Figure 1 shows that the

overall market capitalization of public firms constitutes only a small fraction of GDP in

developing countries, while in developed economies like the US the ratio is above 100

percent.1   Overall, there is a greater reliance on private transactions in developing

countries than in developed economies. Moreover, from the extensive literature on the

role of stock markets across countries (see, for instance, Demirgüc-Kunt and Levine

[2001]), we might anticipate that the dynamics of public and private transactions would

be quite different. Therefore, it is important to understand how the legal system and the

varying enforcement of laws in different countries across the world affect the structure of

private transactions.



       In this paper, we analyze how contracting choices by private parties respond to

their country’s legal regime, and if the differences in the contracting environment are


1
 We present data for the nine developing countries from which we obtain the bulk of our
sample. We observe a few outlier countries that have very small economies but serve as
financial centers for the surrounding regions, such as Hong Kong, Singapore, and
Luxembourg.
reflected in the real outcomes of the investments: e.g., the valuation and size of the

financings. An alternative view might suggest that private parties are able to design

contracts in such a way to “contract around” any differences in the legal environment so

as to replicate the first-best contracts (see for example Johnson, McMillan, and Woodruff

[2002]).



       We focus on a specific set of private transactions: private equity investments. We

concentrate on these transactions for two reasons: contracts in this area are well

documented and second, in contrast to other private transactions, follow a relatively

standardized set-up. Private equity transactions represent a relatively modest share of the

absolute value of investments made in most developing countries. But we think that they

are representative of the legal and economic considerations that private parties face in

any contract negotiation. Because of these advantages, we believe that private equity

deals are ideal for a comparison of contractual structures and outcomes across countries.



       We were able to collect data on the actual contractual relationships between

investors and entrepreneurs. Using a sample of 210 transactions from a wide variety of

private equity groups, we explore the variation in deal structures across different

countries in which the investments are made. This analysis allows us to shed light on the

contracting challenges that equity-holders face in countries with different legal regimes.



       We also contrast the contracting choices of local private equity groups with those

of foreign investors, in particular, U.S.- and U.K.-based organizations. If differences in




                                             2
contracting choices reflect the level of the country’s financial know-how (or business

practices), we would expect that private equity groups based in the nations with the most

developed private equity industries would rely on contract provisions that are similar to

the ones they use at home, no matter where they invest. If contracting differences are

instead driven by underlying constraints in a country’s legal system, however, we would

expect that even foreign private equity groups will adopt local contracting standards.



       We find that legal origin, rule of law, and judicial efficiency are important in

explaining cross sectional differences in contracts across countries. While U.K.- and

U.S.-based private equity groups are somewhat more likely to write contracts that

resemble provisions in their home countries, they do not fully replicate U.S.-style

contracts and adjust many provisions to the local environment. Overall, we infer that

there is a strong need for groups to “go local” in their contracting choices. In a

contemporaneous paper, Kaplan, Martel, and Stromberg [2003] investigate a similar

question for a set of high-income European countries. The results in their paper differ

from ours quite substantially; since they do not find that private equity groups based in

common law based countries tend to “go local.” We discuss these results and their

relationship to our study in more detail in Section 3.



       Several striking patterns emerge from the analysis. Unlike in the United States,

where the use of convertible preferred securities is ubiquitous in private equity,

substantially different securities are employed in developing nations. More than one-half

of the transactions employ common stock, and a subset of deals even uses debt. The




                                              3
choice of securities appears to be driven by the legal regime in the country and the nature

of the private equity group. Investments in countries with a common law tradition and

where the rule of law is well established are far less likely to employ common stock or

straight debt, and more likely to employ preferred stock. Similarly, transactions in

common law nations are generally associated with greater contractual protections such as

more covenants favoring the private equity group. By way of contrast, investors in non-

common law countries, whether with French or socialist legal backgrounds, appear to

rely more heavily on obtaining majority control of the firm’s equity.



       Surprisingly, the composition of boards of directors differs only slightly from that

seen in the United States. Common law countries have more substantial representation of

founders and managers on the board, while French legal origin countries have more

private equity group representatives on the board. These findings suggest that board

structure and majority equity ownership may serve as a substitute for contractual

protections.



     Finally, we investigate if the observed differences in contractual terms across legal

regimes also relate to differences in the valuation and size of the investments made. We

find that firms’ (implied) valuations are significantly higher in nations with better rule of

law and those with a common law tradition. Also, countries with better rule of law have

significantly higher levels of financing. The difference in financing levels between

common law and civil law countries is not significant, but both have higher financing

levels than countries with socialist legal origins. While we would like to examine the




                                             4
outcome of transactions as well, the relative youth of the investments and the limited

opportunities that these private equity groups have had to exit the investments precluded

such an analysis.



     These systematic differences suggest that contracting parties do face different

constraints across legal regimes. This effect is robust even after controlling for the

headquarters of the private equity group: our results are not purely driven by common

law funds investing in common law countries. In fact, we find that U.S.- and U.K.- based

funds invest in a wide range of countries with different legal backgrounds.



       A natural question is whether private equity groups vary their contracting choices

across countries because of differences in investor protection and enforcement of laws, or

because of direct constraints on the type of contracts that can be written. For instance, it

would not be a surprise to see little reliance on convertible preferred securities, if the

security law in the country prevents the use of convertible preferred altogether. We

addressed this concern by seeking to understand the legal curbs on private equity groups

in the nine nations most frequently represented in our sample. We do not find evidence

that the results are “hard-wired” by constraints on the contract space; our findings hold

even when we exclude those countries where the private equity groups face a constrained

choice set.




                                             5
       The plan of this paper is as follows.        Section 2 briefly reviews the earlier

literature. Section 3 describes the construction of the data set. The analysis is in Section

4. The final section concludes the paper.



2. Related Literature and Its Implications

       Our analysis is at the intersection of two bodies of work. First, an extensive “law

and finance” literature in recent years has highlighted the importance of a nation’s legal

origins in determining the structure and efficiency of its financial (and other) institutions.

Many institutions in developing countries are not indigenous, but rather have been

transplanted during colonization: for instance, English colonies widely adopted common

law-based legal systems, while colonies of French legal family nations adopted civil law

codes. A variety of papers have documented the importance of legal origin, starting with

La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, Shleifer, and Vishny [1997, 1998]. They identify legal

origin as a crucial determinant of the laws governing the protection of outside investors

from expropriation by corporate insiders, with common law systems providing better

protection than civil law ones. They also show that better investor protection is strongly

associated with broader and more valuable capital markets, a faster pace of public

offerings, more dispersed ownership of public firms, and other indicators of financial

development. Subsequent research shows that civil law countries exhibit other

problematic features, such as heavier government intervention in economic activity (La

Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, Shleifer, and Vishny [1999]) and more burdensome regulation

of new business entry (Djankov, La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, and Shleifer [2002b]).




                                              6
       The second body of related empirical literature examines the structure of venture

capital investments. For a detailed review of theoretical literature on the structure of

these transactions, the reader is referred to Kaplan and Stromberg [2003]. This work,

such as Gompers [1995], Gompers [1998], and Kaplan and Stromberg [2003], has largely

focused on the United States. The authors emphasize the crucial impact of the degree of

uncertainty surrounding the transaction. In settings where there is substantial uncertainty

surrounding the new venture, greater informational asymmetries should be present and

the contribution of the entrepreneur should be more critical. In these settings, private

equity investors will need to take steps to protect themselves from agency problems.

These analyses will serve as an important benchmark for us. But our focus here will not

be on the differences between certain industries and types of investments, but on the

variation across different countries and legal regimes.



       A couple of earlier academic studies have explicitly compared private equity

investments across a number of developing countries. Jeng and Wells [2001] analyze the

determinants of venture capital for a panel data set of 21 (mostly developed) countries.

They find that IPOs are the strongest driver of venture capital investing, particularly later-

stage investments. Early-stage venture capital investing, however, is relatively unaffected

by IPO activity but negatively impacted by labor market rigidities. Cumming and

MacIntosh [2002] examine the types of transactions funded and exit routes employed in

12 Asian nations. They argue that the legal regimes affect the types of investments

selected and the way in which the private equity groups exit their holdings, but not the

level of the returns the investors enjoy.




                                              7
       The paper that follows our analysis most closely is Kaplan, Martel, and Stromberg

[2003]. The authors focus on private equity contracts in a number of higher-income

European countries. Parallel to our analysis, they find that contracting choices vary across

countries with different legal regimes. Interestingly, however, when controlling for the

legal origin of the private equity group, they do not find the “going local” effect that we

document for our sample of developing countries. Instead, they show that most of the

variation between common law and civil law contracts can be explained by the fact that

U.K.- and U.S.-based private equity groups use contracts that are very similar to the ones

they employ in their home countries. It is possible that the higher sophistication of the

judicial system in these countries allows private equity groups to experiment with

contracts that are different from those customarily employed. One might also conjecture,

however, that a perceived sense of similarity between the U.S. and Continental Europe

led investors in some cases to make contracting choices that might ultimately be very

difficult to enforce in these countries.



3. The Sample

       We constructed the sample by approaching a number of private equity groups

active in developing nations.2       We asked each to provide us with the investment



2
 According to the World Bank, developing nations are those countries that have either
low- or middle-level per capita incomes; have underdeveloped capital markets; and/or are
not industrialized. It should be noted, however, that the application of these criteria is
somewhat subjective. For instance, Kuwait appears on many lists of developing nations
despite its high per capita gross domestic product. The reason for its inclusion lies in the
income distribution inequality that exists there, which has not allowed it to reach the
general living standards of developed countries. For the purposes of this paper, we take


                                             8
memorandum or private placement memorandum of as many transactions as possible, as

well as the associated stock purchase agreements, preferred stock agreements, and any

other documents associated with the structuring and governance of the transaction. We

asked groups to choose a representative array of transactions, along dimensions such as

the type of deal, the location and industry of the firm, and the success of the transaction.

Given the lack of any comprehensive database of private equity transactions in the

developing world, it was difficult to verify the completeness of the sample.



       We deliberately attempted to recruit as diverse an array of private equity funds as

possible.   To this end, we complemented our own direct contacts (which were

disproportionately those of large and U.S.-based groups) with those of four international

development organizations, which tend to invest in smaller funds based in developing

countries. These organizations encouraged funds in which they were invested to provide

data as well.



       Table 1 summarizes the sample. The 210 transactions are from 28 private equity

groups, who contributed between 2 and 21 deals for our sample.            The transactions

occurred between 1987 and 2003, with the bulk of investments having been made

between 1996 and 2002. We first assigned the industries to detailed classes. Because a

number of these industries shared common characteristics (e.g., a considerable number of


an expansive view of what constitutes a developing nation, and simply eliminate any
transactions taking place in the 24 nations who were original members of the
Organisation for Cooperation and Development or joined within the first fifteen years of
its creation (i.e., through the addition of New Zealand in 1973).




                                             9
transactions were in traditional manufacturing industries that are characterized by little

R&D and few intangible assets), we consolidated the categories. The industries include a

broad array, from food to information technology.



       We classified the transactions by type using the definitions in European Venture

Capital Association [2002]. The investments are dominated by expansion transactions

(which typically entail the provision of capital in growing firms that are more mature than

the typical venture-backed concern), as well as venture capital and buyout transactions.

The other transactions are, as discussed above, less commonly seen in developed nations,

such as investments in privatizations, initial public offerings, and acquisitions.



       The nations represented are summarized in the final panel of Table 1. Thirty

distinct countries are represented, from Africa, the Americas, Asia, and Eastern Europe.

No single nation or region dominates the sample.



       From Panel A of Table 2, we see that the average GNP per capita for the countries

in our sample is $2142 per year. Moreover, 27% of the investments included in our study

are based in countries that have British legal origins, 30% in countries that have French

legal origins, and 42% are in former socialist countries. By way of comparison, 56% of

the investments included in this study are funded by private equity partnerships that are

based either in the U.S. or U.K. While U.K.- and U.S.-based partnerships in our sample

make the majority of investments in countries with a British legal origin, we find that

they also invest in a large fraction of deals that are not based in common law countries.




                                             10
This heterogeneity is important, since it will allow us to analyze whether a given

partnership adjusts the contract terms in response to the environment of the country

where the deal takes place.



       To get a deeper understanding of the extent to which the choices of the private

equity groups were driven by the laws in each nation, we research the legal factors

affecting private equity groups in the nine nations most frequently represented in our

sample. We recruited a number of L.L.M. candidates at Harvard Law School from these

respective countries. We asked them to research the factors influencing private equity

funds in their home country, through an examination of the relevant texts and interviews

with practitioners who work in private equity in the respective countries.            This

information is presented in highly summarized form in the Appendix.3



       In a study along these lines, selection biases are an almost inevitable consequence.

(At least somewhat ameliorating this concern, we obtained transactions from a significant

number of groups.) It is likely that the private equity groups that participated in this

study are more Western-oriented and sophisticated than their peers. The presence of

these biases make the substantial differences that we see from the U.S. patterns even

more striking.



4. Analysis


3
 More detailed documentation of the key legal considerations for each of these countries
can be obtained from the authors.




                                           11
       We proceed in several steps. We first examine the broad characteristics of the

transactions. We then consider the types of securities employed. We next turn to

understanding the allocation of equity ownership. We consider several dimensions of

how the control over the company is allocated. We look at the size and valuation of the

investments. Finally, we look at the correlations between these various contractual

features.



A. Summary Statistics

       Panel B of Table 2 provides an initial overview of the transactions.            The

differences between this sample and U.S. transactions are striking. We will highlight

several examples. In the United States, private equity transactions are dominated by

those employing convertible preferred stock: nearly 80% of the transactions in Kaplan

and Stromberg’s [2003] sample of 200 U.S. deals rely on this security.4 Common stock

is quite rare, found in only a little more than 10% of the U.S. deals. In our sample, the

transactions are dominated by common stock: fully 54% of the developing country

transactions employ these securities. Convertible preferred stock is only encountered in

21% of the deals.5



4
 It should be noted that Kaplan and Stromberg’s sample includes only venture capital
transactions, which would encompass transactions described as “venture capital” and
“expansion” transactions in the developing world. (The category of “expansion” deals is
not frequently employed in the U.S.) Legal texts (e.g., Bartlett [1995]), however, suggest
we would observe similar patterns if we examined all U.S. private equity transactions.
5
 We tried as best as possible to avoid any bias in our coding of contractual terms that are
purely based on differences in contractual language. For example, any security structure
that has payoff streams equivalent to a convertible preferred would be classified as such,
even if the contract did not explicitly use that term.



                                            12
       Second, many of the protections commonly employed by venture capitalists in the

U.S. are rarely found here. Kaplan and Stromberg [2003] find that venture capitalists

obtain redemption rights in 84% of the transactions, anti-dilution protection in 95% of

deals, and founder vesting requirements in 42% of transactions. The corresponding

shares in our sample are 31%, 27%, and 5%.



       Finally, the structure of the boards differs little from that seen in the U.S. The

mean U.S. transaction has a board with 6.2 members, of which two seats were allocated

to the founders and managers and two-and-a-half to venture capitalists (Kaplan and

Stromberg [2003]). The patterns here are similar, though we see a slightly greater

representation of founders and managers on the boards.



       In Table 3, we include a number of representative provisions that reflect some of

the interesting differences with the private equity contracts typically observed in the U.S.

Two aspects are particularly interesting. First, the lack of liquid capital markets in these

countries means that the choice of exit option is very different from the U.S. For

example, many private equity contracts in our sample of emerging market deals

implicitly—but often explicitly—state that the preferred exit option is a “sale to a

strategic buyer.” In eight cases, a potential strategic buyer even invests alongside the

private equity group in the financing transaction. Also, we see a much greater tendency to

rely on large dividend payments out of profits when exit through an IPO or sale is not

possible.




                                            13
       A second interesting feature is the reliance on parent companies to either enforce

or back up deals. In many developing countries, ownership structures of firms are much

more complicated and pyramidal than in the U.S. Often a company is ultimately

controlled by a parent company that holds important control rights (but not always cash

flow rights of similar magnitude). We see that in a few instances, private equity groups

use the parent companies to back the loans of the subsidiary. Moreover, in seven cases

we see that the parent provides a potential exit strategy for the private equity group: the

investors are allowed to put back the stock they own to the parent, whose shares are

probably much more liquid (and potentially less volatile).



B. Regression Analysis

       The econometric analysis throughout the paper employs a similar structure: we

begin by analyzing the provisions in the transactions using dummy variables for each

provision.



       The main explanatory variables we are interested in are the countries’ legal origin

and their contractual and economic circumstances surrounding the private equity

investments. We also control for industry, deal type, and year fixed effects.6 While we




6
 We use dummy variables for the observations in three time periods in the reported
regressions: the years 1993 to 1997, 1998 to 2000, and 2001 to 2003. These periods
correspond respectively to the years when many institutions made initial investments into
private equity funds focusing on leveraged buyouts in developing nations, the growth of
venture capital funding in these nations, and the recent sharp fall-off in venture capital
and private equity activity there. The results are robust to the use of dummy variables for


                                            14
believe that the use of these control variables is necessary to avoid potential biases, they

come at a cost: the large numbers of dummy variables play havoc with the results when

we employ a non-linear specification. Thus, while the univariate nature of many of the

dependent variables might suggest the use of a logit specification, we will simply report

ordinary least squares results. (Results employing logit specifications without industry

dummy variables are generally very similar.)



       We also anticipate that the following dimensions may be important in affecting

contracting choices due to underlying differences in the nature and development stage of

a country, independent of the country’s legal origin. Therefore we include a number of

time-varying control variables:

   •   The extent of economic development in the nation. The nature of the opportunities

       that the private equity investors face may differ substantially with the degree of

       development of the nation, which will in turn be a function of its initial resources

       and many other considerations. These environmental factors may affect both the

       size and nature of available financing opportunities, and in turn influence the

       contracting structures as well. We employ the per capita gross national product

       (in current dollars) averaged over the 1990s.

   •   The extent of the rule of law in the nation. Since the relationship between a

       private equity investor and an entrepreneur is fundamentally a contractual one, the

       manner and ease with which property rights can be protected in the courts is a



each year, as well as to the use of controls measuring the annual level of private equity
fundraising worldwide and of foreign direct investment into developing nations.



                                            15
        critical measure. As a result, the types of arrangements entered into between

        these parties should differ. The measure we employ, originally developed by the

        Fraser Institute, was employed in Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson [2001]. This

        index is a rating on a scale from zero to ten, with the greater the equality of parties

        and the access to a non-discriminatory judiciary, the higher the score.7

    •   A measure of judicial efficiency. An alternative measure of the legal protection

        that firms can expect in a given country is the index of judicial efficiency. It

        represents an assessment of the “efficiency and integrity of the legal environment

        as it affects business, particularly foreign firms.” It may be “taken to represent

        investors’ assessment of conditions in the country in question.” This measure

        focuses more on the enforcement of laws rather than the way the law is written. It

        employs a scale from 0 to 10, with lower scores representing lower efficiency

        levels. This measure is produced by the country risk-rating agency International

        Country Risk (ICR), and has been previously used in Djankov, La Porta, Lopez-

        de-Silanes, and Shleifer [2002a].



        Throughout, we employ logarithms of the non-univariate dependent and

independent variables. Our rationale is that the impact of many of the measures is likely

to be non-linear. For instance, the shift from $500 to $600 in per capita GNP is likely to

be far more meaningful than one from $8500 to $8600.



7
 We compared this measure to the index of property right protection developed in the
1997 Index of Economic Freedom, which was used in La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes,
Shleifer, and Vishny [1999]. The correlation coefficient between the two measures is
high (0.82), but the rule of law measure was available for a considerably larger number of
countries.


                                              16
          B1. Security Types

          We begin the econometric analyses by examining the types of securities

employed. Panel A of Table 4 shows that common stock is less frequently employed in

nations with a British legal origin. This pattern continues to hold when we add controls

for whether the private equity group is based in a common law country. Thus, the

observed pattern is not simply a consequence of the fact that investments in common law

countries are disproportionately made by funds based in nations such as the United

States.    Meanwhile, groups based in the U.S. and U.K. use common stock less often.

(The results do weaken when we employ a measure of judicial efficiency as well, which

reduces the sample size.) A similar pattern is seen in the use of straight debt in Panel B:

such a security is much less frequently employed in common law countries and by U.S.-

and U.K.-based funds.



          The reverse pattern is observed in Panel C of Table 4, where we examine the use

of preferred stock. This security, so ubiquitous in the U.S., is disproportionately seen in

nations with British legal origins and in transactions undertaken by American and British

private equity groups.         The security is also employed when the index of judicial

efficiency is higher. (Nations with French legal origins are also significantly more likely

to employ such provisions in this regression, but not in other specifications.)



          We then repeat this analysis while excluding any countries that have legal

restrictions on the type of securities that can be used in private equity transactions. The




                                              17
idea is that we want to prevent our results from being “hard wired” by legal constraints in

different countries. For example, in the case of the Peoples Republic of China, domestic

as well as foreign firms can only get permission to use security structures other than

common stock in very exceptional cases. We find that the results presented above are

qualitatively unchanged when excluding nations from the sample that have any

constraints. This suggests that our findings reflect the investors’ contracting choices and

not just the constraints imposed by different legal regimes.



       B2. Allocation of Equity

       We then turn to the allocation of equity ownership. Panels A and B of Table 5

examine the allocation of control of the company’s equity to the private equity group.

The dependent variable is a dummy that takes on the value one if the private equity

investors have at least 50% of the equity, calculated at their maximum and minimum

stake respectively. (The size of the stake can vary, whether due to contingent clauses or

the vesting of founder and manager shares.) Panel C of Table 5 analyzes the magnitude

of the difference between the largest and smallest ownership stake assigned to the private

equity group.



       The key findings are as follows:

   •   When the rule of law is more established, private equity groups are less likely to

       have control of the firms’ equity in the maximum stake scenario as well as the

       minimum stake scenario. When we add a judicial efficiency measure as well, it

       becomes consistently negatively significant, while the coefficient on the rule of




                                            18
    law variable declines. This finding is consistent with a theme that emerged from

    our conversations with private equity groups. The groups highlighted that they

    placed much greater emphasis on having controlling blocks of the equity of firms

    in nations with poor property rights, particularly during periods when

    performance was troublesome.

•   Second, investments in nations with a common law legal tradition are more likely

    to have control under the maximum scenario. Private equity groups based in the

    U.K. and U.S. are similarly more likely to have control stakes in the maximum

    control scenario, but less likely to have controlling stakes in the minimum control

    scenario. This suggests a greater reliance of these groups on variations in

    ownership control as an incentive mechanism for founders and managers, as well

    as a protection in bad states, perhaps due to their greater ability to enforce

    contingent contracts. (For a formal treatment of this point, see Gennaioli [2003].)

    This idea is also reconfirmed in the analysis of differences between maximum and

    minimum ownership stakes in Panel C of Table 6. Again we find that U.K. legal

    origin countries have much greater variation between the maximum and minimum

    control stakes than civil law countries.

•   Finally, investments in countries with a higher GNP per capita are more likely to

    allow the private equity group to have control in the maximum and minimum

    stake scenarios, as well as to use contingent securities.



    B3. Control Rights




                                         19
        The next four tables analyze what we term control rights: provisions that affect

the prerogatives of the private equity investors or the managers they finance. Here

several consistent themes emerge. Transactions in common law countries are more likely

to offer protections for the private equity investors. We also find that private equity

groups based in the U.K. and U.S. demand more protections than others. Finally, deals in

wealthier nations are generally more likely to include investor protections.



        More specifically, we find the following results for these contract provisions:

    •   First, in Table 6 we analyze the existence of anti-dilution provisions, the right to

        have some compensation if subsequent financing is done at a lower price, and

        provisions for automatic conversion. Lawyers typically interpret the latter as

        protecting the lead private equity investor against individual or smaller private

        equity investors, who may seek to “hold up” an IPO or acquisition by refusing to

        convert their shares. It should be noted that while many nations give investors

        rights to preserve their pro rata equity share in future financings, anti-dilution

        provisions give far greater protections to the private equity groups.8 We find that

        investments in nations with a common law tradition tend to have more

        protections, as seen in the analyses of the anti-dilution provisions and automatic

        conversion provisions. Similarly we find that higher per capita GNP generally is

        related to a higher degree of protection against anti-dilution and automatic




We were able to identify one nation that legally prohibited dilutive financings (Brazil).
8

The results continued to hold when we excluded this nation from the sample.




                                             20
        conversion provisions. We also observe that U.S.- and U.K.-based private equity

        groups tend to rely more heavily on these protections.



    •   Table 7 looks at the extent to which the ability of founders and management to

        liquidate their stake is constrained, either through provisions regarding vesting

        (the staged provision of shares to management) or explicit restrictions on stock

        sales. Because we did not always receive the agreements between the companies

        and managers from the private equity groups, we can measure this phenomenon in

        a less thorough manner than the other transaction characteristics.9 The results

        regarding these contract dimensions did not show any significant patterns. One

        possible explanation was the small sample size for this analysis.



    •   Table 8 investigates the structure of the board as specified in the stock purchase

        agreements, examining the overall board size as well as the seats assigned to the

        private equity group and founders and managers. We see that common law

        nations tend to have larger boards with greater representation of founders and

        managers on the board. One possible interpretation of this finding is that the

        effectiveness of other methods of enforcing investor rights is sufficiently large, so

        that the addition of other board members, and the possible loss of control entailed,

        is less critical.




9
 Again, the results continued to hold when we excluded China, where managerial equity
holdings are sharply limited.




                                             21
     •   Finally, Table 9 looks at supermajority provisions. These provisions regarding

         supermajority approval (where some fraction greater than one-half of the

         members must approve a decision) appear nineteen different places in these

         agreements. We score these clauses from zero to three, with a higher score

         representing a more stringent supermajority clause.10        We simply sum these

         separate scores. We find that investments in common law nations are more likely

         to employ supermajority provisions, while investments in civil law countries are

         less likely to include them in the contracts. Similarly, deals in richer nations rely

         more frequently on supermajority provisions. A puzzling finding in our data is the

         reduced use of supermajority provisions in countries with better rule of law.

         Countries with better judicial efficiency, however, tend to rely more frequently on

         these provisions (though this result is only significant at the 10% level).



C. Financing Characteristics

         A natural question, suggested by La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, Shleifer, and Vishny

[2003], relates to the consequences of these investment choices. Ultimately, we would

like to examine this question by looking at the relationship between transaction structures

and outcomes of the investments.           Given the relative recentness of most of the

investments, and the limited ability that investors have had to exit private equity

investments in developing countries in recent years, such an analysis would be premature.


10
  Zero represents a case with no such provision. Cases where a supermajority of the
shareholders must approve the step are coded as one; instances where a supermajority of
the board must approve are coded as two. Three denotes cases where a supermajority of
both equity-holders and board must approve.



                                              22
Instead, we simply focus on the characteristics of the financial transaction: the size of the

financing and the associated valuation.



       When we look at the size of the financing in Panel A of Table 10, we see that (not

surprisingly) investments in firms with higher sales and in nations with greater per capita

GNP involve larger disbursements of capital. In addition, transactions in common law

countries and by private equity groups based in the U.S. and U.K. are larger in

magnitude, though the effects are less consistent.



       When we turn to valuations,11 we find again that firms with larger revenues are

associated with higher valuations. Both countries rooted in the British and French legal

families are assigned higher valuations, though the magnitude of the effect is

considerably larger and more consistently significant in the common law nations. Higher

GNP per capita and American and British private equity investors are associated as well

with higher valuations. Finally, the index of judicial efficiency is strongly associated

with higher valuations. All these findings suggest that the differences in legal regime

affect not just the structure of these transactions, but also have real effects on firms’

value.12



11
  Following Gompers and Lerner [2000], we examine the “post-money” valuation: the
valuation of the firm after the completion of the financing transaction. As noted above,
the results remain robust when we add additional controls for the characteristics of the
firms and transactions.
12
  Our interpretation of these results must be somewhat cautious since we only observe
realized transactions. Common law countries might have better protection of shareholder
rights and we would therefore expect to see higher valuations for a given investment.
Investments that are completed in non-common law countries, however, might be


                                             23
D. Correlation of Different Contract Parts

       To this point, we have been analyzing each of the contractual features in isolation.

In the final analysis, we investigate the correlation structure between different parts of the

individual contracts. Our goal is to understand whether security structure, ownership

stake, and other control provisions are used as complements or substitutes in financial

contracting. For example, we could imagine that deals where the private equity group

takes a common stock position rely more heavily on having a controlling ownership

stake. In that case, even though the security structure per se does not give the private

equity group as much control rights as a preferred security would, the fact that the group

has the majority ownership stake could be seen as an alternative control mechanism.



       To undertake this analysis, we regress each of the variables of interest on each

other, as well as controls for the logarithm of gross national product, the rule of law

index, and the dummy variables for the year, industry, and deal type. In Panel A, we look

at the correlation between various contractual provisions; in Panel B, we examine the

correlation with financing size and valuation. In each cell we report only three sets of

numbers: each line represents the coefficient of a regression of a contract part on a

different provision of the contract. We repeat these regressions for the entire sample, for

the common law nations only, and for the other nations.


particularly promising. Thus, there may not be as many differences in the intensive
margin, i.e. the observed amount of financing, as along the extensive margin (the number
and types of deals that are done). As discussed before, it is impossible for us to construct
an exhaustive sample of deals for these countries, which makes it very difficult to draw
any conclusions about the extensive margin.


                                             24
        Table 11 shows a number of results from this exercise:

   •   First, we see that while the use of debt and debt-like securities is positively related

       to the presence of common shares, we find a negative correlation between

       common and preferred stock.

   •   We find that preferred stock offerings are more likely to employ other control

       provisions such as anti-dilution and automatic conversion provisions. These

       effects are strongest in common law nations. These features are generally

       negatively associated with common stock.

   •   We find a strong positive correlation between the maximum ownership stakes that

       the private equity group obtains and the use of debt. The correlation between the

       maximum ownership stake and the use of preferred securities is inconsistent and

       rather small. If we look at the correlation of a private equity group’s minimum

       ownership stake with the other contract parts (not reported), the difference

       between common and preferred stock deals becomes even stronger.

   •   Common stock is correlated with smaller deal sizes and valuations. Contractual

       provisions that protect investors (e.g., anti-dilution and automatic conversion

       provisions) are associated with higher valuations, but this effect seems confined to

       common law nations.

Overall, these results suggest that contracts differ systematically in the way they aim to

provide investors with control rights. While preferred security structures and the use of

control provisions such as anti-dilution clauses are generally used as complements,

common share deals and debt-like securities rely more heavily on controlling ownership



                                             25
stakes, and much less frequently on other control provisions. Taken together, these results

suggest that contracts either seem to follow a structure that is fairly reminiscent of U.S.

contracts—i.e., preferred type securities accompanied by a number of control

provisions—or rely on debt or common stock securities without many other control

provisions.



5. Conclusions

         While variations in public securities markets across nations have attracted

increasing scrutiny, the determinants of the variations in private financings have attracted

much less attention. This neglect is particularly worrisome in developing nations, since

the bulk of financings in these markets are private ones.



         This paper seeks to understand how the origins of legal regimes, as well as

differences in the enforcement of these laws, affect private transactions in developing

nations. We focus on a well-documented and reasonable systematized set of transactions:

investments by private equity groups into entrepreneurial or restructuring firms. This

paper analyzes a sample of 210 transactions from a wide variety of private equity groups

in developing countries. We assess deal structures, and how they vary with the nature of

the nations in which the investments are made.



         We find a number of interesting patterns:

     •    Unlike in the United States, where the use of convertible preferred securities is

          ubiquitous, in developing nations a much broader array of securities are




                                             26
    employed. Protections of private equity investor rights that are standard in the

    United States are encountered far less frequently.

•   The choice of security employed appears to be driven by the circumstances of

    the private equity group and the nation. Investments in common law nations and

    by private equity groups based in the U.S. and U.K. are considerably less likely

    to employ common stock or straight debt, and more likely to employ preferred

    stock.

•   In nations where the rule of law is less well established, private equity groups

    emphasize equity protection. They are likely to make the size of their equity

    stakes contingent on the performance of the company and to have the majority of

    the firm’s equity if the investment encounters difficulties.

•   Transactions in common law nations are generally associated with more

    contractual protections for the private equity group. Transaction features appear

    to be highly correlated, with preferred stock transactions being associated with

    the greater use of a variety of contractual protections, while the use of other

    securities is associated with the private equity group having a larger equity stake.

•   Board structures are little different from the U.S. Transactions in common law

    nations have greater founder and manager board representation, suggesting that

    board composition may substitute for contractual provisions.

•   While U.K.- and U.S.-based private equity groups are more likely to write

    contracts that resemble provisions in their home countries, they are not able to

    fully replicate U.S.-style contracts and adjust many provisions to the local

    environment.



                                        27
     •    These contractual differences appear to have real consequences: larger

          transactions with higher valuations are seen in common law countries.

     •    These differences in transactions across nations are not simply consequences of

          the actual legal curbs in these nations. The patterns continue to hold when we

          eliminate nations where the financing choice is “hard wired” by the law.



         We believe that this study makes two contributions.         First, because of the

relatively simple yet well-documented nature of these contracts, we can readily test

theories of corporate finance across different institutional environments. The results that

emerge from this analysis simultaneously are consistent with and extend the findings of

the law and finance literature, which has largely focused on public firms. Second, the

topic of private equity investment in developing countries is an important topic in its own

right: at least $15 billion of international development aid alone has been channeled

through these funds (Brenner [1999]).



         This analysis, it should be noted, leaves questions unanswered about private

equity contracts in developing countries. Key issues include why we do not see the use

transaction structures familiar from the United States setting in developing countries, and

how detrimental these differences are. One possible explanation is that investors demand

controlling blocks because courts and laws do not adequately protect minority

shareholders. Given the necessity to rely on controlling stakes, investors might

(optimally) choose common stock over preferred as a second best outcome, if preferred

stock gives too much cash flow and control rights to the investor.




                                            28
       There are also other important questions about private equity in developing

countries that we do not address in this paper. Foremost among these are the apparently

disappointing returns that these investments have yielded over the past decade and the

declining share of all private equity investments that they represent. From where have

the difficulties encountered by private equity investments in developing countries

sprung? Are these a function of the general macroeconomic troubles that led to public

equity investors in many developing countries to experience low returns during much of

the 1990s? Or do the difficulties stem from the differences in transaction structures from

the U.S. template that we have highlighted above?13



       A second important topic for further research relates to the role of government

programs.   National governments and multinational development organizations have

made substantial investments to stimulate the growth of private equity. These initiatives

have taken many forms, from direct investments in entrepreneurial firms to the provision

of subsidies to private equity groups. How effective have these efforts been? Do any

approaches appear to have been particularly successful?




 A related issue is the similarities and differences between the structure of private and
13

public equity investments in developing nations. The work of Bergman and Nicolaievsky
[2003] highlights the differences between these contracts in the Mexican setting. A
cross-national analysis of these differences would be a rewarding analysis.




                                           29
                                      References


Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, and James A. Robinson, 2001, “The Colonial Origins
of Comparative Development: An Empirical Investigation,” American Economic Review,
91, 1369-1401.

Bartlett, Joseph W., 1995, Equity Finance: Venture Capital, Buyouts, Restructurings, and
Reorganizations, 2nd edition, New York, John Wiley.

Bergman, Nittai, and Daniel Nicolaievsky, 2003, “Investor Protection and the Coasian
View,” Unpublished working paper, Harvard University.

Brenner, James C., 1999, “Direct Equity Investment Funds: Public-Private Partnership
Experience,” Unpublished working paper, Harvard University.

Cumming, Douglas J., and Jeffrey G. MacIntosh, 2002, “A Law and Finance Analysis of
Venture Capital Exits in Emerging Markets,” Unpublished working paper, University of
Alberta.

Demirgüc-Kunt, Asli, and Ross Levine, 2001, Financial Structure and Economic
Growth: A Cross-Country Comparison of Banks, Markets, and Development, Cambridge,
MIT Press.

Djankov, Simeon, Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer,
2002a, “Courts: The Lex Mundi Project,” Working Paper no. 8890, National Bureau of
Economic Research.

Djankov, Simeon, Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer,
2002b, “The Regulation of Entry,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 117, 1-37.

European Venture Capital Association, 2002, EVCA Yearbook, Zaventum, Belgium,
EVCA and KPMG.

Gennaioli, Niccolai, 2003, “Contracting in the Shadow of the Law,” Unpublished
working paper, Harvard University.

Gompers, Paul A., 1995, “Optimal Investing, Monitoring, and the Staging of Venture
Capital,” Journal of Finance, 50, 1461-1490.

Gompers, Paul A., 1998, “An Examination of Convertible Securities in Venture Capital
Investments,” Unpublished working paper, Harvard University.

Gompers, Paul, and Josh Lerner, 2000, “Money Chasing Deals? The Impact of Fund
Inflows on Private Equity Valuations,” Journal of Financial Economics, 55, 281-325.




                                          30
Jeng, Leslie A., and Philippe C. Wells, 2000, “The Determinants of Venture Capital
Funding: Evidence across Countries,” Journal of Corporate Finance: Contracting,
Governance & Organization, 6, 241-289.

Johnson, Simon, John McMillan, and Christopher Woodruff, 2002, “Courts and
Relational Contracts,” Journal of Law, Economics and Organization, 18, 221-277.

Kaplan, Steven N., Frederic Martel, and Per Strömberg, 2003, “How Do Legal
Differences and Learning Affect Financial Contracts?,” Working Paper no. 10097,
National Bureau of Economic Research.

Kaplan, Steven N., and Per Strömberg, 2003, “Financial Contracting Meets the Real
World: An Empirical Analysis of Venture Capital Contracts,” Review of Economic
Studies, 70, 281-316.

La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny, 1997,
“Legal Determinants of External Finance,” Journal of Finance, 52, 1131-1150.

La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny, 1998,
“Law and Finance,” Journal of Political Economy, 106, 1133-1155.

La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny, 1999,
“The Quality of Government,” Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization, 15, 222-
279.

La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny, 2002,
“Investor Protection and Corporate Valuation,” Journal of Finance, 57, 1147-1170.




                                          31
  Table 1—Construction of sample. This table summarizes the key features associated with the
  construction of the sample of 210 private equity transactions.



Private Equity   Year of Deal        Industry of Firm                 Deal Type             Country of Firm
    Group
Group 1      8   1987      2    Distribution/Retail      14   Buyout              28   Argentina              18
Group 2      6   1988      2    Finance                  16   Corp. Acquisition   10   Bolivia                 2
Group 3      6   1992      3    Food                     29   Distress             4   Brazil                 18
Group 4      5   1993      4    Health Care               9   Expansion           97   Bulgaria                8
Group 5      3   1994      2    Information Tech         24   IPO                 12   Chile                   7
Group 6      3   1995      5    Internet                  9   Privatization       10   China                  13
Group 7     10   1996     10    Manufacturing            32   Venture Capital     49   Estonia                 8
Group 8      8   1997     17    Media                     8                            Ghana                   3
Group 9      6   1998     35    Natural Resources        11                            Hong Kong              13
Group 10     6   1999     31    Real Estate               4                            India                  28
Group 11 11      2000     34    Services                 17                            Korea                  10
Group 12     3   2001     40    Software                 10                            Indonesia               2
Group 13     2   2002     22    Telecom                  14                            Latvia                  4
Group 14     4   2003      3    Other                    13                            Malaysia                2
Group 15 10                                                                            Mexico                 14
Group 16     8                                                                         Peru                    2
Group 17     6                                                                         Poland                 13
Group 18     5                                                                         Romania                18
Group 19 10                                                                            Singapore               6
Group 20 13                                                                            South Africa            2
Group 21 14                                                                            Taiwan                  4
Group 22     8                                                                         Tanzania                2
Group 23     5                                                                         Thailand                3
Group 24     7                                                                         Uruguay                 2
Group 25 21                                                                            Yugoslavia              6
Group 26 13                                                                            Other                   5
Group 27     7
Group 28     2




                                                        32
    Table 2—Characteristics of developing country private equity transactions. The sample consists of
    210 investments in developing countries by private equity groups (PEGs). The first panel describes the
    features of the transactions; the second panel, the features of the nation and the private equity group
    involved in the transaction. We do not record the medians and standard deviations of the dummy variables.

                                        Panel A: Setting of Transactions
                                                  Mean       Median Standard Dev          Minimum         Maximum
Per capita gross national product                  2142        1743         2561                181          12368
Logarithm of rule of law index                     0.22         0.28         0.59             -1.25           1.85
English legal family nation                        0.27                                           0              1
French legal family nation                         0.30                                           0              1
Socialist legal family country                     0.42                                           0              1
U.K. or U.S.-based private equity group            0.56                                           0              1
                                        Panel B: Nature of Transactions
                                                  Mean       Median Standard Dev          Minimum         Maximum
Size of financing (1997 $MMs)                      4.31         3.29         5.12             0.17            18.53
Implied valuation (1997 $MMs)                      5.12         4.18         4.92             0.45           61.38a
Straight debt                                      0.11                                          0                1
Convertible debt                                   0.13                                          0                1
Common stock                                       0.55                                          0                1
Straight preferred stock                           0.09                                          0                1
Participating preferred stock                      0.05                                          0                1
Convertible preferred stock                        0.21                                          0                1
Warrants                                           0.06                                          0                1
Contingent equity                                  0.34                                          0                1
PEG’s maximum equity stake                         0.47         0.40         0.37                0                1
PEG’s minimum equity stake                         0.33         0.38         0.38                0                1
Difference in PEG ownership                        0.15         0.01         0.26                0                1
PEG has control when maximum stake                 0.37                                          0                1
PEG has control when minimum stake                 0.29                                          0                1
Anti-dilution provisions                           0.27                                          0                1
Automatic conversion provisions                    0.26                                          0                1
PEG has redemption rights                          0.31                                          0                1
PEG protected against down rounds                  0.10                                          0                1
Vesting of founders                                0.05                                          0                1
Restrictions on founder stock sales                0.49                                          0                1
Maximum board size                                 6.50            6         2.03                3               12
Minimum board size                                 5.40            5         1.95                3               11
Maximum PEG board seats                            2.66            2         1.89                0                9
Minimum PEG board seats                            1.35            1         1.24                0                6
Maximum founder/manager board seats                3.22            3         1.87                0                7
Minimum founder/manager board seats                2.47            2         1.72                0                6
Supermajority sum                                 18.47           15       12.98                 0               57
    a
     The size of the financing is greater than the valuation in the largest transaction (a leveraged buyout which
    entailed the purchase of all of the firm’s equity) because part of the financing proceeds were used to cover
    fees to investment bankers, lawyers, and others.




                                                        33
Table 3—Description of non-standard characteristics of developing country private equity
transactions. The sample consists of 210 investments in developing countries by private equity groups
(PEGs).

                                          Panel A: Exit Provisions
                                                                                                    Frequency
Contract specifies trade sale to strategic buyer as exit goal, not IPO                                     28
If exit is not reached within stated time, firm has to pay annual dividends > 50% of profits               14
PEG has a put that can be triggered at any time if there are disagreements with management                 13
PEG is investing along side a strategic buyer who might ultimately buy the firm                             8
If exit is not reached within stated time, PEG can put back money to parent company of firm                 7
Contract pre-specifies an “arbitrator”, for example an investment bank, in case of discrepancies            4
between shareholders to avoid delays in the courts
If exit is not reached in stated time, PEG can put back shares at a price agreed upon by at least          3
three “reputable” investment banks
                                         Panel B: Financing Provisions
                                                                                                    Frequency
Debt converts to equity if firm defaults                                                                    9
PEG issues debt that is backed by guarantees of the parent company of a firm                                6
“Forgivable” debt: if firms reaches certain earnings targets, loan is converted into 0% equity              4
Majority shareholder of company issues the bond, not company, to avoid political constraints                3
Government debt becomes subordinate to equity if the firm defaults                                          2
                                      Panel C: Anti-Dilution Provisions
                                                                                                    Frequency
No anti-dilution rights per se, but existing investors have to approve issuance of new shares              15
PEG equity stake remains unchanged independent of valuation in next round                                   5
                                           Panel D: Other Provisions
                                                                                                    Frequency
Business dealings with firms owned by family members of the founders/managers have to be                    5
approved by PEG
Founder family members agree not to be involved in competing business unless approved by                   4
the PEG




                                                     34
Table 4—Regression analyses of security type in developing country private equity transactions. The
sample consists of 210 investments in developing countries by private equity groups (PEGs). The
dependent variables are dummies denoting whether common stock was employed in the transaction,
straight debt was employed in the transaction, preferred stock was employed in the transaction, the equity
stake is contingent on the performance of the firm, and the presence of caps and/or floors on the payouts to
the PEGs. Independent variables include the logarithms of an index of the rule of law and per capita gross
national product, and dummy variables denoting nations with British or French legal origins and funds
based in the U.K. or U.S. All regressions employ ordinary least squares specifications. Standard errors are
in brackets.

                                          Panel A: Use of Straight Debt
        Rule of law index                     -0.03            -0.03        -0.03             -0.16
                                             [0.06]           [0.09]       [0.08]            [0.09]
        British legal origins                 -0.14            -0.14        -0.16             -0.05
                                          ***[0.06]       ***[0.06]     ***[0.07]            [0.18]
        French legal origins                                    0.12         0.11              0.26
                                                          ***[0.06]      **[0.06]           *[0.15]
        GNP per capita                        -0.03            -0.04        -0.04             -0.07
                                             [0.07]           [0.07]       [0.08]            [0.08]
        U.K. or U.S. based PEG                                              -0.12
                                                                        ***[0.05]
        Judicial Efficiency                                                                   -0.04
                                                                                             [0.18]
        Industry dummies                          Y              Y                 Y              Y
        Deal type dummies                         Y              Y                 Y              Y
        Year dummies                              Y              Y                 Y              Y
        Number of observations                  210            210               210            182
        Adjusted R2                            0.18           0.19              0.21           0.23
                                         Panel B: Use of Common Stock
        Rule of law index                     -0.05          -0.02            -0.02           -0.02
                                             [0.11]         [0.09]           [0.10]          [0.11]
        British legal origins                 -0.16          -0.16            -0.15           -0.38
                                           **[0.09]       **[0.09]         **[0.08]        **[0.26]
        French legal origins                                 -0.14            -0.13           -0.31
                                                           *[0.10]          *[0.10]          [0.28]
        GNP per capita                        -0.15          -0.14            -0.13           -0.11
                                           **[0.08]        *[0.11]          *[0.11]          [0.11]
        U.K. or U.S. based PEG                                                -0.15
                                                                          ***[0.07]
        Judicial Efficiency                                                                   -0.08
                                                                                             [0.09]
        Industry dummies                           Y               Y               Y              Y
        Deal type dummies                          Y               Y               Y              Y
        Year dummies                               Y               Y               Y              Y
        Number of observations                   210             210             210            182
        Adjusted R2                             0.19            0.21            0.22           0.24




                                                    35
                             Panel C: Use of Preferred Stock
Rule of law index                      0.08            0.13            0.12           0.07
                                     [0.07]         *[0.08]           [012]         [0.13]
British legal origins                  0.23            0.24            0.23           0.67
                                   **[0.13]       **[0.13]        ***[0.11]      ***[0.28]
French legal origins                                   0.11            0.09           0.60
                                                     [0.09]          [0.10]       **[0.30]
GNP per capita                         0.07            0.07            0.10           0.11
                                     [0.10]          [0.10]          [0.09]         [0.12]
U.K. or U.S. based PEG                                                 0.15
                                                                   **[0.08]
Judicial Efficiency                                                                    0.49
                                                                                   **[0.26]
Industry dummies                          Y                Y              Y               Y
Deal type dummies                         Y                Y              Y               Y
Year dummies                              Y                Y              Y               Y
Number of observations                  210              210            210             182
Adjusted R2                            0.16             0.18           0.21            0.24

*=Significant at the 10% level; **=significant at the 5% level; ***=significant at the 1% level.




                                           36
Table 5—Regression analyses of equity ownership in developing country private equity transactions.
The sample consists of 210 investments in developing countries by private equity groups (PEGs). The
dependent variables are dummies denoting whether the PEG has control of the firm’s equity when it has its
maximum and minimum contractually specified share of the equity, and the difference in the equity
ownership stake in these two scenarios. Independent variables include the logarithms of an index of the
rule of law and per capita gross national product, and dummy variables denoting nations with British or
French legal origins and funds based in the U.K. or U.S. All regressions employ ordinary least squares
specifications. Standard errors are in brackets.

                       Panel A: Does PEG Have Control When Minimum Stake?
     Rule of law index                     -0.16         -0.12        -0.13              -0.06
                                       ***[0.07]       *[0.08]      *[0.08]             [0.12]
     British legal origins                 -0.03         -0.02        -0.01              -0.41
                                          [0.08]        [0.08]       [0.08]            *[0.29]
     French legal origins                                 0.19         0.11               0.58
                                                     ***[0.05]    **[0.06]           ***[0.21]
     GNP per capita                         0.12          0.09         0.11               0.05
                                       ***[0.05]      **[0.05]    **[0.06]              [0.07]
     U.K. or U.S. based PEG                                           -0.11
                                                                 ***[0.05]
     Judicial Efficiency                                                                 -0.26
                                                                                       *[0.17]
     Industry dummies                          Y             Y            Y                  Y
     Deal type dummies                         Y             Y            Y                  Y
     Year dummies                              Y             Y            Y                  Y
     Number of observations                  194           194          194                171
     Adjusted R2                            0.18          0.19         0.21               0.23
                       Panel B: Does PEG Have Control When Maximum Stake?
     Rule of law index                     -0.25         -0.26        -0.29              -0.14
                                       ***[0.08]     ***[0.09]   ***[0.09]             *[0.11]
     British legal origins                  0.15          0.13         0.15               0.93
                                         *[0.10]       *[0.09]    **[0.08]           ***[0.33]
     French legal origins                                 0.01         0.04               0.20
                                                        [0.06]       [0.06]           **[0.09]
     GNP per capita                         0.19          0.19         0.21               0.23
                                       ***[0.06]     ***[0.07]   ***[0.08]           ***[0.08]
     U.K. or U.S. based PEG                                            0.09
                                                                    *[0.06]
     Judicial Efficiency                                                                 -0.34
                                                                                      **[0.20]
     Industry dummies                           Y            Y            Y                  Y
     Deal type dummies                          Y            Y            Y                  Y
     Year dummies                               Y            Y            Y                  Y
     Number of observations                   194          194          194                171
     Adjusted R2                             0.17         0.20         0.21               0.22
                   Panel C: Difference Between Maximum and Minimum PEG Stake
     Rule of law index                      -0.08        -0.09        -0.06              -0.14
                                          *[0.05]      *[0.06]       [0.06]           **[0.08]
     British legal origins                   0.14         0.14         0.13               0.39
                                        ***[0.06]    ***[0.06]    ***[0.06]            *[0.27]
     French legal origins                                -0.04        -0.03              -0.18
                                                        [0.04]       [0.04]             [0.24]
     GNP per capita                          0.07         0.06         0.05               0.15
                                         **[0.04]     **[0.04]      *[0.04]          ***[0.06]
     U.K. or U.S. based PEG                                            0.03
                                                                     [0.03]


                                                   37
     Judicial Efficiency                                                                     -0.07
                                                                                            [0.13]
     Industry dummies                            Y               Y               Y               Y
     Deal type dummies                           Y               Y               Y               Y
     Year dummies                                Y               Y               Y               Y
     Number of observations                    194             194             194             171
     Adjusted R2                              0.16            0.17            0.19            0.21

*=Significant at the 10% level; **=significant at the 5% level; ***=significant at the 1% level.




                                                     38
Table 6—Regression analyses of control rights in developing country private equity transactions.
The sample consists of 210 investments in developing countries by private equity groups (PEGs). The
dependent variables are dummies denoting whether the PEG group has anti-dilution protection, redemption
rights, and automatic conversion requirements. Independent variables include the logarithms of an index of
the rule of law and per capita gross national product, and dummy variables denoting nations with British or
French legal origins and funds based in the U.K. or U.S. All regressions employ ordinary least squares
specifications. Standard errors are in brackets.

                                    Panel A: Anti-Dilution Protection
        Rule of law index                      0.08            0.05            0.02           0.02
                                             [0.11]          [0.12]           [012]         [0.14]
        British legal origins                  0.33            0.34            0.33           0.34
                                         ***[0.13]       ***[0.13]        ***[0.13]      ***[0.13]
        French legal origins                                   0.08            0.12           0.14
                                                             [0.10]          [0.10]        *[0.10]
        GNP per capita                         0.17            0.16            0.14           0.10
                                          **[0.09]         **[0.09]         *[0.10]         [0.14]
        U.K. or U.S. based PEG                                                 0.14
                                                                           **[0.08]
        Judicial Efficiency                                                                   0.28
                                                                                            [0.31]
        Industry dummies                          Y              Y                Y              Y
        Deal type dummies                         Y              Y                Y              Y
        Year dummies                              Y              Y                Y              Y
        Number of observations                  210            210              210            184
        Adjusted R2                            0.17           0.19             0.22           0.25
                                       Panel B: Redemption Rights
        Rule of law index                      0.04           0.04             0.03           0.15
                                             [0.12]         [0.12]           [0.12]         [0.13]
        British legal origins                  0.04           0.04             0.04           0.39
                                             [0.13]         [0.13]           [0.14]        *[0.24]
        French legal origins                                 -0.01            -0.01          -0.34
                                                            [0.10]           [0.10]         [0.27]
        GNP per capita                         0.10           0.10             0.17           0.03
                                             [0.09]         [0.10]           [0.10]         [0.11]
        U.K. or U.S. based PEG                                                 0.20
                                                                          ***[0.08]
        Judicial efficiency                                                                   0.23
                                                                                            [0.26]
        Industry dummies                          Y             Y                 Y              Y
        Deal type dummies                         Y             Y                 Y              Y
        Year dummies                              Y             Y                 Y              Y
        Number of observations                  210           210               210            184
        Adjusted R2                            0.09          0.12              0.13           0.14
                                     Panel C: Automatic Conversion
        Rule of law index                     -0.17         -0.15             -0.09          -0.27
                                            *[0.11]       *[0.11]            [0.11]        *[0.17]
        British legal origins                  0.22          0.22              0.20           0.45
                                          **[0.12]       **[0.12]           *[0.12]        *[0.29]
        French legal origins                                 0.04              0.03           0.11
                                                           [0.10]            [0.10]         [0.34]
        GNP per capita                         0.18          0.17              0.17           0.27
                                         ***[0.09]       **[0.09]          **[0.09]      ***[0.13]
        U.K. or U.S. based PEG                                                 0.22
                                                                          ***[0.08]
        Judicial Efficiency                                                                   0.25


                                                   39
                                                                                              [0.32]
        Industry dummies                           Y                Y               Y              Y
        Deal type dummies                          Y                Y               Y              Y
        Year dummies                               Y                Y               Y              Y
        Number of observations                   210              210             210            184
        Adjusted R2                             0.07             0.09            0.10           0.12

*=Significant at the 10% level; **=significant at the 5% level; ***=significant at the 1% level.




                                                     40
Table 7—Regression analyses of restrictions on founders’ and managers’ equity stakes in developing
country private equity transactions. The sample consists of 81 investments in developing countries by
private equity groups (PEGs). The dependent variables are dummies denoting if the shares of the firms’
founders and managers must vest and if there are restrictions on securities sales by founders and managers.
Independent variables include the logarithms of an index of property rights and per capita gross national
product, and dummy variables denoting nations with British or French legal origins and funds based in a
common law nation. All regressions employ ordinary least squares specifications. Standard errors are in
brackets.

                              Panel A: Vesting of Founder and Manager Stock
        Rule of law index                       0.02           0.07           0.03              0.01
                                              [0.13]         [0.16]         [0.16]            [0.15]
        British legal origins                   0.04          -0.01           0.06              0.08
                                              [0.07]         [0.12]         [0.10]            [0.11]
        French legal origins                                  -0.06          -0.05             -0.06
                                                             [0.07]         [0.07]            [0.07]
        GNP per capita                          0.01          -0.04          -0.03             -0.01
                                              [0.04]         [0.05]         [0.05]            [0.04]
        U.K. or U.S. based PEG                                                0.07
                                                                            [0.06]
        Judicial Efficiency                                                                     0.04
                                                                                              [0.03]
        Industry dummies                            Y               Y            Y                 Y
        Deal type dummies                           Y               Y            Y                 Y
        Year dummies                                Y               Y            Y                 Y
        Number of observations                     76              76           76                76
        Adjusted R2                              0.02            0.02         0.04              0.04
                        Panel B: Restrictions on Sales of Founder and Manager Stock
        Rule of law index                       -0.62           -0.63        -0.63             -0.60
                                              *[0.32]         *[0.35]      *[0.34]            [0.44]
        British legal origins                    0.06            0.06         0.07              0.07
                                               [0.22]          [0.26]       [0.25]            [0.25]
        French legal origins                                    0.004        0.004             0.004
                                                               [0.16]       [0.18]            [0.18]
        GNP per capita                          -0.01           -0.01        -0.01             -0.01
                                               [0.10]          [0.10]       [0.11]            [0.11]
        Common law based PEG                                                  0.02
                                                                            [0.14]
        Judicial Efficiency                                                                        0.09
                                                                                                   [0.7]
        Industry dummies                           Y                Y               Y                 Y
        Deal type dummies                          Y                Y               Y                 Y
        Year dummies                               Y                Y               Y                 Y
        Number of observations                    76               76              76                76
        Adjusted R2                             0.06             0.07            0.08              0.07

*=Significant at the 10% level; **=significant at the 5% level; ***=significant at the 1% level.




                                                     41
Table 8—Regression analyses of board seats in developing country private equity transactions. The
sample consists of 210 investments in developing countries by private equity groups (PEGs). The
dependent variables are the logarithms of the maximum number of seats on the board, as well as the
maximum assigned the founders and managers and the PEG. Independent variables include the logarithms
of an index of the rule of law and per capita gross national product, and dummy variables denoting nations
with British or French legal origins and funds based in the U.K. or U.S. All regressions employ ordinary
least squares specifications. Standard errors are in brackets.

                              Panel A: Total Maximum Board Seats
       Rule of law index                  -0.09        -0.09         -0.16                  -0.19
                                         [0.11]       [0.12]       *[0.12]                *[0.15]
       British legal origins               0.31         0.33          0.36                   0.08
                                     ***[0.11]     ***[0.11]     ***[0.12]                 [0.19]
       French legal origins                            -0.06         -0.14                  -0.12
                                                      [0.09]       *[0.09]                 [0.19]
       GNP per capita                      0.09         0.09          0.14                   0.16
                                         [0.09]       [0.09]       *[0.10]                 [0.12]
       U.K. or U.S. based PEG                                         0.15
                                                                 ***[0.07]
       Judicial Efficiency                                                                  -0.28
                                                                                          *[0.20]
       Industry dummies                          Y            Y                  Y              Y
       Deal type dummies                         Y            Y                  Y              Y
       Year dummies                              Y            Y                  Y              Y
       Number of observations                  197          197                197            168
       Adjusted R2                            0.07         0.08               0.09           0.10
                                  Panel B: Maximum PEG Board Seats
       Rule of law index                     -0.09        -0.08              -0.08          -0.07
                                            [0.08]       [0.07]             [0.07]         [0.07]
       British legal origins                 -0.19        -0.18              -0.21          -0.22
                                           *[0.11]      *[0.12]           **[0.11]       **[0.11]
       French legal origins                               -0.17              -0.12          -0.15
                                                        *[0.10]             [0.10]         [0.11]
       GNP per capita                         0.46         0.30               0.30           0.34
                                           *[0.32]       [0.31]             [0.31]         [0.31]
       U.K. or U.S. based PEG                                                 0.39
                                                                         ***[0.14]
       Judicial Efficiency                                                                   -0.59
                                                                                            [0.44]
       Industry dummies                         Y             Y             Y                    Y
       Deal type dummies                        Y             Y             Y                    Y
       Year dummies                             Y             Y             Y                    Y
       Number of observations                 197           197           197                  168
       Adjusted R2                           0.06          0.08          0.10                 0.11
                          Panel C: Maximum Founder and Manager Board Seats
       Rule of law index                     0.13          0.01          0.02                0.06
                                           [0.19]        [0.22]        [0.20]              [0.23]
       British legal origins                 0.31          0.31          0.31                0.74
                                          *[0.21]       *[0.21]       *[0.22]            **[0.38]
       French legal origins                                0.20          0.18                0.03
                                                         [0.19]        [0.20]              [0.09]
       GNP per capita                        0.15          0.08          0.09                0.08
                                           [0.13]        [0.17]        [0.17]              [0.16]
       U.K. or U.S. based PEG                                            0.23
                                                                    **[0.13]
       Judicial Efficiency                                                                   0.62


                                                   42
                                                                                              [0.65]
        Industry dummies                           Y                Y               Y              Y
        Deal type dummies                          Y                Y               Y              Y
        Year dummies                               N                Y               Y              Y
        Number of observations                   197              197             197            168
        Adjusted R2                             0.06             0.09            0.10           0.10

*=Significant at the 10% level; **=significant at the 5% level; ***=significant at the 1% level.




                                                     43
Table 9—Regression analyses of supermajority provisions in developing country private equity
transactions. The sample consists of 210 investments in developing countries by private equity groups
(PEGs). The dependent variable is a sum of the score of supermajority provisions. (A higher score implies
greater use of supermajority provisions.) Independent variables include the logarithms of an index of the
rule of law and per capita gross national product, and dummy variables denoting nations with British or
French legal origins and funds based in the U.K. or U.S. All regressions employ ordinary least squares
specifications. Standard errors are in brackets.

                          Dependent Variable: Supermajority Provision Score
     Rule of law index                    -14.35          -20.95         -23.67            -26.65
                                       ***[7.82]      ***[9.49]       ***[9.98]        ***[10.74]
     British legal origins                  9.83           13.65          11.19             11.44
                                       ***[4.55]       **[6.70]        **[7.96]           *[8.12]
     French legal origins                                                -11.06            -11.48
                                                                       **[5.11]          **[5.67]
     GNP per capita                         3.63            6.01            5.24              5.96
                                         *[2.93]         *[4.86]          [4.56]            [5.02]
     U.K. or U.S. based PEG                                                 1.93
                                                                          [4.85]
     Judicial Efficiency                                                                      3.48
                                                                                           *[2.24]
     Industry dummies                            Y               Y               Y               Y
     Deal type dummies                           Y               Y               Y               Y
     Year dummies                                Y               Y               Y               Y
     Number of observations                    210             210             210             184
     Adjusted R2                              0.29            0.25            0.24            0.23

*=Significant at the 10% level; **=significant at the 5% level; ***=significant at the 1% level.




                                                     44
Table 10—Regression analyses of financing size and valuation in developing country private equity
transactions. The sample consists of 210 investments in developing countries by private equity groups
(PEGs). The dependent variables are the logarithms of the size of the financing and the implied “post-
money” valuation of the transaction, and a dummy denoting whether the financing provides some of the
capital in a follow-on transaction. Independent variables include the logarithms of sales in the year before
the transaction, an index of the rule of law, and per capita gross national product, and dummy variables
denoting nations with British or French legal origins and funds based in the U.K. or U.S. The financing
size, valuation, and sales figures are all in millions of 1997 dollars. All regressions employ ordinary least
squares specifications. Standard errors are in brackets.

                                        Panel A: Size of Financing
        Sales                                  0.33             0.34            0.29           0.34
                                          ***[0.08]       ***[0.09]        ***[0.10]      ***[0.11]
        Rule of law index                      0.85             0.45            0.48           0.20
                                            *[0.49]           [0.49]          [0.43]         [0.40]
        British legal origins                  0.29             0.29            0.38           0.52
                                             [0.41]           [0.41]          [0.47]         [0.50]
        French legal origins                                    0.69            0.44           0.40
                                                              [0.41]          [0.41]         [0.43]
        GNP per capita                         0.79             0.56            0.51           0.37
                                          ***[0.34]          *[0.36]         *[0.36]         [0.42]
        U.K. or U.S. based PEG                                                  0.52
                                                                            **[0.31]
        Judicial Efficiency                                                                     0.51
                                                                                              [0.93]
        Industry dummies                          Y               Y                Y               Y
        Deal type dummies                         Y               Y                Y               Y
        Year dummies                              Y               Y                Y               Y
        Number of observations                  193             193              193             172
        Adjusted R2                            0.33            0.35             0.35            0.34
                                        Panel B: Implied Valuation
        Sales                                  0.38            0.37             0.38           0.34
                                          ***[0.12]       ***[0.12]        ***[0.13]      ***[0.15]
        Rule of law index                      1.48            1.08             0.81           0.84
                                           **[0.72]         *[0.78]           [0.89]         [0.99]
        British legal origins                  1.85            2.04             2.47           1.34
                                          ***[0.88]       ***[0.89]        ***[0.92]        *[0.97]
        French legal origins                                   1.06             1.06           0.84
                                                            *[0.71]          *[0.76]         [0.72]
        GNP per capita                         0.87            0.75             0.56           0.69
                                            *[0.65]          [0.66]           [0.79]         [0.71]
        U.K. or U.S. based PEG                                                  0.75
                                                                             *[0.60]
        Judicial Efficiency                                                                    3.17
                                                                                          ***[1.48]
        Industry dummies                           Y                Y              Y              Y
        Deal type dummies                          Y                Y              Y              Y
        Year dummies                               Y                Y              Y              Y
        Number of observations                   193              193            193            172
        Adjusted R2                             0.40             0.44           0.45           0.47

*=Significant at the 10% level; **=significant at the 5% level; ***=significant at the 1% level.




                                                    45
Table 11—Correlation matrix between different parts of private equity contracts. The sample consists of 210 investments in developing countries by
private equity groups (PEGs). We regress the contract provision at the top of the column on the provisions at the beginning of each row. Each cell contains the
coefficients from separate regressions of the contract provisions on the right-hand side variables (standard errors are reported in brackets). The first row in each
cell reports results for the full sample, the second row reports results for UK legal origin countries only and the last row contains French and socialist legal origin
countries only. We control for log of GNP, rule of law, and year, industry, deal type dummies. All variables are defined as before.

                                                                       Panel A: Correlation in Full Sample
                                      Debt                 Common stock        Preferred stock     Anti-dilution       Automatic     Redemption               PEG equity
                                                                                                                       conversion    rights                        stake
      Common stock                    0.08 [0.04]***
                                      0.09 [0.13]
                                      0.07 [0.05]*

      Preferred stock                 -0.02 [0.04]       -0.21 [0.07]***
                                      -0.02 [0.12]       -0.38 [0.15]***
                                      -0.03 [0.06]       -0.01 [0.09]

      Anti-dilution                   -0.01 [0.04]       -0.25 [0.07]***       0.16 [0.07]***
                                      -0.05 [0.03]**     -0.22 [0.11]**        0.11 [0.05]***
                                       0.01 [0.07]       -0.09 [0.13]          0.13 [0.12]

      Automatic conversion            -0.09 [0.05]**     -0.50 [0.07]***       0.34 [0.08]***    0.43 [0.07]***
                                      -0.18 [0.09]**     -0.20 [0.14]*         0.43 [0.14]***    0.85 [0.15]***
                                      -0.07 [0.07]       -0.46 [0.10]***       0.32 [0.10]***    0.20 [0.10]

      Redemption rights               -0.02 [0.04]       -0.12 [0.07]**        0.14 [0.07]***     0.09 [0.07]      0.26 [0.07]***
                                      -0.04 [0.10]       -0.11 [0.15]          0.43 [0.15]***     0.41 [0.21]**    0.30 [0.15]***
                                       0.03 [0.06]       -0.13 [0.11]          -0.07 [0.08]      0.07 [0.07]       0.12 [0.07]**

      PEG maximum equity stake        0.22 [0.09]***     -0.02 [0.14]           0.20 [0.16]      0.18 [0.16]       -0.07 [0.17]      -0.16 [0.17]
                                      0.01 [0.09]        -0.50 [0.45]          -0.06 [0.48]      0.66 [0.58]       -0.08 [0.45]      -0.89 [0.38]***
                                      0.51 [0.15]***     -0.20 [0.20]          -0.03 [0.24]      0.13 [0.19]       -0.20 [0.23]      -0.28 [0.24]

      Maximum board size              -0.03 [0.08]       0.04 [0.15]           0.38 [0.15]***    0.16 [0.17]        0.06 [0.14]      -0.08 [0.16]          0.10 [0.12]
                                        0.08 [0.20]      0.33 [0.34]           0.56 [0.31]**     0.05 [0.45]        0.23 [0.44]       0.31 [0.35]         -1.14 [0.65]*
                                       -0.04 [0.10]      0.12 [0.10]           0.32 [0.20]*      0.13 [0.20]       -0.18 [0.16]      -0.21 [0.22]          0.23 [0.31]




                                                                                  46
            Panel B: Correlation with Deal Size and Implied Valuation

                             Deal Size                   Implied Valuation

Common stock                 -0.48 [0.26]**              -0.61 [0.34]*
                             -0.53 [0.54]                -0.64 [0.62]
                             -0.56 [0.35]*               -0.68 [0.64]

Preferred stock               0.12 [0.07]**              -0.42 [0.37]
                              0.38 [0.42]                 0.07 [0.59]
                              0.04 [0.36]                -0.75 [0.61]

Anti-dilution                 0.41 [0.28]*                0.61 [0.31]**
                              0.96 [0.31]***              1.02 [0.42]***
                              0.11 [0.47]                 0.43 [0.79]

Automatic conversion          0.27 [0.28]                 0.20 [0.40]
                              1.19 [0.37]***              1.17 [0.51]***
                             -0.07 [0.38]                -0.79 [0.63]

Redemption rights             0.13 [0.24]                 0.03 [0.37]
                              0.15 [0.45]                 0.51 [0.56]
                              0.13 [0.34]                -0.12 [0.58]

PEG maximum equity stake      1.25 [0.56]***              1.68 [0.94]*
                              1.49 [1.00]*                1.06 [1.64]
                              1.07 [0.81]                -2.76 [1.23]***

Maximum board size            2.05 [0.48]***              1.69 [0.53]***
                              2.28 [1.05]***              1.89 [0.74]***
                              1.77 [0.64]***              0.92 [0.95]




                                                                        47
                                         % of GDP
         Ar




                                         100.0
                                                 150.0
                                                         200.0
                                                                 250.0
                                                                         300.0




                            0.0
                                  50.0
            ge
                nt
                   in
                      a
               Br
                  az
                       il
              Ch
                   in
                      a
      Ko Ind
          re         ia
             a,




48
                Re
                     p.
             M
                ex
                    ico
                                                                                                 1990-2000




             Po
                 la
                     n
           Ro d
               m
       Ho ani
           ng          a
     Un         Ko
        ite          ng
            d
              St
                 at
                                                                                 Average Market Capitalization of Listed Firms




                     es
              W
                 or
                     ld
Appendix: Key legal provisions affecting private equity investors in nine nations most frequently represented in the sample.

 Class of                                                                                                                                      People's Republic of
 Limitation          Argentina                Brazil                      Hong Kong               India                 Mexico                 China                        Poland                 Republic of Korea       Romania


                     No restrictions, but                                                         Preferred stocks                             Most domestic and            No restrictions, but
                     preferred stock can                                                          cannot have any                              foreign private equity       limitations on
                     only have same                                                               voting rights,                               investments must             voting (no more
                     vote as common                                                               except in special                            employ common stock-         than 2-3x common       No restrictions, but    No restrictions, but
                     stock. Also possible                                                         circumstances.        No restrictions, but   like structure. Some         stock), dividend,      only common             investors cannot
                     to have common                                                               Limits on extent of   some limitations       large investments may        and liquidation        stock had voting        require that
                     stock with enhanced                                                          returns preferred     on voting rights of    use other securities, but    preference rights      rights until late       classes of
                     voting rights (up to 5                                                       shareholders can      preferred              must receive authorities'    of preferred           1990s. Now, no          shareholders vote
 Security Type       votes).                  No restrictions.            No restrictions.        enjoy.                shareholders.          permission first.            shareholders.          restrictions.           as a block.
                                                                                                                                               No restrictions. Some
                                                                                                                        No restrictions.       corporate events must
                                                                                                                        Some legal             have 2/3rd approval by
                                                                          No restrictions.        No restrictions.      protections for        investors. For foreign       No restrictions.
                                                                          Many corporate          Some corporate        minority               investments, decisions       Some corporate
                                                                          events require          events require        shareholders (e.g.,    must be approved by          events must have
 Super-Majority                                                           approval of 75% of      approval of 75% of    right to name at       2/3rds of directors in       75% approval by
 Provisions          No restrictions.         No restrictions.            shareholders.           shareholders.         least one director).   many cases.                  investors.             No restrictions.        No restrictions.
                                                                                                                                               For most investments,
                                              Limitations on types of                                                                          not possible to issue
                                              firms who can issue         No restrictions,                                                     equity to management.
                     No restrictions.         stock options. Special      except that                                                          May be allowed in
                     Ambiguities              disclosure requirements     shareholders in                                                      certain very large
                     surround tax             for option-issuing firms.   private firms must                                                   investments, but
 Management          treatment of             Disadvantageous tax         first offer shares to   No restrictions on                           permission of authorities
 Equity Holdings     options.                 treatment of options.       other investors.        private firms.        No restrictions.       may be required.             No restrictions.       No restrictions.        No restrictions.

                                                                                                                                                                            Equity holders can
                     Equity holders can       Equity holders can                                  Equity holders can    Equity holders can                                  maintain pro rata      Equity holders          Equity holders
                     maintain pro rata        maintain pro rata share.                            maintain pro rata     maintain pro rata      Equity holders have pre-     share. Provision       have pre-emptive        have pre-emptive
 Reinvestment        share. Provision         Restrictions on             Equity holders can      share. Provision      share. Provision       emptive right to purchase    can be waived with     right to purchase       right to purchase
 and Anti-Dilution   can be waived with       unreasonably dilutive       maintain pro rata       can be waived with    can be waived with     shares, except for certain   80% shareholder        shares, with limited    shares, except for
 Provisions          shareholder vote.        financings.                 share.                  shareholder vote.     shareholder vote.      very large investments.      vote.                  exceptions.             some private firms.

                                                                                                                                                                                                   Can be domiciled
                     Could be domiciled                                                                                                                                                            overseas. May           These restrictions
                     overseas until           Can be domiciled                                                                                                                                     entail loss of          cannot be avoided
                     recently. Now            overseas, but may be                                                                                                                                 attractive tax          by domiciling
                     substantial              more difficult to enforce   Can be domiciled        Can be domiciled      Can be domiciled       Cannot be domiciled          Can be domiciled       incentives for start-   company in
 Domiciling Entity   difficulties to do so.   corporate rights locally.   overseas.               overseas.             overseas.              overseas.                    overseas.              ups.                    another country.




                                                                                                                           49
