                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




            TECHNOLOGICAL INNOVATIONS AND ENDOGENOUS CHANGES
                    IN U.S. LEGAL INSTITUTIONS, 1790-1920

                                            B. Zorina Khan

                                         Working Paper 10346
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w10346


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      March 2004




The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

©2004 by B. Zorina Khan. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Technological Innovations and Endogenous Changes in U.S. Legal Institutions, 1790-1920
B. Zorina Khan
NBER Working Paper No. 10346
March 2004
JEL No. N4, O3

                                             ABSTRACT

Recent scholarship highlights the importance of institutions to the processes of economic growth,
but the precise nature of their relationship bears further examination. This paper considers how the
evolution of legal institutions has contributed to, and in turn been affected by, major technological
innovations. The first section of the paper examines the U.S. intellectual property system. Patent and
copyright laws, and their interpretation and enforcement by the federal judiciary, certainly
influenced the course of technical and cultural change, but it is clear that they did not develop
independently of the state of technology and of the economy. Both the statutes and their
interpretations altered in response to the introduction and diffusion of new technologies. The second
section explores in more detail the impact of some of these technological innovations -- including
steamboats, railroads, telegraphy, medical technologies, and automobiles -- on the common law,
regulation and insurance. Such technological advances often led to institutional bottlenecks, which
then required accommodations in legal rules and their enforcement. Although the common law had
some capability for economizing on legal adjustment costs through "adjudication by analogy," the
socio-economic changes wrought by major innovations ultimately produced more fundamental
change in legal institutions, such as shifts in the relative importance of state and federal policies, and
in the degree of reliance on regulation by bureaucracy. In sum, the historical record of the evolution
of legal rules and standards in the United States indicates a remarkable degree of flexibility as such
institutions responded to changing economic circumstances.

B. Zorina Khan
9700 College Station
Department of Economics
Bowdoin College
Brunswick, ME 04011
and NBER
bkhan@bowdoin.edu
                                           “I am not an advocate for frequent changes in laws and constitutions. But
                                          laws and institutions must go hand and hand with the progress of the
                                          human mind. As that becomes more developed, more enlightened, as
                                          new discoveries are made, new truths discovered and manners and
                                          opinions change, with the change of circumstances, institutions must
                                          advance also to keep pace with the times.….”
                                                                    -- Thomas Jefferson (1810)1

1.INTRODUCTION

Recent scholarship highlights the importance of institutions in long-run economic growth, but the

specific relationship is still not clearly understood, despite a plethora of research on both the

theoretical and empirical aspects of institutions and economic activity.2 Indeed, even in the face

of evidence that such institutions might be endogenous, some empirical studies still treat legal

regimes, patent systems and other forms of property rights as exogenous determinants of economic

performance. Moreover, legal structures and statutory changes are often discussed without

attempts to distinguish between rules and their enforcement. In short, there is a need for research

that contributes to a better understanding of the sources of institutional change, the specific means

through which revisions are implemented, the impact of different rules and standards, the

feedback mechanism between economic factors and institutions, and the degree of substitutability

across institutions. This paper addresses such issues by assessing several thousand lawsuits from

U.S. state and federal courts over the “long nineteenth century.” The analysis indicates how legal

institutions adapted to changing circumstances, and suggests that American economic success was

partly due to the flexibility and transparency of its legal system.

        Law and technology are both critical for understanding the evolution of American society.

As such prominent commentators as Thomas Paine and Alexis de Tocqueville have pointed out,

U.S. policy has always been distinguished by the central role of law and the judiciary.3 Moreover,


1 See http://www.monticello.org/reports/quotes/memorial.html, for inscription at the Jefferson Memorial in
Washington, D.C. (taken from a letter to Samuel Kercheval, July 12, 1810).
2 . For an excellent overview of the debate on institutions and economic growth, see Stanley L. Engerman and
Kenneth L. Sokoloff, “Institutional and Non-Institutional Explanations of Economic Differences,” NBER Working
Paper No. 9989, Sept. 2003; and Douglass North, Institutions, Institutional Change and Economic Performance,
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1990.
3 Thomas Paine felt that “in America THE LAW IS KING”((Caps. in the original text), Common Sense, Chapt. III, p.
49, Philadelphia: W. and T. Bradford,1776. Alexis de Tocqueville argued that American courts wielded enormous
                                                             2
its citizens stand out for their innovativeness and willingness to adopt new technologies, to such an

extent that some have even characterized the United States as a “republic of technology.” This

favourable view of invention and innovation was matched by the readiness of the judiciary to

accommodate the radical transformations caused by innovations. The notion that our own era is

unique reveals a somewhat limited appreciation of the cumulative impact of such innovations as

the telegraph, steam engine, railroad, radio, electric power and the automobile on American society

in the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. Unprecedented technical progress during that

period brought about discrete and measurable changes in the lives, lifestyles and livelihood of

Americans that arguably exceed those of our own time. Technological innovations also affected

the scope and nature of the law. Competition policy, medical malpractice, nuisance, trespass and

torts, the allocation of riparian rights and admiralty law all reflected the turmoil wrought by

technical changes. Advances in forensic science and technology transformed the enforcement and

adjudication of criminal law. Similarly, organizational innovations and the growth of national

markets affected the nature of property rights, employment contracts and liability rules.4

        This study focuses on the period between 1790 and 1920. Clearly, technological change

was not unknown before this time, but the innovations of the nineteenth century were significantly

different from those of previous centuries because their sphere of influence was on a much larger

scale. For the first time in American history, innovations in transportation extended the practical

boundaries of markets and social interactions to encompass repeated national and international

transactions as a common occurrence. Moreover, the expansion of virtually instantaneous

communications networks introduced time as a central feature of such interactions and facilitated


political power, since “Scarcely any question arises in the United States which does not become, sooner or later, a
subject of judicial debate.” (Alexis de Tocqueville, Democracy in America, ed. J.P. Mayer, trans. George
Lawrence,1835; New York: Harper & Row, 1969, Vol. I, Chap. 8, p. 311.)
  4 Technological change was not limited to domestic issues, for it also facilitated more numerous and more rapid
transactions with other nations during peace and war. Indeed, the very boundaries of maritime sovereignty were
constrained by existing technology, since the three-mile limit was determined by the maximum distance a cannon shot
could reach. Innovations like submarines, underwater international cables and manned airplane flights created
jurisdictional and third party effects among nations which the legal system had to address. The legal implications of
naval blockades and sanctions changed as newer ships and submarines developed, and the maritime laws of agency

                                                          3
productivity changes through greater intensity of work and leisure. As a result of both of these

factors, technologies of the nineteenth century not only engendered conflicts between transactors,

they also created a world in which the pace, scale and scope of third-party effects were potentially

much larger. This raised the policy question of how to ensure that technological progress

increased social welfare, while minimizing potential costs such as unrestrained market power or

undue redistributive effects.

        Although this paper centers on the relationship between the law and technology, it is

important to realize that legal institutions comprise part of a complex network of institutions that

function as complements or as substitutes to the law. In certain contexts social norms or familial

ties may serve as the most effective moderator of behaviour, independently of state-enforced rules;

whereas circumstances that require little discretionary decisionmaking may be dealt with at least

cost through administrative bureaucracies. As Montesquieu and Adam Smith pointed out, markets

can be self-regulating, since the pursuit of self-interest in market-related transactions may be

sufficient to ensure that participants cooperate in a civil society in a manner that promotes the

common good.5 Courts in the seventeenth and early eighteenth centuries performed a

comprehensive regulatory function that encompassed both the private and public realms. They

monitored and enforced pervasive moral and religious codes, and imposed restrictions on

commerce through price controls, licensing, enforcement of contracts and property rights. Soon

after the first decade of the eighteenth century, as the scale of market activity increased, a division

of labour across institutions led to caseloads in civil courts that primarily involved economic

transactions to enforce debt contracts. The legal system was therefore well-prepared to

accommodate the economic challenges of the nineteenth century.6


and bottomry incorporated developments in communications that meant ships at sea were no longer completely cut off
from their owners on land.
5 For an empirical study of this issue, see B. Zorina Khan, "Commerce and Cooperation: Litigation and Settlement of
Civil Disputes on the Australian Frontier," Journal of Economic History, vol. 60 (4) 2000:1088-1119.
6 For a quantitative analysis of the evolution of colonial courts that employs an extensive data set of district court
cases, see B. Zorina Khan, “`Justice of the Marketplace’: Legal Disputes and Economic Activity on the Northeastern
Frontier, 1700-1860” (unpublished paper, 2003).
                                                             4
       By the end of the period under review, legal institutions still formed an integral part of

American life, but their orientation had altered because their activities were bolstered by an array

of associative and administrative institutions. This process of bureaucratization, perhaps because

more visible than the decentralized decision-making of the court system, led some observers to

highlight regulation as a twentieth-century innovation. Instead, economic activity in the United

States has always been subjected to the public interest: the major feature that has changed is the

type of institution that accomplished this task. However, which particular institution prevails –

norms, legal system, bureaucratic regulation, government or market -- may be less important than

the degree of flexibility exhibited, for institutions that do not respond to social evolution will

necessarily become irrelevant.

       The Framers of the American Constitution had been certain that social welfare would be

maximized through the “progress of science and useful arts.” They felt that this would be best

achieved through a complementary relationship between law and the market. The Constitution and

early statutes were carefully calibrated to ensure a democratic, market orientation towards

invention. The wish to further technological innovation through private initiative created a

paradox: in order to promote diffusion and enhance social welfare it would first be necessary to

limit diffusion and to protect exclusive rights. Thus, part of the debate about law and technology

has always centered on the boundaries of the private domain relative to the public domain.

Innovations in printing and publishing added to the complexity of the issue by introducing

questions fundamental to a democratic society such as equality of access, opportunity to participate

in progress, and freedom of speech. Effective policies towards innovations, whether by statute or

common law, therefore required a balancing of costs and benefits that was far more subtle than a

monolithic promotion of the interests of any one specific group in society.

       Legal institutions exerted a significant influence on social and economic interactions, and

technology was no exception. Intellectual property law had a direct effect on the rate and direction


                                                   5
of inventive activity and cultural innovations. Patents and copyrights, as the subject of federal

law, exhibited greater uniformity than if under state jurisdiction, and thus facilitated the

development of a national market. As the creators of the intellectual property system recognized,

inventors would be motivated to address important needs of society if they were able to

appropriate the returns from their efforts. Patent laws and their enforcement also had significant

distributional implications for the types of inventors who could benefit from their efforts, and the

nature of their inventions. For instance, relatively low patent fees served to encourage ordinary

citizens to invest in creating new discoveries, whereas an examination system increased the

average technical value of patents, promoted a market in inventions, and encouraged the diffusion

of information. Technology was also shaped by other areas of law, including rules regarding

contract and constitutional issues.

        The relationship between law and technology was reciprocal for, just as law shaped

technology, technical innovations significantly influenced legal innovations. How and why the

common law changed constitutes a standard debate in political and legal histories.7 A classic

source of dissension relates to the arguments of scholars who agree that American legal institutions

were flexible, but contend that the judiciary was captured by the interests of a small group in

society. Morton Horwitz, in particular, admits that the antebellum legal system played a key role

in the nascent industrialization of the United States, but argues that judges were biased in favour of

the capitalists and industrialists whom they regarded as key to the promotion of economic

development. The judiciary reinterpreted existing legal rules in property, torts and contracts in an

instrumentalist fashion to place the burdens of expansion on workers and farmers. In so doing,

judicial decisions led to outcomes that subsidized the efforts of industrialists, regardless of the

statutes and of legal precedent. Judges assumed the role of legislators to the extent that “judge-


7 The standard legal histories include Morton J. Horwitz, The Transformation of American Law, 1780-1860,
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1977, and The Transformation of American Law, 1870-1960: The Crisis
of Legal Orthodoxy, New York, Oxford University Press, 1992; Lawrence M. Friedman, A History of American Law,
New York, Simon & Schuster, 1973; and James Willard Hurst, Law and the Conditions of Freedom in the
Nineteenth-Century United States, Madison, University of Wisconsin Press, 1956. See also Kermit L. Hall, The
                                                           6
made law” should be viewed as a derogatory term. This “ruthless” transformation meant that the

economically progressive classes were able to “dramatically … throw the burden of economic

development on the weakest and least active elements of the population.”8 The specifics of the

subsidy hypothesis have been challenged, but it has proven to be a resilient interpretation of the

American experience.9 Its most recent renaissance has emerged in claims that regulation in the

Gilded Age was an optimal response to the failures of the legal system. Edward Glaeser and

Andrei Shleifer argue that large scale corporations wielded excessive power in the courts,

“routinely bribed” judges and juries, and engaged in other legal and illegal tactics to ensure

outcomes that were biased in their favour. Consequently, the legal system “broke down.” This

“subversion of justice” proved to be inappropriate for the needs of the time and was replaced by

regulatory agencies, which allegedly were less susceptible to the same corrupting influences.10

         An alternative rendering of the history of American law can be obtained from the

application of economic insight to the evidence. According to the Coase Theorem, the legal

system reinforces the market by ensuring that property rights are well-defined and predictable, and

by minimizing transactions costs. Technological change in the era of industrialization affected the

efficiency of private market solutions by creating uncertainties about property rights, by changing

the costs of transacting and by increasing spillover effects. However, the legal system helped to

resolve the potential for market failure by defining rights, reducing costs of transacting, and taking

into account third-party effects, through innovations in legal rules. Such rules helped to ensure


Magic Mirror : Law in American History, New York : Oxford University Press, 1989.
8 Horwitz, Transformation, p. 101.
9 Critics of the subsidy thesis regard the most effective rebuttal to be simply an objective and extensive reading of
lawsuits and legal procedures. They highlight the complementary relationship between legislature, common law,
Constitution, and the judiciary. Peter Karsten, Heart Versus Head: Judge-Made Law in Nineteenth-Century America,
Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1997, argues that court decisions towards contracts, torts and
property tended to protect workers and were not perceptibly biased towards defendants or capitalist developers. See
also Tony A. Freyer, Producers versus Capitalists: Constitutional Conflict in Antebellum America, Charlottesville:
University Press of Virginia, 1994. Gary T. Schwartz critically reviewed Horwitz’s interpretation of negligence
doctrines in “Tort Law and the Economy in Nineteenth-Century America: A Reinterpretation," 90 Yale Law Journal
(1982): 1717-1775; and “The Character of Early American Tort Law," vol. 36, UCLA L. Rev. (1989): 641-718.
10 According to Edward L. Glaeser and Andrei Shleifer, “During the Progressive Era at the beginning of the 20th
century, the United States replaced litigation by regulation as the principal mechanism of social control of business.”
See “The Rise of the Regulatory State,” NBER Working Paper No. 8650, December 2001.
                                                           7
that social costs and benefits were similar to private costs and benefits, facilitated the transition of

resources to the highest-valued use, and also reallocated risk to those who could bear them at

lowest cost. Far from “breaking down,” legal institutions stood out as an important mechanism

that allowed Americans to take advantage of the new opportunities wrought by expanding markets

and technological progress.

         A key question in the economics of institutions relates to the extent to which rules and

standards should be revised, or the appropriate boundaries between credible commitments and

rigidity, or flexibility and flaccidity. New technologies in the nineteenth century raised questions

about the relevance of existing legal rules, and ultimately caused changes in the law, albeit with a

lag. Since the judiciary is by its nature conservative and technology is dynamic, the legal system

potentially could have functioned as a significant bottleneck to further innovation. Instead, the

common law was sufficiently flexible to cope with new discoveries. This flexibility did not occur

because of preconceived bias towards any particular group in society nor because of opaque

precepts that “subverted justice.” Instead, we can identify five transparent mechanisms through

which technological change had an impact on the law: technical innovations affected existing

analogies; altered transactions costs; increased the speed and scope of transactions; influenced

norms and expectations at both the industry and societal levels; and changed judicial and

legislative conceptions of the most effective means to promote the public interest.

         In the first instance, courts attempted to mediate between parties to disputes that related to

the incursions of new technologies through a process we can regard as “adjudication by

analogy.”11 Early on, the law was stretched to accommodate discrete changes by attempting to

detect some degree of equivalence across technologies, either by form or by function. However,



11 According to the court in Lotus Dev. Corp. v. Paperback Software Int'l, 740 F. Supp. 37 (1990): “When strictly
logical deductions from authoritative declarations of law -- in constitutions, statutes, and precedents -- do not provide
answers to questions of law that must be decided in the case before the court, the court turns to analogy.” However,
the court in N.Y. Times Co. v. Tasini, 533 U.S. 483 cautioned against rigid analogies that preclude dynamic standards:
“But no definitive choice among competing analogies (broadcast, common carrier, bookstore) allows us to declare a

                                                            8
inappropriate analogies tended to increase the frequency of legal conflicts or appeals, which served

as a signal to indicate that revisions were insufficient. Second, under these circumstances,

inappropriate rulings increased the cost of transacting, and made it necessary for legal doctrines

and legislation to change in order to encompass the new innovations. The third mechanism was

motivated by technologies, such as major advances in transportation and communications, that led

to a more rapid pace of activity, and thereby produced pressures for correspondingly rapid

responses in the legal system. Fourth, judicial decisions attempted to enforce community

standards and expectations, which were a function of the current state of technology. Finally, the

judiciary recognized that, in order to increase overall social welfare, the law must evolve to allow

citizens the most effective way to take advantage of new opportunities. In the words of the classic

legal maxim: salus populi suprema lex est.12

         The first section of this paper assesses intellectual property laws that the founders

authorized in the very first section of the Constitution, indicating the central role they ascribed to

law and technology in the future of the nation. The United States created the world’s first modern

patent system, and its effectiveness was reinforced by a federal judiciary that ensured property

rights were secure and inventors were able to appropriate the returns from their efforts.

Copyright law illustrated the difficulties and dilemmas that the legal system experienced in dealing

with such new technologies as mimeographs, flash photography, cinematography, piano rolls,

phonographs, radio, and “information technology.” The second section of the paper analyzes the

effect of new technologies – steamboats and canals, railroads, telegraphy, medical and public


rigid single standard, good for now and for all future media and purposes.... aware as we are of the changes taking
place in the law, the technology, and the industrial structure related to telecommunications..... .”
12 “Social welfare is the ultimate law.” It is undoubtedly true that, as the proponents of the subsidy thesis pointed out,
a number of changes in the common law during the nineteenth century benefited corporations, and some decisions
were harsh towards frail widows and workers. However, the tendency was not monolithic. Some doctrinal
developments, such as the abolition of privity of contract, served to increase, rather than decrease, manufacturer
liability. Procedural innovations that benefited low-income plaintiffs included the adoption of contingency fees and
class action suits. Contingency fees were regarded with some disdain by “reputable” jurists as barratry. But even
those who disapproved of them, as did Justice McSherry, of Maryland Appeals Court, acknowledged that “Cases,
however, may sometimes occur in which, without the allowance of such fees, justice might be defeated, and redress
denied to the poor and the oppressed, and it was upon this ground that the Courts first allowed the payment of such

                                                            9
health innovations, and the automobile -- on the common law itself. Technological innovations

led to legal innovations, they changed the relative importance of state and federal policies, and

ensured a continual debate about the effectiveness of the law in comparison to regulation by

bureaucracy.

A. INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAWS13
                                                      “Not logic alone, but logic supplemented by the social sciences
                                                     becomes the instrument of advance”
                                                                                         --- Benjamin Cardozo14
        The United States from its inception as a nation had the option of drawing on European

precedents for its intellectual property system but chose to pursue very different policies towards

both patents and copyrights. The American system was distinguished by its favourable treatment

of inventors and the inducements held out for inventive activity, whereas the copyright regime was

hedged about with caveats and restrictions.          The first Article of the U.S. Constitution included a

clause to “promote the Progress of Science and useful Arts, by securing for limited Times to

Authors and Inventors the exclusive Right to their respective Writings and Discoveries.” George

Washington issued a plea to highlight its importance, and Congress quickly complied in 1790 by

passing separate patent and copyright statutes.

i) Patents

        The American patent system was arguably the most successful in the world in generating

secure property rights, broad-based technological change and economic growth (Figure 1).

Legislators emphatically rejected restrictions on the rights of American inventors, and ensured that

the legal system facilitated the operation of a free market. Working requirements or compulsory

licences were regarded as unwarranted infringements of the rights of “meritorious inventors,” and

incompatible with the philosophy of U.S. patent grants. Fees were deliberately kept among the



fees. Afterwards the validity of such fees was generally recognized….” Davis et al. v. Gemmell et al., 3 Md. 530; 21
A. 712; 1891.
13 This section is largely based on B. Zorina Khan, The Democratization of Invention: Patents and Copyrights in
American Economic Development, NBER and Cambridge University Press, (forthcoming). See also B. Zorina Khan
and Kenneth L. Sokoloff, “The Early Development of Intellectual Property Institutions in the United States,” Journal
of Economic Perspectives, vol. 15 (3) 2001: 233-246.
14 Benjamin Cardozo, The Growth of Law, New Haven: Yale Univ. Press, 1924, p. 73.
                                                           10
lowest in the world, patentees were not required to pay annuities to maintain their property, there

were no opposition proceedings, and once granted a patent could not be revoked unless there was

evidence of fraud. As a result, the annals of American invention were not limited to the wealthy,

corporate entities, or other privileged classes, but reflected a broad spectrum of society. In an era

when state policies prohibited blacks and married women from benefiting from their economic

efforts, Federal patent laws did not discriminate against disadvantaged groups.15

        The initial establishment of an examination system was replaced by the 1793 model in

which patents were awarded through registration, with disputes being resolved in the district

courts. When this system was reformed by statute in 1836, the United States created the world’s

first modern patent institution. The primary feature of the “American system” was an examination

of patent applications for conformity with the laws. In particular, the 1836 Patent Law formally

established a Patent Office that was staffed by trained and technically qualified employee

examiners. The French had opposed examination in part because they were reluctant to create

positions of power that could be abused by office holders, but the characteristic American response

to such potential problems was to institute a policy of judicial checks and balances. In order to

constrain the ability of examiners to engage in arbitrary actions, the applicant was given the right

to file a bill in equity to contest the decisions of the Patent Office with the further right of appeal to

the Supreme Court of the United States. The historical record indicates that the legislature’s

creation of a uniquely American system was a deliberate and conscious process. The basic

parameters of the U.S. patent system were transparent and predictable, in itself an aid to those who

wished to obtain patent rights. In addition, American legislators were concerned with ensuring

that information about the stock of patented knowledge was readily available and diffused rapidly.

The Patent Office was a source of centralized information on the state of the arts.16


15 B. Zorina Khan, "Married Women's Property Laws and Female Commercial Activity: Evidence from United States
Patent Records, 1790-1895," Journal of Economic History, vol. 56 (2)1996:356-88, examines the influence of changes
in state laws on patenting activities by women.
16 As early as 1805 Congress stipulated that the Secretary of State should publish an annual list of patents that were
granted in the preceding year, and after 1832 also required the publication in newspapers of notices regarding expired
                                                           11
         The designers of the American system of intellectual property envisioned that the federal

legal system would be closely integrated with every phase of the life of patents and copyrights,

from the initial grant, its defence and trade, through to possible extensions. The value of patents

was increased because patent issues were litigated at the federal and not the state level, with a right

of appeal to the Supreme Court, which contributed to uniformity and certainty in intellectual

property. Federal courts from their inception attempted to establish a store of doctrine that

fulfilled the intent of the Constitution to secure the rights of intellectual property owners. The

judiciary acknowledged that inventive efforts varied with the extent to which inventors could

appropriate the returns on their discoveries, and attempted to ensure that patentees were not

unjustly deprived of the benefits from their inventions. Technology policy was conducted at the

national level and this contributed to the rapid development of a national market for innovations.

         Courts explicitly attempted to implement decisions that promoted social and economic

development through technological change.17 The attitudes of the judiciary were primarily shaped

by their interpretation of the monopoly aspect of the patent grant. In Whitney et al. v. Emmett et

al., 29 F. Cas. 1074 (1831), Justice Baldwin contrasted the policies in Britain and America towards

the patent contract. English Courts, he pointed out, interpret the patent grant as a privileged

exception from the general ban on monopolies. Apart from this proviso, the judiciary had total

discretion in interpreting and deciding the ends that would promote public welfare. The patent was

seen as a trade-off, a bargain between the inventor and the public with a negotiable outcome. In

contrast, in the United States the patentee was not recognized as a monopolist per se, and judges

had little discretion other than to fulfil the explicit intention of the Constitution. Numerous

reported decisions before the early courts declared that, rather than unwarranted monopolies,

patent rights were "sacred" and to be regarded as the just recompense for inventive ingenuity.


patents.
17
   “The Constitution of the United States, in giving authority to Congress to grant patents for a limited period, declares
the object to be to promote the progress of science and the useful arts, an object as truly national and meritorious, and
well founded in public policy, as any which can possibly be within the scope of national protection.” Ames v. Howard,

                                                           12
Supreme Court Justice Joseph Story, the acknowledged patent expert of the antebellum courts,

indicated in Lowell v. Lewis (1817) that "the inventor has a property in his invention; a property

which is often of very great value, and of which the law intended to give him the absolute

enjoyment and possession ... involving some of the dearest and most valuable rights which society

acknowledges, and the constitution itself means to favor."

         The 1840s saw an increase in the number of patentees resorting to courts of equity, to

obtain temporary or permanent injunctions against unauthorized users of their inventions.

Preliminary injunctions could also be obtained pending common law litigation, if patentees stood

to suffer severe losses. But judges were alert to the possibility of unwarranted harm to the

defendants whose enterprises could be broken up. Oliver Parker's request for a wholesale

injunction against 100 mill owners was disallowed because his patent was within weeks of

expiring. The judge was thus reluctant to issue an injunction that would adversely affect so many

enterprises, when the patentee received no benefit from closure of the mills and would later be

compensated by the payment of damages if it were indeed proven that the patent was infringed. In

the absence of antitrust statutes, equity provided a more flexible channel for mediating between the

inventor's exclusive rights and a general monopoly.18

         One of the advantages of a legal system that secures property rights is that it facilitates

contracts and trade.19 Partly as a result, an extensive national network of licensing and

assignments developed early on: in 1845 the Patent Office recorded 2,108 assignments, which can

be compared to the cumulative stock of 7188 patents that were still in force in that year; by the


1 F. Cas. 755; 1833. See B. Zorina Khan, "Property Rights and Patent Litigation in Early Nineteenth-Century
America," Journal of Economic History, v. 55 (1) 1995: 58-97.
18 The plaintiff in Smith v. Downing, 1 Fish. 54 (Mass., 1850), an assignee of Morse, sought a permanent injunction
against the defendants, who operated a telegraph under assignment from Royal E. House. After a detailed exposition
of the incremental nature of the development of the telegraph, the court refused the injunction. Exclusive patent rights
allowed the inventor to benefit from the acknowledged property in his improvement; at the same time, such property
did not extend to the entire field, because this would grant the marginal improver a monopoly that would halt general
progress in the area. House's telegraph was not only different from Morse's, but technically superior; hence to
mandate an estoppel against his ingenuity and the defendants' enterprise would have been an "extraordinary" measure.
19 For a synopsis of an extensive project that analyses the market for assignments, see Naomi Lamoreaux and Kenneth
L. Sokoloff, “Long-Term Change in the Organization of Inventive Activity,” (NAS Colloquium) Science,
Technology and the Economy vol 93, Nov. (1996): 1286-92.
                                                            13
1870s the number of assignments averaged over 9000 per year, and this increased in the next

decade to over 12,000 contracts recorded annually. Assignments provide a straightforward index

of the effectiveness of the American system, since a market for patented inventions would hardly

proliferate if patent rights were uncertain or worthless. The secondary market in patent rights was

based on the legally valid assumption that the patent embodied some intrinsic technical value. The

English system, which offered no protection to purchasers who were deceived into buying false

patents, encouraged unproductive speculation and deterred the development of trade.20 In contrast,

American legal rulings voided promissory notes and other contracts for useless or fraudulent

patents as part of a policy of protecting and legitimizing property rights.

        The judiciary was willing to grapple with other difficult questions including the appropriate

measure of damages when patent infringement likely lowered prices, disputes between owners of

valid but conflicting patents, and the problem of how to protect the integrity of existing contracts

when the law altered. One such question revolved around the criteria for patentability. The patent

statutes required that inventions should be “new and useful,” but the judiciary treated the utility

requirement as merely nominal, since it was the function of markets, not courts, to determine the

value of patents. Infringers who tried to undermine the validity of the original patent on the

grounds of utility were reminded that their very use of the item overturned any allegation of lack of

utility. The major issue in any patent lawsuit related to the novelty of the invention, or the extent

to which it promoted the progress of useful arts. To 19th century courts, patentable technology

incorporated ideas and discoveries that were vested in tangible form, and “a mere abstract idea” or

processes independent of a means of fixation could not be treated as the exclusive property of any

one person, for this would limit diffusion and learning without any measurable social return.21




20 For evidence on this issue, see B. Zorina Khan and Kenneth L. Sokoloff, “Institutions and Democratic Invention in
19th Century America: Evidence from the ‘Great Inventors,’ 1790-1930,” American Economic Review, (forthcoming)
May 2004.
21 Badische Anilin & Soda Fabrik v. Kalle, Circuit Court, S.D. New York, 94 F. 163; 1899. “Neither an idea nor a
function, nor any other abstraction, is patentable,” Goshen Sweeper Co. v. Bissell Carpet Sweeper Co., 72 F. 67; 1895.
                                                           14
Consequently, several of the early “business method” cases dealt with copyright laws.22 In 1859

Charles Selden obtained copyright in a book entitled "Selden's Condensed Ledger, or Book-

keeping Simplified." His method of book-keeping was infringed by Baker, who denied the

validity of copyright protection for a business method. The Supreme Court agreed that copyright

protection extended only to expression, and did not provide an exclusive right in the idea itself:

“The copyright of a work on mathematical science cannot give to the author an exclusive right to

the methods of operation which he propounds, or to the diagrams which he employs to explain

them, so as to prevent an engineer from using them whenever occasion requires.” Exclusive rights

could only be granted through examination for novelty according to patent laws, although the court

refused to decide whether the book-keeping method was indeed patentable.

         When patents were granted for inventions that seemed to be for contracts or business

methods, they were uniformly overturned by the courts, unless the idea or principle could be

construed as vested in a tangible medium. The Patent Office granted an 1891 patent to Levy

Maybaum of Newark for inventing a “means for securing against excessive losses by bad debts,”

which he assigned to the U.S. Credit System Company. The patent covered a method of

computing the industry norm for operating losses and constructing tables that allowed comparisons

relative to the industry average. When the owners of the patent brought an infringement claim

before the courts, the patent was dismissed as “a method of transacting common business, which

does not seem to be patentable as an art.”23 In litigation regarding the validity of an invention for

"time limit" transfer tickets for use by street railways, the defendants sought to decry the patent as

"a method of transacting business, a form of contract, a mode of procedure, a rule of conduct, a

principle or idea, or a permissive function, predicated upon a thing involving no structural law."


22 See Bartlette v. Crittenden, 2 F. Cas. 981; 1847.
23 U.S. Credit System Co. v. American Credit Indemnity Co., 53 F. 818; 1893. The district judge, in ruling on the
same patent, 51 F. 751; 1892, noted that “One is not entitled to a patent for a plan or method of business which only
requires good judgment and foresight…. I do not intend to decide that a man may not have a patent for a mode of
keeping accounts, or for a form of tabulating amounts or statistics; but am clearly of opinion that this patent cannot be
construed to cover a business principle such as a law of averages, which seems to have been the purpose of the
specifications in this patent.”
                                                           15
The Circuit Court admitted that if the defence claim were true, then the patent would have to be

invalidated. As another judge had expressed it, “advice is not patentable.”24

         In Earle v. Sawyer (8 F. Cas. 254; 1825) Justice Story rejected the argument that patents

required inventive inputs or efforts that went beyond those that could be produced by an artisan

who was skilled in the arts. Story was not persuaded by the “metaphysical” notion of patentability,

for the standard “proceeds upon the language of common sense and common life, and has nothing

mysterious or equivocal in it…. It is of no consequence, whether the thing be simple or

complicated; whether it be by accident, or by long, laborious thought, or by an instantaneous flash

of mind, that it is first done. The law looks to the fact, and not to the process by which it is

accomplished.” This common sense standard was entirely appropriate for an era where ordinary

non-technical craftsmen and women could make valuable innovations based on simple know-how.

A departure from this approach occurred when Hotchkiss v. Greenwood (52 U.S. 248; 1850)

proposed that “unless more ingenuity and skill in applying the old method … were required in the

application of it … than were possessed by an ordinary mechanic acquainted with the business,

there was an absence of that degree of skill and ingenuity which constitute essential elements of

every invention. In other words, the improvement is the work of the skilful mechanic, not that of

the inventor.” The Hotchkiss citations can be used as a proxy for the enforcement of the

nonobviousness doctrine. The frequency of citations indicates that the Hotchkiss ruling long

remained an isolated decision (Figure 2), but after the 1870s it became the precedent for decisions

that invalidated patent grants on the grounds of nonobviousness and later for the absence of a

“flash of genius.” The heightened standards likely functioned as a more effective filter in view of


24 Cincinnati Traction Co. v. Pope, 210 F. 443; 1913. However, it was decided that though “the case is perhaps near
the border line, we think the device should be classed as an article to be used in a method of doing business” and, as an
item to be manufactured, the ticket was patentable. See also Berardini v. Tocci 190 F. 329; 1911 in which a banker
obtained a patent for a code to wire messages to Italy: “It might be enough to bluntly hold that a code message cannot
be an art, but that perhaps is interpreting the mere language of the claims too narrowly. It is therefore thought better to
inquire what is an "art" within the meaning of the patent laws. "In the sense of the patent law an art is not a mere
abstraction. A system of transacting business, disconnected from the means for carrying out the system, is not, within
the most liberal interpretation of the term, an art. Advice is not patentable." Hotel Security, etc., Co. v. Lorraine Co.,
160 Fed. 469, 87 C.C.A. 451, 453, 24 L.R.A. (N.S.) 665 [1908].”
                                                             16
the great increase in patenting rates and technical qualifications among the population during the

postbellum period.

         Another change occurred because early insouciant judicial optimism about the coincidence

between private and public welfare had begun to wane by the second half of the century. By then,

the courts had experienced the network of litigation launched by patentees and their assignees,

such as William Woodworth and the Parker brothers, to protect national monopolies. Justice

Woodbury was prompted to dictate (Woodworth v. Edwards, 30 F. Cas. 567 (1847)): "The rights

of inventive genius, and the valuable property produced by it, all persons in the exercise of this

spirit will be willing to vindicate and uphold, without colorable evasions and wanton piracies; but

those rights on the other hand, should be maintained in a manner not harsh towards other

inventors, nor unaccommodating to the growing wants of the community." Later courts would

continue to grapple with similar issues in deciding the extent to which patent grants were

compatible with antitrust stipulations.25

         The United States differed from the rest of the world in terms of its treatment of foreign

inventions and foreign inventors. Most countries had simple registration systems and allowed

patents of importation, which supported the ability of their residents to appropriate and obtain

patents for discoveries made by residents of other countries. American laws employed the

language of the English statute in granting patents to "the first and true inventor." Nevertheless,

unlike in England, the phrase was used literally, to grant patents for inventions that were original

in the world, not simply within U.S. borders.26 Although the United States varied over time in its



25 See B. Zorina Khan, "Federal Antitrust Agencies and Public Policy towards Patents and Innovation," Cornell
Journal of Law and Public Policy, vol. 9 (Fall) 1999:133-169; B. Zorina Khan, "The Calculus of Enforcement: Legal
and Economic Issues in Antitrust and Innovation," Advances in the Study of Entrepreneurship, Innovation, and
Economic Growth, vol. 12 (1999): 61-106; B. Zorina Khan. Legal monopoly : patents and antitrust litigation in U.S.
manufacturing, 1970-1998. NBER WP No. 7068.
26
   This question was settled early on: “The inventor must be the original inventor as to all the world, to be entitled to a
patent.” See Reutgen v. Kanowrs, 1 Wash. 188 (Pa) 1804; Dawson v. Follen, 2. Wash. 311 (Pa) 1808; Lowell v.
Lewis, 1 Mass. 190 (Mass.) 1817. See Shaw v. Cooper, 32 US 292 1833: “it clearly appears, that it was the intention
of the legislature, by a compliance with the requisites of the law, to vest the exclusive right in the inventor only; and
that on condition, that his invention was neither known nor used by the public, before his application for a patent. If
such use or knowledge shall be proved to have existed, prior to the application for the patent, the act of 1793 declares
                                                             17
treatment of foreign inventors, its provisions were much more favourable towards aliens than was

true of other countries.27 The statutes of 1793, 1800 and 1832, restricted rights in patent property

to citizens or to residents who declared that they intended to become citizens.28 As such, while an

American could not appropriate patent rights to a foreign invention, he could freely use the idea

without any need to bear licensing or similar costs that would otherwise have been due if the

inventor had been able to obtain a patent in this country. However, this comprised a flexible

default rule, since it was quite commonplace for Congress to grant special exemptions to foreign

inventors who applied for waivers.29 In 1836, the stipulations on citizenship or residency were

removed, but were replaced with discriminatory patent fees that retaliated for the significantly

higher fees charged in other countries: foreigners could obtain a patent in the U.S. for a fee of three

hundred dollars, or five hundred if they were British. After 1861 patent rights (with the exception


the patent void; and as has been already stated, the right of an alien is vacated in the same manner, by proving a
foreign use or knowledge of his invention.”
27
   “With the constitution, the English statute and the adjudication upon it before them, Congress have declared the
intention of the law to be to promote the progress of the useful arts by the benefits granted to inventors; not by those
accruing to the public, after the patent had expired, as in England. This is most evident from their imposing as
conditions, that the invention must be new to all the world, and the patentee be a citizen of the United States. If public
benefit had been the sole object, it was immaterial where the invention originated, or by whom invented; but being for
the benefit of the patentee, the meritorious cause was invention, not importation, and the benefit was not extended to
foreigners, in which respects the law had been otherwise settled in England.” Whitney al. v. Emmet et al., 29 F. Cas.
1074; 1831.
28
    The option of patents for importations was specifically rejected by Congress in its deliberations over the text of the
first patent laws: An amendment ordered on December 9, 1790 [HR-121]. Received and read Feb 7, 1791. Vol. vi:
Legislative Histories: text of patents bills 41 and 121, Patents Bill [HR-41], February 16, 1790:
“Sec. 6: And be it further enacted, That any person, who shall after the passing of this act, first import into the United
States from any foreign country, any art, machine, engine, device or invention, or any improvement thereon, not before
used or known in the said States, such person, his executors, administrators and assigns, shall have the full benefit of
this act, as if he were the original inventor or improver within the said States. [p. 1631] [fn 42, p. 1631: "The House
struck out this section."]
29. For a small sample of such foreign inventors, see: Journal of the Senate of the United States of America, 1789-
1873, March 28, 1816: The bill entitled "An act authorizing and requiring the Secretary of State to issue letters patent
to Andrew Kurtz," An act authorizing the Secretary of State to issue letters patent to Henry Burden, Journal of the
House of Representatives of the United States, 1819-1820, April 12, 1820; Bill S. 38, 16th Congress, 1st Session, Feb
17, 1820: A Bill Authorizing the Secretary of State to issue letters patent to Richard Willcox; H.R. 57, 20th Congress,
1st Session, Jan 11, 1828, “An Act for the relief of Simeon Broadmeadow;” a petition of Richard Holden Approved by
the President, Journal of the Senate of the United States of America, 1789-1873, May 8, 1822;18th Congress, 1st
Session, H.R. 230, 26th of May, 1824, Congress passed a law, authorizing the Department of State to issue a patent for
a similar invention, to a certain Nathaniel Sylvester; Christopher Bechtler, praying that letters patent may be granted
him for invention of two new and useful machines for the purpose of washing gold ores, without requiring the two
years' residence as is by law now required. Approved by the President of the United States on March 3, 1831, Journal
of the Senate of the United States of America, 1789-1873;Anthony Hermange, an alien, residing in the City or
Washington, and Paul Steenstrup, of Kongsberg, in the Kingdom of Norway praying that letters patent for an invention
may be granted, Approved by President May 1, 1828. However, not all petitions were granted; see for instance, Peter
Hirgoyen’s petition to be able to apply for a patent for a distilling apparatus (Journal of the House of Representatives

                                                           18
of caveats) were available to all applicants on the same basis without regard to nationality.30 This

liberality to foreign inventors was obtained at low cost since for most of the nineteenth century

foreign patenting in the United States was trivial relative to the total. By the end of the 19th

century, the United States directed its efforts towards attaining uniformity in intellectual property

rights regimes across countries.31 A significant motivating factor was the success of American

patentees in penetrating foreign markets. Americans inventors were also concerned about the lack

of protection accorded to their exhibits in the increasingly more prominent World’s Fairs.

         The United States was the most prolific patenting nation in the world, many of the major

American enterprises owed their success to patents and were expanding into international markets,

and the U.S. patent system was recognized as the most successful. It is therefore not surprising

that the harmonization of patent laws implied convergence towards the American model, which

was viewed as “the ideal of the future,” despite resistance from other nations. Countries such as

Germany were initially averse to extending equal protection to foreigners because they feared that

their domestic industry would be overwhelmed by American patents. Ironically, because its patent

laws were the most liberal, the United States found itself with weaker bargaining abilities than

nations who could make concessions by changing their provisions. This likely influenced the U.S.

tendency to use bilateral trade sanctions rather than multilateral conventions to obtain reforms in

international patent policies. The movement to create an international patent system elucidated the

reality that intellectual property laws did not exist in a vacuum, but were part of a bundle of rights




of the United States, 1817-1818, January 21, 1818.)
30
   During the proceedings to celebrate the centenary of the U.S. patent system, this liberality was noted as one of its
essential features: “Our law gives to all men of all nations the same privileges, and recognizes to the fullest extent the
international character of property in inventions. In this respect ... the United States may claim to have led the world
and to be leading it still.” F. A. Seely, “International Protection of Industrial Property,” p. 205, in Proceedings and
Addresses: Celebration of the Beginning of the Second Century of the American Patent System Wash. DC, Gedney &
Roberts, 1892.
31 The standard reference to the development of international patent harmonization is Edith Penrose, Economics of the
International Patent System, Baltimore, Johns Hopkins Press, 1951. B. Zorina Khan and Kenneth L. Sokoloff, “The
Innovation of Patent Systems in the Nineteenth Century: A Comparative Perspective,” unpublished manuscript (2002),
discuss American exceptionalism and highlight the importance of low fees and an examination system in accounting
for the nature of American patenting relative to other countries.
                                                              19
 that were affected by other laws and policies, as well as by the scale and scope of economic

 activity.

 ii) Copyright and Allied Rights

          Despite their common source in the intellectual property clause of the U.S. Constitution,

 American copyright policies provided a marked contrast to the patent system. The subsidy

 argument is quite implausible in accounting for the differences between patent and copyright

 doctrines. Copyright differed from patents precisely because the objective of both systems was to

 maximize social welfare, which led to an underlying rationale that was consistent with economic

 reasoning. The political rhetoric of copyright has always centered about the creative individual,

 but then (as now) copyright enforcement was largely the concern of commercial interests.32 Like

 other forms of intellectual property laws, the copyright system evolved to encompass

 improvements in technology and changes in the marketplace. Copyright decisions illustrate how

 adjudication by analogy economized on the costs of technological transitions. Still, many of the

 technological innovations of the nineteenth century were sufficiently different from existing

 technologies as to make judicial analogies somewhat strained, and ultimately required

 accommodation by the legislature instead. This area of the law indicates the extent to which

 judge-made policies were constrained by the statutes, and the extent to which legislative revisions

 were influenced by bargains among interest groups that could at times deviate from the goal of

 social welfare maximization.33

          The earliest federal statute to protect the product of authors was approved on May 31 1790,


32 The fraction of copyright plaintiffs who were authors (broadly defined) was initially quite low, and fell continuously
 during the nineteenth century. By the start of the twentieth cenury less than 10 percent of all plaintiffs in copyright
 cases were the creators of the item that was the subject of the litigation. Instead, by the same period, the majority of
 parties bringing cases were publishing enterprises and other assignees of copyrights. Although the judiciary attempted
 to ensure that the rights of all parties were fairly considered, their major concern was not to benefit publishing
 companies, but to protect the public interest in learning.
 33 . As the Supreme Court pointed out: “From its beginning, the law of copyright has developed in response to
 significant changes in technology. Indeed, it was the invention of a new form of copying equipment -- the printing
 press -- that gave rise to the original need for copyright protection. Repeatedly, as new developments have occurred in
 this country, it has been the Congress that has fashioned the new rules that new technology made necessary.” See
 Sony Corp. of America v. Universal City Studios, Inc., 464 U.S. 417 (1984).
                                                               20
“for the encouragement of learning.” This utilitarian objective meant that, unlike European

doctrines that enshrined the inalienable rights of authors, in the United States primary focus was on

widespread access in order to increase public welfare, and incentives to copyright owners were

viewed only as a secondary motive. Registration secured the right to print, publish and sell maps,

charts and books for a term of fourteen years, with the possibility of an extension for an equal

term. Major issues in copyright law primarily related to subject matter, duration, and enforcement,

all of which expanded significantly during the course of the nineteenth century. The statutes were

substantively revised in 1831, 1870 and 1909. The statutory extension of copyrights to musical

compositions and plays was quite straightforward, as was the grant of property rights for

engravings and sculpture. By 1910 the original copyright holder was granted derivative rights

including translations into other languages; performances; and the rights to adapt musical works.

The burgeoning scope of copyright protection that technological advances required raised

numerous questions about the rights of authors and publishers relative to the public, and courts

continually were confronted with the need to delineate the boundaries of private property in such a

way as to guard the public domain.

         Although musical works were not protected by the first copyright Act, the 1831 statute

allowed protection for musical compositions, at that time limited to sheet music. The creation of

mechanical means of reproducing music, such as the player piano and the phonograph, raised

questions about the relevance of existing copyright rules, in part because the analogy between

sheet music and these mechanical inventions appeared remote. Stern v. Rosey dealt with the

question of whether an injunction should issue against a manufacturer of phonograph records who

had used copyrighted music. The court rejected the notion that copyright protection for music

extended to such a different technological transformation.34 Kennedy v. McTammany, 33 F. 584


34 According to the court, “We can not regard the reproduction, through the agency of the phonograph, of the sounds
of musical instruments playing the music composed and published by the appellants, as the copy or publication of the
same within the meaning of the act. The ordinary signification of the words "copying," "publishing," etc., can not be
stretched to include it…. these prepared wax cylinders can neither substitute the copyrighted sheets of music nor serve
any purpose which is within their scope. In these respects there would seem to be no substantial difference between
                                                           21
(1888), which was argued in the Massachusetts Federal District Court, was brought by the

copyright owner of a song entitled “Cradle’s Empty, Baby’s Gone.” Judge Colt failed to accept

the plaintiff’s argument that McTammany’s perforated piano rolls infringed on the copyright for

the music, because he could “find no decided cases which, directly or by analogy, support the

position of the plaintiffs.” In 1908 the Supreme Court affirmed this position when it considered the

claim brought by a music publishing company against the manufacturer of player piano rolls.35 In

1909 Congress responded by revising the copyright law to give composers the right to the first

mechanical reproduction of their music. However, after the first recording, the statute permitted a

compulsory licence to issue for copyrighted musical compositions: that is to say, anyone could

subsequently make their own recording of the composition on payment of a fee that was set by the

statute at two cents per recording. In effect, the property right was transformed into a liability rule.

The prevalence of compulsory licences for copyrighted material is worth noting for a number of

reasons: they underline some of the statutory differences between patents and copyrights in the

United States; they reflect economic reasons for such distinctions; and they were also the result of

political compromises among the various interest groups in the music industry.36

        The advent of photography created a new form of “authorship” which was granted
copyright protection in 1865.37 Photography also offered a ready means of copying books,
paintings and engravings that led to copyright infringement litigation. Rossiter v. Hall, 20 F. Cas.
1253 (1866), dealt with photographic copies that had been taken of a copyrighted engraving of
Washington’s house that the statutes protected against unauthorized reprints. The defendant
argued unsuccessfully that, since photography had not been invented at the time of the statute, it
followed that this form of copying was not prohibited. Although the judiciary was reluctant to
appropriate the task of Congress and create new policies, at times they were able to adjudicate


them and the metal cylinder of the old and familiar music box; and this, though in use at and before the passage of the
copyright act, has never been regarded as infringing upon the copyrights of authors and publishers.” 17 App. D.C. 562;
1901.
35 White-Smith Music Pub. Co. v. Apollo Co, 209 U.S. 1; 28 S. Ct. 319; 1908. Although some commentators today
are derisive about the ruling in this case, it should be noted that this was the international standard set down in the
British courts and in the Berne Convention.
36 One of the primary interest groups in the world of music, the American Society of Composers, Authors and
Publishers (ASCAP), was founded in 1914.
37 (Act of March 3, 1865; 13 Stat. 540).
                                                              22
cases relating to new technologies by stretching the existing analogy. This was apparent in the
development of litigation surrounding movies not long after Edison obtained his 1896 patent for a
kinetoscope. The lower court rejected Edison’s copyright of moving pictures under the statutory
category of photographs, but this decision was overturned by the appellate court: “To say that the
continuous method by which this negative was secured was unknown when the act was passed,
and therefore a photograph of it was not covered by the act, is to beg the question. Such
construction is at variance with the object of the act, which was passed to further the constitutional
grant of power to “promote the progress of science and useful arts. ... [Congress] must have
recognized there would be change and advance in making photographs, just as there has been in
making books, printing chromos, and other subjects of copyright protection”38
        Technological innovation created new cultural properties to be protected, but many of these

also facilitated infringement through mechanical means of reproduction that lowered the costs of

duplicating copyrighted works. Congress responded to the creation of new subject matter by

expanding the scope of the copyright laws. The legislature also repeatedly lengthened the term of

copyright, arguably in order to support the value of copyright protection in the face of falling costs

of infringement. In 1790 the duration of copyright protection comprised 14 years from

registration, with the possibility of renewal for a further 14 years; after 1831 the maximum term

was 28 years from time of registration with the right of renewal for 14 years; whereas the 1909

statute allowed 28 years plus extension for a further 28 years if the author were still alive.

Nevertheless, it is worth repeating that the largely utilitarian rationale of the American statutes (“to

promote learning”) precluded perpetual grants, and the term of copyright protection in United

States was among the most abbreviated in the world. Similarly, the United States offered the most

liberal opportunities for unauthorized use if copying qualified as “fair use.”

        Technological innovations that facilitated unauthorized copying heightened the tension

between public welfare and private interests, leading some to question whether the fair use

doctrine and copyright itself could endure. However, it is vital to understand that fair use was not


38 Edison v. Lubin, 122 F. Cas. 240 (1903); and American Mutoscope & Biograph Co. v. Edison Mfg. Co., 137 F. 262
(1905). Congress specifically granted copyright protection to moving pictures in the Act of Aug. 24, 1912, 37 Stat.
488.
                                                          23
formulated simply as a function of technologies that influenced the ability to monitor use, nor was

it limited because courts recognized the (moral or other) rights of authors. Even if monitoring

costs were zero, and all use could be traced by the author, fair use doctrines would still be relevant

to fulfil the ultimate democratic function of legal rights in cultural products. Without fair use,

copyright would be transmuted into a monopoly right that would limit public access and violate the

Constitution’s mandate to promote the progress of science. In short, according to American legal

doctrines, fair use was not regarded as an exception to the grant of copyright; instead, the grant of

copyright was a limited exception to the primacy of the public domain.

       The crucial need to balance public welfare against the right of authors is partly why

copyright, according to Justice Joseph Story, belonged to the “metaphysics of the law.” It was

Story who first outlined the American fair use doctrine in Gray v. Russell (1839) and the more

frequently cited Folsom v. Marsh (1841). Fair use allowed unauthorized use of some portion of a

copyrighted work, although exactly how much copying was permissible constituted (and remains

today) “one of the most difficult points that can well arise for judicial discussion.” Story offered a

number of guidelines in Folsom v. Marsh., 9 F. Cas. 342 (1841): “we must often, in deciding

questions of this sort, look to the nature and objects of the selections made, the quantity and value

of the materials used, and the degree in which the use may prejudice the sale, or diminish the

profits, or supersede the objects, of the original work.” The fair use doctrine thus illustrates the

extent to which policy makers weighed the benefits of diffusion against the costs of exclusion. If

copyrights were as strictly construed as patents, it would serve to reduce scholarship, prevent

public access for noncommercial purposes, increase transactions costs for potential users, and

inhibit learning which the statutes were meant to promote.

       The increasingly polarized debate today about the scope of patents and copyrights often

underestimates or ignores the importance of allied rights that are available through other forms of

the law such as contract and unfair competition. A noticeable feature of nineteenth century case

law was the willingness of the judiciary to extend protection to noncopyrighted works under
                                                   24
alternative doctrines in the common law, although the judicial mind in 1915 balked at the thought

of extending free speech protections to commercial productions such as movies.39 More than 10

percent of “copyright” cases were decided using concepts of unfair competition, where the court

rejected copyright claims but still protected the work against unauthorized users using fair trade

doctrines. Some 7.7 percent dealt with contracts, which raised questions such as ownership of

photographs in cases of “work for hire.” A further 12 percent encompassed issues of trade secrets,

misappropriation, and the right to privacy.

        The development of the right to privacy is especially interesting, since it illustrates the

creation of a new legal concept at common law to compensate for the potential of new

technologies to infringe on third-party rights. Samuel Warren and Louis Brandeis, in what has

been touted as the most effective law review piece of all time, argued that “modern enterprise and

invention” subjected the ordinary individual to unwarranted suffering that could not be alleviated

through existing laws of copyright, tort, trespass, nor slander and libel. Instant photographs and

“numerous mechanical devices” led to the “evil of invasion of privacy.”40 The concept of a legal

right to privacy immediately entered into litigated arguments, and the New York Supreme Court,

in Schuyler v. Curtis et al. (15 N.Y.S. 787;1891), quoted directly from the law review, but

distinguished between private individuals and public figures who by implication ceded the right to

privacy. In a Massachusetts case three years later (Corliss v. Walker Co., 64 F. 280; 1894) the

wife of the great inventor George H. Corliss tried to enjoin the publication of a photograph of her

late husband. The court rejected the plea because her husband was “among the first of American

inventors, and he sought recognition as such,” permitting thousands of his photographs to be

distributed at the Centennial Exposition in Philadelphia. In 1903, the New York legislature passed

a statute that levied criminal and civil liability for the unauthorized use of the "name, portrait or




39 See Mutual Film Corp. v. Industrial Commission of Ohio, 236 U.S. 230; 35 S. Ct. 387 (1915).
40 Samuel D. Warren and Louis D. Brandeis, “The Right to Privacy,” Harvard Law Review Vol. IV (5) December 15,
1890: 193-220.
                                                       25
picture of any living person" for "advertising purposes, or for the purposes of trade," and several

other states did the same.41

         The legal records of patent and copyright disputes yield valuable insights into nineteenth-

century society. The significant differences in international patent and copyright laws in particular

illustrate the extent to which these policies were market-oriented. A nation of artificers and

innovators, both as consumers and producers, American citizens were confident of their global

competitiveness in technology, and accordingly took an active role in international patent

conventions. Although they excelled at pragmatic contrivances, Americans were advisedly less

sanguine about their efforts in the realm of music, art, literature and drama.42 As a developing

country, the United States was initially a net debtor in flows of material culture from Europe. The

first copyright statute implicitly recognized this when it authorized Americans to take free

advantage of the cultural output of other countries and encouraged international copyright piracy

that persisted for a century. The tendency to reprint foreign works was encouraged by the

existence of tariffs on imported books that ranged as high as 25 percent. Throughout the 19th

century proposals to reform the law and to acknowledge foreign copyrights were repeatedly

brought before Congress without any success. It was not until 1891 when American literature was

gaining in the international market that copyright protection was granted to foreign residents, in

order to gain reciprocal rights for American writers and artists.43



41 The first unambiguously successful application of the right to privacy in court, Pavesich v. New England Life
Insurance Co, 50 SE 98 (1905), along with some thirty other lawsuits prior to 1920, dealt with allegations that
unauthorized commercial use of the plaintiff's photograph violated a right to privacy.
42 John Ruggles, who had recommended the changes in the patent system in 1836, was also a member of an 1838
Committee to reform international copyrights. He argued that “American ingenuity in the arts and practical sciences,
would derive at least as much benefit from international patent laws, as that of foreigners. Not so with authorship and
book-making. The difference is too obvious to admit of controversy.” According to Ruggles, an international
copyright law was ill-advised, because “The answer is found in the significant inquiry of the British reviewer -- ‘Who
ever reads an American book?’ ...the profits of trade and manufacture, and all the benefits ... would be, for us, on the
wrong side of the leger.” Report to accompany Senate Bill No. 32, 25th Congress, 2d Session, June 25 (1838).
43 However, the statute also included significant concessions to printers’ unions in the form of manufacturing clauses.
First, a book had to be published in the U.S. before or at the same time as the publication date in its country of origin.
Second, the work had to be printed here, or printed from type set in the United States or from plates made from type
set in the United States. Copyright protection also depended on conformity with stipulations such as formal
registration of the work. These clauses resulted in U.S. failure to qualify for admission to the international Berne
Convention until 1988, one hundred years after the initial Convention.
                                                             26
B. TECHNOLOGICAL INNOVATIONS AND INSTITUTIONAL CHANGE

                                    “Sooner or later, if the demands of social utility are sufficiently urgent, if the
                                    operation of an existing rule is sufficiently productive of hardship or
                                    inconvenience, utility will tend to triumph.”
                                                                                    --- Benjamin Cardozo (1924)44

         American society at the start of the nineteenth century was still overwhelmingly agrarian

but by 1920 the United States had become the world’s foremost industrial power. The advent of

industrialization and more extensive markets created conflicts between the rights of farmers and

mill owners, mill owners and their workers, as well as enterprises and consumers, all of which

required legal mediation. Technological advances and legal change had reciprocal and mutually

reinforcing effects. Property laws and contracts attempted to define rights and allocate liability

within a changing context. In particular, tort law developed as a distinct body of thought

independently of property and contract, because new technologies, urbanization and more frequent

exchange among strangers led to an increase in the number of accidental injuries and externalities.

At the same time, the costs of injuries created incentives for inventors to direct their attentions to

safety devices such as steam gauges, safety elevators, and more effective railroad couplers, air

brakes and crossing signals.45 The courts responded by quickly altering the standards of due care

to incorporate existing technological options as long as they were cost effective.

i)       Canals and Railroads

         The development of cheap and efficient internal transportation was a prerequisite for

economic development in a country as vast as the United States, so it is not surprising that this

comprised a key element of state policy and private initiatives. By 1830, even though state

involvement was largely limited to the grant of charters, investors and entrepreneurs privately

funded an extensive network of turnpikes in the Northeast. After the state of New York financed

the building of the hugely successful Erie canal, numerous other public and private canal ventures


44 Benjamin Cardozo, The Growth of Law, New Haven, Yale Univ. Press, 1924. p. 117.

45 In the entire period before 1860, only 771 patents mentioned safety in the specification; but during the 1860s some
1940 patents did so, and by the 1870s this number increased to over 3021 patents.
                                                          27
were undertaken throughout New England, the Middle Atlantic and Midwest. The United States

also possessed ready access to natural bodies of water, and advances in steamboat technologies

increased their importance as a conduit for commerce. Between 1830 and 1860 national steamboat

tonnage increased by a factor of ten and rates on upriver transport fell dramatically. As a result of

these technical and price savings, the effective distance between towns and markets was

significantly reduced.

         In the antebellum period some 650 lawsuits involved canals and another 468 dealt with

steamboats. Transportation along water routes raised many of the issues that the railroads later

would confront, including the nature of state charters, the role and effectiveness of canal

commissioners, compensation for injuries to passengers and workers, takings and just

compensation, discriminatory prices, taxation and financing. Many states, beginning with New

York, altered their constitutions to restrict debt financing at both the state and municipal levels,

because of their unhappy experience when financial panics adversely affected the funding of

canals. In the era of canal-building mania, the courts provided well-needed ballast to the airy

financial schemes of canal boosters.46 Some of these lawsuits involved conflicts between different

cohorts of technologies: could canals and turnpikes block railroads because their charters were

drawn up earlier and implicitly conferred exclusive rights that could not be eroded by later

technologies? The famous Charles River Bridge decision in 1837 rejected this view because if

earlier charters ensured monopoly profits the benefits from competition and technological change

would be reduced or eliminated. Progress also meant that already existing property rights might

have to be more narrowly defined. Thus, the old common law rule that property rights in land

extended upwards and downwards without limit no longer applied, and courts allowed railroads

and bridges to cross privately owned waterways and turnpikes. New technologies required a

balancing of the benefits to be derived from their applications against the harm that is associated


46 For instance, Newell v. People, 7 N.Y. 9 (1852), held that a New York state statute, which authorized the debt for
the Erie Canal Enlargement and the building of the Genesee Valley and Black River Canals to be paid from future
                                                          28
with their use. They brought the possibility that economic and social advances could be blocked

by hold-outs or by individuals with conflicting interests who threatened to make the transactions

costs associated with innovations prohibitively high.

         The use of eminent domain played an important part in the promotion of turnpikes, canals,

railroads and telegraphs by reducing or eliminating such costs. The takings clause raised questions

about the security of private property, what comprised public use, and how just compensation was

to be determined in a nonconsensual nonmarket exchange. In the nineteenth-century transportation

cases, just compensation for takings was ascertained through mutual agreement, by commissioners

in an administrative process, or by a jury. Legislatures determined the constraints of “public use.”

Their decisions were straight-forward in the specific case of canals for transportation or railroads

that, though privately owned, offered valuable common carrier services to the general public. In

other instances, the benefits to the public were less direct, but this did not entirely rule out the

application of the doctrine of eminent domain. In 1832 Jasper Scudder brought a case in equity

against the Trenton Delaware Falls Company (1 N.J. Eq. 694; 1832) which was incorporated to

create water power for some seventy manufacturing mills. Scudder’s counsel argued that the

corporation was created only for private purposes since the benefits of the water mills would

derive solely to private individuals, thus it was inappropriate to allow the use of eminent domain.

The Chancellor rejected this viewpoint because manufacturing enterprises, though admittedly

private, contributed to employment and general economic prosperity, and indeed promised to

generate far larger communal benefits than some turnpikes actually produced.47


canal revenue surpluses, was unconstitutional.
47 “The water power about to be created, will be sufficient for the erection of seventy mills, and factories, and other
works dependent on such power. It will be located at the seat of government, at the head of tide water, and in a
flourishing and populous district of country. It will be no experiment in a country like ours; and, judging from the
results in other places, we may make a sufficiently accurate calculation as to the result here. Take the town of Paterson
as an example. The water power there is in the hands of individuals--a company like this. They are under no obligation
to lease or sell any mills or privileges to the public; and yet see the result of a few years' operation. Paterson is now the
manufacturing emporium of the state, with a population of eight thousand souls. It has increased the value of property
in all that district of country; opened a market for the produce of the soil, and given a stimulus to industry of every
kind. May we not hope that a similar benefit may be experienced here?” See also The Proprietors of Sudbury
Meadows versus The Proprietors of the Middlesex Canal,. 40 Mass. 36 (1839); and Rubottom v. M’Clure, 4 Blackf.
505 (1838).
                                                              29
         To an even greater extent than canals, railroads quickly gained public approval and became

a symbol of American progress.48 Economic historians rightly caution against an inflated

assessment of the role of locomotives in the nineteenth century economy, given the existence of

viable alternatives, but it is undoubtedly true that the significance of railways increased over this

period in terms of use, employment, and social impact.49 Courts demonstrated a readiness to

ensure that the common law kept up with innovations in transportation, since "To say that a new

mode of passage shall be banished from the streets, no matter how much the general good may

require it, simply because the streets were not so used in the days of Blackstone, would hardly

comport with the advancement and enlightenment of the present age."50

         The benefits from all improvements in internal transportation came at a higher risk if only

because of the growth in the number of transactions. Steamboats proved to be especially

hazardous because of fires from sparks, and accidents when high pressure boilers exploded. This

led to the passage of federal statutes in 1838 and 1852 that attempted to regulate safety and

assigned the burden of proof in negligence cases on steamboat owners and captains.51 An

enduring legal legacy arose after the scale of railroad injuries mounted rapidly after the Civil War.

In 1890 over 29,000 individuals were injured in railroad accidents and 6,335 persons were killed,


48 Albert Fishlow surveys the development of transportation in “Internal Transportation in the Nineteenth and Early
Twentieth Centuries,” in The Cambridge Economic History of the United States, Vol. II, (eds) Stanley L. Engerman
and Robert E. Gallman, Cambridge, Cambridge University Press (2000):543-642. The law of railroads has been
discussed in a large number of books and articles, the most comprehensive of which is James W. Ely’s Railroads and
American Law, Lawrence, University of Kansas Press, 2001. Ely emphasizes the role of legislators and inefficient
regulation in the decline of the railroads.
49 Justice Caruthers of the Tennessee Supreme Court lyrically wrote in 33 Tenn. 637 (1854) that “the common dirt
road for wagons is superseded by turnpikes, and these again by the railroad. … Blessings innumerable, prosperity
unexampled, have marked the progress of this master improvement of the age. Activity, industry, enterprise and
wealth seem to spring up as if by enchantment, wherever the iron track has been laid, or the locomotive moved.” In
1840 7,000 individuals were employed in the railway industry, compared to 95,000 in ocean vessels. Also in that year
491 miles of new tracks were laid, and some 2,818 miles of road were in operation. By 1870 160,000 employees
worked for the railroads, a number that surpassed ocean transportation, whereas almost 53,000 miles of tracks were in
operation. The growth of passenger service was equally rapid, and in 1870 passenger revenue service exceeded $108
million, but this was significantly lower than the $294 million generated from freight. See Historical Statistics of the
United States.
50 Hiram P. Moses et al. v. The Pittsburgh, Fort Wayne and Chicago R.R. Co. 21 Ill. 516, 523. (1859).
51 July 7th, 1838, “Act to provide for the better security of the lives of passengers on board of vessels propelled, in
whole or in part, by steam," Sec. 13, 5 U.S. Statutes at Large 306 (1838). The issue of accidents on steamboats is
addressed in Richard N. Langlois, David J. Denault and Samson M. Kimenyi, “Bursting Boilers and the Federal
Power Redux: The Evolution of Safety on the Western Rivers,” University of Connecticut Working Paper 1995. For a

                                                          30
and in 1913 injuries attained the quite astonishing level of 200,308 with almost 11,000 fatalities in

one year alone.

         The debate over the impetus for the imposition of regulations and their efficacy has still not

been resolved. Some economists have argued that, while regulatory policies succeeded in

generating and funding useful research, the improvements in safety were predominantly due to

private initiatives which would have proceeded in the absence of federal regulation. Figure 3

presents the annual number of patents granted for railroad safety, and for safety-related inventions

in general, expressed as a percent of all patents. The two series are procyclical and behave very

like each other until the first World War. After this period, railroad traffic was substantially

reduced, and patents for railroad safety fell relative to overall safety patents. Both series suggest

that investments in safety-related innovations were primarily responding to the market rather than

to regulation. In particular, Interstate Commerce Commission oversight of the railroads from 1887

and the introduction of federal railroad safety legislation in 1893 do not seem to be associated with

spurts in railroad safety patents when compared to safety patents in general. These data bear out

the findings of researchers who find little impact of regulation on the adoption of such devices as

air brakes and automatic couplers. When government intervention succeeded in generating the

development of automatic train controls, the innovation proved to be ineffective on both technical

and cost bases. The patent data suggest that we should not underestimate market incentives for

enterprises to invest in safety and to self-regulate.52

         Liability rules differed in ways that comported with economic logic. The common law for

unintended torts adhered to four rules in deciding liability: industry norms; the fellow servant rule;

contributory negligence; and the assumption of risk. The judiciary held enterprises to a standard of

care that comprised the norm for the industry, and only punished deviations away from the norm.


different view, see John G. Burke, “Bursting Boilers and the Federal Power,” Technology and Culture vol. 7 (Winter
1966): 1-23.
52 Mark Aldrich points out that railroads were not opposed to safety-related legislation, but they rejected provisions
that mandated specific devices which might be incompatible with other forms of equipment and might become
obsolete quickly. Mark Aldrich, Safety First: Technology, Labor, and Business in the Building of American Work
                                                          31
The industry norm criterion, by relying on established community standards, economized on

information gathering by the judiciary. The fellow servant rule was first upheld in a railroad case

in 1842, and absolved the railroad from liability because there was contributory negligence on the

part of another employee.53 A rule of contributory negligence induced bilateral care for it created

incentives for workers to monitor each other. This made sense in contexts such as railroad

operations where workers were mobile and had a great deal of discretion: first, many injuries

occurred because workers acted without due care; and second, monitoring and enforcement costs

for employers were high. Railroads that tried to introduce rules to alter hazardous but convenient

habits encountered resistance from workers. The assumption of risk involved the idea that

rational individuals will weigh the costs and benefits of their actions, so an employee will engage

in a risky activity only if he is compensated for the expected harm either through insurance or

through a higher wage premium. Thus, as long as the employer was not negligent or deficient in

safety standards, there was little need for judicial intervention when employees in risky jobs were

injured in the normal course of employment.54 We can further examine variation in the application



Safety, 1870-1939, Baltimore, Johns Hopkins University Press, 1997.
53 Farwell v. Boston & W. R. R. Corp., 45 Mass. 49; 1842. Liability rules give incentives for precautionary
behaviour, and also have implications for informational and administrative costs: negligence rules give both parties
incentives for efficient precaution but have higher informational and administrative costs; whereas, a rule of strict
liability towards enterprises minimizes transactions costs, but creates little incentive for victims to invest in precaution.
If firms are held strictly liable, and consumer demand is not very responsive to price changes, firms can increase
prices, implying that the cost of injuries will be borne by consumers in general. If consumer demand is responsive to
price changes, shareholders in the firm will bear the costs of injuries in the form of lower net earnings, and the firm
will tend to over- invest in resources to reduce harm. After the Civil War a number of state legislatures limited the use
of the fellow servant rule in railroad accidents and in 1908 the Federal Employers’ Liability Act abolished it entirely.
54 However, it should be noted that this approach depends on the assumption that workers have many alternatives
from which to choose, and that wages will adjust to reflect a risk premium. The empirical evidence on this point is
hard to assess because of data inadequacies, but suggests that wages were indeed higher to compensate for risk,
although workers were not perfectly compensated for risk-bearing. Moreover, workers who chose to engage in risky
activities may have had few alternative opportunities. A key guide to the impact of state legislation to offer insured
benefits to workers is Price Fishback and Shawn Kantor, Prelude to the Welfare State: The Origins of Workers'
Compensation, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2000. Fishback and Kantor argue that the state laws were
associated with greater certainty for working families. They show that all parties concerned – firms, workers, and
insurers – benefited from the introduction of workmen’s compensation, in part because workers paid for some of the
increase in benefits through lower wages. However, in industries where unions predominated, such as the building
trades, employees were able to successfully counter the tendency for workers to bear the incidence of the
compensation laws. See also Price Fishback and Shawn Kantor, "NonFatal Accident Compensation Under the
Negligence Liability System at the Turn of the Century," Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization, 11(2) (1995):
406-433; Price Fishback and Seung-Wook Kim, "Institutional Change, Compensating Differentials and Accident Risk
in American Railroading, 1892-1945," Journal of Economic History 53 (December 1993): 796-823; and Price
                                                             32
of liability standards in the case of passengers and freight. Although employees might be held to

have assumed the risk inherent in railroad or other industrial occupations, this was not entirely true

of passengers. Hence, railroads were held to higher standards of care for passengers than for

employees and, if a passenger was injured, the burden of proof was on the railroad to show why it

should not be held liable. In the case of goods to be transported, once the items were conveyed to

the train they were completely within the control of the shipper, hence railroads were strictly liable

for freight. Slave passengers could not be viewed in the same liability context as freight, for “the

carrier cannot, consistent with humanity and regard to the life and health of the slave, have the

same absolute control over an intelligent being endowed with feelings and volition, that he has

over property placed in his custody.”55

         Improvements in transportation and communications created a national market in which

state laws were increasingly discordant and discriminatory.56 These questions had arisen

regarding waterways, when federal admiralty laws were applied to steamships engaged in

interstate commerce, but Figures 4 and 5 highlight the role of railroad litigation in providing the

impetus towards federalization. Some states refused to honour charters of ‘foreign railroads’ that

were granted in other jurisdictions; others tried to add to the revenues of their treasury by taxing

interim transactions, or imposing restrictions on rates and operations even though the final

destination was in another state. As the figures indicate, the disproportionate appeal to federal

courts relative to state courts comprised an integral part of the policies of the railroad companies

well into the twentieth century. Their victories in the Supreme Court changed the interpretation of

the Constitution, in particular the Commerce Clause, the prohibition of lawsuits against state

governments in the Eleventh Amendment, and the due process clause of the Fourteenth


Fishback, "Liability Rules and Accident Prevention in the Workplace: Empirical Evidence from the Early Twentieth
Century," Journal of Legal Studies, 16 (June 1987): 305-328.
55 Wilson v. Hamilton, Sup Ct. Oh., 4 Ohio St. 722; 1855.
56 In the landmark Wabash opinion, Justice Miller asserted that “It cannot be too strongly insisted upon that the right
of continuous transportation from one end of the country to the other is essential in modern times to that freedom of
commerce from the restraints which the State might choose to impose upon it, that the commerce clause was intended
to secure.” Wabash, St. Louis & Pacific R’wy Co., v. Illinois, 118 U.S. 557; 7 S. Ct. 4; 30 L. Ed. 244; 1886.
                                                          33
Amendment.57 Railroad companies ultimately succeeded in obtaining legal recognition that the

public interest was not consistent with constraints on market expansion that benefited narrow local

interests.58

         Several other significant legal doctrines were influenced by the public interest nature of the

railroads, most noticeably in bankruptcy and reorganization.59 Federal bankruptcy legislation was

intermittent and largely unenforced for much of the nineteenth century until the passage of the

National Bankruptcy Law of 1898. State rulings initially followed the English bias towards the

rights of creditors, who were generally allowed to levy against and sell distressed property on a

first-comer basis. This created perverse incentives for creditors to race to force the firm into

bankruptcy even when the corporation might be viable in long run. Clearly, state interests were

not necessarily mutually consistent or appropriate for dealing with interstate enterprises like

railroads. The result was a legislative vacuum that became especially problematic during the panic

of 1873 when almost a fifth of railroad operations failed. Federal courts were reluctant to grant

individual creditors the right to dissolve national corporations at the cost of losing the public


57 See Richard C. Cortner, The Iron Horse and the Constitution, Greenwood Press, Westport, CT, 1993.
58 This recognition did not occur instantaneously, but through a long process of appeals. Railroads questioned state
regulation of rates in the Granger cases of 1877, but were defeated. The judiciary hesitated to apply the Due Process
clause of the Fourteenth Amendment, and conceded the right of the states to regulate rates for undertakings that
affected the public interest. However, in the California Railroad Tax Cases of 1882 (13 F. 722), the court agreed that a
local tax violated the railroad’s due process rights, and further was inconsistent with the equal protection provision
because the railroad was taxed differently from other enterprises. The U.S. Supreme Court ultimately in 1890 upheld
the view that state policy regarding rates was within the jurisdiction of the courts under the “substantive due process”
clause of the Constitution. In the 1890s 41 federal cases involved questions of due process that were raised in
connection with the railroads, the following decade there were 87, and by the 1920s the number had increased to 449
cases. These decisions enabled the federal judiciary to overrule state policies, and allowed them to support private
property rights that the state actions would have constrained. Although the Supreme Court abandoned the use of
substantive due process to protect private property in the 1930s, the concept endured in other contexts, especially in
the battle to promote civil liberties. The railroads won a second victory in terms of the interpretation of the Eleventh
Amendment that barred federal lawsuits against the states or state officials. In Ex Parte Young (1908), the Supreme
Court ruled that federal courts could prevent state officials from enforcing policies that conflicted with the Fourteenth
Amendment, a decision that had lasting implications for the movement to end racial segregation in schools.
59 Bankruptcy and tort laws in relation to the railroads have also been well-investigated. Bradley Hansen, “The
People’s Welfare and the Origins of Corporate Reorganization: The Wabash Receivership Reconsidered,” Business
History Review 74(3) 2000: 377-406, finds no evidence for the view that courts radically transformed creditors’ rights
in the 1880s. Instead, he proposes that the features of equity receivership in the Wabash decision were consistent with
earlier precedents, and with the attempt to further public welfare. Peter Tufano points to the link between legally
mandated governance mechanisms and financial innovations that allowed distressed firms to obtain funding, in
“Business Failure, Judicial Intervention, and Financial Innovation: Restructuring U.S. Railroads in the Nineteenth
Century,” Business History Review, vol. 71(1) 1997: 1-40. See also Albro Martin, “Railroads and the Equity
Receivership: An Essay on Institutional Change,” JEH, vol. 34 (3) 1974: 685-709.
                                                             34
benefits of a functioning interstate railroad. Instead, court-appointed receivers kept the railway

operating during bankruptcy while the firm was reorganized and financially restructured. Strikes

were not tolerated while the railroad was under receivership, and lawsuits could not be brought

against receivers during restructuring, although equity courts tried to ensure that existing

management did not unduly skew outcomes in their own favour. This gradual shifting of bias

towards the rights of debtors became a permanent feature of American bankruptcy policy starting

with the 1898 federal legislation that was enacted after the great depression of 1893.

       The process of railroad consolidation accelerated after the Civil War, and at the same time

exacerbated the tensions between state and federal oversight of commerce. As discussed above,

railroads appealed to federal courts to mediate, but the figures indicate that the major forces acting

on railroad concerns remained at the state level until the end of the century. In 1887 the Federal

Interstate Commerce Act superseded many elements of state policies, as did a number of other

federal acts up to passage of the Transportation Act of 1920. At this point, federal regulation

influenced content, access, ownership, safety, pricing, consolidations and operations, not only in

the railroad industry, but in other key enterprises such as electric utilities and the telephone.

Despite the rhetoric that accompanied the introduction of federal regulatory commissions,

regulation had a long common law tradition vested in court rulings towards natural monopolies

and other enterprises that involved the public interest.60 Moreover, judicial oversight was not

made redundant by the advent of regulation; instead, regulatory and antitrust enforcement

depended heavily on court decisions. Although much of the historical focus has been on state and

federal regulation, we also speculated about the incentives for firms to self-regulate. Indeed, some

have argued that federal regulation was instigated by railroads and electric utilities as a means of

reducing competition.




                                                   35
ii) Telegraphy

         The telegraph, although not quite a “Victorian Internet,” emerged in the 1840s as the first

commercially viable means of interstate electronic communication.61 Telegraphy diffused so

rapidly that by 1851 the Bureau of the Census reported that 75 companies with over 20,000 miles

of wire were in operation. These small scale enterprises proved to be inefficient, and a series of

consolidations and exits ultimately resulted in the domination of Western Union. In 1870 Western

Union alone operated almost 4,000 offices and handled more than 9 million messages. By 1890,

its 19,382 offices were dealing with approximately 56 million messages.62 Diffusion of this form

of communication was impressive but (like the Internet today) the applications were

predominantly among businesses rather than consumers. Perhaps as a result of this business

orientation, the law did not draw an analogy to newspapers or other print media, nor did it raise

First Amendment questions about freedom of speech. Instead, the courts and legislature stressed a

comparison with postal roads, turnpikes and railways. The Post Roads Act of 1866 designated

telegraph companies as common carriers who were granted privileges including rights of way on

public lands and waterways, access to free timber and resources, and recourse to eminent domain.

In return, the telegraphs assumed the public interest duties of common carriers analogous to the

transportation enterprises.63

         The Supreme Court of Massachusetts argued that, while the telegraph was undoubtedly a

valuable means of communication, "Its use is certainly similar to, if not identical with, that public

use of transmitting information for which the highway was originally taken, even if the means


60 “The act of congress known as the "Interstate Commerce Act" contains few new features and was chiefly designed
to carry into the statutes of the United States … the principles of the common law already enforced by the states in
their domestic affairs.” Western Union Tel. Co. v. Call Publishing Co., 44 Neb. 326 (1895).
61 See Tom Standage, The Victorian Internet: The Remarkable Story of the Telegraph and the Nineteenth Century's
On-Line Pioneers, London, Weidenfeld and Nicolson, 1998.
62 U.S. Bureau of the Census. Historical Statistics of the United States: Colonial Times to 1970: Bicentennial Edition,
Washington: GPO,1976. Series R 46-55.
63 William Cook, A Treatise on Telegraph Law, New York, Siegrist Inc., 1920. Several law review articles have
proposed the application of the common carrier model to the Internet, including James B. Speta, “A Common Carrier

                                                          36
adopted are quite different from the post-boy or the mail coach. It is a newly discovered method of

exercising the old public easement, and all appropriate methods must have been deemed to have

been paid for when the road was laid out."64 It was initially fortunate for telegraph companies that

courts supported the idea that the previously granted rights of use also extended to the newer

technology. As the court in Magee v. Overshiner, 150 Ind. 127 (1898) pointed out, “If this were

not true, … the advancement of commerce, and the increase in inventions for the aid of mankind

would be required to adjust themselves to the conditions existing at the time of the dedication, and

with reference to the uses then actually contemplated.” An atypical award of $2500 in damages

that was given for use of a narrow plot of land illustrates the high costs if owners of the telegraph

lines had had to contract new bargains with holders of public easements.65 In states which rejected

such analogies, including California, Illinois, Maryland, Mississippi, and Missouri, property

owners were able to sustain costly injunctions and compensation for trespass or reductions in the

value of their land.

        A second consequence was that the most significant doctrines in telegraph cases related to

the duties of common carriers. English legal decisions dating back to the Middle Ages raised

questions of a duty to serve the public and to charge “just rates” in so doing, especially in the case

of monopolies. According to the Supreme Court of California in 1851, “The rules of law which

govern the liability of telegraph companies are not new. They are old rules applied to new

circumstances. Such companies hold themselves out to the public as engaged in a particular branch

of business, in which the interests of the public are deeply concerned. They propose to do a certain

service for a given price. There is no difference in the general nature of the legal obligation of the

contract between carrying a message along a wire and carrying goods or a package along a route.

The physical agency may be different, but the essential nature of the contract is the same.”66 As


Approach to Internet Interconnection,” Federal Communications Law Journal, vol. 54 (March) 2002: 225-279.
64 Pierce v. Drew, 136 Mass. 75 (1883).
65
   See N.Y. Tel. Co. v. De Noyelles Brick Co., 154 N.Y. App. Div. 845 (1913).
66 Parks v. Alta California Telegraph Company,13 Cal. 422 (1859).
                                                        37
common carriers, telegraph companies were not permitted to refuse any messages, although they

were not held vicariously liable for criminal transactions conveyed by telegraph.

         Telegraph companies that accepted the designation of common carrier and its benefits were

also obligated to charge reasonable, nondiscriminatory rates. This stipulation allowed judicial

oversight over competition policy well before the antitrust statutes were enacted. Courts adopted

an economic definition of discrimination, rejecting charges of anticompetitive behaviour if the

differences in price were justified in terms of difference in costs. For instance, in Western Union

Tel. Co. v. Call Publishing Co., 44 Neb. 326 (1895), the court held that the telegraph company had

not engaged in “unjust discrimination” because it faced different circumstances and costs in

meeting the needs of a morning newspaper relative to an evening newspaper, which explained the

differential tariffs charged. However, courts varied in their support for quantity discounts, some

arguing that this pricing policy suppressed competition and encouraged the creation of monopolies.

         The established telegraph law for much of the nineteenth century accepted the common

carrier analogy, but quite early on some noticed that the comparison was somewhat strained.67

The common carrier designation had an important implication for the telegraph company because

it implied assumption of liability for the “goods carried.” Railroads as common carriers were

strictly liable for freight entrusted to their care and thus could be viewed as insurers of goods

consignments. Under this doctrine, the liability of telegraph companies for their messages could

be enormous, since an error in the transmission of a buy or sell order could amount to many

thousands of dollars. At the same time, unlike the value of consignments on railroads or turnpikes,

clearly the intrinsic value to the telegraph company of any message was significantly lower than its

value to the sender and receiver of the message. In order to insure against mistakes, the telegraph

company required that the message should be repeated at a cost of half the regular rate, or else



67 For instance, a lower court in California in 1855 held that telegraph companies were not common carriers; as did
the Maryland Court of Appeals: “A telegraph company is not a common carrier, but a bailee performing, through its
agents, work for its employer, according to certain rules and regulations, which, under the law, it has a right to make
for its government.” Birney v. NY & Wash. Printing Telegraph Co., 18 Md. 341 (1862).
                                                            38
liability was limited to the cost of the transmission. The courts were confronted with disputes that

challenged the right of companies that attempted to limit their liability in this way, since common

carriers were supposed to assume that risk themselves. The stakes increased when businesses

began to use abstruse codes or ciphers to protect their confidentiality and to reduce the cost of

sending lengthy messages.68 In one case, the telegraph operator transmitted the word “chatter”

rather than the “charter” of the ciphered message, and the difference between the letter "r" and the

letter "t" cost the sender about $1000, leading to an action against the telegraph company for

$1054 in damages.69

        In response, the analogy to common carriers was ultimately rejected.70 Instead of common
carriers, some courts treated telegraph messages as bailments. Bailees were not expected to act as
insurers, but only to hold to reasonable standards of diligence in completing their task, with
damages generally limited to the price of their services. Certainly, in the case of coded messages,
it was impossible for the telegraph company to determine the relative importance of the
communication, and to regulate the amount of care it took accordingly. Western Union was
justified in charging higher rates for important messages by requiring that they should be repeated,
since “It does not exempt the company from responsibility, but only fixes the price of that
responsibility, and allows the person who sends the message either to transmit it at his own risk at
the usual price, or by paying in addition thereto half the usual price to have it repeated, and thus
render the company liable for any mistake that may occur." 71 This was simply the standard of
limiting liability to the level of foreseeable reliance, that had been set long before in the classic
1854 case of Hadley v. Baxendale, but its application to the telegraph industry was delayed
because of the common carrier analogy.
        The advent of the telegraph introduced a number of other interesting questions in the area

of contract law. Previous methods of communication had depended on physical delivery through

the postal service, whereas telegraphed messages ensured transmissions could be received within


68 Cotton exporters who wished to convey the message, "We make firm bid two hundred bales of fully middling
cotton at 43-4d twenty-eight millimeters, January and February delivery, shipment to Havre" instead required Western
Union to send the words "Holminop, New Orleans, Galeistraf, dipnoi, Granzoso, Liebsesin Dipnoi liciatorum, diomus,
grapholite, Gradatos and Texas” (Minoprio, Forgan & Co., 5 Teiss. 79; 1907.)
69 . Shaw v. Postal Telegraph & Cable Co., 79 Miss. 670; 31 So. 222; 1901.
70 The Supreme Court in the landmark decision, Primrose v. Western Union, 154 U.S. 1 (1894), ruled that “Telegraph
companies resemble railroad companies and other common carriers… But they are not common carriers; their duties
are different, and are performed in different ways; and they are not subject to the same liabilities.”
                                                         39
minutes. Time was therefore introduced as an important part of a contract conveyed by telegraph,

and charges of negligence related to slight delays or errors in transmission.72 Other cases

determined that a telegraph message could be regarded as a valid form of contract even if it was

not signed in handwriting by both parties. As the California Supreme Court expressed it, “Any

other conclusion than the one here reached would certainly impair the usefulness of modern

appliances to modern business, tend to hamper trade, and increase the expense thereof.”73 The

development of international cable services further increased market efficiency and the ability to

monitor agents engaged in distant transactions. At least one outcome of this was to reduce the

autonomy of agents at sea, and for the first time constrained their ability while at sea to enter into

contracts that would bind the owners of the ship without the owners’ previous consent.

         As with other technologies, conflicts arose because of nuisance and trespass, including

claims that electrolysis destroyed water pipes, and that high voltage electric lines of urban tramcars

interfered with telegraph and telephone transmissions. Again, courts avoided assigning fault and

instead tried to determine the lowest cost avoider, given the existing state of the arts. The opinion

in an 1890 lawsuit between a telephone company and an electric railway effectively described the

role of technological advances in determining the standards of liability: “In solving these

questions, we are compelled to bear in mind the fact that the science of electricity is still in its

experimental stage; that a device which to-day may be the best, cheapest, and most practicable,

may, in another year, be superseded by something incomparably better fitted for the purpose. It is

quite possible, too, that the legal obligations of the parties may change with the progress of

invention, and the duty of surmounting the difficulty be thrown upon one party or the other, as a

cheaper or more effectual remedy is discovered…. the question of his liability will depend upon


71 Camp v. Western Union Tel. Co., 58 Ky. 164; 1858.
72 “Prompt and speedy communication between different localities is one of the most urgent wants of the present age.
…. Persons whose messages do not require the most rapid transmission and speedy delivery, take the cheaper and
slower method of communication afforded by the mails. When a telegraph company therefore receives a message for
transmission, the fair inference is that the sender resorts to the telegraph because he cannot or does not choose to wait
for the mail, and the telegraph company agrees by implication that his message shall be carefully transmitted by
telegraph and delivered without unnecessary delay.” Dorgan v. Telegraph Co., 7 F. Cas. 918; 1874.
                                                           40
the fact whether he has made use of the means which, in the progress of science and improvement,

have been shown by experience to be the best; but he is not bound to experiment with recent

inventions, not generally known, or to adopt expensive devices, when it lies in the power of the

person injured to make use himself of an effective and inexpensive method of prevention.”74

iii) Medical Technologies and Public Health

         Legal doctrines towards public health and medicine drew on metaphors that echoed

policies towards transportation and communications technologies.75 Advances in steamboats,

railroads and the telegraph and telephone were presented in the rhetoric of the nineteenth century

as the natural object of public policy because they were integral to broad based economic and

social growth. Numerous other innovations such as the water closest or faucets were more modest

in terms of rhetorical flair, but could be interpreted as no less significant to social welfare, and thus

the proper scope for state law and judicial intervention. Innovations that affected the quality and

length of life fell into this category, including those that improved hygiene, sanitation, pollution,

and medical techniques and devices. Medical and health issues in especial were at the forefront of

contentious legal decisions that related to private disputes and public laws.

         At the beginning of the nineteenth century it is likely that cures were regarded as being “in

the hands of Him who giveth life, and not within the physical control of the most skillful of the

profession.”76 Doctors tended to be trained informally, were unattached to medical networks or

hospitals, and were accorded little respect.77 By the 1890s medicine was regarded as an eminent

calling, doctors had acquired significant authority, and even general practitioners appealed to

current findings in both science and technology. Health care had become specialized and

organized within institutions, and the laboratory comprised an important unit in hospitals as well as


73 Brewer v. Horst & Lachmund, 127 Cal. 643; 60 P. 418; 1900.
74Cumberland Telephone and Telegraph Co. v. United Electric R’y Co., 42 F. 273; 1890.
75 Stanley J. Reiser, Medicine and the Reign of Technology, Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 1978, is an
excellent general introduction to the history of medical technology.
76 Grindle v. Rush and Greene, 7 Ohio 123;1836.
77According to one judge, “if there was any kind of testimony not only of no value, but even worse than that, it was,
in his judgment, that of medical experts.” Supreme Court of Illinois, Rutherford v. Morris, 77 Ill. 397;1875.
                                                            41
for doctors in private practice. The industrialization of medicine occurred partly because of

technological advances that provided doctors with a formidable array of new diagnostic tools. By

the end of the nineteenth century these included the stethoscope, ophthalmoscope, laryngoscope,

microscope, X-ray machine, spirometer, neurocalometer, blood pressure gauge and

electrocardiograph. Medical instruments facilitated tests and treatment for notorious diseases like

tuberculosis, typhoid, cholera and diabetes and encouraged the professionalization of nascent

specialties such as chiropractice.

        Medical malpractice suits became more prevalent relative to population during the period

of early industrialization because of shifts in demand and supply factors.78         Technological

innovation affected medical malpractice through its impact on both the demand side and the supply

side. The demand for legal redress was partly related to social expectations that were raised by the

achievements that had been attained in medical technology and by the diffusion of such knowledge

among lay persons. The supply of disputes likely increased because more doctors were available

to offer second (and different) opinions and alternative services, and because of the rapid adoption

and more extensive usage of medical devices. Impersonal mechanical diagnoses and laboratory

tests quickly became the gauge of effective treatment regardless of their actual efficacy.

Ironically, to observers from other countries, American medicine had lost sight of the patient in its

obsession with technological advances. This assessment was complicated by the desire of patients

themselves for more technological inputs in their medical care, regardless of their productivity; for

instance, the battery of tests that comprised the physical check-up became an annual routine early

in the twentieth century.

        Technological innovations in the field of medicine had varying effects on the propensity to

litigate. It was true that they could facilitate more accurate diagnoses and improve the treatment of



78 The best work on medical malpractice from an historical perspective is Kenneth Allen de Ville, Medical
Malpractice in Nineteenth-Century America: Origins and Legacy, New York, New York University Press, 1990. See
also James C. Mohr, Doctors and the Law: Medical Jurisprudence in Nineteenth-Century America, New York: Oxford
University Press, 1993.
                                                        42
patients, but it was also possible that innovations led to more uniform standards of treatment which

made defective practices more measurable and manifest. It might be expected that some doctors

would be accused because they were less proficient with new devices or less up-to-date, and that

current technologies might lead to unrealistic expectations. The application of X-rays in medical

litigation illustrates the role of new technologies in malpractice suits. Wilhem Conrad Roentgen

first published his discovery of “a new kind of ray” at the end of 1895 in the Proceedings of the

Würzburg Phisico-Medical Society. Only a few months later the use of X-rays was introduced in

the United States and related patents were being filed, but ordinary citizens were also captivated by

the discovery. Doctors who failed to use the machines, despite the dangers of burns to patients,

risked being accused of incompetence and a violation of their fiduciary duty.79 Less than two

years after the invention was introduced, a Midwestern jury was instructed to drawn conclusions

from X-ray photographs that were entered into the records.80 Patients retained the services of

expert witnesses who used X-ray evidence to prove their case, and doctors countered with their

own proofs.

         As with other technologies, the law varied its standard of what was acceptable according to

the state of the arts. The courts considered malpractice as a physician’s breach of his fiduciary duty

to offer competent services, through negligence, ignorance, or lack of due care. The physician was

initially held to a standard of competence that took into consideration the type of community in

which he practiced. In 1824 a dispute in the remote village of Lubec, Maine involved a patient

whose local doctor had allegedly botched treatment of a dislocated joint. The judge felt that it was



79 Schmidt and Fuchs v. Balling, 91 Ill. App. 388 (1899) was brought as an appeal against a lower court judgement of
$7000 in damages, in a lawsuit where the plaintiff claimed negligence in the use of X-Rays.
80 “There have been offered in evidence two photographic negatives, taken by the Roentgen or X-ray process, of the
plaintiff's injured femur bone. Scientists, by the aid of that wonderful and mysterious force we call electricity, have
discovered a process by which they are enabled to procure a photograph, showing the shape and size of the living
human body with a fair degree of accuracy. The negatives offered here in evidence in this case represent the shape and
size of the plaintiff's right femur bone, somewhat enlarged, at the time the negatives were taken, namely, Exhibit A, on
October 24, 1896, and Exhibit B, on May 9, 1896. …You are to take these negatives and consider them as
approximately correct representations of the shape and size of the plaintiff's injured femur bone, at the time they were
taken, and at the present time, for the purpose of aiding you in determining the extent of the plaintiff's injury, or in any
other way in the consideration of the evidence in this case.” Tish v. Welker, 5 Ohio Dec. 725 (1897).
                                                              43
not to be expected that a doctor in a small rural town would possess the same degree of skill as a

European-trained specialist in Boston. Later courts argued that doctors should uphold a nationally

accepted standard because improvements in transportation and communications had created a

national market, with equality of access to information. Despite this, the locality standard proved

to be enduring and was still the norm even in the early twentieth century.

        The endogeneity of legal doctrines to technological changes was evident in cases that dealt

with medical malpractice, but the converse was also true – that is, medical practice changed

according to what was legally acceptable – as witnessed by rules about abortion.81 The Supreme

Court of New Jersey in 22 NJL 52 (1849) outlined the development of the law towards abortions,

and pointed out that legal precedent uniformly was in agreement that it was acceptable to procure

an abortion before the point of “quickening” in the pregnancy. The opinion quoted Blackstone’s

view that “Life begins in contemplation of law as soon as an infant is able to stir in the mother’s

womb.” Even after quickening the removal of the unborn child was deemed to be a misdemeanor

rather than murder. In the decades after the Civil War abortion at any stage was outlawed by

statute throughout the country and criminalized as a felony. However, in a number of states an

abortion was still held to be acceptable at any point in the pregnancy if there were valid medical

reasons for the procedure in order to save the mother’s life, or to prevent serious bodily injury.

Thus, the legality of each abortion depended heavily on the interpretation and state of medical

knowledge regarding its alleged therapeutic necessity, itself a function of current diagnostic

technology.82

        Public health likewise had long been considered a legitimate concern of the state.83 From

the earliest years of settlement, local governments regulated the provision of food and sanitation,


81 For the history of abortion, see Leslie J. Reagan, When Abortion Was a Crime: Women, Medicine, and Law in the
United States 1867-1973, Berkeley :University of California Press,1997; and James C. Mohr, Abortion in America:
The Origins and Evolution of National Policy, 1800-1900, Oxford University Press, 1979.
82 In 1899, medical justifications for abortion included Bright’s disease of the kidney, cancer of the womb and
malformation of the pelvis, among others (191 Pa. 207).
83 A good survey of public health administration and law is James A. Tobey, Public Health Law, New York,
Commonwealth Fund, 1947.
                                                           44
enacted laws to prevent nuisances, and called upon formidable police powers to deal with

perceived dangers to community welfare. Measures to counter infectious diseases could lead to

especially draconian measures, including lengthy quarantines, forcible entry and the seizure or

destruction of private property, criminal prosecution and imprisonment. In 1796 a Congressional

statute (1 Stat. 474) pledged federal support for state measures to ensure effective quarantines. In

1809 Massachusetts introduced the first law to require vaccination against smallpox. In an age of

widespread danger of epidemics, many towns used funds from their treasury to pay for

preventative measures. For instance, in 1828 the Connecticut town of Salisbury paid $50 to local

physicians to innoculate its residents with the cowpox bacillus.84 Public health policy in the

nineteenth century was closely aligned with sanitation technology and engineering. For instance,

the police power of the state to ensure the health and safety of the public was used to enforce the

provision of running water and the use of water closets in private properties. These measures led

to protests, such as occurred when the City of New York passed an act in 1887 that required

tenement houses to provide running water on all floors because of health and safety reasons. The

owners of one such tenement (oddly enough, a church) claimed that the costs of installing such

facilities were so high as to constitute a taking of private property. And indeed, Ellen Richards, an

MIT chemist, estimated that the cost of improved sanitation and fittings in homes had increased

the cost of house construction by $15,000 in the period between 1850 and 1900. The takings

argument was rejected by the appellate court, which pointed out that “Hand rails to stairs, hoisting

shafts to be inclosed, automatic doors to elevators, automatic shifters for throwing off belts or

pulleys, and fire escapes on the outside of certain factories, .... Under the police power persons and

property are subjected to all kinds of restraints and burdens in order to secure the general comfort

and health of the public.”85


84 Landon v. Humphrey, 9 Conn. 209; 1832. Similarly, the Philadelphia City Council in 1798 commissioned the
eminent engineer Benjamin Henry Latrobe to design a public water system, in order to counter fears that contaminated
water was responsible for outbreaks of yellow fever. However, the subjects of quarantines such as merchant ships or
owners of tenements were just as likely to be forced to underwrite the expenses themselves.
85 The Health Department of the City of New York, Appellant, v. The Rector, Church Wardens and Vestrymen of
                                                           45
         The U.S. Supreme Court tended to support the actions of state health officials acting in the

public interest, to extent that it was argued that the state did not have to provide evidence to justify

its public health policies as long as they were in accordance with “common beliefs.”86 The

dangers of such unfettered powers were illustrated in the eugenics movement that developed

towards the end of the nineteenth century. At that time genetic science, studies of evolutionary

biology and heredity, as well as biostatistics and sociology, combined to reach the conclusion that

the genetic composition of the population should be regulated by statute.87 These supposedly

scientific rationales provided an impetus for policies that ranged from restrictive immigration laws,

to the forced sterilization of individuals with allegedly undesirable genetic characteristics. In 1896

Connecticut restricted the ability of epileptics and mentally disabled persons to marry, and similar

laws were enacted in more than twenty states including Kansas, New Jersey, Ohio, Michigan and

Indiana. In Re Thomson, 169 N.Y.S. 638 (1918), examined the constitutionality of a 1912 law that

New York passed to permit the sterilization of mentally disabled adults in its institutions.88 The

court ruled that the statute violated the equal protection clause of Fourteenth Amendment, noting

that a similar law had been declared unconstitutional by the Supreme Court of New Jersey.

Although a number of state judges joined in restricting or overturning such laws, the Supreme

Court of the United States affirmed these policies on the grounds of public interest. Advances in

medical technology meant that sterilization could readily and safely be effected in males by

vasectomy and in females by salpingectomy rather than more drastic invasive measures. The


Trinity Church in the City of New York, 145 N.Y. 32; 39 N.E. 833; 1895.
86 “The possibility that the belief may be wrong, and that science may yet show it to be wrong, is not conclusive; for
the legislature has the right to pass laws which, according to the common belief of the people, are adapted to prevent
the spread of contagious diseases,” Jacobsen v. Massachusetts, 197 U.S. 11 1905.
87 Philip R.Reilly, The Surgical Solution: A History of Involuntary Sterilization in the United States, Baltimore:
Johns Hopkins University Press, 1991, provides an overview of the eugenics movement. Paul A. Lombardo,
“Medicine, Eugenics, and the Supreme Court: From Coercive Sterilization to Reproductive Freedom,” vol. 13 Journal
of Contemp. Health L. & Policy 1 (1996) contends (p. 1) that "the most powerful vehicle of the eugenic ideology was
the law."
88 The court’s opinion noted that “This statute grows out of studies and efforts of those who are interested in the
subject of eugenics, which has to do with the improvement of the population by taking advantage of laws of heredity;
with improving through better breeding. It deals with the inheritance of traits; with changes in population through
differential fecundity; the greater or less fecundity of the different classes of population; with changes of population
from emigration; or better or worse strains, with hereditary basis of the traits of population.”
                                                              46
court’s approval of compulsory sterilization drew on the public health analogy of compulsory

vaccination, which served the public interest as well as the interest of the parties directly involved

irrespective of their individual wishes.89

iv) Automobiles

         The automobile for some is the most characteristic icon of the American way of life. In

1920 only 1 percent of American homes had central heating, but 26 percent owned automobiles;

by 1930 this number had increased to 60 percent, and as early as 1917 the United States accounted

for 85 percent of the world’s motor cars. The automobile, to an even greater extent than the

railroad or other transportation innovations, changed patterns of work, crime, leisure and

residence. As early as 1906, the author of a legal treatise pointed out that, although “... many of

the cases merely have called for the application of established rules of law, in dealing with the

motor vehicle,” it was also true that “many branches of the law are being affected by the horseless

carriage figuring in litigation. Where the automobile’s permeating influence will stop is beyond

prophesy. It is certain, however, that the motor car, including everything connected with it, is

bound to be the subject of a vast amount of litigation in the future...” 90 By 1931, the same author’s

Encyclopedia of Automobile Law ran to twenty volumes. Figure 8 confirms his assessment of the

legal impact of the automobile, as demonstrated by the rapid increase in both state and federal

litigation.

         Although litigation increased markedly, the figure also indicates that federal courts did not

play a major role in the public policies that developed towards motor vehicles. We may speculate


89 Oliver Wendell Holmes wrote that “The public welfare may call upon the best citizens for their lives. It would be
strange if it could not call upon those who already sap the strength of the state for these lesser sacrifices, often not felt
to be such by those concerned, in order to prevent our being swamped with incompetence. It is better for all the world,
if instead of waiting to execute degenerate offspring for crime, or to let them starve for their imbecility, society can
prevent those who are manifestly unfit from continuing their kind. The principle that sustains compulsory vaccination
is broad enough to cover cutting the fallopian tubes. Three generations of imbeciles are enough.” Only Justice Butler
dissented. (Buck v. Bell, 274 U.S. 200 (1927)).
90 Preface, pp. vi-vii. Huddy, Xenophon P., The Law of Automobiles, Matthew Bender & Co., 1906. The family
agency doctrine is described in the seventh edition of this work, published in 1924. Arthur F. Curtis, who wrote the
preface for the 1924 edition, noted that “The ever increasing number of decisions relating to the law of automobiles
brings new burden to the lawyer. The question constantly before him is “How can I keep step with the progress in
this, the most actively litigated branch of the law?”
                                                            47
whether this would have been the case if the interstate highways had been constructed more

rapidly, or whether the decentralized nature of motor vehicle ownership necessarily encouraged

state governance. The common carrier concept was applied to commercial motor vehicles, but

analogies from the era of the railroads proved to be of limited relevance, and the doctrine was

modified almost beyond recognition. Rate regulation of common carrier motor vehicles was

viewed as redundant, because the number of alternative modes of transportation ensured that

competition protected the public from exorbitant prices. States established commissions to issue

licences or “certificates of public convenience and necessity” that regulated the numbers of

carriers, their routes, modes of operation, and ownership issues such as whether railroads should be

allowed to offer vehicular common carrier service. As with all licensing, an argument can be

made that, despite the stated objectives, the end result was to limit competition rather than uphold

standards that benefited public safety or convenience.

        The case of the automobile illustrates the ambiguities of attitudes towards overt constraints

on individual behaviour as opposed to regulations that affected enterprises in the name of the

public. Little controversy occurred when states introduced consumption taxes in order to fund the

expansion and maintenance of public highways.91 These taxes proved to be as popular as any tax

could be, since the revenues financed roads that benefited all motorists and nonusers of highways

(such as farmers running machinery) were reimbursed. However, the dual standard towards

regulation was evident in responses to measures to deal with automobile torts, which were far

more costly than those associated with railroads or mining. Increased use of motor vehicles was

accompanied by increased harm.92 The majority of automobile accidents were caused by human


91 In 1919 Oregon introduced gasoline taxes (one cent per gallon), as did New Mexico (two cents) and Colorado (one
cent). Other states quickly followed suit, and over time the taxes were increased, so by 1929 gasoline taxes were
raising $431 million annually.
92 In 1920 automobiles caused some 11,000 deaths (half of whom were children); in 1924 this number more than
doubled, over 700,000 injuries were sustained, and property damage was substantial. The fatality rate for automobile
accidents rose from below five deaths per million persons in 1906 to 72 deaths per million a decade later. Fatalities
were highest in urban areas, and in 1920 the largest number of fatalities relative to population occurred in Los
Angeles, followed by Buffalo, both of which experienced rates that exceeded 200 per million. New York injury rates
in 1920 were approximately 25 times that of fatalities, and Boston alone recorded 21,182 injuries in the same year.
                                                           48
error rather than mechanical flaws, and terms such as “speed maniac” or “road hog” had already

entered the public lexicon at the turn of the century. Public policy was again required to mediate

among competing claims. Efforts included the passage of legislation to provide rules and regulate

behaviour, appeal to the courts, and third party means of compensating those who were harmed.

Safety measures that regulated individual behaviour -- drivers’ tests and licences, vehicle

registration, age limits, and traffic regulations -- were introduced in a slow and haphazard fashion.

In the 1920s and 1930s states imposed an inconsistent jumble of regulations on drivers, but

enforcement was lax and such legislation was not at the forefront of policies towards automobiles.

        Instead, the state courts were rapidly clogged with disputes brought by victims of “jitneys,”

taxicabs, trucks and privately operated vehicles. As in all tort cases, the key issues centered on

liability and on compensation. When conflicts appeared between existing and former

technologies, judges refused to assign unilateral blame, and instead ensured that the lowest cost

outcome prevailed. For instance, over 900 lawsuits dealt with the harm caused by cars frightening

horses. In Macomber v. Nichols, 34 Mich. 212 (1876), the judge declared that “Persons making

use of horses as the means of travel or traffic by the highways have no rights therein superior to

those who make use of the ways in other modes. ...Horses may be, and often are, frightened by

locomotives in both town and country, but it would be as reasonable to treat the horse as a public

nuisance from his tendency to shy and be frightened by unaccustomed objects, as to regard the

locomotive as a public nuisance from its tendency to frighten the horse.”93 The standard of the

time required the driver of the car to defer to horses, since the latter were more common.

However, when automobiles became the norm, the standard shifted to reflect that fact. 94


93 Indiana Springs Company v. Brown. 165 Ind. 465; 1905: “In all human activities the law keeps up with
improvement and progress brought about by discovery and invention, and, in respect to highways, if the introduction
of a new contrivance for transportation purposes, conducted with due care, is met with inconvenience and even
incidental injury to those using ordinary modes, there can be no recovery, provided the contrivance is compatible with
the general use and safety of the road. It is, therefore, the adaptation and use, rather than the form or kind of
conveyance, that concerns the courts.”
94 In Re Thomas Berry, Supreme Court of California, 147 Cal. 523; 82 P. 44; 1905: “Of course, if the use of
automobiles gradually becomes more common, there may come a time when an ordinance like the one here in question
would be unreasonable…”
                                                              49
       A significant legal development occurred when courts overturned the privity of contract

doctrine to take into account the circumstances of automobile manufacture and the complexity of

the vehicle structure. Before 1906 there were no cases involving manufacturer’s liability except

when the item was held to be inherently dangerous. In Johnson v. Cadillac Motor Co, the plaintiff

was seriously injured by a defective tire on his automobile, which had been sold by a retail dealer.

The court held that no contractual relationship existed between the driver and the manufacturer and

dismissed the complaint. Judge Coxe, in his dissent from this decision, implied that the buyer of

complicated mechanisms of new technologies could not readily judge their safety as well as the

manufacturer. Coxe’s argument was similar to the decision in MacPherson v. Buick Motor Co.,

217 N.Y. 382 (1916), which stated that a manufacturer had a duty of care even to third parties who

were not directly involved in contractual relations with the firm. Cardozo rejected the privity of

contract defence because the standard approach had to change with the times: "The maker of this

car supplied it for the use of purchasers from the dealer.... The dealer was indeed the one person of

whom it might be said with some approach to certainty that by him the car would not be used. Yet

the defendant would have us say that he was the one person whom it was under a legal duty to

protect. The law does not lead us to so inconsequent a conclusion. Precedents drawn from the days

of travel by stagecoach do not fit the conditions of travel to-day. The principle that the danger

must be imminent does not change, but the things subject to the principle do change. They are

whatever the needs of life in a developing civilization require them to be."

       The appellate court in the Johnson case (Johnson v. Cadillac Motor Co, 261 F. 878;1919)

affirmed this view. They drew on a shaky analogy to a principle that had always been accepted by

the common law, likening the automobile manufacturer to a producer of poisonous drugs or

“imminently dangerous articles” who had a duty of care to the public. However, Cardozo correctly

highlighted the extent to which harm could be foreseen: “foresight of the consequences involves

the creation of a duty.” Predictability of outcomes was also emphasized in Chittenden v.

Columbus, 5 Ohio C.C. 84 (1904). When the court imposed a fine of $25 on a motorist who was
                                                 50
exceeding the town speed limit of seven miles, the plaintiff protested that the law illegally

discriminated against automobiles, since streetcars were allowed to go faster. The court disagreed

since, unlike automobiles, streetcars ran on set tracks and could thus be more easily avoided by

others. If injury could be foreseen, efficiency required that the law offer incentives to avoid such

harm by placing liability on those who could avoid it at lowest cost. As Coxe had presciently

pointed out, the automobile was such a complicated mechanism it was unlikely that the ordinary

driver could detect a structural deficiency, whereas it was readily within the capability of

manufacturers to test each part and ensure that it was safe. A corollary of this doctrine was that the

federal courts later upheld GM’s right to stipulate that their dealers should use only GM

replacement parts: exclusive contracts of this sort did not lessen competition but ensured quality

control, since any defects would have adverse effects on GM’s reputation.95

        Automobiles influenced the rise of enterprise liability and motivated legal doctrines that

absolved users from responsibility for their actions on the grounds that technology had outpaced

their understanding. However, the majority of automobile accidents did not occur because of

tortious actions by enterprises, but involved harms caused by negligence on the part of drivers or

pedestrians. A number of legal innovations were a response to falling prices for the new

technology that encouraged its diffusion throughout the population. The first automobile owners

were wealthy individuals who were likely to hire chauffeurs, which led to legal questions of

agency that could be subsumed in the existing law of master and servant. However, the law of

agency had to be modified when the price of cars fell to the point where ordinary families could

afford to purchase vehicles that they drove themselves. The family agency doctrine took into

account the likelihood that other family members would be just as likely to drive the car as the

owner, and courts held the owner (generally the father) vicariously liable for the actions of the rest

of the family. This holding encouraged the owner of the vehicle to monitor and regulate the

actions of family members in order to ensure that their behaviour was consistent with safe use.


95 Pick Mfg. Co. v. General Motors Corp., , 80 F.2d 641; 1935.
                                                         51
        Another result of automobile ownership by ordinary families was that insurance soon

comprised an important public policy issue.96 Plaintiffs, even if successful in obtaining a judgment

for damages, were often unable to collect their dues because the impecunious automobile owner

had purchased the vehicle on an installment plan and was financially unable to pay. Early

insurance companies lacked information to compute and rate risks, so the majority chose to avoid

universal coverage and limited their policies to specific contingencies such as theft or fire. The

problems for insurance writers of uneconomical risks were compounded by inconsistent state and

municipal regulations. In some states, insurance liability only applied to commercial vehicles or

major urban centers, and some cities like Los Angeles and Cleveland passed local ordinances

independently of state laws. Safety advocates turned to the analogy of workers’ compensation to

lobby for state-sponsored automobile insurance or regulation of the insurance industry. After 1910

the National Workmen’s Compensation Service Bureau computed rates for liability and property

damage insurance for automobiles. However, lobbyists for state-sponsored insurance plans along

the lines of workmen’s compensation failed to achieve their objectives and states continued to vary

in their treatment of insurance. The major policy towards automobile torts remains that of

insurance or compensation for harm done, rather than self-insurance or limitations on use.

CONCLUSION

                                                             “The final cause of law is the welfare of society.”
                                                                                      --Benjamin Cardozo97
        We live in interesting times; but so did the population of the nineteenth and early twentieth

centuries. The elevation in standards of living during this period was associated with the rapid

diffusion of inventions that transformed the daily life of ordinary citizens. Technological change

was not uniformly benevolent and it is appalling to modern observers to assess the costs in terms

of injuries, mortality, morbidity and environmental damage. Innovations also had redistributive

effects, such as interference with existing water rights, the fall in returns to railroad stockholders


96 Contemporary discussion of insurance issues include Robert Riegel, “Automobile Insurance Rates,” Journal of
Political Economy, Vol. 25, No. 6. (Jun., 1917): 561-579; and Morris Pike, “Some Aspects of the Compulsory

                                                        52
when automotive vehicles substituted for passenger and freight transportation, or even the

increased benefits to personal beauty that resulted from the rise of service-oriented occupations.

The incentives to invent and innovate were influenced by the rules and standards of social and

economic exchange, and in turn those rules had to accommodate the new technologies: “the great

inventions that embodied the power of steam and electricity, the railroad and the steamship, the

telegraph and the telephone, have built up new customs and new law.”98

        This paper suggested that one of the reasons for the relative success of the United States

during the long nineteenth century was its dependence on an array of institutions that proved to be

sufficiently flexible to provide incentives for the creation of technological innovations and also the

means to manage their use and consequences in the public interest. These institutions included

(but clearly were not limited to) the private market, the political process vested in the legislature,

administrative regulation, insurance, and the legal system. I have deliberately highlighted the role

of the market economy and that of the common law. President Roosevelt did likewise in his 1908

address to Congress, noting that “for the peaceful progress of our people during the twentieth

century we shall owe most to those judges who hold to a twentieth century economic and social

philosophy and not to a long outgrown philosophy, which was itself the product of primitive

economic conditions.” In short, the democratic market orientation of the American legal system

played a key role in the advances of this era.

        The United States benefited from the talents of the extraordinary cadre of individuals who

comprised the judiciary. Courts confronted the continuous stream of mankind about its

commonplace business of life, and from these unpropitious materials created decisions that were

based on analogies drawn from historical experience, logic, and the attempt to serve the

community in general. An analysis of law reports supports the notion that the judiciary objectively

weighed costs and benefits, and ultimately the decisions that prevailed promoted social welfare


Automobile Insurance Movement,” in Proceedings of the Casualty Actuarial Society, Vol. 9 (1922): 23-37.
97 The Nature of the Judicial Process, New Haven, Yale Univ. Press, 1921, p. 66.
                                                        53
rather than the interests of any single group. American judges understood that one of the best

means to protect the rights of customers and to constrain the power of corporations was through

market competition. The legal system formed a decentralized method of mediation that was

continuously calibrated to the changes that affected society, technological or otherwise. This is not

to say that every judge was of the calibre of Joseph Story or Benjamin Cardozo, but a system of

appeals assured that “the tide rises and falls, but the sands of error crumble.”99

        Regulation, on the other hand, was too often a function of a unique cataclysmic event -- a

stock market crash, a fire or train collision that results in much loss of life, a single epidemic or

terrorist attack, the sinking of a ship -- that gripped the public imagination and provided the

political impetus for policies that might have been appropriate for that event but subsequently

proved to be ineffective guides for future actions or outcomes. Regulation and “protective”

legislation typically occurred because of political interests rather than economic reasons, and often

constituted a veiled attempt at raising barriers to entry, or a way to increase the costs of

competitors and of disdained social groups. Regulatory provisions were most effective when they

simply codified the historical tendencies of the common law and ultimately depended on

enforcement from the federal legal system. Administrative bodies such as the ICC and the FTC at

times were headed by legal practitioners: Brandeis is credited (or blamed) for the establishment of

the FTC and SEC, and Cooley was the first ICC Commissioner. Rather than substitutes, the legal

system was a valuable and necessary complement to state and federal regulatory systems, but their

relative importance varied with time and circumstance.

        Although the nineteenth century is frequently characterized as the heyday of untethered

competition, one is impressed with the extent to which new technologies were both enabled and

constrained by common law holdings in order to conform to prevailing conceptions of social

welfare. The major innovations that we considered here – the railroad, the telegraph, medical


98 Benjamin Cardozo, The Nature of the Judicial Process, p. 62.
99 Benjamin Cardozo, The Nature of the Judicial Process, p. 177.
                                                       54
technologies and public health – were regarded as integral to social progress. Because they were

vested with a public purpose, private enterprises were conscripted to serve the needs of the

community. It is therefore not surprising that judges such as Cardozo saw the ultimate objective of

law to be the promotion of “social utility.”100 From this perspective, neither is it surprising that

courts ensured the protection of railroad passengers, consumers, children, debtors and other classes

of society, at the same time that they were attempting to provide incentives for the growth of

private enterprise.

         The advent of each new technology created uncertainty about how the law would be

interpreted, which analogies will be applied, and what the prevailing standard would be. This

likely accounts, at least in part, for the increase in the number of lawsuits that initially occurred,

even after adjusting for the scale of use. The courts were typically at the forefront of policies

towards technology in the nineteenth century, and provided a gauge of legislative needs.

Legislation encountered the technologies of the day with a lag and tended to follow signals

emanating from the conflicts before the courts. Thus, legal decisions, although statute-bound and

based on historical experience, were to some extent forward-looking. We can only speculate about

the subsequent decline in litigation rates that all of the figures exhibit, but the number of litigated

disputes likely fell because of learning by all parties involved, greater certainty about standards,

the introduction of new legislation that resolved outstanding issues, or in some instances as a result

of a shifting of oversight from the courts to other institutions.

         Patents and (to a lesser extent) copyrights were regarded as fundamental to industrial and

cultural progress, and protected as such at the federal level from the very beginning of nationhood.

As a result, interstate markets developed early on with extensive trade in rights and subdivided

rights. Inventors were regarded as public benefactors, because (unlike monopolists) they

contributed new improvements that expanded the frontiers of production and consumption.


100 “Where then shall we look for the revelations of the folk-spirit if not in the prevailing standards of utility and
welfare?” Cardozo, The Growth of Law, New Haven, Yale Univ. Press, 1924. p. 104.
                                                           55
Therefore, the law was quite unambiguous in its objective of protecting legitimate patent rights in

order to provide incentives for inventive activity and diffusion. However, it was necessary for

judges in equity jurisdiction to thwart patent owners who attempted to extend their rights beyond

their just bounds to obtain monopoly control over the entire industry. Copyrights, on the other

hand, provided weaker incentives for new expression and risked reducing public access to

knowledge. New technologies presented further dilemmas because they increased the scope and

duration of copyright protection and had potentially deleterious effects on the public domain. In

the attempt to protect public welfare, legal innovations expanded beyond traditional copyright

doctrines to noncopyright holdings under unfair competition, trade secrets, and the right to privacy.

       In the context of technological innovations, market integration ran up against the

constraints of individual state policies that inhibited standardization and increased the costs of

transacting. The first national enterprises -- the railroads and the telegraph companies -- appealed

to the federal courts to apply provisions of the Constitution. Had they failed, the consequences

would have been pervasive not just for big business and market integration, but for the attempts of

social reformers who wished to override the political biases of state legislatures in areas as

disparate as racial segregation and abortion. While federalism was a prerequisite for market

integration, the converse did not necessarily hold, since general market integration did not preclude

state oversight, especially for technologies whose use was predominantly local. During the period

under review roads were largely intrastate and unconnected, making long distance travel

prohibitively costly for most purposes. This comprised at least one reason why the law towards

automobile users was predominantly state-oriented, and relatively few federal questions arose in

the courts. Instead, federal policies were mainly directed towards resolving free-rider problems

among states by matching state funding to construct interstate highways.

       The automobile industry quickly made important contributions to law, economy and

technology. Despite its prominence, few scholars have addressed the legal implications of the

automobile, an omission that is all the more noticeable when compared to the attention accorded to
                                                  56
other major innovations such as the railroad. Although the transportation function of both railroads

and automobiles was the same, few analogies were drawn between them. It might be argued that

the railroad’s legal significance owed to the public need for laws to deal with the harms to

consumers and workers from accidents, and the need to regulate its monopolistic strategies. Yet,

third party effects associated with automobiles, in the form of injuries to children and other

bystanders, was far greater than in the case of railroads. In contrast, even with growing market

integration, the automobile was associated with decentralized consumer use, harms to ordinary

citizens by other ordinary citizens, few interstate issues and increased oversight by states and

municipalities. The decentralization of activities that occurred with widespread automobile

ownership meant that the public would have had to bear the consequences of pervasive regulation.

Instead of legal or regulatory measures to significantly limit private use, the scale of harms

afflicted by automobile users motivated an institutional shift towards private insurance. Policy

makers were reluctant to follow the vaccination analogy that allowed incursions into the private

sphere of consumer activities in the name of the public interest.

       This survey of innovations in law and technology has not identified discrete

transformations in law; neither does it detect monolithic tendencies towards centralization or

increased administrative regulation. Still less does the evidence support the claims of subsidy

hypothesis. Effective policies towards innovations required a social calculus that was far more

subtle than the promotion of the interests of any one specific group in society. Technological

advances altered the costs and benefits of transacting within a particular network of rules and

standards, and institutions proved to be sufficiently flexible to encompass these changes. In short,

since the founding of the Republic, institutions have altered as the scale and scope of market and

society have evolved, but the central policy objective of promoting the public interest has remained

the same. That is, after all, one of the chief virtues of a society that is bound and enabled by

prescient Constitutional principles.


                                                  57
       The perusal of legal decisions to detect prevailing tendencies is a hazardous undertaking.

The analyst, however objective and well-meaning, risks misinterpretation or selective use of the

evidence to reconfirm a pre-existing bias. However, we can gain some insights from the

experience of developing countries today. In many nations political elites have captured

institutions to further the narrow self-interest of these privileged groups. Institutional sclerosis, the

prevalence of inefficient regulatory bureaucracies, corruption and inadequate legal systems have

resulted in widespread poverty, despair, and the absence of incentives for increased productivity.

If the subsidy thesis is correct, and the American legal system was early on captured to promote

the interests of a favoured few, it is quite unlikely that the United States would have experienced

more than a century of relatively democratic economic growth and technological progress.




                                                   58
                                                  Figure 1
                         Rate of Patenting Per Capita in the United States, 1790-2000

  600




  500




  400




  300




  200




  100




    0
     1790 1799 1808 1817 1826 1835 1844 1853 1862 1871 1880 1889 1898 1907 1916 1925 1934 1943 1952 1961 1970 1979 1988 1997


             All Patents                           Patents Awarded to U.S. Residents




Source: B. Zorina Khan and Kenneth L. Sokoloff, “The Early Development of Intellectual
Property Institutions in the United States,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, Vol. 15 (3) 2001:
233-246. Notes: The figure shows patents granted, per million residents in the U.S. population.



                    Fi gu re 2: C i tati on s to H otch k i s s Pa te n t De ci s i o n ,
                                              1850-2000
           90
           80
           70
           60
           50
           40
           30
           20
           10
             0




Notes and Source: Lexis-Nexis, federal lawsuits database. The count comprises the number of
cases in which Hotchkiss v. Greenwood was cited in relation to the doctrine of nonobviousness, by
decade. Note the dramatic decline in applications of this doctrine in the 1990s, coinciding with the
rise of software, the Internet, and business method patents.


                                                                           59
                                                Figure 3
                         Safety Related Inventions in Railroad and All Sectors,
                                   1840-1940 (percent of all patents)
                   4.5                                                            1.2

                   4.0
                                                                                  1.0
                   3.5




                                                                                        Railroad safety (%)
                   3.0                                                            0.8
  All Safety (%)




                   2.5
                                                                                  0.6
                   2.0

                   1.5                                                            0.4

                   1.0
                                                                                  0.2
                   0.5

                   0.0                                                            0.0
                     40
                     46
                     52
                     58
                     64
                     70
                     76
                     82
                     88
                     94
                     00
                     06
                     12
                     18
                     24
                     30
                     36
                   18
                   18
                   18
                   18
                   18
                   18
                   18
                   18
                   18
                   18
                   19
                   19
                   19
                   19
                   19
                   19
                   19



                                          All Safety    RR Safety




Source: U.S. Patent Office, 1840-1940.
Notes: Inventions are considered to be safety related if the patent specification includes two or
more appearances of variations of the word “safe.” Changing the frequency affects levels but does
not substantively affect the patterns.




                                                       60
                                                Figure 4
                           Railroads: State and Federal Litigation, 1830-1970


                  2500                                                                                         16000

                                                                                                               14000
                  2000
                                                                                                               12000
  Federal Cases




                                                                                                                       State Cases
                  1500                                                                                         10000

                                                                                                               8000
                  1000                                                                                         6000

                                                                                                               4000
                  500
                                                                                                               2000

                    0                                                                                          0
                         1830- 1840- 1850- 1860- 1870- 1880- 1890- 1900- 1910- 1920- 1930- 1940- 1950- 1960-
                         1839 1849 1859 1869 1879 1889 1899 1909 1919 1929 1939 1949 1959 1969


                                      Federal               State




Source: Lexis-Nexis database of state and federal reported cases.


                                             Figure 5
                     Railroads: State and Federal Lawsuits Relative to Usage,
                              1830-1970 (per million miles travelled)

      1.2

      1.0

      0.8

      0.6

      0.4

      0.2

      0.0
                   1830- 1840- 1850- 1860- 1870- 1880- 1890-
                                               State         1900- 1910- 1920- 1930- 1940- 1950- 1960-
                                                          Federal
                   1839 1849 1859 1869 1879 1889 1899 1909 1919 1929 1939 1949 1959 1969




Notes and Sources: Lexis-Nexis. Usage reflects millions of passenger miles traveled, from the
Historical Statistics of the United States, series Q274-312.




                                                                                      61
                                                     Figure 6
                                 Telegraph: State and Federal Lawsuits, 1840-1950

                        1200

                        1000

                         800
   Number of Lawsuits




                         600

                         400

                         200

                           0
                                  Bef   1850-   1860-    1870-   1880-    1890-    1900-    1910-   1920-   1930-   1940-
                                 1850   1859    1869     1879    1889     1899     1909     1919    1929    1939    1949


                                                         State           Federal




Sources: Lexis-Nexis; see above.



                                                       Figure 7
                                Telegraph: State and Federal Lawsuits relative to Usage,
                                                      1860-1950

  1.6
  1.4
  1.2
  1.0
  0.8
  0.6
  0.4
  0.2
  0.0
                               1860-    1870-     1880-      1890-       1900-       1910-      1920-       1930-    1940-
                               1869     1879      1889       1899        1909        1919       1929        1939     1949

                                                        State            Federal




Notes and Sources: Lexis-Nexis (see above). Usage data from Historical Statistics of the United
States, millions of messages sent.




                                                                                           62
                                       Figure 8
                  Automobiles: State and Federal Lawsuits, 1900-1945

            200                                                        2500


            180


            160                                                        2000


            140


            120                                                        1500
  Federal




                                                                              State
            100


             80                                                        1000


             60


             40                                                        500


             20


              0                                                        0
              00

              02

              04

              06

              08

              10

              12

              14

              16

              18

              20

              22

              24

              26

              28

              30

              32

              34

              36

              38

              40

              42

              44
            19

            19

            19

            19

            19

            19

            19

            19

            19

            19

            19

            19

            19

            19

            19

            19

            19

            19

            19

            19

            19

            19

            19
                              Federal   State




Source: Lexis-Nexis database of state and federal reported cases.




                                                    63
