NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ON THE DISTRIBUTIONAL CONSEQUENCES
OF CHILD LABOR LEGISLATION
Dirk Krueger
Jessica Tjornhom Donohue
Working Paper 10347
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10347
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2004

We would like to thank Daron Acemoglu, Moshe Hazan, Tim Kehoe, Krishna Kumar, Ellen McGrattan, Lee
Ohanian, Fabrizio Perri, Edward Prescott, Warren Weber, Christian Zimmermann, two anonymous referees,
an associate editor, and seminar participants at the Minneapolis FED and Stanford for many helpful
comments. We bear full responsibility for all remaining errors. Krueger acknowledges financial support from
the NSF under grant SES 0004376. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2004 by Dirk Krueger and Jessica Tjornhom Donohue. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Technological Innovations and Endogenous Changes in U.S. Legal Institutions, 1790-1920
Dirk Krueger and Jessica Tjornhom Donohue
NBER Working Paper No. 10347
March 2004
JEL No. I28, J22, D31, O10
ABSTRACT
In this paper we construct a dynamic heterogeneous agent general equilibrium model to quantify the
effects of child labor legislation on human capital accumulation and the distribution of wealth and
welfare. Crucial model elements include a human capital externality in the market sector, an
informal home production sector in which child labor laws cannot be enforced, uninsurable
idiosyncratic income risk, borrowing constraints, and endogenous wage and interest rate
determination in general equilibrium. We calibrate the model to US data around 1880 and find that
the welfare consequences for individual households of a transition to policies that restrict child labor
or provide tax-financed free education depend crucially on the main source of a households' income.
Whereas households with significant financial asset holdings unambiguously lose from any
government intervention, high-wage workers benefit most from a ban on child labor, while lowwage workers benefit most from free education. Based on a utilitarian social welfare function, the
introduction of free education results in substantial welfare gains, in the order of 3% of consumption,
mainly because it leads to higher human capital accumulation. A child labor ban, in contrast, induces
(small) welfare losses because it reduces income opportunities for poor families without being
effective in stimulating education attainment.
Dirk Krueger
Department of Economics
University of Pennsylvania
3718 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104
and NBER
dkrueger@econ.upenn.edu
Jessica Tjornhom Donohue
State Street Associates
138 Mt. Auburn Street
Cambridge, MA 02138

1

Introduction

A child that works is less likely to receive a good education. If education, and
thus the accumulation of human capital, is associated with positive externalities, implying a divergence of private and social returns to human capital, then
a benevolent government should possibly intervene in parents’ private schooling
decisions, even if parents are altruistic.1 Even without externalities, credit market imperfections that prevent parents from borrowing against the future labor
income of their children may induce ineﬃciently low investment into education.
On the other hand child labor contributes significantly to household income,2
particularly in developing economies. Thus policy makers deciding whether or
not to adopt child labor legislation3 face the crucial trade-oﬀ between distorting
private decisions and correcting potential ineﬃciencies arising from human capital externalities and credit market frictions. In addition, the costs and benefits
of such legislation are not evenly distributed among the population. The poor
laborer who cannot aﬀord to send his children to school may feel very diﬀerently about these policy innovations than the wealthy member of the upper class
whose own children receive an education whether or not child labor legislation
is in place and for whom children are an important source of cheap labor for
their factories.
In this paper we build a dynamic heterogeneous agent general equilibrium
model to assess the quantitative importance and distributional consequences
of these trade-oﬀs. We study two possible policy reforms: (1) a ban on child
labor and (2) tax-financed free schooling.4 Our main focus is on the welfare
consequences of these policies across diﬀerent groups of the population. By
documenting the winners and losers of child labor legislation reforms our paper
provides predictions about which households (that is, their economic characteristics) one should expect to support and to oppose such reforms.
To qualitatively evaluate our model predictions and to guide us in the calibration of our model economy, we look to the United States of the second half of
the 19th century - a time period of heated debates around child labor legislation.
Our reading of this historical record for the U.S. indicates that economic status
(one’s position in the income and wealth distribution) was a crucial element
in determining support or opposition of child labor bans and publicly funded
education in the U.S. While the policy reforms and the economic forces at work
in the 19th century U.S. are very similar to those of many developing countries
in the present, one key diﬀerence makes us prefer the historical U.S. evidence
1 Government intervention may obviously be justified if parents do not value the well-being
of their children, whereas the social welfare function of the benevolent government does.
2 See, among others, Psacharopoulos (1997) and Levison, et. al. (2001) for empirical work
on the contribution of child labor to household income in developing countries and Ensign
(1969) and Trattner (1970) for a historical perspective of this subject.
3 When we use the term “child labor legislation”, from now on we refer to both child labor
bans as well as schooling laws.
4 We will demonstrate below that a tax-financed mandatory schooling law and a combination of child labor bans and schooling laws have consequences very similar to those of
tax-financed free schooling.

2

as point of comparison. The lack of international political pressure that might
lead a developing nation to adopt such legislation, even if it is not in the interest
of its citizens, allows us to better compare our model results with the U.S. historical record. We do believe, however, that the results derived from our model
provide insights into the political debate of child labor legislation in developing
countries today as well, and thus we use some features of developing economies
as motivation for our theoretical model.
We find that the welfare consequences for individual households of a transition to policies that restrict child labor or provide tax-financed free education
depend crucially on the main source of a households’ income. Households with
significant financial asset holdings unambiguously lose from any government intervention because it reduces labor supply from children and thus leads to a
decline (at least initially) in the capital-labor ratio and thus the return to capital. Workers with high labor productivity and no assets are the only group of
the population benefitting from a ban on child labor (even though this policy
has no impact on educational attainment and thus the size of the human capital
externality), since the reduction of labor supply increases their wages and they
do not rely on income from their own children working in the market sector.
Meanwhile, providing free, linear income tax-financed education benefits
income-poor families to the largest extent, because it provides them with otherwise unaﬀordable schooling opportunities, financed mainly by taxes on high
(capital and labor) income households. Since this policy is increases average
human capital in the economy substantially, all groups but the wealthiest 7% of
the population benefit from such a policy innovation. The welfare consequences
from the free education law are substantial: while the steady state welfare gains,
based on a utilitarian welfare functional, amount to more than 3% of consumption, the gains taking the transitional costs into account explicitly still range
between 0.5% − 1% of consumption for most households. A child labor ban, in
contrast, induces small steady state and somewhat bigger transitional welfare
losses, because it reduces income opportunities for poor families, without being
eﬀective in stimulating education attainment.
The next section outlines the model’s crucial elements and provides a discussion of the related literature and the historical context. In Section 3 we present
the model and section 4 describes our policy experiments. Section 5 explains
the calibration of the model for our numerical exercises. In Section 6 we present
our main results, including a sensitivity analysis of key parameters, before we
compare the empirical predictions of the model with the historical record for
the U.S. in section 7. This section also includes a concluding discussion of the
implications of our findings for the discussion about child labor legislation in
currently developing countries.

3

2
2.1

Key Model Elements and Related Literature
Model Elements

Our model contains six key elements designed to evaluate the economic tradeoﬀs associated with child labor and schooling legislation: (1) parental altruism
and paternalism; (2) uninsurable idiosyncratic income risk (3) the presence of
potentially binding borrowing constraints (4) human capital externalities in the
market production sector (5) a formal market- and informal household production sector and (6) price determination in dynamic general equilibrium . We
now justify each feature of the model and discuss its relation to the existing
literature.
In the tradition of Ben-Porath (1967) and Becker and Barro (1988), we
assume that parents are altruistic and care about their children’s future utility.
Thus,instead of using them as a tools for generating household income (as in,
e.g., Gupta, 2000), parents in our model may send their children to school out
of concern for their future earnings potential and thus overall lifetime utility.
The altruism assumption has been used extensively in the literature on child
labor, human capital accumulation and growth. Examples include Dessy (2000),
Doepke (2003), Fernández-Villaverde (2001) and Hazan and Berdugo (2002).
Parents are also paternalistic in our model in that they make all economic
decisions for their children, including their time allocation.
Since parents internalize the well-being of their children, the rationale for
government intervention in our model stems from market imperfections.5 As
a second key model element, households face idiosyncratic labor income risk
against which no insurance contracts can be purchased. Child labor is used, as
a partial substitute for missing insurance markets, to stabilize family income.
Empirical studies show that lower-income parents often send their children to
work instead of (or in addition to) school in order to supplement family income
and smooth income shocks. According to Grootaert and Kanbur (1995), “Child
labor can be part of a strategy to minimize the risk of interruption of a household’s income stream, and hence to reduce the potential impact of job loss by a
family member, of a failed harvest, etc.” (p.194). Jacoby and Skoufias (1997)
find that child labor helps to smooth income of rural Indian families,consistent
with poorly developed markets for credit and risk. Uninsurable labor income
risk gives rise to a nondegenerate wealth distribution within the population in
our model, allowing for a meaningful analysis of child labor legislation’s distributional welfare consequences, the key question addressed in this paper. This
feature endogenously generates both poor households whose only income stems
from labor earnings and wealthy households who derive a substantial fraction
of their income from asset returns.
Third, we assume that adults cannot borrow against their children’s income
to finance their education or to increase current household consumption. Access
to credit markets is limited for most individual households in developing nations,
5 Glomm (1997), Dessy (2000), and Pallage and Zimmermann (2000) also use the assumption of parental paternalism.

4

including the U.S. in the 19th century. Income from child labor thus plays an
important role for poor households for which credit does not exist. In making
this assumption, which limits a households’ ability to self-insure6 , we follow a
large body of the literature studying optimal consumption and saving choices
under uncertainty in general equilibrium (see e.g. Aiyagari (1994), Krusell and
Smith (1998) and many others).
A fourth key model feature that gives rise to potential market failures is a
human capital externality in production, as proposed by Lucas(1988), which enhances both the marginal products of labor and capital in the market production
sector. Consequently the social returns from education exceed the corresponding private returns. By incorporating “the traditional argument for government
intervention in child labor markets” (Basu (1999) p. 1084), we attempt to assess
the quantitative importance of human capital externalities for the justification
of child labor legislation.
As a fifth model ingredient we introduce both a formal market and an informal household production sector. Their distinguishing characteristics is that
child labor bans are enforceable in the market sector, but not in the household
sector. Including an informal household production sector is necessary given
our objective, because, in order to properly model the allocation of children’s
time between school and work, we must allow them to be employed in activities
besides working for wages. Many empirical studies find that a good portion
of child labor occurs in the household sector in developing countries and the
same was true in the U.S. historical context.7 The distinction of household and
market sectors, also used in Basu and Van (1998), Levison et. al. (2001), and
Dessy (2000) allows us to evaluate the widespread conjecture that the sole eﬀect
of child labor bans is to drive children into less eﬃcient production activities
instead of increasing educational attainment, particularly among the poor.
Lastly, we place our households into an overlapping generations dynamic
general equilibrium frame work in which factor prices are endogenously determined over time. Because our model contains dynamic human capital and asset
accumulation decisions along transition paths induced by a reform in child labor
legislation, changing factor prices have important distributional consequences.
An increase in wages benefits the poor laborer and a fall in the interest rate hurts
the rich capitalist. As we intuitively argued above and quantitatively demonstrate below, these eﬀects are crucial for determining the welfare consequences
that policy reforms engender among various groups of the population.
One final comment on human capital and economic growth is in order. In
our model human capital is a potential engine of growth. Induced by a policy
reform, human capital accumulation may increase, leading to economic growth
along the transition to a new steady state. However, these growth eﬀects are, by
construction, transitory since our model does not exhibit endogenous growth (as
in, e.g. Lucas, 1988). We decided against using an endogenous growth model
6 Note that we do allow dynasties to self-insure against intergenerational labor income
fluctuations by accumulating assets.
7 Grootaert and Kanbur (1995), for example, report very high participation rates in family
businesses, farms and housework (up to 68% of children under 15).

5

in which human capital accumulation is the engine of permanent growth for
the following reason. The debate of whether economic policies have persistent
eﬀects on growth rates (rather than just level eﬀects) is very much unsettled.
Making the conservative assumption of no long-run growth eﬀects of child labor
policies prevents us from overstating the benefits of such laws, since permanent
growth eﬀects from these laws would likely exceed the benefits from transitory
human capital accumulation-induced growth in our model.8

2.2

Related Literature

Our paper continues a growing literature that uses theoretical models to evaluate the consequences of child labor legislation.9 This literature is motivated
by the descriptive and empirical evidence about the origins and eﬀects of child
labor legislation in now industrialized countries in the 19th century as well as
in currently developing countries. While a detailed summary of the historical
and development literature goes well beyond the scope of this paper we briefly
summarize the main stylized facts surrounding the adoption of child labor legislation in the 19th century U.S.. Since our model has explicit implications for
the distribution of welfare consequences from child labor legislation, in section 7
we will discuss to what extent the historical record and the results of our model
coincide.10
In Colonial North America work by children was not only common but expected by society (see Hindman (2002), p. 45-47). The first child labor laws
were passed in New England in the 1840; however, few states outside this region
followed until after 1880 (see Nardinelli (1990), p. 129). The public provision
of education tended to predate child labor bans in most states (see Landes and
Solmon, 1972). Since our model analysis will determine the economic status
of households predicted to gain and lose most from child labor legislation, it
is crucial to identify which groups of the population favored and which groups
opposed child labor legislation historically. Nardinelli (1990) identifies workers,
primarily those organized in unions, as the main group supporting child labor
laws based on economic incentives. It is important to note that their first eﬀorts
to curb child labor focused on equalizing education opportunities, rather than
child labor bans directly (see Hindman (2002), p. 49). Interestingly, unorganized workers, in particular those from poor households who would see family
income decline as a result of child labor bans, often opposed such legislation (see
8 A second, equally important reason is computational. Given our focus on the distributional impacts from child labor legislation our model has a rich cross-sectional distribution
of types, induced by uninsurable idiosyncratic uncertainty. Endogenous growth would make
the economy nonstationary, and would require us to compute a balanced growth path along
which all variables grow at an endogenously determined growth rate, yet the cross-sectional
distribution of assets remains (after appropriate normalization) constant. To the best of our
knowledge such a model (the incorporation of an Aiyagari (1994) economy into an endogenous
growth model) has not yet been solved numerically.
9 See Basu (1999) for an excellent survey of the theoretical and empirical literature.
1 0 For a summary of the development literature see Basu (1999) and the many references
therein.

6

Nardinelli (1990), p. 143).11 The most powerful and vocal opposition against
child legislation came, not surprisingly, from the capitalists employing child labor and their trade associations (see Hindman (2002), p. 53-57). Were child
labor bans eﬀective in curbing child labor? Nardinelli (1990) and Moehling
(1999) suggest that the decline of child labor in the late 19th and early 20th
century in the U.S. cannot be attributed to this legislation,but rather to other
economic factors that made industrial child labor obsolete. We will compare
these historical facts to the predictions of our theoretical model below.
Other model-based studies of child labor legislation include Basu and Van
(1998), who combine Stone-Geary preferences with the assumption that adult
and child labor are substitutes to generate the existence of multiple equilibria
in the labor market. A ban on child labor can then be used to implement the
desired equilibrium. Baland and Robinson (2000) construct a model where ineﬃcient child labor occurs in equilibrium if altruistic parents, because of credit
market imperfections as in our model, fail to fully internalize the negative impact of child labor on human capital accumulation. Neither model, however,
introduces heterogeneity, and thus cannot fully address the impact of child labor legislation on the distribution of wealth and welfare.
Dessy and Knowles (2001) link income inequality to the emergence of child
labor laws. In their model parents have time-inconsistent preferences with respect to their children’s utility. Consequently, parents benefit from a commitment device such as a child labor ban. Our model, in contrast, postulates timeconsistent preferences; child labor legislation is justified on normative grounds
by human capital externalities and capital market imperfections. Also, while
their main focus is the analysis of the conditions under which a mandatory education law emerges politically, we devote more attention to the distribution of
the welfare consequences of such policy innovation, without explicitly modelling
the political process that leads to it.
Doepke (2003), while primarily concerned with the interaction of economic
growth and fertility, also studies the distributional eﬀects of child labor legislation. In his model, heterogeneity is confined to a distinction between skilled
and unskilled households, whereas in ours a nondegenerate wealth distribution
is crucial for the study of the distributional eﬀects of child labor legislation.
Dessy (2000) presents a model of growth with endogenous fertility where, as in
Doepke (2003), human capital is the only source of heterogeneity and studies
compulsory education measures to alleviate child labor. Finally, Pallage and
Zimmermann (2000) present a two-country growth model to investigate the use
of transfers from a rich to a poor country in order to secure compliance with a
child labor ban. To these studies our paper adds richness with respect crosssectional income and wealth heterogeneity, in order to study the distributional
consequences of child labor and education legislation.
1 1 For Britain, Cunningham (1996) writes that “child labor founds its strongest and most
persistent advocates within the working class, much to the embarrassment of trade union
leaders.” This citation is taken from Doepke and Zilibotti (2003).

7

3

The Model

The economy is populated by two-period lived overlapping generations. Each
household consists of one adult and one child, and there is continuum of measure
one of both adults and children at each date t. The single good in this economy
is produced in both the market sector and the household sector and can be used
for either consumption or investment.

3.1

Technology

In the market sector the representative firm operates the technology
F (Kt , Nt , H̄t ) = AKtθ Nt1−θ H̄tγ

(1)

with A > 0 and θ ∈ (0, 1). Here Kt is the aggregate level of physical capital
at time t and Nt represents the aggregate labor input at time t, measured in
eﬃciency units. The average human capital in the economy is denoted by H̄t ;
its value is taken as given by firms and households when making their economic
decisions.12 The parameter γ ≥ 0 measures the extent of the human capital
externality in production; its size will turn out to be an important determinant
of the welfare consequences of child labor legislation.
In the household sector labor supplied by a child, nt , is used to produce the
non-storable consumption good. The household technology is specific to and
owned by each household, and all production accrues to that household. Production using this technology features decreasing returns to scale with respect
to labor input and is given by
f (nt ) = (y c nt )α

(2)

where α ∈ (0, 1) and y c > 0 are parameters, and y c measures labor productivity
of a child relative to that of an adult.
The level of human capital of an adult, which determines her labor income
as described below, is determined by a human capital production function of
the form
ht+1 = 1 + ϕst l

(3)

where ϕ, l > 0 are parameters13 and st ∈ {0, 1} denotes the parent’s discrete
choice of whether or not to send their child to school, with st = 1 if the parent
sends the child to school and 0 otherwise. The parameter l indicates the time
necessary to go to school. Thus we normalize the human capital of an adult
with no education to 1. Given this specification there are two possible values
of human capital for adults in any period t + 1: ht+1 ∈ {1, 1 + ϕl}. Note for
calibration purposes that ϕl will equal the wage premium for educated workers.
1 2 Hence firms face constant returns to scale with respect to the production factors they
choose. Thus the number of firms is indeterminate in equilibrium, and our assumption of a
single representative firm is without loss of generality.
1 3 The parameter ϕ captures, in a reduced form, the eﬀects on human capital formation of
the amount of spending on each child, peer group eﬀects as well as the quality of teachers.

8

3.2

Endowments and Preferences

Adults face idiosyncratic shocks to labor productivity. The stochastic process
for adult labor productivity follows a finite state Markov process with support
Y = {y 1 , . . . y N } and transition function π, where
π(y 0 |y) = prob(yt+1 = y 0 |yt = y).

(4)

We assume that π has a unique invariant distribution Π, equal to the crosssectional distribution of labor productivities at period 1 (and hence at any future date). Furthermore,
we assume that the average labor productivity of an
P
adult equals y yΠ(y) = 1. By assumption labor productivity shocks are uninsurable in that households cannot write explicit contracts that are contingent
on the current realization of yt . They can, however, self-insure by accumulating
risk-free capital. In the benchmark version of our model relative child labor productivity yc is non-stochastic; we will explore the implications of idiosyncratic
uncertainty with respect to child labor productivity in our sensitivity analysis,
in section 6.3.
Adults in period t are characterized by the vector (yt , ht , kt ), where yt is
idiosyncratic labor productivity, ht is the individual level of human capital,
and kt the level of individual capital, the only financial asset available in this
economy. We use Φt (yt , ht , kt ) to denote the measure of adult agents of type
(yt , ht , kt ) at date t, and Φ1 (y1 , h1 , k1 ) to denote the initial distribution of adults.
Each adult in the economy is endowed with one unit of time, which she supplies
inelastically to the market sector. The eﬀective labor supply of an adult of type
(yt , ht , kt ) then equals yt ht .
Adults of generation t have preferences over their own consumption in period
t and the expected future utility of their child. We assume that preferences can
be represented by
u(ct ) + βEt [Vt+1 (yt+1 , ht+1 , kt+1 ; Φt+1 )|yt ]

(5)

where ct is adult consumption in period t, and yt+1 , ht+1 and kt+1 , respectively,
are the idiosyncratic labor productivity, individual level of human capital, and
physical capital of generation t + 1. The function Vt+1 denotes the maximal
utility a child can obtain if he or she reaches adulthood with labor productivity
shock yt+1 , human capital ht+1 and assets kt+1 . Furthermore Φt+1 denotes the
distribution over types of adults in t + 1 and Et [.|yt ] denotes the expectation
operator, conditional on the realization of the idiosyncratic shock yt . Finally,
the parameter β is the parental discount factor for the utility of their children
and thus a measure of altruism.
In the model each parent has one child. Children do not consume14 but are
endowed with one unit of time. Parents allocate a child’s time to school and
work in the market and household sectors. Sending a child to school involves
two costs: a direct cost of paying tuition (unless a schooling law is in place that
1 4 Obviously one can interpret c as total household consumption, given that the number of
t
household members alive at any given time is fixed at 2.

9

finances public schools via income taxation) and the opportunity cost of time
spent in school rather than at work in the market or household sector. Parents
face the following constraint for the allocation of time of their child:
st l + mt + nt = 1

(6)

where mt denotes a child’s time spent working in the market sector.

3.3

Government Policies

We consider combinations of three types of child labor legislation. Let ν t be an
indicator variable that equals 0 if there is no ban on child labor and 1 is there is
a ban on child labor. Let µt be an indicator variable that equals 1 if education is
free. Finally let τ t denote the flat income tax rate used to raise the revenue for
public education. We assume that τ t is set so as to obtain government budget
balance in each period. Agents in the model take the sequence of government
policies, {ν t , µt , τ t }∞
t=1 as exogenously given.

3.4

The Household Problem

Adults with characteristics (yt , ht , kt ) in period t choose their own consumption,
ct , the time their child spends in the market and household sectors, mt and nt ,
whether they send their child to school, st , the level of their child’s human
capital, ht+1 , and the size of their bequest, kt+1 , to solve




X
u(ct ) + β
max
π(yt+1 |yt )Vt+1 (yt+1 , ht+1 , kt+1 ; Φt+1 )
Vt (yt , ht , kt ; Φt ) =

ct ,mt ,nt ,st ,ht+1 ,kt+1 
yt+1 ∈Y

(7)

subject to the constraints (3), (6), the constraints
0 ≤ mt , nt ≤ 1
ct ≥ 0, kt+1 ≥ 0
st ∈ {0, 1}

(8)

and the budget constraints
ct + κ(1 − µt )st + kt+1 ≤ (1 − τ t ) [(yt ht + (1 − ν t )y c mt )wt + rt kt ] + kt + f (y c nt )
(9)
where wt is the real wage per eﬃciency unit of labor in the market sector and rt is
the real interest rate. Note that the restriction kt+1 ≥ 0 imposes the assumption
of non-negative bequests, ruling out parental borrowing against a child’s labor
income. The parameter κ denotes the real resource cost of education per pupil
that parents must pay for their child’s education. Households are assumed to
behave competitively in that they take government policies (ν t , µt , τ t ), prices
10

(wt , rt ) and the distribution of types Φt as exogenously given and beyond their
control.15

3.5

Competitive Equilibrium

We are now ready to define a competitive equilibrium for our economy. Let
Z = Y × R+ × R+ be the set of all possible (yt , ht , kt ). Let B(R+ ) be the
Borel σ-algebra of R+ and P(Y ) be the power set of Y . Finally let B(Z) =
P(Y )×B(R+ )×B(R+ ) and M be the set of all finite measures on the measurable
space (Z, B(Z)).
Definition 1 Given the initial distribution Φ1 , and child labor legislation {ν t , µt }∞
t=1
a competitive equilibrium is a sequence of individual functions for the household
{Vt , ct , mt , nt , st , ht+1 , kt+1 : Z × M → R}∞
t=1 , sequences of production plans for
∞
the firm {Nt , Kt }∞
,
factor
prices
{w
,
r
t t }t=1 , aggregate human capital levels
t=1
∞
∞
∞
{H̄t }t=1 , government taxes {τ t }t=1 , and a sequence of measures {Φ}t=1 such
that, for all t,
1. (Maximization of Households): Given {wt , rt , H̄t } and {ν t , µt , τ t } the functions {Vt } satisfy (7) and {ct , mt , nt , st , ht+1 , kt+1 } are the associated policy functions
2. (Marginal Product Pricing): The prices wt and rt satisfy
µ ¶θ
Kt
H̄tγ
wt = A(1 − θ)
Nt
rt = Aθ

µ

Nt
Kt

¶1−θ

H̄tγ − δ.

(10)

(11)

3. (Government Budget Constraint): If education is publicly funded, then
τt =

St κ
wt Nt + rt Kt

(12)

and else τ t = 0 for all t ≥ 1.
4. (Market Clearing):
Z
Z
ct (yt , ht , kt )dΦt + κ st (yt , ht , kt )dΦt + Kt+1
Z
θ 1−θ γ
= AKt Nt H̄t + [y c nt (yt , ht , kt )]α dΦt + (1 − δ)Kt

(13)

1 5 The aggregate distribution Φ needs to be included as a state variable in the household’s
t
problem because it determines the aggregate stocks of physical and human capital as well as
aggregate labor supply. These in turn imply the factor prices, rt and wt , which households
need to know in order to solve their maximization problem. For the same reason, households
need to forecast tomorrow’s distribution over types, Φt+1 , as it aﬀects the maximization
problem that their children will solve (and hence the child’s maximal utility, given their
individual state (yt+1 , ht+1 , kt+1 )).

11

Nt
Kt+1
H̄t+1
St

=
=
=
=

Z
Z
Z
Z

(yt ht + y c mt (yt , ht , kt ))dΦt

(14)

kt+1 (yt , ht , kt )dΦt

(15)

ht+1 (yt , ht , kt )dΦt

(16)

st (yt , ht , kt )dΦt

(17)

5. (Aggregate Law of Motion):16
Φt+1 = Γt (Φt )

(20)

A steady-state equilibrium is an equilibrium such that all elements of the
equilibrium that are indexed by t are constant over time.

4

Policy Experiments

Our benchmark economy has no child labor legislation in place (i.e. ν t = µt =
τ t = 0). We assume that the economy starts in the steady state equilibrium
associated with the absence of child labor legislation. We denote by period t = 1
this initial steady state. A reform is carried out at the beginning of period t = 2,
and the government is committed to this reform and enforces it perfectly.17 The
reform is not expected by any household, but once it is carried out, all agents
of the economy correctly believe that it stays in place for all time. The three
reforms we study are
1. A child labor ban (i.e. ν t = 1, µt = 0 and τ t = 0 for all t ≥ 2). Under
the new policy parents can no longer have their child work in the market
sector for the wage wt . Children can still work in the household sector. As
there is no publicly financed education, parents must still pay the resource
cost κ to send their children to school.
1 6 The functions Γ can be written explicitly as follows. Define Markov transition functions
t
Qt : Z × B(Z) → [0, 1] induced by the transition probabilities π and the optimal policies
ht+1 (y, h, k; Φt ) and kt+1 (y, h, k; Φt ) as
X ½ π(y 0 |y) if ht+1 (y, h, k; Φt ) ∈ A and kt+1 (y, h, k; Φt ) ∈ C
Qt ((y, h, k), (Y, A, C)) =
0 else
0
y ∈Y

(18)

for all (y, h, k) ∈ Z and all (Y, A, C) ∈ B(Z). Then
Φt+1 (Y, A, C) = [Γt (Φt )] (Y, A, C) =

Z

Qt ((y, h, k), (Y, A, C))dΦt

(19)

for all (Y, A, C) ∈ B(Z).
1 7 This implies that under a child labor ban children cannot work in the market sector
(although they may work in the household sector); if an education law requires mandatory
schooling, all children go to school.

12

2. Provision of public tax-financed education (i.e. vt = 0, µt = 1 and τ t =
St κ
wt Nt +rt Kt for all t ≥ 2). Parents retain complete freedom with respect
to the time allocation of their child and have to pay income taxes on all
market-generated income (including that from child labor), but can send
their children to school free of charge. Note that it still may be suboptimal
to do so since school still carries time opportunity costs; thus St < 1 is
possible. This thought experiment may also represent a situation where
a mandatory education law is in place, but it is not enforced. Also note
that if this policy leads to universal school attendance, then its allocative
and welfare consequences are identical to those of a compulsory schooling
law (which includes public financing of school).
3. Adoption of a mandatory schooling law with publicly financed education
(i.e. vt = 0, µt = 1 and τ t = wt Nt κ+rt Kt for all t ≥ 2). The government
now provides free schooling to each child, but imposes the restriction st =
St = 1. Now mandatory schooling necessarily takes up a portion of the
child’s time that could have been used for work. By law all children in the
population attend school and acquire human capital.
To quantify the welfare eﬀects of diﬀerent policy reforms, we compute consumption equivalent variation measures for diﬀerent groups of agents. We ask
by what percentage a dynasty’s consumption has to be increased, for all time
and all contingencies, in the old steady state with no child labor and schooling
legislation, in order to be indiﬀerent to a policy reform inducing a transition to
the new steady state. Note that this measure explicitly captures welfare along
the transition path. If the period utility function is assumed to be of CRRA
form with coeﬃcient of relative risk aversion σ, this welfare measure is given by
µ
¶ 1
V2 (y, h, k) (1−σ)
EV (y, h, k) =
.
(21)
V1 (y, h, k)
For example, an EV (y, h, k) = 1.05 means that a dynasty with characteristics
(y, h, k) experiences a welfare gain from a given reform equivalent to receiving
5% higher consumption for all time and all states in the old steady state.
Similarly, to compare steady state welfare between a regime with no child
labor legislation and a regime with such legislation, we compute the consumption
equivalent variation of a dynasty about to be born into the new as compared to
be born into the old steady state, i.e. under the veil of ignorance, as
µR
¶ 1
VT (y, h, k)dΦT (1−σ)
SS
EV
= R
(22)
V1 (y, h, k)dΦ1
where T indexes variables in the new steady state.

5

Model Calibration

The model parameters are calibrated so that the initial steady state without
child labor legislation replicates selected observations in the U.S. economy dur13

ing the time before most states adopted such laws18 . We calibrate to available
data from around 1870-80 for this reason. As individuals live for only two periods in the benchmark version of our model, one model period is interpreted
to last 20 years. This is roughly consistent with U.S. data on average life expectancy (conditional on successful survival to age 6, the age at which we assume
children become economically active).

5.1

Technology

For the market sector we normalize A = 1 and set the capital share of income
to θ = 0.34, the value reported by Williamson and Lindert (1980) for the US
in 1871. The value of the externality parameter γ cited in the literature falls
in a fairly large interval γ ∈ [0, 0.417] where the upper end of the interval is an
extreme outlier and stems from Lucas (1988). Borjas (1992) and also Carpena
and Santos (2000) find values of 0.18 and 0.15, respectively. Using the lower of
these values as benchmark, we conduct sensitivity analysis on gamma to assess
how the results change when there is no externality, and as the value of the
externality is increased over the range γ ∈ [0, 0.417]. Finally, the chosen value
for depreciation 1 − δ = (1 − 0.06)20 = 1 − 0.71 is standard in business cycle
research, as we do not have reliable data on capital stocks or investment for the
U.S. economy before the turn of the century.
The curvature parameter α for the household production function determines
the marginal return of household production, relative to market work of children.
We choose α such that in the stationary equilibrium of our benchmark economy
the average time children spend working in the market sector is 22% of their
non-sleeping, non-leisure time, consistent with Carter and Sutch (1996), who
report a labor force participation rate for boys in 1880 of 32% and for girls of
12% (and thus an average participation rate of 22%). This yields α = 0.12 and
thus strongly decreasing returns to scale in the informal household production
sector.19
Two parameters (l, ϕ) specify the technology governing human capital accumulation, where l measures the time required to go to school and ϕ measures
the returns of human capital to an extra unit of time spent in school. Landes
and Solmon (1972) report that in states that had a compulsory schooling law
by 1880 a pupil enrolled in a public school attended school 94 days a year on
average. The total number of days in a year, excluding Sundays, is 6 ∗ 52 = 318
days. Thus children in states that required school attendance on average went to
school for 30% of all working days per year in 1880. Therefore we choose l = 0.3
indicating that in the model 30% of a child’s time is spend in school if schooling
1 8 According to the data in Landes and Solmon (1972) the only states that had passed
mandatory education legislation before the 1869-70 school year were Massachusetts, which
passed a law in 1852 requiring children of ages 8-14 to attend school for 20 weeks each year,
and Vermont, which passed a law with the same requirements in 1867.
1 9 It is understood that in a general equilibrium model like ours all parameters aﬀect all
equilibrium quantities and prices. In our discussion of the calibration we associate a parameter
with that equilibrium entity it aﬀects most, in a quantitative sense.

14

is chosen by their parents or dictated by the government.20 Our choices imply
that, if all children go to school, on average a child spends 30% of the year in
school, 22% working in the market sector and the remaining 48% working at
home. To calibrate ϕ, the multiplicative term in the human capital production
function, we use the wage premium for education estimated by Acemoglu and
Angrist (2000). They find an increase in the wage of approximately 8% per year
of schooling. In states with compulsory schooling laws in 1880 children had
to attend school from age eight to fourteen at least (see Landes and Solomon,
1972). With six years of school and the estimated wage premium of 8% per year
a skill premium of 48% results. Hence ϕl = 0.48, and with l calibrated to 0.3
we obtain ϕ = 1.6.
Finally, school expenditures per child, κ, are derived from the annual cost of
sending a child to school as a percentage of GDP per capita. The total annual
expenditure per pupil in 1870 was $15.55 in current dollars (U.S. Department
of Education, 1997) and GDP per capita was $170 in current dollars (U.S.
Department of Commerce). Thus we select κ so that the per-pupil schooling
cost is 9.15% of GDP per capita in our initial steady state, where GDP in our
model is measured as output in the market sector. This requires κ = 0.069.
Table 1 summarizes the calibration of technology parameters.
A
1.0

5.2

θ
0.34

Table 1: Technology Parameters
γ
δ
α
l
ϕ
0.15 6% p.a. 0.12 0.3 1.6

κ
0.069

Preferences and Endowments

We assume that the period utility function of an adult is of Constant Relative
1−σ
Risk Aversion (CRRA) form, u(c) = c1−σ . We choose a coeﬃcient of relative
risk aversion σ = 2, well within the values usually employed for business cycle
and public finance studies. The time discount factor β is chosen so that the
annual risk free real interest rate, r, in the initial steady state is equal to 2%.
This implies β = (0.979)20 .
We specify the stochastic component of adult labor productivity as a symmetric two-state Markov process. Hence the parameters to calibrate are the
states of the income process, yl and yh and the conditional probability that
children, once adults, remain at the same productivity level as their parents,
π. We use data on the spread of wages within an education group and intergenerational persistence of income to pin down yh , yl, and π. Williamson and
Lindert (1980), in studying intra-sectoral wage diﬀerentials for common laborers in 1850, suggest a wage diﬀerential within an educational group of around
60%. Normalizing E(y) = 1 and choosing yl , yh such that yyhl = 1.6 yields values
2 0 Implicit in this choice is the assumption that school, including the sometimes long commute to and from school, takes up the entire non-sleeping, non-leisure time of a day. In
addition, our assumption of two periods of life, one spent as child, may overstate the time
commitment needed for school, but is necessary to justify the fact that economic decisions are
taken only in the second period of life.

15

(exploiting the symmetry of the Markov chain21 ) of yl = 0.769 and yh = 1.231.
Solon (1992) and Zimmerman (1992) estimate the elasticity of a son’s income
with respect to his father’s income at 0.4. This provides an estimate of persistence. Since, conditional on same education, a lucky parent is 60% richer
than an unlucky parent, this number implies that, on average, children of lucky
parents should be 24% richer than children of unlucky parents. We have
E(y 0 |y
E(y 0 |y

= yl ) = πyl + (1 − π)yh
= yh ) = πyh + (1 − π)yl

(23)

and thus
E(y 0 |y = yh )
πyh + (1 − π)yl
= 1.24
=
0
E(y |y = yl )
πyl + (1 − π)yh

(24)

which yields, conditional on the calibrated values for yl and yh , a π = 0.732.
Finally we have to specify the productivity of a child, relative to that of an
adult, yc . Goldin (1979) documents that in Philadelphia in 1880, in a typical
native white American family with father of age 40-44, roughly 11% of all income
was derived from child labor. Assuming the same number of children as adults
in such a family22 and using our earlier target of 22% of children’s time used
in market production we find yc = 0.45 necessary to reproduce the child labor
income statistic.23 We summarize our parameter choices governing preferences
and endowments in Table 2.
Table 2: Preference and Endowment Parameters
β
σ
yh
yl
π
yc
20
(0.979)
2.0 1.231 0.769 0.732 0.45

6

Results

All of the policy experiments that we consider start with an initial steady state
with no child labor legislation and end in a final steady state with a child labor
ban or tax-financed free (compulsory or voluntary) education. We first discuss
the properties of the steady state equilibria under these diﬀerent policies and
then discuss the transition dynamics and welfare consequences induced by the
various policy reforms. Finally, we perform an extensive sensitivity analysis of
our results with respect to changes in crucial parameters and modelling assumptions.
2 1 This

symmetry implies that the unique invariant measure associated with the Markov
transition matrix puts 50% probability on both states. The expectation of income is with
respect to this probability measure.
2 2 This is of course true by construction in our model, but also approximately true in Goldin’s
(1979) data, with 2.037 children present, on average, in a family with the same characteristics.
2 3 We solved
0.22yc w
= 0.11
(1 + 0.22yc )w
for yc , using the fact that average adult productivity is 1 and adults work in the market sector
all their discretionary time.

16

6.1

Steady State

Table 3 summarizes the values of model variables under a child labor ban, free
education, and free but mandatory education. For all steady states with child
labor legislation we compute the percentage change of a particular variable
with respect to the initial steady state with no legislation in place (with the
exception of rpa , m̄, s̄, Gi(k) and EV SS ). Here rpa is the annualized interest
rate, Y is output in the market sector, H is the stock of human capital, m̄ is
the average time spent by children in the formal sector, s̄ is the fraction of all
children going to school, and Gi(k) is the Gini coeﬃcient of asset holdings.24

Initial SS
Ch. L. Ban
Free Educ.
Man. Educ.
6.1.1

rpa
2%
1.99%
2.18%
2.18%

Table 3.
w
0.363
0.13%
1.77%
1.77%

Steady State Results
Y
K/Y
H
0.749
5.69
1.24
−7.0%
0.2%
0%
10.4% −4.3% 19.4%
10.4% −4.3% 19.4%

N
1.364
−7.2%
8.5%
8.5%

m̄
22%
0%
0%
0%

s̄
50%
50%
100%
100%

Child Labor Ban

Comparing the no-policy steady state to the steady state with a ban on child
labor in the market sector, we observe that labor supply in the market sector
declines and production in the household sector increases significantly. This is
because children who formerly worked in the market sector now spend part of
their former market time (apart from going to school) working in the household
sector. This reallocation of child labor increases the real wage of adult workers in
the market sector and drives down the interest rate. The changes in both prices
are modest, however, since not only labor supply, but also the supply of capital
falls (this can be deduced from the table by observing that the capital-output
ratio is roughly unchanged and output falls significantly). As both production
inputs decline substantially, so does output. Why does capital accumulation
drop with a ban on child labor in the formal sector? Families, in particular
poor ones (those with a low y-shock) are now forced to make their children work
exclusively in the informal sector, which is very unproductive at the margin. The
loss in family income is compensated in part by lower savings and thus a lower
capital stock available for production in equilibrium.
Most important for our purposes is the eﬀect of the legislative change on
the individual education decision. As evident from the table, the policy is not
successful in inducing more families to send their children to school. With
and without child labor ban all households with currently good productivity
shocks send their children to school and those with bad shocks do not, partially
because of the direct cost of schooling, partially because of the opportunity cost
of a child’s time. Simply reducing this opportunity cost by making child labor
2 4 Since

Y is a flow variable and K a stock variable, in our measurement of the capitaloutput ratio we divided Y by the period length, 20 years, to make our numbers comparable
to capital-output ratios in yearly models.

17

Gi(k)
0.56
0.56
0.55
0.55

EV ss
−0.94%
3.26%
3.26%

in the formal sector illegal is insuﬃcient to induce school attendance of children
from poor families, it merely robs these families of the ability to use child labor
in the formal sector as insurance against bad parental productivity shocks and
thus makes poor families even poorer.25 Consequently, a ban of child labor,
when not coupled with any law further encouraging school attendance, leads to
welfare losses in our benchmark model. The size of these losses are nontrivial;
the steady state equivalent variation amounts to −0.94%, indicating that one
could lower steady state consumption, for any individual state and for all time,
by 0.94% in the initial steady state and still have a dynasty ex ante indiﬀerent
between being born into the old and the new steady state which child labor ban.
6.1.2

Education Policies

All our education policies contain a public provision of schooling, financed by a
proportional income tax. In addition, school attendance may be stipulated by
a compulsory schooling law or may be left to the decision of the parents. As
mentioned above, if the unconstrained decisions of households yield universal
school attendance, then the introduction of a compulsory schooling law does not
change allocations or welfare. As is evident from table 3, with tax financed free
education all families send their children to school, and thus the ensuing stationary equilibrium is identical to that under tax-financed mandatory schooling.
Therefore, from now on we will limit our discussion of education policies to the
tax-financed free schooling policy, unless compulsory schooling laws give rise to
diﬀerent allocations.
Under our benchmark calibration, giving households access to free education induces all families to send their children to school. Consequently in the
stationary equilibrium all adults are educated, with aggregate human capital
amounting to H = H̄max = 1 + ϕl = 1.48, a 19% increase over the initial steady
state in which only half of the population (those whose parents where highly productive) was educated, so that H = 1+0.5ϕl = 1.24. As a result aggregate labor
input N and thus output in the formal sector increases, the real wage declines
and the interest rate increases (as the capital-labor ratio declines). However,
since children substitute schooling and informal activity for work in the formal
sector (partially because of the decline in the real wage), the increase in formal
sector labor supply is smaller, in equilibrium, than the increase in adult human
capital. In fact, the reduction in the real wage is substantial enough that households opt not to send their children to work in the formal sector, even though
there is no legal restriction preventing them from doing so.
Apart from leading to growth in economic activity due to increased human
capital accumulation, the education policy contains an important redistributive
component, since taxes to finance education are proportional to a households’ income, whereas the benefits (saving the schooling cost κ) are independent across
incomes. This redistribution between households that diﬀer in their labor productivity ex post provides insurance against bad productivity shocks ex-ante,
2 5 At the margin, a child that does not go to school could, if permitted, earn a wage in the
formal sector that is about 33% higher than its marginal product in the informal sector.

18

and thus is a welcome partial substitute to private labor income insurance markets, which are absent in our model by construction. While the increased level
of human capital and thus production and consumption is mainly responsible
for the sizeable welfare gains of 3.3% in consumption equivalent variation, the
insurance aspect of the education policy contributes to its size. A side eﬀect
of the redistributional features of the education policy is a small reduction in
wealth inequality due to the introduction of free schooling; the Gini coeﬃcient
of wealth declines close to one percentage point in the new, as compared to the
pre-policy steady state.
6.1.3

A Combination of Policies

In the baseline calibration of our model, with free (or mandatory) education all
households send their children to school and no household finds it optimal to
make them work in the formal sector. Thus, adding a child labor ban to such an
education policy introduces a nonbinding constraint; the resulting allocations
are thus identical to those arising in a steady state with education policy only.
For the remainder of this paper we therefore do not report results for a combination of education and child labor legislation, unless the results diﬀer from the
case of education policies only.26

6.2

Transition Dynamics and Welfare Implications

The allocation and welfare analysis so far has compared steady states under
diﬀerent policies, including the laissez-faire economy. We now discuss the dynamic transition induced by a sudden, unexpected policy reform. Our main
focus is the growth path of the main macroeconomic aggregates as well as the
distribution of welfare gains/losses across the population. As we will see, the
steady state welfare numbers reported in the previous section may, for some
groups substantially, overstate the welfare gains from an education reform and
understate the welfare losses from a ban of child labor in the formal sector.
6.2.1

Child Labor Ban

The steady state analysis indicated a reduction in market production, a small
increase in real wages and no change of human capital in response to the introduction of a child labor law in the market sector. In addition, steady state
welfare declined by about 1% in steady state consumption, from an ex-ante
point of view.
From figure 1 we observe that, before settling down to their new steady
state values, macroeconomic variables follow a nontrivial transition path, the
dynamics of which helps to explain the welfare results obtained below. In this
figure, period 0 represents the old steady state and period 1 represents the first
2 6 These diﬀerences arise only if with education policies alone either not all households send
their children to school or some households still opt to have their children work part-time in
the formal sector.

19

Percent Change from Initial Steady State

Aggregate Variables along Transition: Child Labor Ban
2
0

-2

Output
Real Wages
Labor Supply
Capital Stock

-4
-6
-8

-10
0

5

10
Time

15

Figure 1: Transition Path: Child Labor Law
model period after the unanticipated reform was enacted. Thus by construction
physical and human capital (the latter not shown) remain at their old steady
state values in period 1 (because these variables are predetermined from the
previous period). As child labor in the formal sector declines, due to the forced
substitution into the informal sector, so does labor supply in period 1. Since
capital is predetermined in period 1, the large initial decline in labor supply
induces a substantial increase in the capital-labor ratio and thus a large increase
of the real wage on impact (and a consequent decline in the real interest rate).
As capital accumulation also starts to decline, the real wage falls towards its
new steady state, which is slightly above its old steady state. It is crucial for
the welfare numbers to remember that, although the increase in real wages
is modest when comparing steady states, along the transition substantial real
wage increases persist for several model periods. Finally, the dynamics of output
in the formal sector follows that of labor and capital (since aggregate human

20

20

capital remains constant throughout the transition, because schooling choices
do not change); we observe a fast decline of output towards its new, 7% lower
steady state value.

Percentage Change in Welfare

0.03

Welfare Consequences of Child Labor Ban

0.02

Zero Line
Low y, Low h
Low y, High h
High y, Low h
High y, High h

0.01
0

-0.01
-0.02
-0.03
0

0.2

0.4

Assets

0.6

0.8

Figure 2: Welfare Consequences of Child Labor Ban
In figure 2 we show the welfare losses of diﬀerent groups of the population,
measured by consumption equivalent variation. We observe that the only population group that would benefit from a ban of child labor in the formal sector
are households with currently high parental labor productivity and no financial
assets.27 These households derive all their income from parental work in the
2 7 The impact of the state variables (y, h) on welfare diﬀers in a subtle way. High current
productivity y and high current human capital h increase current income, although the spread
in wages induced by productivity diﬀerences yyh = 1.6 is higher than that between human
l
capital diﬀerences (which, by calibration, equals 1.48). Furthermore the process for y features
persistence, whereas human capital dies with the parent and needs to be newly acquired by
the child. This implies that currently and persistently high wages benefit households with
currently high productivity to a larger extent than households with highly educated parents.

21

1

market sector, send their children to school and let them work in the informal
sector after school. The reform induces a strong increase in the parental wage
(declining over time, however) and does not distort the child’s time allocation
for these households. It is also evident that, ceteris paribus, the higher a households’ financial assets, the larger the welfare losses from a child labor ban. This
is due to the fact that a reduction in the real interest rate, substantial at the
time of adoption of the reform, reduces the return on those households’ (the capitalists) assets. Households with low labor productivity (those one may term
the “poor” if they don’t possess assets) also stand to lose from ban on child
labor, because, even though the parental real wage increases, these households
found it optimal to send their children to work in the formal sector to stabilize
family income and are now prohibited from doing so. In terms of household
income and welfare, the latter negative eﬀect dominates. Thus our empirical
model prediction is that capitalists and low-productivity workers lose from a
child labor ban, whereas high-productivity workers with little capital income
are set to gain. To the extent that these welfare consequences determine opposition and support for such a reform, our model predicts that capitalists and,
to a lesser extent, the income-poor oppose child labor bans, while supporters
should be found mainly among workers with well-paid jobs.
Our model determines the fraction of agents with particular characteristics
endogenously in any given point of time. Hence figure 2 has to be “weighted” by
the initial steady state distribution over types (y, h, k), in order to determine the
fraction of the population that would benefit from a transition of an economy
without child labor legislation to an economy with a child labor ban. We find
that only about 20% of the population would prefer to adopt a child labor ban28 ,
namely exactly the high-wage families with no financial assets that benefit most
from the (mostly temporary) increases in the real wage. It is also interesting
to note that most other households’ welfare losses from the reform are smaller
than the 0.94% in the steady state. The transition takes time, the decline in
output and thus consumption does not occur immediately and real wages rise
substantially on impact, so that the steady state welfare losses overstate the
true (still substantial) welfare costs from the reform. Thus, in order to derive
reliable welfare numbers for the application at hand, it is crucial to compute and
analyze the transition dynamics of the economy explicitly. That steady state
welfare comparisons can be quite misleading will become even more apparent
2 8 There

is an obvious, albeit very restrictive, sense in which our results can be interpreted
as a political economic equilibrium. If the following conditions are met then the fraction of
agents with welfare gains from a reform can be interpreted as the fraction of agents voting
for the reform. First, a potential reform is voted upon -against the status quo- only once.
Second, the reform, once approved, cannot be reversed. Third, all households vote sincerely
for the policy yielding higher welfare. Finally, fourth, all households understand that there
is one, and only one vote about a reform. Under this interpretation a fraction of agents with
welfare gains of more than 50% indicates that the reform is approved under a simple majority
rule. Since there is no repeated voting and thus no startegic or dynamic aspects to the voting
decision, nor does the analysis explain why these reform enter the political agenda, we do not
want to stress this interpretation. For an explicit voting model of child labor legislation, see
Doepke and Zilibotti (2003).

22

in our study of education policies, to which we turn next.
6.2.2

Education Policies

Percent Change from Initial Steady State

The steady state allocative and welfare consequences of a free schooling law
(coupled or not with the legal requirement to attend school) diﬀer substantially,
in a positive way, from a child labor ban. Figure 3 shows that the transition
dynamics of factor prices and allocations are qualitatively diﬀerent from the
previous reform as well.

15

Aggregate Variables along Transition: Free Education

10

5

0
Output
Real Wages
Labor Supply
Capital Stock

-5

-10
0

5

10
Time

15

Figure 3: Transition Path: Free Education
As before, in the first period after the reform labor supply in the formal sector
declines because children substitute school (rather than informal sector work)
for market work. Since human and physical capital stocks are predetermined,
output declines and the real wage jumps up. But now, very much in contrast to
a child labor ban, the higher school attendance leads to an increase in human

23

20

capital of adults from period 2 onwards, thus an increase in eﬀective labor
supply and in output. In this sense human capital, via the endogenous education
decision and fueled by educational reform, is the engine of growth in economic
activity. Since our model stems from the class of exogenous growth models,
this human-capital accumulation induced growth is necessarily temporary and
the economy, over time, converges to its new steady state. The dynamics of the
capital stock and real wages documented in figure 3 is more subtle. Directly after
the reform all households (instead of only a selected group of them) send their
children to school, roughly doubling the income tax to finance schools, leading
households to save less and thus reducing the capital stock in the second period
of the reform. The decline in capital, together with the increase in labor supply,
fosters a decline in real wages below the initial steady state level. After the
second period, the increase in human capital induces higher wages and thus
labor earnings, increased savings, a recovery of the capital stock and thus the
real wage converges towards its new, higher steady state level.29
The welfare consequences of a transition to publicly financed education are
summarized in figure 4. We observe that, ceteris paribus, households with
low human capital and with little financial assets benefit most from the reform.
Before the reform households with low human capital did not send their children
to school, mainly because it was too costly (in terms of resources and in terms
of forgone child labor income). Now education is free, which amounts to a large
subsidy for this group of the population, given that it now takes advantage of
the schooling opportunity and pays moderate income taxes for it (since taxes
are proportional and income of these families is low).
Since wages increase more substantially than interest rates, those households
that derive a larger fraction of their income from wages, rather than capital, have
higher welfare gains, other things equal, which explains why welfare improvements from the reform are declining with assets. The fact that they become
negative for large asset holdings is explained by the fact that these households
send their children to school even before the reform, labor income is unimportant for them and the income tax for free schools reduces their after tax income
by more than the cost of schooling and the moderate gains from rising interest
rates (which only becomes eﬀective in period 2 after the reform).
One remarkable feature of figure 4 is the observation that welfare gains for all
groups, although sizeable, are bounded below 1% of consumption, substantially
lower than the reported steady state gains of 3.3%. The reason behind these
seemingly contradictory results is the change of the cross-sectional distribution
over household types between steady states. In the old steady state, at the
starting point of the transition, 50% of all household are without an education
and thus have low human capital. In the new steady state all households obtain
an education. The steady state welfare gains only capture two eﬀects, the
improvement in welfare of a given type in the long run, and the shift towards
types with higher welfare. But obtaining education is costly and takes time, the
2 9 In addition, as the economy grows, so does the tax base, and thus the income tax rate
required to finance schooling expenditures declines.

24

Percentage Change in Welfare

0.03

Welfare Consequences of Free Education

Zero Line
Low y, Low h
Low y, High h
High y, Low h
High y, High h

0.02
0.01
0
-0.01
-0.02
-0.03
0

0.2

0.4

Assets

0.6

0.8

Figure 4: Welfare Consequences: Free Education
steady state welfare numbers grossly overstate the still sizeable benefits from
the reform, a finding which cannot be derived and quantified without explicit
consideration of the transition path induced by the reform. Finally, 93% of all
households benefit from the reform of introducing free, tax financed education
(all but the richest capitalists).

6.3
6.3.1

Sensitivity Analysis
The Size of the Externality

The steady state and transition results outlined above are derived from the
model, under a particular calibration described in detail in Section 6. One crucial and controversial model parameter is the human capital externality, which
we set to γ = 0.15. We conducted sensitivity analysis for the range γ ∈ [0, 0.417],
the set of empirical estimates we are aware of, to determine how a weaker or
25

1

stronger human capital externality would aﬀect our results. The human capital
externality is one of the reasons that child labor legislation has potentially positive welfare eﬀects in our model. But even in its absence, policy interventions
may be called for to oﬀset the inability of households to write contracts contingent on idiosyncratic income shocks and, more importantly, to borrow against
their children’s income. Hence, although weakening the externality will weaken
positive the welfare eﬀects for child labor legislation, it is not clear a priori that
even eliminating the human capital externality altogether will result in negative
welfare eﬀects. Table 4 summarizes our results.
Table 4: Sensitivity of Results to Human Capital Externality
γ=0
γ = 0.15
γ = 0.417
Variable
Ban
Educ.
Ban
Educ.
Ban
Educ.
%∆ in w
0.14%
−2.46
0.13%
1.77% 12.18%
9.85%
%∆ in Y
−4.96%
8.23% −7.06% 10.42% 19.33% 21.55%
%∆ in H
1.39% 21.01%
0% 19.35% 19.35% 19.35%
EV SS
−0.47%
1.61% −0.94%
3.26%
7.48%
7.74%
% Benef.
21.5%
0%
20.4%
93.1%
100%
100%
The results are not surprising, for the most part. A higher externality
strengthens the increase of wages, output and human capital accumulation due
to child labor and education reforms and leads to more favorable welfare consequences from enacting the reform. With a bigger externality a households’
wage depends more strongly on the economy-wide average human capital; consequently any policy that is successful in increasing that average will benefit those
whose income is mostly derived from labor. The table also shows that, qualitatively, the assessment about the desirability and implementability of both types
of reforms changes as the size of the externality changes. Our results for γ = 0
lead us to conclude that credit market frictions alone (the absence of insurance
markets and the inability of households to borrow against future labor income
of their children to pay for their education) are not suﬃcient to make the case,
on normative grounds, for the existence of child labor and education policies of
the kind studied in this paper.30
6.3.2

Relaxation of Borrowing Constraints

One of the premier reasons in our model to expect under-investment in human
capital, besides the human capital externality, is the inability of households
to borrow against their children’s earnings to finance their education. In this
subsection we relax this assumption; in particular we now permit households to
3 0 Some details for the results deserve further comment. First, the finding that human
capital increases with a child labor ban for γ = 0, but not for γ = 0.15 is due to the fact
that human capital accumulation is lower in the steady state without policy for γ = 0 to start
with. Second, for γ = 0.417 the results obtained for a combination of both policies do not
coincide with those fore ducation policies only, because for the latter policy children continue
to work in the formal sector after the reform. The additional child labor restriction is thus an
occationally binding constraint, which leads to lower labor supply and welfare gains.

26

borrow up to a generous amount equal to the entire lifetime wage of an adult
with low human capital and low productivity shock. While we believe that our
previous assumption preventing borrowing altogether is a better approximation
of reality, the results derived under the new, relaxed constraint will allow us
to assess the relative quantitative importance of externalities and borrowing
constraints as a rationale for child labor and education laws. All parameters are
re-calibrated to deliver the same empirical targets as before.
Table 5: Steady State Results with Relaxed Borrowing Constraint
rpa
w
Y
H
N
m̄
s̄
Initial SS
2%
0.362
0.75
1.24
1.364 22% 50%
Ch. L. Ban
2%
0.06% −7.1%
0%
−7.2% 0%
50%
Free Educ. 2.19% 1.77% 10.5% 19.4%
8.5%
0% 100%

EV ss

% Ben.

−0.9%
3.61%

35.1%
86.5%

Table 5 shows that the relaxation of the borrowing constraint leaves the
result qualitatively, and for the most part quantitatively, unchanged. The borrowing limit is loose enough for households to borrow the entire cost of schooling
for their children (in fact, it allows borrowing of roughly three times that cost).
Thus one may expect the households that previously (under the strict constraint
and without policy) did not send their children to school now change their mind.
They do not. These are households with currently low labor productivity; given
that the Markov process is mean-reverting in expectation their children are more
productive and will have better lives, conditional on the same level of education. Thus these households would like to bring consumption of the dynasty
forward, rather than postpone it by making a human capital investment. This
becomes apparent when noting that these households do borrow, once allowed
to, however, not for schooling expenses of their children, but rather for higher
current consumption.
The fact that the asset distribution becomes more dispersed (a significant
fraction of households incurs debt, and more asset-rich people issuing that debt
emerge) also explains why the percentage of households benefitting from an
education law slips, compared to the benchmark economy. While the welfare
consequences, conditional on the same state (y, h, k), remain roughly the same,
the presence of more asset-rich people in the stationary distribution opposed to
the education law decreases the constituency for such a reform. On the other
hand, more households now favor child labor bans as the stationary distribution
features more asset-poor households.
6.3.3

Stochastic Child Labor Productivity

So far we have treated child labor productivity y c as a deterministic parameter,
making child labor an eﬀective tool to insure adult labor productivity shocks.
Now we relax this assumption and allow child labor productivity to be stochastic
c
as well, following a discrete-state Markov chain with support Y c = {ylc , ym
, yhc }
c
and transition probabilities for the productivity of the family (y, y ) given by
π(y 0 , y c0 |y, y c ).
27

Productivity or wages diﬀerentials among child workers are hard to find for
the U.S. around 1880. We have data, however, for wage diﬀerentials between
boys and girls working in the market sector. Thus we interpret the randomness
of child wages as deriving from the random sex of the child. A family is assumed
to be composed of two adults and two children, which are both male with
probability 0.25, both female with the same probability and with probability 0.5
are of mixed sex. As adults, these agents form marriages, with wages determined
by the main breadwinner of the family. These assumptions imply that the
productivity of the children in the household is uncorrelated with that of adults
(although adult productivity is still correlated with the productivity of parents,
c
as before). Thus π(y 0 , y c0 |y, y c ) = π(y 0 |y)π(y c0 ). If we let yboy
denote the relative
c
wage of a boy and ygirl that of a girl, the states and probabilities of child labor
productivity are
Table 6: Stochastic Child Labor Productivity
State Value
π(y c )
c
c
yl
ygirl
0.25
c
ym
yhc

c
c
yboy
+ygirl
2
c
yboy

0.5
0.25

Goldin (1979) documents that for American white families in Philadelphia
in 1880 the average family size was roughly 4.3 (suggesting that the assumption
of two children per family is a good approximation) and that wages of girls of
age 10 were roughly 86% of that of boys. Remembering from above that average
child productivity, relative to average adult productivity equals 0.45, we choose
c
ygirl
=

0.45 ∗ 0.86
0.45 ∗ 1
c
=
and yboy
.
1 + 0.86
1 + 0.86

This choice implies significant child labor productivity uncertainty, of slightly
smaller size than adult labor productivity uncertainty. All predetermined parameters are kept the same, the remaining ones are re-calibrated so that the
economy with stochastic child labor attains the same empirical targets as the
benchmark economy.
Table 7: Steady State Results with Stochastic Child Labor Productivity
rpa
w
Y
H
N
m̄
s̄
Initial SS
2%
0.362
0.75
1.237
1.366
22% 49.4%
Ch. L. Ban 1.99% 0.22% −7.2% 0.3% −7.34% 0%
50%
Free Educ. 2.18% 1.88% 11.1% 19.7%
9.06%
2%
100%

EV ss

% Ben.

−0.93%
3.37%

19.2%
94.7%

Since the dynamic programming problem for a given household as well as the
equilibrium conditions remain almost unchanged we omit their repetition. Table
7 instead summarizes the results from our sensitivity analysis, documenting that
the findings are almost identical to the benchmark economy. The only significant
diﬀerence from our previous results is some heterogeneity of families with respect
to the time allocation of children. Families with boys, other things equal, send
28

their children to work longer hours in the formal sector, whereas girls work
longer hours in the informal sector, consistent with the historical U.S. evidence
as well as stylized facts from currently developing countries.
6.3.4

Transfers to Elder Members of the Household

The U.S. around 1880 did not have a social security system (it was introduced
in 1935). Thus older individuals often had to rely on intra-family transfers for
old-age consumption. In order to account for this phenomenon we modify our
model to include a third period of life. The first two periods of life remain
the same, but in the third period agents consume resources given to them by
their children. Let c2 denote this consumption, assumed to be a fixed fraction
ξ of the gross income of their children, and let χ > 0 denote the discount
factor between the second and the third period of an individuals’ life. The
dynamic programming problem now reads as (without child labor legislation
and stochastic child productivity)


X
u(c1 ) +
V (y, h, k; Φ) =
max
π(y 0 |y) {χu(c02 ) + βV (y 0 , h0 , k0 ; Φ0 )}
c1 ,m,n,s,h0 ,k0

y0

subject to
c02 (y 0 , h0 , k0 ) = ξ [(y 0 h0 w0 + (1 + r0 )k0 ]
c1 + κs + k + c2 (y, h, k) ≤ (yh + y c m)wt + (1 + rt )k + f (y c n)
0

as well as the time constraint for child labor and the law of motion for human
capital. Note that the amount of consumption provided to parents in old age is
not a choice variable, but rather a matter of social convention, as measured by ξ.
Without altruism towards the elderly, the optimal transfer to an old individual
is 0. Also note that, given this formulation, a current adult can, by educating her
child and/or leaving her financial assets, positively impact her own consumption
when old.
The additional parameters that need to by chosen for this extension are ξ and
χ. To insure comparability with our previous results we keep the time discount
factor β at its benchmark economy level of 0.979 (per annum) and jointly choose
χ = 0.1655 and ξ = 0.614 so that the new steady state equilibrium (without
policy) has an interest rate of 2% per annum and average consumption of old
people equals average consumption of young people in the economy.31
Table 8: Steady State Results with 3-Period Lived Households
rpa
w
Y
H
N
m̄
s̄
Initial SS
2%
0.362
0.75
1.237
1.366 22% 49.4%
Ch. L. Ban 1.99% 0.22% −7.2% 0.3% −7.3% 0%
50%
Free Educ. 2.18% 1.88% 11.1% 19.7%
9.1%
2%
100%

EV ss

% Ben.

−0.93%
3.37%

19.2%
94.7%

3 1 All previously calibrated parameters were re-calibrated, so that the new economy matches
the same empirical targets as before.

29

Comparing table 8 to table 3 we observe that the results of the extended
model are almost identical to those obtained under the benchmark model, both
qualitatively as well as quantitatively. School attendance and human capital
accumulation is slightly lower in the no-policy steady state, since the substantial
transfers to the elderly make it harder to spare the resources to sending children
to school for the asset-poor (even if they have currently high labor productivity).
Since the new post-policy steady states remain virtually the same under the
extended model, now child labor bans have positive (but quantitatively small)
eﬀect on human capital accumulation.32

7

Conclusions: Model Implications and Empirical Evidence

We conclude by discussing how the results of our model compare with the historical record for the U.S. Our main model predictions are that child labor restrictions in the market sector are most strongly disliked by asset-rich capitalists and
low-wage workers, and yield welfare gains only for high wage workers with little
assets. Interpreting welfare gains and losses as support and opposition to such a
policy reform, the predictions are very much in line with the historical evidence
cited in section 2.2 above. Furthermore, our model predicts that education reforms are beneficial for a much larger fraction of the population, potentially
explaining why in most states such reforms predated child labor restrictions.33
In addition, our results imply that, conditional on having implemented publicly
provided education for everybody, neither a mandatory education law nor child
labor restrictions are necessary to induce universal school attendance. Furthermore, the impact of introducing these additional laws on market child labor and
schooling are small, consistent with the empirical findings for the 19th century
U.S. of Moehling (1999) for child labor bans and Landes and Solmon (1972) for
compulsory schooling.34
From our viewpoint, the most important normative predictions of our model
with respect to the current discussion surrounding child labor in developing
countries is that education reform is a much more eﬀective way to curb child
labor and to increase human capital accumulation and growth than preventing
children from working in the market sector. The latter legal restriction (if not
3 2 Also note that under free education some children still work in the formal sector, so
that the additional introduction of a child labor ban has further (again quantitatively small)
impacts on the time allocation of a child, in contrast to the benchmark model.
3 3 In stating this we again acknowledge that without an explicit model of the political process
no model-based statements about timing of policy changes can be made.
3 4 The second half of the 19th century also appears to have been a period of constant
wealth inequality, after a steep increase in the first half of the century. Our model predicts
that, although child labor legislation, in particular an education reform has profound growth
and welfare eﬀects, its impact on wealth inequality is relatively minor, consistent with the
historical record. But since many other economic factors aﬀect wealth inequality and the
empirical evidence for this time period is very sparse (see Williamson and Lindert (1980), p.
47), we do not want to emphasize this point too strongly.

30

accompanied by free education provision for the poor), according to the predictions of our model, simply induces poor families to make their children work in
low-return, informal activities, making them even poorer, without providing the
necessary incentives to send their children to school. While these predictions
of our model are in principle testable with a cross-developing-country data set
that contains suﬃcient variation with respect to child labor laws and education
policies, in practice almost all countries formally have child labor and compulsory education laws. Any empirical study therefore has to take the issue of
enforcement of these laws very seriously. While we believe that such work is of
high interest, its careful execution goes well beyond the scope of this paper and
is therefore deferred to future research.

References
[1] Acemoglu, D. and J. Angrist (2000), “How Large Are The Social Returns
to Education? Evidence from Compulsory Schooling Laws,” 2000 NBER
Macroannual, 9-59.
[2] Aiyagari, R. (1994), “Uninsured Idiosyncratic Risk and Aggregate Saving,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 109(3), 659-684.
[3] Baland, J. and J. Robinson (2000), “Is Child Labor Ineﬃcient?,” Journal
of Political Economy, 108, 663-79.
[4] Basu, K. (1999), “Child Labor: Cause, Consequence, and Cure, with Remarks on International Labor Standards,” Journal of Economic Literature,
37, 1083-1119.
[5] Basu, K. and P. Van (1998), “The Economics of Child Labor,” American
Economic Review, 88, 412-427.
[6] Becker, G. and R. Barro (1988), “A Reformulation of the Economic Theory
of Fertility,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 103, 1-25.
[7] Ben-Porath, Y. (1967), ”The Production of Human Capital and the Life
Cycle of Earnings,” Journal of Political Economy, 75, 352-365.
[8] Borjas, G. (1992), “Ethnic Capital and Intergenerational Mobility,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 107, 123-150.
[9] Carpena, L. and M. Santos (2000), “Economic Growth in Some Latin American and OECD Countries, 1960-1990,” mimeo, University of Minnesota.
[10] Carter, S. and R. Sutch (1996), “Fixing the Facts: Editing of the 1880
U.S. Census of Occupations with Implications for Long-Term Labor Force
Trends and the Sociology of Oﬃcial Statistics,” Historical Methods, 29,
5-24.

31

[11] Cunningham , H. (1996), “Combatting Child Labor: The British Experience,” in Child Labor in Historical Perspective: Case Studies from Europe,
Japan and Colombia, 41-55, UNICEF, New York.
[12] Dessy, S. (2000), “A Defense of Compulsory Measures Against Child Labor,” Journal of Development Economics, 62, 261-75.
[13] Dessy, S. and J. Knowles (2001), “Why is Child Labor Illegal?” mimeo,
University of Pennsylvania.
[14] Doepke, M. (2003), “Accounting for Fertility Decline During the Transition
to Growth,” mimeo, UCLA.
[15] Doepke, M. and F. Zilibotti (2003), “The Macroeconomics of Child Labor
Regulation,” mimeo, UCLA.
[16] Ensign, F. (1969), Compulsory School Attendance and Child Labor, Arno
Press & The New York Times, New York.
[17] Fernandez-Villaverde, J. (2001), “Was Malthus Right? Economic Growth
and Population Dynamics,” mimeo, University of Pennsylvania.
[18] Glomm, G. (1997), “Parental Choice and Human Capital Investment,”
Journal of Development Economics, 53, 99-114.
[19] Goldin, C. (1979), “Household and Market Production of Families in a Late
Nineteenth Century American City,” Explorations in Economic History, 16,
111-131.
[20] Grootaert, C. and R. Kanbur (1995), “Child Labour: An Economic Perspective,” International Labour Review, 134, 187-203.
[21] Gupta, M. (2000), “Wage Determination of a Child Worker: A Theoretical
Analysis,” Review of Development Economics, 4, 219-28 .
[22] Hazan, M. and B. Berdugo (2002), “Child Labour, Fertility and Economic
Growth,” The Economic Journal, 112, 810-828.
[23] Hindman, H. (2002), Child Labor. An American History, M. E. Sharpe,
New York.
[24] Jacoby, H. G. and E. Skoufias (1997), “Risk, Financial Markets, and Human
Capital in a Developing Country,” Review of Economic Studies, 64, 311-35.
[25] Krusell, P. and A. Smith (1998), “Income and Wealth Heterogeneity and
the Macroeconomy,” Journal of Political Economy, 106, 867-896.
[26] Landes, W. and L. Solmon (1972), “Compulsory Schooling Legislation: An
Economic Analysis of Law and Social Change in the Nineteenth Century,”
Journal of Economic History, 32, 54-91.

32

[27] Levison, D., K. S. Moe, and F. M. Knaul (2001), “Youth Education and
Work in Mexico,” World Development, 29, 167-88.
[28] Lucas, R. (1988), “On the Mechanics of Economic Development,” Journal
of Monetary Economics, 22, 3-42.
[29] Moehling, C. (1999), “State Child Labor Laws and the Decline of Child
Labor,” Explorations in Economic History, 36, 72-106.
[30] Nardinelli, C. (1990), Child Labor and the Industrial Revolution, Indiana
University Press, Bloomington.
[31] Pallage, S. and C. Zimmermann (2000), “Buying Out Child Labor?” Center for Research on Economic Fluctuations and Employment, Working Paper No. 123.
[32] Psacharopoulos, G. (1997), “Child Labor versus Educational Attainment:
Some Evidence from Latin America,” Journal of Population Economics,
10, 377-86.
[33] Solon, G. (1992), “Intergenerational Income Mobility in the United States,”
American Economic Review, 82, 393-408.
[34] Trattner, W.I. (1970), The Crusade for the Children, Quadrangle Books,
Chicago.
[35] U.S. Department of Commerce (undated) Historical Statistics of the U.S.
[36] U.S. Department of Education (1997), Digest of Educational Statistics,
1997, National Center for Educational Statistics, Washington, D.C.
[37] Williamson, J. G. and P. H. Lindert (1980), American Inequality: A
Macroeconomic History, Academic Press, New York.
[38] Zimmerman, D. J. (1992), “Regression Toward Mediocrity in Economic
Stature,” American Economic Review, 82, 409-429.

33

