NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

PORTFOLIO DIVERSIFICATION AND CITY AGGLOMERATION
William N. Goetzmann
Massimo Massa
Andrei Simonov
Working Paper 10343
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10343
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2004

We are grateful to Sven-Ivan Sundqvist for numerous helpful discussions and for providing us with the data.
We thank AFA discussant Toby Moskowitz for helpful suggestions. Andrei Simonov acknowledges financial
support from the Stockholm Institute for Financial Research and Jan Wallander och Tom Hedelius Stiftelse.
All remaining errors are the responsibility of the authors. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2004 by William N. Goetzmann, Massimo Massa, and Andrei Simonov. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Portfolio Diversification and City Agglomeration
William N. Goetzmann, Massimo Massa, and Andrei Simonov
NBER Working Paper No. 10343
March 2004
JEL No. G11, G14
ABSTRACT
We relate the degree of investor portfolio focus to the broader urban economic context of the
household. Using a detailed panel of investors in Sweden over the period 1995 to 2000, we find that
the level of investor diversification, as measured by number of stocks in the portfolio and by the
average correlation among holdings, is partially explained by city industrial characteristics. We find
that rural portfolios are more diversified than urban portfolios and that portfolio diversification is
characterized by factors associated with urban growth. We consider a number of theories to explain
investor focus, including behavioral biases, real and perceived informational advantage, local social
competition and hedging of non-tradable risk. We find little evidence to support social and hedging
motives to explain the lack of portfolio diversification, and some evidence in favor of perceived
informational advantage in an urban setting. We attribute this evidence as support for the broader
"knowledge-spillover" processes documented in the recent urban economics literature. Portfolio
effects may be added to the list of factors that define and differentiate urbanism.
William N. Goetzmann
School of Management
Yale University
Box 208200
New Haven, CT 06520-8200
and NBER
william.goetzmann@yale.edu
Massimo Massa
INSEAD
Andrei Simonov
Stockholm School of Economics

Introduction

Urban economics in recent years has taught us a lot about the economic function of cities,
from their special capacity as engines of enterprise, to the role they play in stimulating the
acquisition of labor skills and knowledge. For example, by bringing firms from a variety of
industries together in a single location, cities present a wider array of opportunities for
employment, even while attracting a motivated labor force to compete for these jobs.

By the

same token, by bringing firms within a single industry together, cites have been shown to
compound the potential for technological development. Papers over the past decade by Edward
Glaeser and co-authors in particular have explored the role that geographical concentration plays
in innovation and the transfer of knowledge. 2

Testing whether indus trial concentration or

diversification are determinants of economic growth, these papers emphasize the benefits of
knowledge spillover in an urban setting and the role of density in skill development. For
example, Glaeser et al. (1992) show that industrial competition rather than concentration is a
determining factor in growth, and Glaeser and Maré (2001) find empirical evidence suggesting
that the development of human capital within cities is the major vector of growth. Taken
together, this work and the work of others in the field suggest that skill development and
knowledge transfer may well be the key determinant of urbanism.
The economic influence of cities on both enterprise and human capital is so important
that it is natural to ask whether its effects can be documented in the financial portion of the
household investment portfolio. More broadly, urbanism itself might be viewed as having an
impact on investing.

The cross-sectional differences afforded by urban vs. rural locations as

well as the cross-sectional differences among cities themselves should allow us to test some
basic theories about how and why people invest in financial assets. These theories can be
broadly divided into those concerned with risk and return.

Risk
Neo-classical portfolio theory emphasizes the risk-reducing role of the investment
portfolio. Ross’s (1978) K-fund separation theory, for instance, posits that all investors will
hold some combination of diversified investment funds – at least in a frictionless world where all
2

See, for example, Ellison and Glaeser, 1999, Glaeser et al. 1992, 1995, 1997 and 2002, Glaeser and Mare, 2001.

1

assets are traded and returns correspond to a quite general set of distributions. With non-traded
human capital, and frictions like the high costs of re-location or search costs for selling a home,
answers to the household portfolio problem are mo re complicated. The financial portion of the
investment portfolio becomes a potential tool for hedging non-financial income risk. 3
Besides standard macro and micro economic risks, recent research has also posited a
geographically based “social risk.” Bakshi and Chen (1996) for example, build an economy in
which investors are motivated by the social status of wealth – presumably with respect to their
geographical neighbors. 4

DeMarzo, Kaniel and Kremer (2002) term this regional factor in the

investment motive “district risk.”

Thus, cities can be seen not only as a technology for

diversifying human capital risk, but also as a medium for stimulating social competition with
investment implications. These two effects suggest that the financial diversification of urban
investors is likely to be different from that of rural investors. By the same token, under these
various hedging stories, cities that have more focused economies might be expected to have
investors whose portfolios effectively hedge out the focus of the city economy.

Return
The other side of investment is expected return. People invest in financial assets to make
money, not simply to insure themselves against shocks to labor income or other sources of
uncertainty. Under the assumption of efficient markets, speculation in individual securities is
expected to yield no higher rate of return than provided by a diversified portfolio. However, with
asymmetric information, diversification is not necessarily an optimal investment strategy.
Recent behavioral studies have suggested that the average speculator in stocks does not profit by
trading on his ideas (Barber and Odean, 2000). However, this does not appear to prevent the
majority of investors from focusing their stock portfolios into only a few, correlated securities
(cf. Goetzmann and Kumar, 2002).
One potential reason for this portfolio concentration is the existence of actual or
perceived informational advantage. Given that knowledge spillover is a major characteristic of
cities, one might expect to find portfolio concentration in urban, rather than rural settings.

3

Recent work on the financial portfolio as hedging instrument includes, DeMarzo, Kaniel and Kre mer, 2002,
Heaton and Lucas, 2000, a&b, and Vissing-Jorgensen, 2002a, as well as a broader literature on precautionary
savings, including Carroll and Samwick, 1997 and Carroll and Kimball, 2001.
4
This is similar to the idea of “keeping up with the Joneses ” (Ryder and Heal, 1973 and Gali, 1994).

2

Because much business is still largely conducted through personal interaction, cities continue to
be settings for the creation and propagation of value-relevant info rmation and skills. This is not
to say that knowledge is not created in rural settings, but density of enterprise and a critical level
of personal interaction are needed for diffusion and utilization of that knowledge.

Thus,

investment opportunities may be expected to appear more frequently in an urban environment,
and to yield economic returns to those who seize them.

In

this

context,

the

investment

portfolio might be thought of as capital for exploiting short- lived investment ideas. A caveat to
“don’t put all of your eggs in one basket” is that you may know something special about one
particular basket. Hence, we might expect urban households with access to knowledge spillover
to use their investment portfolio to take advantage of this knowledge.
It is important to note that, for most investors, these investment opportunities created in
an “information-dense” business environment might be illusory. Investors with access to
business information flow about a particular company may not know whether the current
security price already reflects this new information or not. In fact, they may be subject to
behavioral biases such as over-confidence or mistaken self- attribution that would lead them to
believe incorrectly that they have superior investment knowledge. Thus, unless investment
activity is completely characterized by unbiased, rational expectations about returns, we may not
find that urban investors perform better on average than rural investors. Since most people
believe themselves to have above average skill, we might expect to find more focused,
speculative portfolios among investors regularly exposed to information – whether they are truly
mediocre investors or not.
Another feature we might expect from informed -- or seemingly informed -- trading on
urban knowledge spill-over is investment in local industry.

Zhu (2002) documents the

propensity of speculators to trade in stocks close to where they live and finds little evidence that
trading in localized shares yields higher profits. Academic interest in geographically proximate
investing has been growing, however. Coval and Moskowitz (2001) find evidence of positive
returns to institutional trading close to home.

Ivkovic and Weisbrenner (2003) report that

investor holdings in local stocks outperform distant holdings. The debate about whether local
investors actually profit from geographical information diffusion is still not settled, however,
most researchers agree that investors at least tend to behave as if they believed they had
superior information about local firms.

3

Contribution of the Current Work
A major challenge to exploring the relationship between investment portfolios and
geographical location has been the lack of comprehensive and detailed data.

Do investors

hedge human capital risks with financial investments? Are urban portfolios more diversified than
rural portfolios? These are empirical questions that rely upon data which, to date, have been
difficult to obtain. Testing requires not only a detailed knowledge of the assets in the financial
portfolio but also information about employment, housing, geographical location and even
demographic characteristics. If people are optimizing over all the relevant economic factors in
their lives, how would we know without having an embarrassing amount of personal detail to
study?
In fact, in this paper we have access to a very detailed geo-coded panel dataset over the
period 1995 to 2000 for a large sample of households in Sweden. Constructed from several
sources, this dataset allows us to explore the geographical determinants of investment. We seek
to address the question of how cities affect household risk and return, and how these effects are
manifested in the choice of a diversified vs. a focused investment portfolio. We use the panel
data to test a number of implications about both the risk and return stories presented above. Our
findings suggest that, in general, city investors are more focused (less-diversified) and that the
tendency to focus the portfolio increases with the degree to which the city itself is industryfocused.

Our results are consistent with the hypothesis of real or perceived local knowledge

spillover. We test for “distric t effects” by considering whether portfolio focus depends upon a
city’s relative economic prosperity, and find little support for this theory. On balance, our
findings suggest that the composition of investor stock portfolios does not reflect

hedging

motives, but rather reflects expectations about superior information- motivated return.
Our results provide some potentially useful evidence on theories of agglomeration. Cities
appear to enhance risk-taking behavior based on the economic opportunities they offer – or
appear to offer -- their inhabitants.

Moreover, we find that the very factors economists have

associated with urban growth -- particularly industry scale, diversity and concentration, are
associated with investor risk-taking.
The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. In the next section, we discuss the
literature related to our work with particular focus on the various theories that might explain

4

investor focus, and the testable implications given our dataset. Section 3 discus ses the data,
Section 4 describes the construction of the variables. Section 5 describes the estimation
procedure. Section 6 reports the empirical results. A brief conclusion follows.

2. Background and Testable Hypotheses

2.1 Some alternative approaches to portfolio under-diversification
One rational explanation for apparently under-diversified investor portfolios is a hedging
argument. Merton (1971) for example, shows that, in the presence of non- financial income risk
investors will hold the market portfolio and some additional position constructed to hedge the
changes in the stochastic opportunity set or other sources of uncertainty. For example, an
investor subject to income risk may try to diversify it away by holding, in addition to the market
portfolio, a portfolio negatively correlated to his labor income.

The net overall financial

portfolio may appear undiversified, when in fact the investor has reduced the overall risk of his
portfolio.

The hedging motive predicts that under-diversification should be related to non-

investment income risks. We are able to test this with the current dataset.
A second explanation for portfolio focus is

motivated by asymmetric information.

Investors may hold focused portfolios because they either possess value-relevant information, or
believe they possess value relevant information. Superior information about a few securities
implies a portfolio concentrated in those securities (Grinold and Kahn, 1999). Even the mistaken
belief by the investor that information in his possession can provide superior returns will
motivate a deviation from a diversified portfolio.
A third explanation relies on prospect theory and, in general, on the preference for
skewness. Shore and White (2002) and Polkovnichenko (2003) point out those investors with a
taste for low-probability high-stakes gambles will invest only in the very few stocks from which
they expect higher returns, forfeiting the benefits of diversification in return for a chance at great
wealth. Perhaps the investment accounts of individuals in our sample are, in effect, gambling
accounts which lose their attractiveness to investors once they become too diversified to provide
returns well in excess of the market. Strange as the suggestion may seem, this might be rational
for some form of utility function.

5

A fourth explanation for under-diversification is bounded rationality. Goetzmann and
Kumar (2002) find that less sophisticated investors are also less diversified. Barber and Odean
(2003) find that investors tend to trade more frequently in stocks in the news – suggesting either
non-trivial information costs to investment research, or uncritical use of the current news. The
direct implication of bounded-rationality theories is a strong correlation between familiarity and
investment in stocks (Merton, 1987 and Shapiro, 2000). In fact, Grinblatt and Keloharju (2001)
document just such a familiarity bias in Finland using a similarly geo-coded investor dataset. If
investor interest drops off with the distance fro the company, individual portfolios will tend to be
regionally focused, and thus exposed to more volatility than they should be. This is a question
we can put to the data.
A fifth explanation is a theory of social competition. The theory of district risk argues
that investors -- competing for local resources within their district -- have utility that depends on
both their own wealth as well as the aggregate district wealth (DeMarzo, Kaniel and Kremer,
2002). In their model, investors, in order to keep up with their neighbors, invest in the same
stocks in which their neighbors invest, resulting in an un-diversified portfolio. 5 The district risk
theory postulates that the higher the growth of wealth of the district, the higher the local
(consumption) prices, the more investors would concentrate on the same stocks. This suggests a
strong positive correlation between the growth and change in wealth of the local district and the
degree of under-diversification. It is important to note that this theory assumes away the mere
possibility of migration across districts, while we will argue that this is one of the main
components of the story. Our approach to testing this is to examine the correlations between the
economic performance of the district and the degree of diversification of the investors within it.
It is important to notice that in Sweden investors are not forced or induced to own
company stocks. This is not only confirmed by casual evidence collected by the authors, but also
by the data. Moreover, in general professional proximity (that is the degree to which a stock is
close to the profession of the investor) does not induce investors to tilt their portfolio toward
stocks of the company they work for or of companies belonging to the same industry. This
suggests that investor loyalty and own company ownership do not provide a valid alternative
explanation.
5

This argument does not quite explain focused portfolios, because one equilibrium is that all investors in a district
might hold the market. However, if keeping up with the Joneses depends upon seeking to keep up with the most
successful investor in the district, the extreme portfolio in a population is de facto undiversified.

6

2.2 The city agglomeration approach
As emphasized above, the economists have provided considerable evidence suggesting
that knowledge creation and knowledge spillover are the main determinants of city
agglomeration and development (Glaeser, et al., 1992, Glaeser, et al., 2002, Glaeser and Mare,
2001, Ellison and Glaeser, 1997, Glaeser, et al., 1995). Knowledge creation and spillover are
defined in terms of professional specialization and proximity. Agglomeration economies,
characterized by dynamic local externalities, increase the returns to investment in high laborcapital intensive technologies and induce specialization.
A major question addressed by urban economists is whether intra- industry or interindustry spillover is more important. Glaeser et al. (1992) characterize the former as a Marshall,
Arrow and Romer [MAR] model. Along these lines, Porter (1990) argues that the main
determinant of growth is specialization.

Local monopoly increases growth as it allows

externalities to be internalized. On the other hand, Jacobs (1969) links city growth to the
existence of various and proximate industries, and in tests of these off-setting propositions,
Glaeser et al., 1992 find that "important knowledge transfers come from outside the core
industry''. They find that cross- industry spillover as opposed to within- industry spillover is the
main driver to city growth.
The archtypal MAR region is Silicon Valley. Concentration of the high-tech industry
around San Jose, California generates knowledge spillover between firms in the same industry.
Jacobs's model represents the development of industries that grow out of specialization of a
particular process. The example he gives is the brassiere industry, which evolved from the
dressmakers' industry as opposed to the lingerie industry. An additional feature of the Jacobs
model is that it suggests that local competition induces knowledge creation and innovation. The
given example is the Italian ceramics industry, in which technical and aesthetic innovation is
driven by intense, local competition among many similar firms.
These theories disagree in terms of the form of the market most conducive to knowledge
creation and specialization (i.e., competition as opposed to local monopoly). However, they do
agree on relating growth to the process of knowledge creation and specialization. While existing
theories of urban economics focus on development of skills and stimulus for technological
innovation, they apply equally well to the propagation of investment opportunities and ideas.

7

Workers in both diversified and concentrated urban settings are likely to be exposed to valuerelevant information. If this information is about publicly traded firms, then we would expect
knowledge spillover to stimulate investment activity.

Whether this spill-over results in a

portfolio with many or few stocks is somewhat ambiguous.

If the city employment is

concentrated in a few major firms, we might expect to find local investor portfolios highly
concentrated. However, if a city has a number of publicly traded companies and there is
knowledge transfer among them, then local speculators might take a number of positions at once.

2.3 A simple model of specialization
An important consideration in the question of portfolio focus and knowledge spill-over is
that employment specialization itself has the potential to affect investment behavior. Investment
activities compete for the attention of the worker. As specialization increases, and labor market
competition rises, the time investors allocate to search for new stocks may decrease, even as the
value-relevance – or apparent value-relevance – of acquired information increases. In a MAR
setting, for example, in which an investor acquires knowledge of the particular sector/industry,
this implies a lower search cost for the stocks of that industry, but a higher information search
cost for stocks outside of the industry.
To examine this issue in a bit more detail, we consider a search framework (Carlson and
McAfee, 1983, Hortacsu and Syverson, 2002). We assume that investors have a certain wealth
(W) to invest and a search cost (x ). The search cost may be alternatively seen as a discrete
amount that has to be paid to enter a specific market. 6 Investors are risk averse and are aware
that different stocks have different risk-return profiles, but are uncertain about the asset that
represents the best next addition to the portfolio. Each stock has a specific risk-return profile (R)
that is a function of the stock expected return, correlation and volatility. If we also assume that
investors have identical perceptions of the risk-returns profiles of the different stocks, it can be
shown (Hortacsu and Syverson, 2002) that an investor with W to invest and a search cost x will
adopt the following investment rule: keep on investigating one additional stock if the cost of
searching is less than the benefit, that is,
R*

∫ ([EU (R

*

)] [ (

)])

,W − EU R i ,W dF > x

(1)

0

6

See, for example, Ukhov (2002) for a model with a fixed investor cost of market entry.

8

otherwise stop and invest in that stock. The intuition behind equation 1 is the existence of
discreteness in the cost of investment that effectively segments the market and generates a
discontinuity in the investment process. This approach assumes that the degree of portfolio
diversification is mainly a function of the search cost to invest in a specific stock. Equation 1
provides a stylized representation that contains all the elements of portfolio choice, but it is
completely unlike the neo-classical portfolio problem, in that past choices are not re-evaluated in
the context of current ones. It has the feature of habit- formation in which the existing portfolio is
the acquired habit.
Investment in stocks provides three advantages: the first is that a search may turn up a
genuine, undervalued security. While insider trading laws may prevent the exploitation of this
information, trading in the stocks of related companies exposed to such information may not be
prohibited (Tookes, 2003). The second is the reduction of the overall portfolio risk due to
diversification. Therefore, if the investor is risk averse, he has an incentive to keep on searching
and not to invest only in a single stock. A risk neutral investor will only care about the return
payoff and will concentrate on one stock – it is well-known that the maximum expected return
portfolio is a composed of a single security, however it is costly to continue to search for that
highest-returning security.
What is exactly the search cost? It is a function of the actual purchase of information as
well as the time spent doing so. The latter increases with alternative opportunities the investor
faces and, therefore, with the reward/opportunity ratio provided by his professional activity.
Therefore, the more professionally involved the investor is, the less time he will have to devote
to portfolio allocation. We can think of this in terms of bounded rationality (Simon, 1986,
Sargent, 1993) or limited processing capacity (Sims, 2000). Building on Sims’ results in terms of
limited processing capacity, Peng and Xiong (2002) show how limited capacity, defined in terms
of time to process information, affects portfolio choice.
The search cost is negatively related to the investor’s ability to get information.
Therefore, in a business setting in which an investor is naturally exposed to certain kind of
information, professional, geographical and informational proximity are by-products of labor and
thus reduce the search cost. Even in a situation in which there is no excess return expected from
an investment, if the search cost is discrete and high enough, an investor will forfeit the benefits
of broader diversification and hold the few stocks related to his job – in a sense, free-riding on

9

professional knowledge spillover. It thus follows that the degree of portfolio diversification is a
direct function of the search cost. This simple model is consistent with existing empirical
evidence showing that investors tend to invest in stocks of companies headquartered close to
where they live (Coval and Moskowitz, 1999, 2001, Hau, 2001) or of the country they come
from (Bhattacharya and Groznik, 2001). Proximity may be seen as a proxy for lower search
costs.
The main implication of this simple model is to suggest portfolio diversification may be
related to an investor’s professional life. This allows us to link portfolio diversification to the
process of city agglomeration and industrial specialization. We find evidence that the same
factors that drive agglomeration are those that affect the professional lives of investors, and by
extension, their search cost.

3 The data

In order to examine the relationship between urbanism and diversification, we require a
set of variables that proxy for knowledge spillover and local prosperity, as well as a set of
variables to test competing theories. To test hypotheses about hedging, we require a measure of
non- financial income risk by the investor, measures of the level and risk of non- financial income,
as well as proxies for investor borrowing constraints. Theories related to information spillover
and bounded rationality require proxies for the degree of professional and geographical
proximity of the investor. The district risk theory requires a measure of local prosperity as well
as investor specific wealth and sources of income. Finally, a fairly general set of individual
investor control variables are needed. These will allow us to separately identify the impact of
belonging to a particular district from the investor's specific characteristics.
We collect data from different sources. For each investor we have detailed information
about his or her individual holdings of stocks (broken down at the stock level), mutual funds,
bank accounts, real estate and other types of wealth. Fiscal authorities provide us with
information on the different sources of investor income, as well as demographic and family
characteristics. This information is matched at the individual level, so as to construct a time
series of investment and income for each investor. For each stock we have detailed information
on the company and the price, volume and volatility at which it trades. We also use aggregated

10

data on Swedish macro-economic conditions and on the indexes of the real estate market. We
now explain the data sources more in detail.

3.1 Individual stockholding
We use the data on individual shareholders collected by Vardepappererscentralen (VPC),
the Security Register Center. The data contain both stockholding held directly and in a street
name, including holdings of US- listed ADRs. In addition, SIS Ägarservice AB collects
information on ultimate owners of shares held via trusts, foreign holding companies and alike
(for details see Sundin and Sundquist, 2002). Our data cover the period 1995-2000. Overall, the
records provide information about the owners of 98% of the market capitalization of publicly
traded Swedish companies. For the median company, we have information about 97.9% of the
equity, and in the worst case we have information on 81.6% of market capitalization of the
company. The data provided by SIS Ägarservice AB were linked by Statistics Sweden with the
LINDA dataset described below.

3.2 LINDA
LINDA (Longitudinal INdividual DAtaset for Sweden) is a register-based longitudinal
data set and is a joint endeavor between the Department of Economics at Uppsala University,
The National Social Insurance Board (RFV), Statistics Sweden, and the Ministries of Finance
and Labor. It consists of a large, representative panel of households for the population over the
period 1960 to 2000. For each year, information on all family members of the sampled
individuals is added to the data set. The sampling procedure ensures that the data are
representative for each year. Moreover, the same family is traced over time. This provides a real
time series dimension which, in general, is lacking in surveys based on different cohorts polled
over time.
The variables include individual characteristics (gender, age, marital status, country of
birth, citizenship, year of immigration, place of residence detailed at the parish level, education,
profession, employment status), housing information (type and size of housing, owner, rental and
occupation status, one- family or several- family dwelling, year of construction, housing taxation
value) and tax and wealth information. In particular, the income and wealth tax registers include
information on labor income, capital gains and losses, business income and losses, pension

11

contributions, taxes paid and taxable wealth. A detailed description of the dataset is provided by
Edin and Fredriksson, (2000) and is available on the web site http://linda.nek.uu.se/.
The tax aspect deserves more detailed discussion. In Sweden, in addition to income
taxation, there exists an additional wealth tax which is paid by every investor with net worth in
excess of 900,000 SEK (about US$90,000). The taxable wealth includes the tax-assessed value
of real estate, market value of publicly listed securities, balance of bank accounts and fair value
of valuable possessions (including jewelry, cars, antiques, etc.).
For the purpose of this paper, we compute the current market value of housing using the
tax-assessed value provided by LINDA. We evaluate it at current prices by using the average
ratio of market value to tax-assessed value that is provided for each year and county by the
Swedish Office of Statistics. There is no estimate of the market value of privately held
companies. However, the data contains an indicator variable for owners of privately held
companies and entrepreneurs who file their business tax return along with their personal tax
return. For the privately held unlimited liability companies the value of the assets is included in
the tax return. For the privately held unlimited liability companies that are not listed, the value of
assets held is generally missing. However, the size of the group is rather small (1.74%-1.91% of
the sample depending on a year) and is unlikely to affect our estimates in a significant way.
Moreover, for the members of the wealthiest 5,000 families, we have been able to reconstruct
their values and to correctly impute it by using information from SIS Ägarservice AB (Sundin
and Sundquist, 2002).
The combined LINDA/Shareholding dataset covers the period 1995-2000. The overall
sample we use contains 1,757,406 observations. In addition, we also use 1990-1994 data from
LINDA in the implementation of the Carroll and Samwick (1996) procedure to construct the
moments of conditional no n- financial income. In Table 1 we report some descriptive statistics. In
particular, Panel A contains the general demographic characteristics (number of households for
each year, members in household, adults in household, age of the oldest member of household,
percent of the sample with secondary and higher education, percent of immigrants) as well the
proxies for diversification (D1 , D2 , D3 and D4 ). Panels B report the characteristics of the local
districts in terms of the main variables we will focus on (i.e., number of active enterprises,
competition, specialization, diversity,...). Panels C and D report, respectively, the age and
gender distribution of the sample and their wealth and income characteristics.

12

3.3 Firm-level information and other data
For individual security returns (including dividends) and the overall market index (SIX
market index), we use the SIX Trust Database. For information on firm- level characteristics we
use the Market Manager Partners Databases. These two databases are the equivalent of,
respectively, CRSP and COMPUSTAT for the US. In addition, Market Manager Partners
Databases contain information at the plant level, including municipality location of the plant.
The consumer confidence index is provided by Statistics Sweden. Geographical coordinates are
supplied by the Swedish Postal Service and contain latitude and longitude of Swedish Postal
Offices.

4 Construction of variables

4.1 Measures of portfolio diversification
We consider four measures of portfolio diversification. These are derived from
Goetzmann and Kumar (2002). We refer to their paper for a proper description and the rationale
of their use. The first measure (D1 ) is simply the number of positions in the portfolio (i.e., D1 =
N). The second (D2 ) is constructed as:
1
1

D 2 = −  + (1 − ) * Corr 
N
N


where N is the number of positions and Corr is the average correlation of the stocks in the
portfolio. It can be shown that D2 is just a normalized version of the portfolio variance multiplied
by –1. It increases with the degree of diversification of the financial portfolio. Diversification
increases when the variance is reduced. The variance can be reduced either by increasing the
number of shares in the portfolio (N), or by selecting the stocks so as to reduce the average
correlation among the stocks in the portfolio (Corr ). In the limit as N goes to infinity the
portfolio variance converges to the covariance among the stocks in the portfolio.
The third and fourth measures (D3 and D4 ) are constructed as:
N

(

)

D3 = −∑ wi − wmkt 3 2 ,
i =1

N

and

(

D4 = −∑ wi − wmkt 4
i =1

13

)

2

for each i = 1, ..., N,

where wi is the weight of the stock in the portfolio of the investor and wmkt is the weight that the
same stock would have in the market portfolio. They differ in the way wmkt is constructed. In the
case of D3 , wmkt3 is constructed by using the overall capitalization of the company, while in the
case of D4 , wmkt4 is constructed by using just the free float. 7 These measures express
diversification in terms of divergence of the financial portfolio from the market portfolio of the
investor. Higher diversification implies a divergence closer to zero. Both D3 , and D4 are defined
so that as diversification decreases, the measures become more negative. They will be very
useful in terms of comparison with our measure of active hedging of non- financial income risk.
We will indeed see how the distance from the market portfolio relates to the desire to hedge nonfinancial income risk. All our measures of portfolio versification increase with the degree of
diversification of the portfolio that is “a higher value of these variables is indicative of a higher
level of diversification”.

4.2 Measures of professional specialization
To proxy for professional specialization, we use the measures similar to those developed
by Glaeser et al. (1992): specialization, competition, uniformity and diversity. We create a
specialization variable as ratio of the share of the top five industries in local employment to the
share of these same five industries in national employment. Thus, the denominator of this
variable differs across municipalities. This provides a measure of specialization at the
municipality level. Competition is captured by the number of firms per employee in a
municipality relative to the number of firms per employee in Sweden. As Glaeser et al. (1992)
point out, this is not distinguishable from a relative scale variable, but should be correlated to the
degree of firm competition for employees. Our measure of diversity is somewhat different from
that used by Glaeser et al. (1992), since their study is conducted on industry- level data. We
proxy for diversity using the negative of the share of the top 5 industries in municipal
employment.

Cites with more diversity in employment beyond the top five industries by

employment will have a higher value.

Glaeser et al. (1992), using a sample of US cities,

between 1956 and 1987, find that specialization and diversity reduce city growth, while

7

This is all the more relevant in a country like Sweden where a sizable fraction of the companies’ shares are in the
hands of a restricted number of shareholders.

14

competition increases it. In order to assess how these variables affect city growth in our sample,
we estimate an analogous regression8 for Sweden.

Our estimation of this relationship for

Sweden (not reported) suggests that all three variables are associated with the growth rate of the
city.
We also construct variables that proxy for the degree of “isolation” of the local district.
These are meant to describe how isolated the district is with respect to major financial and
information centers. These measures are: the index of rural areas, the distance from the closest
civilian airport and the population density. The index of rural areas is the Urban Code as reported
by Statistics Sweden. It ranges from 1 in the case of a Metropolitan area to 9 in the case of the
countryside. The distance to the closest civilian airport is measured as the logarithm of the
distance between airport and central post office in the district. Population density is the
population (in tens of thousands) per square kilometer.

4.3 Measures of local prosperity
We consider six variables that measure the degree of prosperity of the district in a given
year: the percentage of new start- ups, the percentage of bankruptcies, the number of enterprises
active in the district, the employment growth and some measures of profitability of the
companies operating in the district (i.e., the profitability of sales and the return on capital). These
variables are constructed at the firm level and aggregated at the district level. As an alternative
measure of local prosperity we also considered local consumption price indexes. This would be
the variable required by the district risk hypothesis. However, this variable is very highly
correlated to the other variables of local prosperity. We therefore omit it in the reported
specification.

4.4 Measures of financial and municipal services availability
The degree of financial sophistication and bank coverage of a district provide a good
proxy for both the availability of financial information and the vitality of the local economy
(Garmaise and Moskowitz, 2003). In order to proxy for the availability of financial services, we
include the degree of bank coverage. It is constructed as follows. We first identify the list of
8

While for Glaeser et al. (1992) the unit of measure is the industry-level data, we focus on municipality-level data.
These results, that replicate Table 3 in Glaeser et al. (1992) using this alternative specification are available upon
request from the authors

15

credit institutions as reported by the Finance Inspection (Swedish equivalent of SEC) and then
we calculate, for each municipality, the number of branches that each institution has for a given
year. The resulting variable “Bank Coverage” is the logarithm of 1 + the number of branches per
district. To proxy for the degree of availability of municipal services, we use the percentage of
the population that is emp loyed by the municipality.

4.5 Non-financial risk variables.
We define as non- financial risk variables those that allow us to test for portfolio choice in
the presence of non- financial income risk (cf. Heaton and Lucas, 2000). We consider three
variables. The first variable an the index of investor hedging (Γi ). It measures the extent to
which the investor’s portfolio differs from the market portfolio in terms of correlation with
investor's non-financial risk. It is constructed as:
Γi = corr (Yi , rm ) − corr (Yi , ri ,port ) ,

where rm is the return on the market portfolio, ri,port is the return on the financial portfolio of the
ith investor and Yi is the investor non- financial expected income. In the Appendix we provide a
detailed description of how this variable is constructed. Γi proxies for the change in correlation
between financial and non-financial risk induced by investor’s portfolio choice and quantifies the
extent to which the investor deviates from a passive strategy. It is positive in the case of active
hedging and captures the contribution of portfolio choice to the reduction of the overall investor's
risk.
The second variable is a measure of borrowing constraints. Standard portfolio theory
links portfolio choice and market participation to the existence of borrowing constraints. Our
proxy for these is the ratio of investor debt to total assets. It is constructed at the investor level at
time t. The third proxy for non-financial risk is the percentage of the population in the district
that is enrolled in welfare programs. It proxies for the risk of unemployment that comes from the
fact of living in a depressed area. It is worth stressing that this is above and beyond the risk of
unemployment that each individual investor perceives. The latter is constructed for each investor
and included among the control variables (see below).

16

4.6 Measures of familiarity
The index of familiarity ( Ψi ) represents the degree of “professional” or “geographical
proximity” to a particular stock. In the case of professional proximity, the index is a dummy
taking the value 1 if the investor’s profession is in the same area of activity as the company
whose stock is under consideration and zero otherwise. We use the one digit SNI92 codes
(similar to SIC codes) to identify the areas of activities. For example, for an investor working in
the mining sector who holds the stock of a mining firm, the dummy would be equal to 1.
In the case of geographical proximity, we use the proximity between the residence of the
investor and the place where the company is located. We consider two different measures: the
first one is the logarithm of the inverse of the distance between the ZIP code of the investor and
the ZIP code of the closest branch/subsidiary of the company whose stock we consider. As an
alternative measure, we use the logarithm of the inverse of the distance between the ZIP code of
the investor and the ZIP code of the company headquarter. Given that the results do not differ
and the variables are highly collinear, we report only the first specification. These measures are
analogous to those proposed by Coval and Moskowitz (1999, 2001) in a study of geographical
preferences in mutual fund investment. The greater the value of the variable, the closer the
investor is to the stock. These measures are constructed at the stock level and then aggregated at
the investor level, across all the stocks of his portfolio, weighting them by their share in the
portfolio. This procedure delivers three measures of familiarity for each investor and time.

4.7 Control variables
We consider the following sets of control variables: measures of income and wealth,
contemporaneous gain/loss variables, demographic variables, momentum variables, and
macroeconomic and social variables.
The measures of wealth include the overall level of wealth of the investor and a
decomposition by components. Overall wealth is defined as the sum of financial and real estate
wealth. The measures of income variance include the variance of labor and entrepreneurial
income of the investor and the correlations between them and financial and real estate income. In
order to make the results comparable with the standard literature on portfolio choice in the
presence of non- financial income risk, we construct measures of the permanent (expected) non-

17

financial income following the approach of Carrol and Samwick (1997) and Vissing-Jorgensen
(2001). In the Appendix we provide a brief description of the methodology. We consider nonfinancial income to be labor income and entrepreneurial income. We also construct a measure of
unemployment risk that proxies for the probability of being unemployed in the following year. It
is the one year-ahead forecast of a linear probability model where the unemployment status (i.e.,
1 if unemployed and zero otherwise) is regressed on demographic variables, measures of income
and wealth and regional, geographic and professional dummies.
As an additional robustness check, we also replicated our results by using the actual
levels of non- financial income, their volatilities and the correlation of financial and non- financial
incomes. This replaces the measures of permanent income, volatility of income and their
correlations with portfolio returns that had been constructed according to the Carrol and
Samwick (1997) methodology we described earlier. Given that the results are consistent, we will
report only those based on the Carrol and Samwick methodology.
The momentum variables include the return of the portfolio of the investor and of the
market portfolio in the previous 12 months. These variables are meant to control for the
possibility that the change in the degree of portfolio diversification or portfolio choice (i.e.,
familiarity bias) is due to momentum, that is, changes to the variation in the value of the stock
market or in the value of the portfolio holdings.
The demographic variables include: the level of education of the investor, broken down
into high-school and university level, the age of the oldest member of the family of the investor
and its value squared. This latter variable is consistent with standard results (Guiso and Jappelli,
2002, Vissing-Jorgensen, 2002) which find a non- linear relationship between age and the degree
of stock market participation. We also include a measure of unemployment risk that proxies for
the probability of being unemployed in the following year. It is the one- year-ahead forecast of a
linear probability model where the unemployment status (i.e., 1 if unemployed and zero
otherwise) is regressed on demographic variables, measures of income and wealth and regional,
geographical and professional dummies.
To control for the effect of the local economy, we also include a Stockholm and an
immigration dummy. The Stockholm dummy takes the value of 1 if the investor lives in the
capital and 0 otherwise. The immigration dummy takes the value 0 if all the members of the
household are native Swedes, and 1 if at least one member of household immigrated from

18

abroad. Furthermore, we construct a variable to proxy for the ability of the investor in his
occupation. This is based on the difference between his income and the average income of his
profession. The assumption is that the higher the income of the investor relative to the average
income of the other investors in the same area, the higher his ability should be.
We also consider macroeconomic and social variables. The macroeconomic variable is
the Index of Consumer Confidence. The social variables include the local tax rate and the
percentage of foreign-born households. The local tax rate controls for disparities across districts
merely due to tax treatment. The percentage of foreign-born in the population of the district
controls for the assistances provided to the immigrants. It can be particularly relevant in some
areas of the country. We also include a variable that reports the number of injured in auto
accidents per km of the roads, as reported by the Ministry of Industry, Employment and
Communications. This allows us to control for some outside background risk.

5 Econometric methodology

We concentrate on the following specification:

Yit = α + ßA it + ?C Y
it + ε it ,

(2)

where Yit is alternatively one of our measures of portfolio diversification or one of our proxies of
familiarity (i.e., professional and geographical proximity). The matrix Ai t contains the sets of
variables we are interested in (i.e., proxies of professional specialization, local prosperity, local
welfare assistance and degree of isolation). The matrix C Y
it contains all the control variables (i.e.,
income, wealth, momentum, demographic and macroeconomic variables).
The econometric estimation of equation (2) has to account for the selection bias due to
the fact that we do not observe the investment decision of investors who do not participate in the
financial market. Given that the participation decision is endogenous, the standard estimates of
equation (2) would be biased (Maddala, 1983, Nijman and Verbeek, 1996). To address this issue
we use a Heckman (1979) two-stage procedure and separately estimate the factors associated
with holding stocks and what influences his choices of assets. The decision to enter the market
can be represented as:

Pit = α + ßA it + ?C itP + ε it ,

19

(3)

where Pit is a dummy that takes the value of 1 if the investor participates in the financial market
9
and zero otherwise, Ai t is defined as before, while C P
it contains the vector of control variables.

The probability that the investor enters the financial ma rket (Pit ) is modeled as a normal c.d.f.,
defined on an expanded dataset that contains both households who hold financial assets and
households who do not. The expanded dataset includes the totality of the households tracked
over time over each of the samp le years 1995 through 2000, regardless of whether they invested
in the stock market. It totals 1,757,406 households-year observations.
From the estimation of equation (3) we derive a variable ( λ it ) that is employed in the
second stage to control for the selection bias (see Heckman, 1979). The significance of the
estimate of λ it provides a test of the null of no sample selection bias. The results show that in all
the specifications λ it is always strongly significant, suggesting that self-selection is indeed
important in the sample. We will therefore estimate:

Yit = α + ßA it + ?C Y
it + δλ it + ε it ,

(4)

Given that equation (3) is just an auxiliary regression only needed for the proper
estimation of the second stage, but out of the scope of this paper, for brevity we will not report
the results and we will focus on specification (4). A few results are, however, worth mentioning.
Professional specialization always increases stock market participation. This result holds across
all the different specifications and for both the low wealth and the high wealth investors. Local
isolation reduces stock market participation, while local prosperity has an ambiguous impact.
Higher company profitability reduces stock market participation, while an increase in the number
of companies raises stock market participation. This is consistent with the fact that if the
industrial area is thriving, local investors are more likely to invest in their own business and to
start their own enterprises and ventures than to invest in the stock market. On the contrary, an
increase in the number of companies, by providing better job opportunities and higher
9

C iPt differs

from CY
i t only in terms of some variables that provide the identification restriction in the Heckman

specification. CP
i t also contains time dummies, macro-regions, industry dummies and the correlations between nonfinancial income and the market portfolio. That is, the correlations between labor income and entrepreneurial labor
income and the market portfolio and the correlation between the investor's real estate and the market portfolio.
CY
i t also contains the prior 12 month returns and volatility of the investor's portfolio, his prior capital gains and
losses separately considered, and his tax rate. The main implicit assumption is that the participation decision is a
function of the market portfolio (i.e., its correlations), while the portfolio decision is a function of the individual
stocks.

20

employment raises stock market participation. This is controlling for individual wealth (both
financial and real estate) and for the level and volatility of income (labor and entrepreneurial).
Considering the potential endogeneity of some of the explanatory variables, we use an
instrumental variable estimation. 10 In order to control for heteroskedasticity, we correct the
standard errors in the second stage regression. We therefore use a two stage least squares with a
consistent variance-covariance matrix. We employ data disaggregated at the individual investor
level.

6. Main results

We proceed in two steps. First, we consider the determinants of portfolio diversification.
This allows us to directly compare evidence in favor of the different theories described above.
This first part of the analysis, while it addresses the question of why investors might hold few
stocks in their portfolio, however, does not explain which stocks they invest in. Therefore, the
second part of the analysis addresses the issue of stock-selection. That is, we relate the drive to
invest in local or familiar stocks to the degree of professional specialization and city
agglomeration.

6.1 Determinants of portfolio under-diversification
We regress our measures of portfolio diversification on the proxies for local professional
specialization, local prosperity, financial and municipal service availability and the non- financial
risk variables, as well as a set of control variables meant to control for investors’ idiosyncratic
wealth, income and demographic characteristics and for geographic and country shocks. The
results are reported in Tables 2-6. In particular, Table 2 contains the main specification for the 4
measures of portfolio diversification (respectively for the different measures of portfolio
diversification D1 , D2 , D3 , and D4 ) for the entire sample. Tables 3-6 report the main
specifications for the different measures of portfolio diversification, with the sample broken
down into low-wealth and wealthy investors. For each class of investors we consider four
alternative specifications differing on the basis of the control variables that are used. We will
mostly focus on the complete specification with all controls -- Specification 1 in the tables. The
10

Lagged variables and a set of demographic variables, industry and time dummies are used as instruments.

21

results broadly support the city agglomeration theory and the limited information theory, while
they fail to support the standard portfolio theory and the district risk theory.
The first finding is a significant negative correlation between portfolio diversification and
our urban measures of professional specialization. This holds overall and for the different classes
of investors. Industrial specialization and competition negatively relate to portfolio
diversification. That is, the more concentrated in a particular area the industry is, the higher the
degree of local competition for employees and the higher the labor concentration, the lower is the
degree of portfolio diversification. This result is robust across all specifications and for different
measures of portfolio diversification for low-wealth investors. It also holds for high-wealth
investors when we use D3 and D4 as proxies for portfolio diversification, while it is not always
significant when we use D1 and D2 . This may be due to the fact that, since high-wealth investors
are more financially sophisticated, crude measures of diversification such as D1 and D2 are not
able to capture the extent of the investor’s portfolio policies. The effect of industry diversity is
consistently negative for the low-wealth investors for D1 and D2 and insignificant otherwise. This
lack of significance may be due to the relatively high correlation between this variable and the
specialization variable. The results on specialization, competition and diversity are striking in
that they are the same factors related in previous research to knowledge spillover and urban
growth.
As the tables indicate, diversification decreases significantly with the growth of
competition, specialization and diversity. Thus, a one standard deviation increase in our measure
of competition leads to a decrease in diversification of 2.2%, 0.5%, 1.7% and 2.0% for the
measures of diversification D1 , D2 , D3 , D4 , respectively. Similarly, one standard deviation
increase in specialization leads to a 1.1%, 0.2%, 1.6% and 1.5% for the corresponding measures
of diversification. The effect of diversity seems to be smaller at less than 1%.
It is interesting to compare these findings to the results from the first stage: professional
specialization increases stock market participation, but reduces portfolio diversification. This is
consistent with the spill-over hypothesis. In particular, it suggests that the very process of city
growth generates more – perhaps illusory - investment opportunities for the investors who rush
to invest into them. This simultaneously increases stock market participation and portfolio
concentration.

22

The results about the measures of local prosperity are also interesting. Local prosperity
may induce two effects: on the one hand it increases investors’ wealth and therefore financial
sophistication. On the other hand, it raises the incentive to invest in local stocks. The latter may
be due to an incentive to catch- up with the neighbors as the local-district theory would suggest,
or to an incentive to increase the stakes in locally successful enterprises. This would be
particularly true for the variables representing the number of local start-ups, local bankruptcies
and local sale profitability. These variables proxy for the existence of successful local companies
in which it is worth investing. A typical example would be an area like Silicon Valley, where we
would expect most of the local investors to be highly invested on successful local companies. In
this case, we would expect a negative relationship between local prosperity and diversification.
The results hold overall and for the different classes of investors and are particularly
strong for the low-wealth investors. A one standard deviation increase in the number of startups
(employment growth) leads to a 5.6% (1%) decrease in average correlation. The effect is
noticeably stronger for wealthy households.

Thus, a one standard deviation increase in

bankruptcies rate leads to a 4.0% decrease in average correlation (D2 ) for the low wealth
households, and a 4.6% decrease for the high wealth households.
The findings show that portfolio diversification increases with the prosperity of the local
area. There is, indeed, a positive relationship between portfolio diversification and employment
growth, the number of new start-ups, the measures of profitability of local establishment (Sales
Profitability and Return on Capital) and the number of active enterprises. An increase in
bankruptcies on the other hand reduces diversification. It is also worth remembering that if we
consider local consumption prices as a proxy for local prosperity there is a strong positive
correlation between prosperity and portfolio diversification. The results hold overall as well as
for different classes of investors and are particularly strong for low-wealth investors.
These findings do not support the district risk theory, which postulates a negative
relationship between local prosperity and portfolio diversification. However, they support the
information story. Indeed, it is likely that more information is generated in more prosperous
districts. For example, newspapers may be established, brokers and financial analysts may flock
in, banks may increase the number of their branches and the number of financial services
provided. This would reduce the search cost and therefore increase portfolio diversification.

23

A further element to support the limited information theory is the strong, positive and
statistically significant relationship between portfolio diversification and availability of financial
services. That is, the higher the degree of bank coverage, the more investors are likely to
diversify their portfolios. This holds across all the measures of diversification and for both
classes of investors. A one standard deviation increase in the number of banking branches in a
municipality leads to an average diversification increase between 1.4 and 2.0%. Moreover, the
effect is stronger for high- wealth households. Thus, the number of assets increases 3.5% for high
wealth households vs. 0.8% for low-wealth households.
It is worth stressing that in these specifications we are also controlling for the wealth and
income of the investors. Therefore, these effects are “district effects” that act over and above the
individual wealth and income effects. Analogously, our proxy for the availability of public
services (the percentage of municipal employees) is mostly 11 positively related to portfolio
diversification.
What do these results tell us in terms of standard portfolio theory? They suggest that
diversification increases at the very time when either non- financial income risk decreases
(reduction in the number of bankruptcies, increase in growth and profitability) or its effects are
alleviated by the existence of public services or of a financial network. This runs against standard
portfolio theory. Indeed, this theory would suggest that portfolio diversification should be greater
when non- financial risk is higher. Areas characterized by a high employment growth rate, high
start-up rate, and low bankruptcy rate should be areas characterized by low non-financial income
risk and should therefore display lower financial diversification. Indeed, if the local economy is
prosperous and growing, the risk of unemployment and well as the risk of a wage reduction
should be lower. Therefore, portfolio diversification should be lower. The findings point in the
opposite direction.
The percentage of people on welfare assistance impacts investors differently, depending
on their level of wealth. It is always negative and statistically significant for the high-wealth
investors and either not significant (for D1 and D2 ) or positive for the low-wealth investors (for
D3 and D4 ). This provides some partial evidence of an impact of non financial risk for lowwealth investors.

11

This holds for D2 ,D3 and D4 , for both classes of investors. However, it is mostly insignificant in the case of D1 .

24

These findings provide some preliminary and mixed evidence on standard portfolio
theory in the presence of background risk. In order to further examine this issue, we need to
consider the relationship between portfolio diversification and non- financial income risk
hedging. This is represented by the correlation between our measures of portfolio diversification
and Γi . The results are very striking. They show no correlation between hedging and portfolio
diversification for the low-wealth investors and a negative correlation for the high wealth
households and for the entire sample. These results are very robust across different specifications
and alternative measures of portfolio diversification. This suggests that the portfolio underdiversification is not due to the need to hedge non- financial income risk. Quite the contrary, for
the high wealth investors the negative correlation suggests familiarity-based investment or
knowledge spill-over as an explanation for under-diversification.
Therefore, the relative lack of diversification in cities may not be attributed to the fact
that cities allow investors to diversify away non-financial income risk by providing them with
alternative occupational and professional possibilities. A possible rationalization of this is the
fact that investors simply do not use their financia l portfolio to hedge against non- financial
income risk. In this case, the process of knowledge creation that takes place in the city just
reduces the cost of search and increases portfolio diversification. This would be supported by
recent findings showing that optimally choose not to hedge but invest in familiar stocks (Massa
and Simonov, 2002).
It is interesting to note the role played by borrowing constraints. They do not affect the
low-wealth investors, while they do increase portfolio diversification for the high-wealth ones.
At the aggregate level they are positively related to D1 and D2 and not related to the other proxies
of diversification. This apparently counterintuitive result may be explained as follows. For the
low-wealth investors, borrowing constraints mostly affect the decision to participate in the stock
market. And indeed, from the estimation of equation 3) 12 , we find that the borrowing constraints
negatively affect stock market participation for the low-wealth investors. For the high-wealth
investors, instead, the borrowing constraints, while not sufficient to prevent stock market
participation, induce the investors to reduce the financial exposure of their portfolio. This
additional prudence increases the degree of financial diversification.

12

Not reported, but available upon request.

25

To this point, both the limited information theory and the city agglomeration ones seem
to be supported by the data. However, if we consider variables that proxy for the “degree of
isolation”, we find that, all else equal, portfolio diversification increases with isolation. That is,
the further away an investor is from an urban center, the lower his connection to the rest of the
world is and the less densely populated the district where he lives is, the more diversified his
portfolio. In particular, one standard deviation increase in population density leads to a decrease
of 2.46% in the number of risky assets held (D1 ), a 1% increase in average correlation between
assets (D2 ) and a 7.5-8% increase in concentration as measured by D3 and D4 . These results are
contrary to what the limited information theory would predict13 , while they are consistent with
the city-agglomeration and knowledge spill-over explanations.
To sum up, the local district affects the investors in two ways, on the one hand, the
process of professional specialization that takes place in the city reduces the drive to
diversification. On the other hand, the very same of process of knowledge creation reduces the
search costs and may also increase portfolio diversification. We no w move on to directly study
portfolio choice.

6.2 Familiarity and city agglomeration
We regress our measures of familiarity – i.e., professional and geographical proximity –
on the proxies for local professional specialization, local prosperity, financial and municipal
service availability and the non- financial risk variables, as well as a set of control variables
meant to control for investors’ idiosyncratic wealth, income and demographic characteristics and
for geographic and country shocks.
As before, we consider a specification based on the aggregated sample and one where the
sample has been broken down into high and low wealth investors. The results are reported in
Tables 7-9. In particular, Table 7 contains the main specification for both geographical and
professional proximity for the entire sample. Tables 8 and 9 report the estimates for the low and
high wealth investors, for geographical and professional proximity respectively. For each class of
investors we consider four alternative specifications differing on the basis of the control

13

They would actually lend some support to standard portfolio theory. Indeed, the more isolated the investor is, the
higher is the probability that he will not be able to hedge away his income or professional idiosyncratic shock and,
therefore, the more diversified he should be.

26

variables that are used. The results show that that the same variables that determine the degree of
portfolio under-diversification are also those which affect investors’ familiarity bias.
As a preliminary check, we consider the relationship between familiarity and hedging.
Our working hypothesis is that familiarity should be negatively related to hedging as
professional specialization induces investment in stocks that are professionally and
geographically closer. This induces a behavior opposite to that required by hedging. And indeed,
the relationship between our measures of familiarity and the indexes of non-financial risk show,
that, as expected, hedging is negatively related to familiarity. That is, the more the investors
choose familiar stocks, the more they tilt their financial portfolio away from the optimal
composition required to hedge non- financial income risk. This suggests that familiarity is not due
to hedging.
Let us now consider our measures of professional specialization and city agglomeration.
The main finding is a significant positive correlation between both measures of familiarity and
our measures of professional specialization. This relationship is strong, statistically significant
and holds across all the specifications, for the overall sample and for both classes of investors in
the case of competition and specialization. It is less significant for specialization. This may be
due, as it was the case in the previous section, to the relatively high correlation between this
variable and the diversity variable. These results suggest that the higher the degree of
professional specialization of the district, the more the investors of such a district tend to invest
in familiar stocks. This holds for both geographical and professional proximity. In particular,
one standard deviation increase in competition (diversity) results in the portfolio being 1.9 (1.7)
times "closer" to the investor as measured by value-weighted portfolio proximity. It also results
in increase of probability of investors choosing the professionally related stocks by 2.1% (6.0%).
If we then consider the variables that proxy for the degree of isolation, we find that, all
else equal, the more isolated the investors are, the more they tend to invest in stocks
professionally and geographically close to them. That is, the further away an investor is from a
big center, the less connected he is to the rest of the world and the less densely populated the
district where he lives is, the more he will invest in nearby stocks. Living in a municipality with
a population density one standard deviation away from the national mean results in the portfolio
being 1.6 times closer to the investor. These results hold across investors (overall and for the
different classes) and for different specifications.

27

The findings on the measures of local prosperity are also interesting. Investment in
familiar stocks increases with the number of new start- ups and the local sales profitability, while
it decreases with the numb er of local bankruptcies, number of active enterprises and return on
capital. Employment growth reduces familiarity for the low-wealth investors, while, for the highwealth investors, it reduces familiarity for the case of geographical proximity and seems to
increase it for professional proximity. While in general higher prosperity seems to reduce the
impact of familiarity, three measures of prosperity – new start-ups, bankruptcies and sales
profitability – seem to go in the opposite direction and increase familiarity. 14 These variables are
proxies for the “entrepreneurial dimension” of the district. As we mentioned before, a local
investor in Silicon Valley would tend to invest in companies that are geographically and
professionally close to him due to the fact that he is likely to be linked to these start- ups and to
their profitability. Therefore, in general, local prosperity by increasing wealth and, therefore,
financial sophistication reduces the impact of familiarity. However, if local prosperity is related
to the local entrepreneurial dimension shared by the investor, the mere need to be part of such a
dimension will induce the investor to invest in such shares. Finally, it is worth noting that the
availability of financial services (bank coverage) in ge neral reduces familiarity15 . Indeed, the
availability of financial services is a way of increasing financial sophistication and therefore
reducing the local bias.
These results are consistent with the previous findings on portfolio under-diversification
and provide a direct link between the familiarity/limited information story and the city
agglomeration story. They suggest that the tension between professional specialization and
prosperity also affects the exposure to the familiarity bias. The more professionally specialized
the investors are and the more numerous the local investment opportunities where they are
locally involved (i.e., local entrepreneurial dimension), the more they will invest in closely
related stocks. In contrast, the richer and more prosperous the area where they live, the greater
and the easier the access to information, the lower is the search cost and therefore the lower is
the impact of the familiarity bias.
14

The only exception are the high-wealth investors for the case of professional proximity.
This is the case for both professional and geographical proximity for the low-wealth investors and for professional
proximity for the high-wealth investors. Instead, it decreases familiarity for the high-wealth investors in the case of
geographical proximity. For the latter case, we do not have a fully satisfactory explanation. We may argue that a
better local financial coverage provide them with a quick way to act on the basis of the inside knowledge provided
by proximity.
15

28

Conclusion
In this paper we address the puzzle of portfolio under-diversification from a broader
perspective, linking it to theories of labor and the urban economy. In particular, we argue that
portfolio under-diversification is closely related to factors linked to knowledge creation and spillover in the urban environment. We showed that the processes of professional specialization and
knowledge spillover that characterizes city agglomeration on the one hand reduce the availability
of time to collect and analyze financial information and by the same token increases the relative
information that an investor has with respect to stocks closer – professionally or geographically –
to him. The net effect of these two factors appears to be that investors in an information-rich
urban professional environment -- educated though they may be -- appear to diversify less.

29

Appendix: Construction of income -related variables
Here, we briefly describe the methodology we follow to construct proxies for permanent
non- financial income, its volatility and its correlation to financial and real estate income. We
follow the approach of Carroll and Samwick (1997) and Vissing-Jørgensen (2001). We consider
as non- financial income: labor income and entrepreneurial income. In particular, we define the
relevant moments of long term investor's non- financial income:
E(? it |? it-1 , Xit-1 ), Var(? it |? it-1 , Xit-1 ) and ? it ,
where ? it is the non- financial income of investor i at time t, Xit-1 are the variables that can be
used to predict income next period and ?it is the conditional correlation between shocks to log
non- financial income and the log stock return. We assume that non- financial income follows:
ln? it = pit +?it ,
where:
pit = git +pit-1 +? it , ?it ~N(0,s εt2 ), ? it ~N(0,s ? i2 ),
and
cov(?it , ?is) = 0, cov(?it , ? is) = 0, cov(?it , ? is) = 0 for each t, s.
The variable pit represents the permanent income component of non- financial income. It has a
drift term (git ) that is known and based on the information available at t-1. This allows us to
write:
ln? it -ln? it-1 = pit-pit-1 +?it-?it-1 = git + ?it-?it-1 +? it ,
or

ln? it = ln? it-1 + git + ? it + ?it - ?it-1
This implies:
E(? it |? it-1 , Xit-1 ) = ln? it-1 + git = ? i,t-1 Git exp{Jit /2}
Var(? it |? it-1 , Xit-1 ) = (? i,t-1 Git )2 exp(Jit ) { exp(Jit ) - 1},
where:
Git = exp(git ), Jit = s ?i2 +2s ? i2
and Xi,t-1 is the set of variables usable to predict git .
In order to estimate E(? it |? it-1 , Xit-1 ) and Var(? it |? it-1 , Xit-1 ), we use data for the period
1990-2000, with a 5-year lagged rolling window. Following the Carrol and Samwick (1997) and
Vissing-Jørgensen (2001) methodolo gies, we regress ln? it - ln? it-1 on the set of explanatory

30

variables Xi,t-1 and use the predicted values of such a regression as an estimate of git and the
residuals as an estimate of ? it +?it-?it-1 . The correlation between financial and non- financial
income (? it ) is constructed as the conditional correlation between shocks to log non- financial
income (?it +?it-?it-1 ) and the log gross stock returns (i.e., ln(1+Rt )). We use rolling five year
windows to estimate the parameters.
The set of variables contained in Xi,t-1 are: demographic variables (secondary education,
higher education, age, age squared, marriage status, size of the household, number of adults
belonging to the household), changes in the demographic variables, industry dummies for the
company the investor is working for (e.g., oil industry), dummies for the type of profession of
the investor (e.g., doctor), emigration status. Following Vissing-Jørgensen (2002a), given the
potential inaccuracy of estimates based on few observations, we calculate the correlation over the
entire sample.

31

References
Arrow, Kenneth J., 1962, “The Economic Implications of Learning by Doing,” Review of
Economic Studies, 29(3), June, pp.155-73.
Bakshi, Gurdip. and Zhiwu Chen, 1996, “The Spirit of Capitalism and Stock Market Prices,”
American Economic Review, 86(1), March, pp. 133-157.
Barber, Brad M. and Terrance Odean, 2000, “Trading is Hazardous to Your Wealth: The
Common Stock Investment Performance of Individual Investors,” Journal of Finance, 55(2),
April, pp. 773-806.
Barber, Brad M.. and Terrance Odean, 2003, “All that Glitters: The Effect of Attention and News
on the Buying Behavior of Individual and Institutional Investors.” Working Paper, University of
California, Berkeley.
Barry, Christopher B. and Stephen J. Brown, 1985, “Differential Information and Security
Market Equilibrium,” Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 20(4), December, pp. 407422.
Brav, Alon. and John B. Heaton, 2002, “Competing Theories of Financial Anomalies,” The
Review of Financial Studies, 15, 575-606.
Benartzi, Shlomo. and Richard H. Thaler, 1995, “Myopic Loss Aversion and the Equity
Premium Puzzle,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 110(1), February, pp.73-92.
Benartzi, Shlomo., 2001, “Excessive Extrapolation and the Allocation of 401(k) Accounts to
Company Stock,” Journal of Finance, 56(5), October, pp. 1747-1764.
Bhattacharya, Utpal. and Peter Groznik, 2001, “Melting Pot or Salad Bowl: Some Evidence from
US Investments Abroad,” Working Paper, Indiana and MIT.
Carlson, John A. and R. Preston MacAfee, 1983, R.P., “Discrete Price Equilibrium Dispersion,”
Journal of Political Economy, 91(3), June, pp. 480-493.
Carroll, Christopher. D. and Andrew A., Samwick, 1997, “The Nature of Precautionary
Wealth, ” Journal of Monetary Economics, 40(1), pp. 41-71.
Carroll, Christopher .D. and Miles S. Kimball., 2001, “Liquidity Constraints and Precautionary
Saving, ” NBER Working Paper 8496.
Coval, Joshua. D. and Tobias J. Moskowitz., 1999, “Home Bias at Home: Local Equity
Preference in Domestic Portfolios,” Journal of Finance, 54(6), December, pp. 2045-2073.
Coval, J. D. and Tobias J. Moskowitz, 2001, “The Geography of Investment: Informed Trading
and Asset Prices,” Journal of Political Economy, 109, pp. 811-841.

32

DeMarzo, Peter M., Ronald Kaniel and Ilan Kremer., 2002, “District Effects and Externalities in
Portfolio Choice, “Working paper, Stanford and Duke Universities.
Edin, P.A., and Fredriksson, P., 2000, “LINDA: Longitudinal Individual Data for Sweden 19601997” Working Paper 2000:19, Department of Economics, Uppsala University.
Ellison, Glenn and Glaeser, Edward L., 1999, “The Geographic Concentration of Industry: does
Natural Advantage Explain Agglomeration? ” American Economic Review, 89(2), May, pp. 31116
Englund, Peter, John M. Quigley, ., and Christian Redfearn, 1998, “Improved Price Indexes for
Real Estate: Measuring the Course of Swedish Housing Prices,” Journal of Urban Economics
44, pp. 171-196.
Feenberg, Daniel R. and James M., 2000, “The Income and Tax Share of Very High-Income
Households, 1960-1995” American Economic Review, 90, May, pp. 264-270.
Gal,i Jordi, 1994, Keeping Up With the Joneses : Consumption Externalities, Portfolio Choice,
and Asset Prices, Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 26(1), pp. 1-8.
Garmaise, Mark and Tobias J. Moskowitz. 2003, “More Banks Less Crime. The Real and Social
Effects of Bank Competition,” Working Paper, The Wharton School and University of Chicago.
Glaeser Edward L., Hedi D. Kalla l, , Jose A. Scheinkman and Andrei Shleifer, 1992, “Growth in
Cities,” The Journal of Political Economy, 100(6), December, pp. 1126-1151.
Glaeser Edward L Jose A. Scheinkman and Andrei Shleifer, 1995, “Economic Growth in a
Cross-Section of Cities,“ Journal of Monetary Economics, 36(1), August, pp. 117-143.
Glaeser, Edward L., Jed Kolko and Albert Saiz, 2002, “Consumer City, ” Harvard Institute of
Economic Research Working Papers.
Glaeser, Edward L. and David C. Mare, 2001, “Cities and Skills,” Journal of Labor Economics,
19(2), April, pp. 316-42.
Glaeser, Edward L. 1997, “Learning in Cities,” Journal of Urban Economics, 46(2) September,
pp. 254-277.
Goetzmann, William N. and Alok Kumar, 2002, “Equity Portfolio Diversification, ” National
Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper # 8686.
Grinblatt, Mark and Matti Keloharju,, 2000, “The Investment Behavior and Performance of
Various Investor Types: A Study of Finland's Unique Data Set,” Journal of Financial
Economics, 55(1), January, pp. 43-67.

33

Grinblatt, Mark and Matti Keloharju, 2001, “How Distance, Language, and Culture Influence
Stockholdings and Trades,” Journal of Finance, 56(3), June, pp. 1053-1073.
Grinblatt, M. and Keloharju, M., 2001, “What Makes Investors Trade?,” Journal of Finance,
56(2), April, pp. 589-616.
Grinold, Richard C. and Ronald N. Kahn, 1999, Active Portfolio Management: A Quantitative
Approach for Producing Superior Returns and Selecting Superior Returns and Controlling Risk,
McGraw-Hill.
Guiso, Luigi and Tullio Jappelli, 2002, “Household Portfolios in Italy,” in Luigi Guiso, Michael
Halaiassos and Tullio Jappelli (eds.) Households Portfolios, MIT Press, Cambridge, pp. 250289.
Haliassos, Michael. and Christis Hassapis, 2002, “Borrowing Constraints, Portfolio Behavior and
Precautionary Motives” in Kontoghiorghes, E., B. Rustem and S. Siokos (Eds.), Computational
Methods in Decision-making, Economics and Finance (Volume 1: Optimization Models), Kluwer
Publishers Applied Optimization Series, vol. 74, 2002, pp. 183-210.
Hau, Harald, 2001, “Location Matters: An Examination of Trading Profits,” Journal of Finance,
56(5), October, pp. 1959-1983.
Heaton, John B. and Deborah Lucas, 2000, “Portfolio Choice and Asset Prices: The Importance
of Entrepreneurial Risk,” Journal of Finance, 55(3), pp. 1163-1198.
Heaton, John B. and Deborah Lucas, 2000, “Portfolio Choice in the Presence of Background
Risk,” Economic Journal, 110(460), January, pp. 1-26.
Heckman, James., 1979, “Sample Selection Bias as a Specification Error,” Econometrica 47(1),
January, pp. 153-161.
Hortacsu, Ali and Chad Syverson, 2002, Search Costs, Product Differentation, and Welfare
Effects of Entry: A Case Study of S&P 500 Index Funds, forthcoming, The Quarterly Journal of
Economics.
Ivkovic, Zoran and Scott J. Weisbenner, 2003, “Local Does as Local Is: Information Content of
the Geography of Individual Investors' Common Stock Investments,”
Working Paper,
University of Illinois.
Huberman, Gur, 2001, “Familiarity Breeds Investment, “Review of Financial Studies, 14(3),
Fall, pp. 659-680.
Jagannathan, Ravi and Kocherlakota, N. R., 1996, Why Should Older People Invest Less in
Stocks Than Younger People?; Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly Review, 20(3),
Summer, pp. 11-23.

34

Jacobs, Jane, 1969, The Economy of Cities, New York, Vintage.
Marshall, Alfred, 1890, Principles of Economics, London, Macmillan.
Merton, Robert C., 1971, “Optimum Consumption and Portfolio Rules in a Continuous-Time
Model, ” Journal of Economic Theory, 3(4), December, pp. 247-413.
Merton, R.C., 1987, “A Simple Model of Capital Market Equilibrium with Incomplete
Information, ” Journal of Finance, 42(3), July, pp. 483-510.
Pastor, Lubos. and Pietro Veronesi, 2002, “Stock Valuation and Learning about Profitability, ”
Journal of Finance, 58(5), October, pp. 1749-89.
Peng, Lin and Wei Xiong, 2002, “Time to Digest and Volatility Dynamics,” Working Paper,
Duke and Princeton Universities.
Porter, Michael E., 1990, The Competitive Advantage of Nations, New York, Free Press.
Poterba, James M. and Andrew A. Samwick,. 1997, “Household Portfolio Allocation Over the
Life Cycle,” NBER Working Paper: 6185.
Ross, Stephen A., 1978, “Mutual Fund Separation in Financial Theory: the Separating
Distributions,” Journal of Economic Theory 17(2), April, pp. 254-286.
Ryder Harl E.. and Geoffrey M. Heal, 1973, “Optimal Growth with Intertemporally Dependent
Preferences,” The Review of Economic Studies, 40(1), January, pp. 1-31.
Shapiro, Alexander, 2002, “The Investor Recognition Hypothesis in a Dynamic General
Equilibrium: Theory and Evidence,” Review of Financial Studies, 15(1), Spring, pp. 97-141.
Shore, Stephen H. and Joshua S. White, 2002,” External Habit Formation and the Home Bias
Puzzle,” Working Paper, Harvard University.
Sargent, Thomas J., 1993, Bounded Rationality in Macroeconomics, Oxford University Press,
Clarendon Press.
Simon, Herbert A, 1986, Theories of Bounded Rationality, University of Minnesota Press,
Minneapolis.
Sims, Christopher, 2000, “Implications of Rational Inattention, ” Working Paper, Princeton
University.
Sundin, Anneli and Sven-Ivan Sundqvist, 2002, “Owners and Power in Sweden's Listed
Companies,” SIS Ägarservice AB, 1986-2002.

35

Tookes, Heather E., 2003, “Cross-Sectional Implications of Insider Trading: Insider Gains and
Product Market Dominance,” Cornell University Johnson School of Business, Working Paper.
Vissing-Jorgensen, Annette, 2002, “Towards an Explanation of Household Portfolio Choice
Heterogeneity: Non-Financial Income and Participation Cost Structures,” NBER Working Paper
No. w8884.
Vissing-Jorgensen, A., 2002, “Limited Stock Market Participation and the Elasticity of
Intertemporal Substitution,” Journal of Political Economy, 110(4), August, pp. 825-53.
Zhu, Ning., 2003, The Local Bias of Individual Investors,” Working Paper, Yale School of
Management.

36

Table 1: Descriptive statistics
This table contains the descriptive statistics of the sample. Panel A reports the general demographic characteristics
(number of households for each year, members in household, adults in household, age of the oldest member of
household, percentage of the sample with secondary and higher education, percentage of immigrants). Panel B
describes local characteristics. We used 289 municipalities for 1999-2000 and 288 for 1995-1998. We also report
descriptive statistics for our measures of diversification
D1 = N,
D2 =- 1/N -(1-1/N) Corr ,
N
N
D 3 = − ∑ ( w i − w mkt )2 , and D 4 = − ∑ (w i − w ffl )2 , where N is number of positions in the portfolio, Corr
i =1
i =1
is average correlation of stocks in the portfolio, wi is the weight of the stock in the portfolio of the investor, wmkt is the
weight that the same stock would have in the market portfolio, and wffl is the weight that the same stock would have in
the free float portfolio. Specialization is the share of the top five industries in local employment to the share of the top
five industries in national employment (source: Statistics Sweden). Competition is the number of firm per employee
incorporated in a municipality relative to the number of firms per employee in Sweden (sources: Statistics Sweden,
MM Partners). Diversity is the negative of the share of the top 5 industries in municipal employment (source: Statistics
Sweden). Active enterprises is number (in thousands) of active firms in municipality in a given year (source: MM
Partners). Start-ups and Bankruptcies measure percent of failed (ceased business activities) and started firms in
municipality in a given year as percentage of active firms (source: MM Partners). Profitability and Return on Capital
are sales-weighted average of profitability and return on capital of the enterprises in municipality (source: MM
Partners). Employment growth is growth of employment in municipality w.r.t. 1985 (source: Statistics Sweden).Index
of Rural Areas is a code that is set by Statistics Sweden from 1 (Metropolitan area) to 9 (countryside). Distance from
Airport is measured as logarithm of the distance between closest civilian airport and central post office in municipality
(sources: Cartesia Informationsteknik AB, Swedish Civil Aviation Board). Population Density is population (in tens of
thousands) per square kilometer (source: Statistics Sweden). Bank Coverage is logarithm of number of credit
institutions’ branches in municipality (source: MM Partners). Percent of population on welfare assistance and Percent
of municipal employees are provided by Statistics Sweden. Panel C reports the age and gender distribution of the
sample. Panel D reports the percentage of the households paying wealth tax, having labor income, having
entrepreneurial income and having real estate wealth. We report mean, standard deviation, median and inter-quartile
range (IQR). They have been calculated over the whole sample (i.e., across-investors and time). The column
“Representation in the sample” reports the fraction of households in the sample who pay wealth tax, earn labor or
entrepreneurial income or hold real estate wealth. The other columns report statistics (Mean, Standard Deviation, IQR,
Maximum) of, respectively, the value wealth, labor and entrepreneurial income gross yearly income) and real estate.
All monetary values are in Swedish krowns (SEK).

Panel A: General demographic characteristics

Variable

Number of households
# of members in household
# of adults in household
Age of oldest household member
% with secondary education
% with higher education
% of immigrants
D1
D2
D3
D4

Mean

Median

Std.Dev.

IQR

Maximum

292,901
2.67
1.77
49.28
43.5%
31.4%
16.4%

291,913
2.00
2.00
47
43.5%
31.2%
16.3%

647
1.51
0.69
17
0.6%
1.4%
2.7%

686
3.00
1.00
24
0.5%
1.4%
4.6%

293,320
16.00
9.00
107
44.3%
33.7%
19.3%

1.63
-0.87
-0.98
-0.96

1.00
-1.00
-0.88
-0.95

1.78
0.23
0.60
0.50

0.00
0.00
0.61
0.61

68.00
0.33
-3.1E-7
-1.6E-7

37

Panel B: Characteristics of the local district
Variable

Mean

Median

Std. Dev.

I. Q. R.

Maximum

Active Enterprises
Competition
Specialization
Diversity
Bankruptcies
Start-ups
Sale Profitability
Return on Capital
Employment Growth
% of Population on Welfare Asst.
% of Municipal Employees
Index of Rural Areas
Distance from Airport
Population Density
Bank Coverage

0.795
1.934
1.618
-0.230
0.717
0.501
0.103
0.046
-0.094
0.075
0.065
3.544
8.425
0.609
1.768

0.239
1.874
1.519
-0.230
0.746
0.512
0.091
0.001
-0.097
0.073
0.065
3.000
8.909
0.078
1.792

1.947
0.466
0.463
0.023
1.457
1.427
0.154
0.107
0.118
0.031
0.011
2.104
1.538
1.159
0.711

0.406
0.708
0.389
0.024
0.299
0.263
0.040
0.008
0.133
0.038
0.015
3.000
2.622
0.516
0.811

12.589
3.778
6.521
-0.114
13.750
9.750
2.746
1.128
0.426
0.161
0.104
9.000
10.874
3.971
5.501

Panel C: Age and gender distribution of the sample
Age

Males

Females

Age of oldest
household member

0-19
20-29
30-39
40-49
50-59
60+

18.2%
4.8%
7.1%
7.4%
5.9%
6.6%

17.2%
4.9%
8.2%
7.4%
5.3%
7.2%

0.5%
10.7%
21.7%
23.6%
17.9%
25.8%

Total

49.9%

50.2%

100%

Panel D: Wealth and income characteristics of the households

Variable

Representation
in the sample

Mean

Median

Std.Dev.

I. Q. R.

Maximum

Wealth-Tax Payers
Real Estate Holders
Labor Income Earners
Entrepr. Income Earners

7.9%
54.6%
100.0%
9.8%

359,592
449,400
321,489
88,114

102,700
387,000
287,722
43,268

2,648,521
348,736
237,526
172,565

353,400
340,000
276,190
111,726

1,023,147,857
78,140,000
43,445,271
7,320,000

38

Table 2: Measures of diversification for overall sample
We report the results for the full specification where the dependent variables are measures of diversification D1 = N, D2 =N
N
1/N -(1-1/N) Corr , D 3 = − ∑ ( w i − w mkt )2 , and D 4 = − ∑ (w i − w ffl )2 , where N is number of positions in the
i =1
i =1
portfolio, Corr is average correlation of stocks in the portfolio, wi is the weight of the stock in the portfolio of the investor,
wmkt is the weight that the same stock would have in the market portfolio, and wffl is the weight that the same stock would have
in the free float portfolio. The main variables are as described in Table 1, while the control variables are described in the text.
We also control in each specification for consumer confidence and local tax rate (not reported). t-statistics are reported in
parentheses. We also report the Adjusted R2. All the coefficients are multiplied by 100.

D1
Variable

Coeff.

D2
t-stat

D3

Coeff.

t-stat

D4

Coeff.

t-stat

Coeff.

t-stat

Local Professional Specialization
Competition

-7.50

(-7.18)

-0.88

(-7.14)

-1.84

(-6.57)

-2.17

(-9.39)

Specialization

-3.80

(-3.30)

-0.35

(-2.57)

-1.70

(-5.50)

-1.61

(-6.34)

-58.80

(-2.81)

-8.69

(-3.52)

10.62

(1.90)

3.30

(0.72)

Diversity

Degree of Local Isolation
-22.96

(-1.25)

-6.35

(-2.86)

-39.06

(-7.81)

-41.87

(-10.21)

Index of Rural Areas

1.90

(5.63)

0.14

(3.61)

0.49

(5.49)

0.39

(5.36)

Distance from Airport

2.70

(7.15)

0.25

(5.55)

0.47

(4.59)

0.40

(4.72)

-4.33 (-24.48)

-2.42

(-6.16)

-3.65

(-11.26)

Population Density

Local Prosperity
Bankruptcies

-41.10 (-27.00)

Start -ups

37.20

(25.56)

3.94

(23.17)

2.09

(5.50)

3.27

(10.42)

Sale Profitability

17.10

(6.01)

1.95

(5.82)

1.07

(1.41)

0.20

(0.32)

Return on Capital

27.09

(4.63)

5.51

(7.91)

17.40

(10.75)

17.50

(13.13)

Employment Growth

66.10

(13.65)

8.72

(15.40)

6.61

(5.19)

11.42

(10.88)

Active Enterprises

-1.89

(-5.85)

-0.10

(-2.85)

0.39

(4.74)

0.29

(4.10)

Financial Services Availability
Bank Coverage
% of public employees

4.50

(6.34)

0.77

(9.14)

1.64

(8.52)

1.53

(9.69)

-101.70

(-1.86)

8.63

(1.31)

178.14

(11.55)

160.81

(12.72)

-1.43

(-5.29)

-1.50

(-6.81)

-0.01

(-0.34)

0.00

(-0.11)

-65.38 (-11.58)

-62.79

(-13.53)

Non-Financial Risk and Financial Constraints
Active Hedging Index
Borrowing Constraints
% of population on welfare asst.

-10.01 (-11.80)

-1.53 (-14.14)

0.13

(2.58)

0.02

(3.49)

74.90

(3.59)

-0.72

(-0.29)

Wealth Variables

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Income Variables

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Momentum Variables

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Demographic Variables

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Macro and Social Variables

Yes

Yes

Yes

Lambda
Constant
Adj R2

-251.10 (-37.46)
668.08

(37.27)

-22.58 (-29.09)
-46.83 (-22.14)

0.057

0.064

39

-7.04

Yes
(-4.10)

-15.38

(-10.84)

-69.64 (-14.49)

-58.96

(-14.92)

0.115

0.178

Table 3: Dependent variable D1
We report the results for the specification where the dependent variable D1 = N where N is number of positions in the portfolio. We report results for Low and High-wealth households.
In each case, four different specifications are reported. The main variables are as described in Table 1, while the control variables are described in the text. We also control in each
specification for consumer confidence and local tax rate (not reported). T-statistics is reported in parentheses. We also report adjusted R2. All the coefficients are multiplied by 100.

Low-wealth households
(1)

Variable

Coeff.

(2)

High-wealth households

(3)

(4)

(1)

(2)

(3)

t-stat

Coeff.

t-stat

Coeff.
t-stat
Coeff.
t-stat
Coeff.
Local Professional Specialization

t-stat

Coeff.

t-stat

Coeff.

-1.38 (-0.52)
-7.34
-4.11 (-1.41)
-7.6
-21.72 (-0.41) -100.53

(4)
t-stat

Coeff.

t-stat

(-2.04)
(-1.92)
(-1.40)

-2.03
-4.52
-40.22

(-0.78)
(-1.57)
(-0.77)

(0.22)
(1.04)
(4.97)

10
3.37
1.63

(0.29)
(4.13)
(1.66)

-63.96 (-11.14)
61.45 (10.93)
36.93
(3.63)
24.9
(1.26)
142.93
(7.89)
-4.60 (-4.59)

-17.67
17.15
-1.14
27.8
37.25
-2.70

(-5.58)
(5.43)
(-0.16)
(1.86)
(3.20)
(-3.66)

Competition
Specialization
Diversity

-2.61
-1.65
-31.2

(-4.97)
(-2.83)
(-2.96)

-1.72
-1.52
-21.55

(-3.40)
(-2.67)
(-2.10)

-1.68
-1.38
-21.65

(-3.36)
-2.36 (-4.64)
(-2.44)
-1.44 (-2.51)
(-2.12) -29.98 (-2.89)
Degree of Local Isolation

-6.38
-7.11
-71.54

(-1.93)
(-1.96)
(-1.08)

Population Density
Index of Rural Areas
Distance from Airport

-0.82
0.52
0.76

(-0.08)
(3.16)
(4.04)

7.15
0.22
0.56

(0.75)
(1.36)
(3.05)

5.44
0.13
0.48

(0.57)
0.99
(0.10)
(0.83)
0.32
(1.99)
(2.67)
0.67
(3.66)
Local Prosperity

20
-1.89
5.84

(0.41)
(-1.85)
(4.48)

Bankruptcies
Start -ups
Sales Profitability
Return on Capital
Employment Growth
Active Enterprises

-9.82 (-13.05)
8.78 (12.18)
3.24
(2.29)
18.4
(6.02)
24.87 (10.17)
0.55
(3.32)

-6.16
5.53
1.67
17.7
20.83
0.70

(-9.53)
(8.74)
(1.21)
(5.91)
(8.99)
(4.37)

(-9.87)
(9.69)
(2.97)
(1.37)
(7.22)
(-4.45)

Bank Coverage
% of Municipal Employees

1.70
46.19

(4.68)
(1.63)

1.52
44.55

-5.4 (-10.29)
-8.2 (-14.47)
-52.6
4.83
(9.04)
7.33 (12.88)
50.57
1.14
(0.84)
2.35
(1.71)
27.9
17.7
(5.92)
18
(5.95)
25
18.91
(8.31) 22.94 (10.00) 120.56
0.76
(4.79)
0.67
(4.10)
-4.10
Financial and Municipal Services Availability
(4.28)
1.44
(4.08)
1.58
(4.41)
7.95
(1.60) 51.07
(1.84) 43.37
(1.54) -333.14
Non-financial Risk and Financial Constraints

(3.49)
7.85 (4.26)
8.36
(-1.88) -278.93 (-1.85) -359.25

(3.38)
8.03
(-1.89) -239.05

(4.41)
(-1.60)

Active Hedging Index
Borrowing Constraints
% of Population on Welfare Asst.

0.98
0.03
22.46

(1.76)
(1.27)
(2.13)

1.17
0.03
-0.57

(1.10)
(1.09)
(-0.06)

(-8.58) -16.16 (-8.07)
(5.32)
58.11 (5.23)
(-1.66) -233.28 (-4.52)

(-8.63)
-16.2
(4.47)
61.15
(-1.00) -240.11

(-8.11)
(5.71)
(-4.72)

Wealth Variables
Income Variables
Momentum Variables
Demographic Variables
Macro and Social Variables
Lambda
Constant
Adj R2

1.04
0.02
-3.53

(1.76)
1.16
(1.68)
(1.00)
0.03
(1.26)
(-0.36)
19.55
(1.94)
Control Variables

-17.56
69.88
-106.3

20
3.19
2.15

(0.53)
(3.86)
(2.12)

-18.72 (-5.15)
18.25 (5.08)
1.2 (0.16)
28.1 (1.86)
47.41 (3.83)
-2.80 (-3.86)

10
1.15
7.03

-17.88
62.35
-68.93

Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
-50.31 (-14.94) -27.54 (-11.25) -22.72 (-26.96) -40.01 (-30.31) -413.48 (-14.37) -149.41 (-9.34) -497.48 (-16.27) -131.43 (-15.68)
221.12 (23.70) 172.53 (23.89) 153.43 (29.43) 200.77 (40.09) 621.25 (15.23) 419.17 (13.32) 729.77 (17.41) 297.77 (13.27)
0.037
0.033
0.035
0.035
0.053
0.047
0.052
0.048

40

Table 4: Dependent variable D2
We report the results for the specification where the dependent variable is the measure of diversification D2 =- 1/N -(1-1/N)
positions in the portfolio and

Corr

is average correlation of stocks in the portfolio. The notations are as in Table 2. All the coefficients are multiplied by 100.
Low-wealth households
High-wealth households

(1)

Variable

Corr where N is number of

(2)

(3)

Coeff.

t-stat

Coeff.

t-stat

Coeff.

Competition
Specialization
Diversity

-0.82
-0.3
-7.24

(-7.24)
(-2.37)
(-3.18)

-0.59
-0.26
-4.73

(-5.46)
(-2.18)
(-2.16)

-0.54
-0.22
-4.4

Population Density
Index of Rural Areas
Distance from Airport

-6.22
0.18
0.16

(-2.95)
(5.02)
(3.81)

-4.36
0.1
0.1

(-2.15)
(2.99)
(2.55)

-4.34
0.06
0.07

Bankruptcies
Start -ups
Sales Profitability
Return on Capital
Employment Growth
Active Enterprises

-2.88
2.59
1.27
4.7
6.35
0.11

(-17.66)
(16.58)
(4.16)
(7.09)
(12.01)
(3.18)

-1.91
1.72
0.84
4.5
5.19
0.16

(-13.83)
(12.78)
(2.87)
(7.08)
(10.52)
(4.54)

-1.57
1.41
0.65
4.4
4.58
0.18

(4)
t-stat

Coeff.

(1)
t-stat

(2)

(3)

(4)

Coeff.

t-stat

Coeff.

t-stat

Coeff.

t-stat

Coeff.

t-stat

(-5.14) -0.72 (-6.63)
(-1.82) -0.22 (-1.80)
(-2.04) -6.53 (-2.95)
Degree of Local Isolation
(-2.16) -5.71 (-2.78)
(1.89)
0.11
(3.21)
(1.88)
0.12
(3.03)
Local Prosperity

-0.49
-0.3
-9.95

(-1.77)
(-0.98)
(-1.79)

-0.27
-0.2
-6.91

(-1.04)
(-0.68)
(-1.32)

-0.52
-0.32
-10.89

(-1.85)
(-1.02)
(-1.92)

-0.43
-0.28
-6.68

(-1.63)
(-0.96)
(-1.25)

-3.23
-0.16
0.35

(-0.69)
(-1.90)
(3.18)

-3.58
0.2
0.22

(-0.80)
(2.40)
(2.14)

-3.51
0.14
0.39

(-0.73)
(1.57)
(3.48)

-4.72
0.18
0.26

(-1.03)
(2.12)
(2.55)

(-14.09)
(12.49)
(2.25)
(7.02)
(9.50)
(5.25)

-3.28
3.18
1.7
5
8.69
-0.31

(-7.39)
(7.30)
(2.14)
(3.20)
(6.22)
(-3.99)

-2.12
2.07
0.75
5.3
6.12
-0.27

(-5.91)
(5.84)
(1.02)
(3.57)
(5.02)
(-3.76)

-3.66
3.54
2
5
9.45
-0.33

(-8.16)
(8.05)
(2.47)
(3.14)
(6.64)
(-4.12)

-2.84
2.75
1.29
5
6.98
-0.28

(-8.77)
(8.52)
(1.75)
(3.30)
(5.87)
(-3.84)

(3.96)
(0.17)

0.79
6

(4.32)
(0.40)

0.78
1.69

(3.96)
(0.11)

0.91
5.98

(4.91)
(0.39)

(-12.87)
(11.14)
(-3.17)

-2.52
12.73
-22.07

(-12.63)
(11.57)
(-4.33)

-2.59
12.55
-15.87

Local Professional Specialization

-2.28
2.05
0.94
4.5
5.59
0.16

(-18.83)
(16.87)
(3.20)
(7.02)
(11.43)
(4.47)

Financial and Municipal Services Availability
0.58
23.75

(7.36)
(3.90)

0.54
24.25

(7.08)
(4.09)

Active Hedging Index
-0.04
Borrowing Constraints
0.01
% of Population on Welfare Asst. 4.14

(-0.37)
(2.79)
(1.82)

0.01
0.01
-1.95

(0.05)
(2.56)
(-0.90)

Bank Coverage
% of Municipal Employees

0.5
25.17

(6.69)
(4.27)

0.55
23.23

(7.23)
(3.89)

0.76
2.59

Non-financial Risk and Financial Constraints

Wealth Variables
Income Variables
Momentum Variables
Demographic Variables
Macro and Social Variables
Lambda
Constant
Adj R2

-0.03
0.01
-3.55

(-0.22)
0.03
(0.23)
(2.39)
0.01
(2.72)
(-1.69)
2.15
(1.00)
Control Variables

Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
-13.42 (-18.38) -7.33 (-14.04) -5.22 (-29.26) -9.56 (-34.00)
-64.29 (-31.92) -77.97 (-50.71) -84.33 (-76.38) -73.39 (-68.82)
0.0333
0.0288
0.0310
0.0290

41

-2.58
12.84
-17.19

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
-21.75 (-8.91)
-45.27 (-12.53)
0.0400

Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
-12.63 (-8.01)
-53.12 (-17.05)
0.0366

(-12.91) -2.41 (-12.08)
(10.81) 15.7
(14.45)
(-2.87) -21.67 (-4.18)

No
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
-24.6 (-10.07) -17.13 (-20.05)
-41.44 (-11.72) -65.15 (-28.48)
0.0399
0.0357

Table 5: Dependent variable D3
N

We report the results for the specification where the dependent variable is the measure of diversification D 3 = − ∑ ( w i − w mkt )2 , where wi is the weight of the
i =1

stock in the portfolio of the investor and wmkt is the weight that the same stock would have in the market portfolio. The notations are as in Table 2. All the
coefficients are multiplied by 100.

Low-wealth households
(1)

Variable

(2)

High-wealth households

(3)

Coeff.

t-stat

Coeff.

t-stat

Coeff.

Competition
Specialization
Diversity

-2.28
-1.17
-4.46

(-9.44)
(-4.38)
(-0.92)

-2.31
-1.22
-4.1

(-9.69)
(-4.56)
(-0.85)

-2.04
-1.1
-6.72

Population Density
Index of Rural Areas
Distance from Airport

-42
-0.08
0.48

(-9.30)
(-1.07)
(5.53)

-43.74
-0.01
0.48

(-9.71)
(-0.19)
(5.58)

-41
0.17
0.41

Bankruptcies
Start -ups
Sales Profitability
Return on Capital
Employment Growth
Active Enterprises

-1.65
1.42
1.08
15.7
6.95
0.55

(-4.80)
(4.28)
(1.66)
(11.06)
(6.19)
(7.27)

-1.87
1.61
1.17
16.1
6.76
0.54

(-6.16)
(5.42)
(1.81)
(11.34)
(6.19)
(7.13)

(4)
t-stat

Coeff.

(1)
t-stat

(2)

(3)

(4)

Coeff.

t-stat

Coeff.

t-stat

Coeff.

t-stat

Coeff.

t-stat

-0.78
-1.98
23.37

(-1.02)
(-2.37)
(1.53)

-0.76
-1.97
23.75

(-1.00)
(-2.35)
(1.56)

-0.48
-1.84
31.61

(-0.61)
(-2.11)
(1.99)

-1.42
-2.75
11.42

(-1.88)
(-3.30)
(0.75)

-44
1.34
-0.01

(-3.36)
(5.62)
(-0.03)

-45
1.33
-0.06

(-3.45)
(5.61)
(-0.22)

-41
1.55
-0.35

(-3.06)
(6.29)
(-1.14)

-45
1.03
0.64

(-3.47)
(4.39)
(2.24)

-0.57
(-2.31)
-3.2 (-11.94)
1.29
0.45
(1.78)
2.79 (10.37)
-1.62
0.56
(0.88)
1.98
(3.05)
-2.92
15.6
(11.02)
15.9 (11.11)
19
5.44
(5.07)
10.09 (9.31)
-6.12
0.61
(8.06)
0.47
(6.16)
0.41
Financial and Municipal Services Availability
1.62
(9.69)
1.45
(8.69)
1.57
(9.27)
1.42
171.62 (13.03) 168.29 (12.79) 161.26 (12.12)
249.3
Non-financial Risk and Financial Constraints

(1.06)
(-1.36)
(-1.33)
(4.38)
(-1.60)
(1.91)

1.57
-1.89
-3.16
19.4
-7.05
0.42

(1.51)
(-1.84)
(-1.48)
(4.46)
(-1.99)
(1.98)

4.54
-4.73
-5.51
19
-12.49
0.55

(3.63)
(-3.86)
(-2.43)
(4.23)
(-3.15)
(2.48)

-4.89
4.32
2.37
19
8.03
0.13

(-5.36)
(4.75)
(1.13)
(4.39)
(2.39)
(0.61)

(2.69)
(5.73)

1.44
252.46

(2.73)
(5.79)

1.29
256.8

(2.34)
(5.74)

1.85
(3.52)
235.39 (5.41)

(-3.65)
(4.05)
(-6.20)

-2.15
12.91
-93.62

(-3.65)
-2.06 (-3.47)
(4.01) 15.62 (4.74)
(-6.30) -104.01 (-6.71)

-2.15 (-3.66)
21.55 (6.92)
-78.97 (-5.36)

Local Professional Specialization

Bank Coverage
% of Municipal Employees

1.52
(9.12)
166.27 (12.62)

Active Hedging Index
-0.30
Borrowing Constraints
-0.01
% of Population on Welfare Asst. 43.51
Wealth Variables
Income Variables
Momentum Variables
Demographic Variables
Macro and Social Variables
Lambda
Constant
Adj R2

(-1.13)
(-0.82)
(8.93)

-0.27
-0.01
43.1

(-1.02)
(-0.74)
(9.02)

-0.28
-0.01
50.89

(-8.64)
-2.62 (-10.91)
(-4.10)
-1.18 (-4.34)
(-1.40)
-0.39 (-0.08)
Degree of Local Isolation
(-9.14)
-44
(-9.62)
(2.32)
0.07
(0.92)
(4.80)
0.58
(6.72)
Local Prosperity

(-1.07)
-0.27 (-1.04)
(-0.97)
-0.01 (-0.56)
(10.87) 32.91 (6.90)
Control Variables

Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
-5.94 (-3.86)
-6.93 (-6.02)
0.78
(1.99) -16.33 (-26.18)
-84.45 (-19.68) -85.68 (-25.17) -102.72 (-41.65) -67.86 (-28.66)
0.226
0.225
0.226
0.226

42

-2.15
13.12
-92.89

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
24.63
(3.65)
1.41
(0.14)
0.042

Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
27.31
(5.95)
-3.77 (-0.41)
0.015

No
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
48.71 (7.10)
-31.11 (-3.08)
0.040

Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
-23.08 (-9.51)
-27.3 (-4.20)
0.038

Table 6: Dependent variable D4
N

We report the results for the specification where the dependent variable is the measure of diversification D 4 = − ∑ (w i − w ffl )2 , where wi is the weight of the
i =1

stock in the portfolio of the investor and wffl is the weight that the same stock would have in the free float portfolio. The notations are as in Table 2. All the
coefficients are multiplied by 100.

Low-wealth households
Variable

Coeff.

(1)

t-stat

Coeff.

(-11.67)
(-5.52)
(-0.06)

-2.06
-1.18
-2.01

(2)

t-stat

Coeff.

(-10.74)
(-5.46)
(-0.52)

-2.00
-1.12
-2.62

(3)

t-stat

High-wealth households
Coeff.

(4)

t-stat

Coeff.

(1)

t-stat

(2)
Coeff.
t-stat

(3)
Coeff.
t-stat

Coeff.

(4)

t-stat

Local Professional Specialization
Competition
Specialization
Diversity
Population Density
Index of Rural Areas
Distance from Airport

-2.28
-1.20
-0.25

(-10.54) -2.53 (-12.92)
(-5.19)
-1.23 (-5.54)
(-0.68)
3.58
(0.89)
Degree of Local Isolation
-41.00 (-11.13) -40.00 (-10.95) -39.00 (-10.84) -42.00 (-11.26)
-0.06 (-1.00)
-0.14 (-1.33)
0.18
(3.04)
0.04
(0.72)
0.38
(5.34)
0.29
(4.20)
0.29
(4.24)
0.46
(6.43)
Local Prosperi ty

Bankruptcies
Start -ups
Sales Profitability
Return on Capital
Employment Growth
Active Enterprises

-2.32
2.00
0.90
15.10
9.66
0.45

Bank Coverage
% of Municipal Employees

1.45
(10.69) 1.42 (10.62)
156.24 (14.66) 160.34 (15.18)

Active Hedging Index
0.07
Borrowing Constraints
-0.01
% of Population on Welfare Asst. 44.99
Wealth Variables
Income Variables
Momentum Variables
Demographic Variables
Macro and Social Variables
Lambda
Constant
Adj R2

(-8.29)
(7.43)
(1.70)
(13.15)
(10.60)
(7.33)

(0.30)
(-0.88)
(11.39)

-1.17
0.97
0.36
15.10
7.99
0.51

0.08
-0.01
51.68

(-4.80)
(4.07)
(0.69)
(13.29)
(9.13)
(8.31)

(0.37)
(-1.01)
(13.49)

-2.20
-2.24
-2.66

(-3.58)
(-3.31)
(-0.22)

-1.65
-1.83
13.97

(-2.73)
(-2.74)
(1.15)

-1.71
-1.87
15.55

(-2.79)
(-2.78)
(1.27)

-2.14
-2.47
5.44

(-3.50)
(-3.66)
(0.44)

-50.20
0.91
0.50

(-4.80)
(4.75)
(2.06)

-51.00
1.10
-0.02

(-4.92)
(5.78)
(-0.09)

-47.00
1.19
-0.04

(-4.53)
(6.25)
(-0.17)

-50.00
0.90
0.51

(-4.76)
(4.71)
(2.19)

-5.10
4.79
-1.98
18.80
11.62
0.10

(-5.19)
(4.97)
(-1.12)
(5.35)
(3.75)
(0.57)

-0.62
0.50
-5.57
19.40
1.61
0.29

(-0.75)
(0.61)
(-3.26)
(5.58)
(0.57)
(1.73)

-0.07
-0.03
-5.96
18.90
1.17
0.32

(-0.08)
(-0.03)
(-3.39)
(5.41)
(0.38)
(1.90)

-5.27
4.97
-1.62
19.00
12.74
0.08

(-7.12)
(6.73)
(-0.95)
(5.39)
(4.68)
(0.45)

Financial and Municipal Services Availability
1.36 (10.21)
1.48 (10.69)
1.07
158.11 (14.96) 152.45 (14.08) 213.15
Non-financial Risk and Financial Constraints

(2.51)
(6.06)

1
225.09

(2.37)
(6.45)

0.93
222.95

(2.20)
(6.37)

1.21
209.83

(2.83)
(5.96)

(-5.05)
(5.06)
(-5.91)

-2.27
11.16
-86.49

(-4.79)
(4.33)
(-7.29)

-2.27
12.65
-87.65

(-4.78)
(4.90)
(-7.29)

-2.44
14.87
-74.61

(-5.13)
(5.90)
(-6.25)

-0.98
0.80
0.26
14.90
7.83
0.52

0.08
-0.01
53.33

(-4.91)
(3.93)
(0.50)
(13.13)
(9.07)
(8.58)

-3.48
3.03
1.55
15.20
11.90
0.39

(-15.84)
(13.76)
(2.91)
(13.06)
(13.40)
(6.28)

(0.39)
0.04
(0.20)
(-1.10)
-0.01 (-0.68)
(14.18) 37.01 (9.50)
Control Variables

Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
-11.6 (-9.27)
-4.07 (-4.41)
-3.23 (-10.09) -19.36 (-37.93)
-74.61 (-21.42) -94.23 (-34.53) -95.93 (-48.43) -61.35 (-31.71)
0.313
0.312
0.313
0.313

43

-2.4
13.22
-71.56

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
-21.76
(-3.99)
18.51
(2.25)
0.067

Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
13.54 (3.70)
-13.27 (-1.82)
0.066

No
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
16.48 (3.10)
-16.92 (-2.14)
0.066

Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
-23.2 (-11.79)
-29.6 (-5.62)
0.064

Table 7: Measures of proximity for overall sample
We report the results for the specification where the dependent variables are our measures of
geographical and professional proximity. Geographical proximity is measured as valueweighted average of inverse of the logarithm of the distance between the ZIP code of the
investor and the ZIP code of the closest branch/subsidiary of the company whose stock we
consider. Professional proximity for each position it takes value 1 if any of the household
members are employed in the same industry of the company they are investing in. For investor
the measure is computed as value-weighted average over all position in household portfolio.
The notations are as in Table 2.

Geographical proximity
Variable

Coeff.

Professional proximity

t-stat

Coeff.

t-stat

0.046
-3.295
2.491

(24.24)
(-1.54)
(9.58)

-22.200
0.088
0.588

(-10.90)
(3.68)
(8.32)

-0.111
0.112
0.187
-0.002
0.026
-0.020

(-10.28)
(19.63)
(17.40)
(-19.97)
(8.02)
(-26.55)

-0.022
0.111

(-17.72)
(2.99)

-0.043
0.000
0.278

(-35.45)
(0.92)
(17.56)

Local Professional Specialization
0.577
0.001
10.426

Competition
Specialization
Diversity

(34.18)
(58.84)
(33.36)

Degree of Local Isolation
-1.284
0.057
0.033

Population Density
Index of Rural Areas
Distance from Airport

(-4.24)
(9.95)
(5.49)

Local Prosperity
-4.342
5.146
-0.110
-0.037
-1.226
0.604

Bankruptcies
Start-ups
Sales Profitability
Return on Capital
Employment Growth
Active Enterprises

(-17.11)
(25.09)
(-2.41)
(-38.01)
(-15.98)
(29.03)

Financial and Municipal Services Availability
Bank Coverage
% of Municipal Employees

0.052
17.411

(4.68)
(19.04)

Background Risk and Financial Constraints
Active Hedging Index
Borrowing Constraints
% of Population on Welfare Asst.

-1.427
-0.003
-19.304

(-91.97)
(-0.40)
(-50.67)

Wealth Variables

Yes

Yes

Income Variables

Yes

Yes

Momentum Variables

Yes

Yes

Demographic Variables

Yes

Yes

Macro and Social Variables

Yes

Yes

Lambda
Constant
Adj R2

-2.235
-10.217

(-19.93)
(-34.80)

0.0792

-0.167
0.269
0.0094

44

(-4.64)
(22.39)

Table 8: Dependent variable geographical proximity
We report the results for the specification where the dependent variable is our measure of geographical proximity. It is measured as value-weighted average of
inverse of the logarithm of the distance between the ZIP code of the investor and the ZIP code of the closest branch/subsidiary of the company whose stock we
consider. The notations are as in Table 2. Coefficients for Specialization are multiplied by 100.
Low-wealth households
High-wealth households
(1)

Variable

Coeff.

(2)
t-stat

Coeff.

(3)
t-stat

Coeff.

(4)
t-stat

Coeff.

(1)
t-stat

(2)

Coeff.

t-stat

0.059
0.032
15.593

(0.53)
(4.33)
(7.40)

-4.089
0.379
0.144

Coeff.

(3)
t-stat

(4)

Coeff.

t-stat

Coeff.

t-stat

0.233 (11.43)
0.041 (21.15)
3.056
(7.98)

0.056
0.031
15.613

(0.50)
(4.22)
(7.40)

0.247
0.046
2.839

(11.90)
(23.15)
(7.30)

(-2.26)
(10.33)
(3.31)

0.160
0.029
0.047

(0.47)
(4.36)
(5.98)

-4.139 (-2.26)
0.380 (10.34)
0.144
(3.32)

-0.089
0.015
0.040

(-0.31)
(2.21)
(5.04)

-6.050 (-17.50) -5.632 (-24.26) -5.001 (-24.58)
6.837 (24.30)
6.304 (27.62)
6.417 (32.50)
1.861 (30.36)
2.978 (54.41) -3.006 (-9.53)
-0.055 (-41.92) -0.057 (-47.14) -0.008 (-1.35)
-1.271 (-12.04) -1.178 (-12.69)
2.234
(3.99)
-1.028 (-14.90) -1.070 (-16.56) -0.160 (-5.25)
Financial and Municipal Services Availability

-1.533
1.950
-1.085
-0.003
0.061
-0.094

(-53.03)
(68.48)
(-18.96)
(-2.85)
(0.64)
(-16.51)

-5.013 (-24.62)
6.428 (32.54)
-2.914 (-9.24)
-0.008 (-1.37)
2.235
(3.99)
-0.158 (-5.16)

-1.572 (-62.26)
2.014 (80.01)
-2.384 (-41.56)
-0.004 (-3.64)
-0.004 (-0.04)
-0.111 (-18.80)

0.705
37.369

0.157
12.909

Local Professional Specialization
Competition
Specialization
Diversity

0.751
0.076
12.703

(32.91)
(33.32)
(29.92)

0.654 (30.63)
0.042 (18.95)
12.289 (30.64)

Population Density
Index of Rural Areas
Distance from Airport

-2.425
0.066
0.072

(-5.60)
(8.67)
(8.84)

0.493
(1.21)
0.055
(7.95)
0.091 (11.74)

Bankruptcies
Start -ups
Sales Profitability
Return on Capital
Employment Growth
Active Enterprises

-6.051
6.838
1.860
-0.055
-1.271
-1.028

(-17.50)
(24.31)
(30.34)
(-41.92)
(-12.04)
(-12.89)

-6.020
6.691
4.265
-0.059
-0.929
-1.074

(-21.85)
(25.56)
(73.93)
(-46.64)
(-9.45)
(-15.16)

Bank Coverage
% of Municipal Employees

-0.035
13.840

(-2.30)
(11.34)

-0.084
6.508

(-5.79)
(5.57)

0.751 (32.91)
0.778 (38.49)
0.076 (33.31)
0.065 (30.47)
12.702 (29.92) 12.006 (31.37)
Degree of Local Isolation
-2.311 (-5.60) -0.510 (-1.24)
0.066
(8.66)
0.021
(3.24)
0.072
(8.84)
0.078 (10.62)
Local Prosperity

-0.035 (-2.30)
13.838 (11.33)

-0.117
8.853

(-8.53)
(7.87)

0.706
37.464

(9.45)
(6.96)

0.158 (11.36)
11.405
(9.82)

(9.44)
(6.94)

(11.12)
(10.81)

Non-financial Risk and Financial Constraints
Active Hedging Index
-1.274 (-53.87) -1.655 (-72.06) -1.274 (-53.86) -1.457 (-64.69) -1.991 (-57.31) -1.185 (-76.94) -1.985 (-57.15) -1.324 (-82.93)
Borrowing Constraints
-0.012 (-1.29) -0.014
(1.05) -0.012
(0.74) -0.017
(0.61) 19.797
(4.98)
7.775
(9.11) 19.775
(4.97)
8.198
(9.62)
% of Population on Welfare Asst. -16.884 (-32.71) -12.127 (-24.67) -16.881 (-32.71) -12.129 (-25.77) -53.340 (-21.11) -16.186 (-34.46) -53.273 (-21.07) -17.161 (-35.89)
Control Variables
Wealth Variables
Income Variables
Momentum Variables
Demographic Variables
Macro and Social Variables
Lambda
Constant
Adj R2

Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
-2.767 (-16.81) -2.086 (-19.26) -2.767 (-16.81) -1.068 (-20.22) -20.716 (-18.33)
-10.204 (-23.90) -10.121 (-33.86) -10.204 (-23.90) -13.112 (-70.06)
4.090
(3.51)
0.0594
0.0569
0.0594
0.0566
0.0732

45

Yes
No
No
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
-1.150 (-8.81) -20.729 (-18.33)
-6.246 (-26.89)
4.101
(3.52)
0.0724
0.0732

Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
-0.944 (-14.07)
-7.650 (-45.97)
0.0705

Table 9: Dependent variable professional proximity
We report the results for the specification where the dependent variable is our measure of geographical proximity. For each position it takes value 1 if any of the
household members are employed in the same industry of the company they are investing in. For investor the measure is computed as value-weighted average
over all position in household portfolio. The notations are as in Table 2. . Coefficients for Specialization for non-wealthy households are multiplied by 100.
Low-wealth households
High-wealth households
(1)

Variable

Coeff.

(2)
t-stat

Coeff.

(3)
t-stat

Coeff.

(4)
t-stat

Coeff.

(1)
t-stat

Coeff.

(2)

(3)

t-stat

Coeff.

t-stat

Coeff.

t-stat

0.024
-5.101
1.455

(9.40)
(-0.78)
(4.62)

0.010
-8.184
1.789

(3.57)
(-1.29)
(5.36)

0.022 (13.13)
-6.138 (-1.51)
2.275 (11.28)

-1.982
0.140
0.242

(-2.61)
(1.63)
(2.47)

-1.990
0.583
0.389

(-2.80)
(6.45)
(3.72)

-1.785
0.319
0.091

(4)
Coeff. t-stat

Local Professional Specialization
Competition
Specialization
Diversity

0.051 (14.74)
-0.001 (-0.28)
0.162
(2.48)

0.040 (24.48)
-0.001 (-0.86)
0.177
(5.71)

Population Density
Index of Rural Areas
Distance from Airport

-0.209
-0.270
0.271

-0.195
1.476
0.050

Bankruptcies
Start -ups
Sales Profitability
Return on Capital
Employment Growth
Active Enterprises

-0.108 (-20.31) -0.101 (-43.94)
0.113 (22.42) 0.109 (49.50)
-0.010 (-1.10) 0.052 (11.73)
-0.001 (-5.31) -0.001 (-10.18)
-0.041 (-2.55) -0.028 (-3.72)
-0.020 (-15.81) -0.019 (-31.48)

-0.102 (-37.91) -0.055 (-31.27)
0.042
(9.08)
0.110 (43.10) 0.059 (33.13)
-0.023
(-5.04)
0.041
(8.71) -0.005 (-1.05)
0.213 (28.56)
-0.001 (-9.92) -0.001 (-7.63)
-0.001 (-10.36)
-0.032 (-3.89) -0.020 (-2.76)
0.017
(1.39)
-0.020 (-31.54) -0.010 (-26.74)
-0.020 (-22.69)
Financial and Municipal Services Availability

Bank Coverage
% of Municipal Employees

-0.006
0.001

-0.005 (-4.43) -0.004 (-3.55)
-0.020 (-11.38)
0.089
(0.94) 0.024
(0.27)
0.310
(2.13)
Non-financial Risk and Financial Constraints

(-2.36)
(-0.23)
(0.49)

(-2.71)
(0.01)

-0.004
0.075

(-5.09)
(2.71)
(0.87)

(-3.91)
(0.84)

0.043 (24.49) 0.010
(6.18)
-0.001 (-0.72)
0.001
(1.25)
0.175
(5.34) 0.120
(3.95)
Degree of Local Isolation
-0.200 (-5.48) -0.785 (-4.80)
1.027
(1.75) -0.020 (-0.38)
0.045
(0.74) 0.043
(0.76)
Local Prosperity

0.012
0.608
0.253

(3.06)
(2.76)
(3.57)

(-3.92)
(1.99)
(1.45)

-1.345 (-1.17)
-0.042 (-0.35)
0.431 (3.07)

0.022
(5.09)
0.006
(1.55)
0.273 (35.12)
-0.001 (-7.47)
0.051
(3.95)
-0.009 (-11.16)

0.022
(7.56)
-0.002 (-0.57)
0.306 (64.11)
-0.002 (-21.01)
-0.004 (-0.50)
-0.020 (-50.73)

0.019 (4.27)
-0.012 (-2.66)
-0.099 (-9.56)
0.000 (0.20)
0.029 (1.74)
0.002 (1.58)

-0.009
0.292

(-5.00)
(1.91)

-0.018 (-16.52)
0.280
(3.05)

-0.015 (-5.86)
0.181 (0.83)

Active Hedging Index
-0.080 (-21.16) -0.064 (-35.78)
Borrowing Constraints
0.000
(0.14) 0.000
(0.13)
% of Population on Welfare Asst. -0.525 (-6.66) -0.444 (-11.76)

-0.060 (-31.44) -0.043 (-24.02)
0.000
(0.09) 0.000 (-0.09)
-0.438 (-11.01) -0.048 (-1.30)
Control Variables

-0.052 (-26.65)
0.483
(4.46)
0.084
(1.44)

-0.066 (-34.87)
0.655
(5.84)
-0.225 (-3.61)

-0.058 (-48.72)
0.384
(5.63)
-0.059 (-1.58)

-0.025 (-8.52)
0.442 (2.84)
0.728 (8.49)

Wealth Variables
Income Variables
Momentum Variables
Demographic Variables
Macro and Social Variables
Lambda
Constant
Adj R2

No
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
-0.092 (-7.39)
0.134
(4.10)
0.0057

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
-0.101
(-3.72)
-0.013
(-0.41)
0.0202

Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
-0.279 (-12.93)
0.201
(6.57)
0.0193

No
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
-0.125 (-7.20)
0.000
(0.02)
0.0196

Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
0.042 (3.49)
-0.139 (-4.73)
0.0112

Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
-0.088 (-3.56) -0.102 (-10.41)
0.130
(1.99) 0.171
(6.37)
0.0058
0.0053

Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
0.012
(2.81)
-0.080 (-4.86)
0.0035

46

