NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE EUROPEAN UNION: A POLITICALLY INCORRECT VIEW
Alberto Alesina
Roberto Perotti
Working Paper 10342
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10342
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2004

We thank Ignazio Angeloni, Ludger Schucknecht, Guido Tabellini and especially Olivier Blanchard and
Andrei Shleifer for useful comments. Alberto Alesina is grateful to the National Science Foundation for a
grant through the NBER. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of
the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2004 by Alberto Alesina and Roberto Perotti. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

The European Union: A Politically Incorrect View
Alberto Alesina and Roberto Perotti
NBER Working Paper No. 10342
March 2004
JEL No. E0, H0
ABSTRACT
In this paper, we present our view of the recent evolution of European integration. We
first briefly describe the main features of the institution and decision making process in the European
Union, with particular attention to the debate between federalists and super nationalists. We then
identify two key issues in the process of European integration: 1) an emphasis on “institutional
balance” based on a complex web of institutions with overlapping jurisdiction; 2) A conflict between
a dirigiste versus a more laissez faire approach to government. We argue that the first problem leads
to a lack of clarity in the allocation of powers between European institutions, confusion in the
allocation of prerogatives between national governments and EU institutions, and lack of
transparency and accountability. This dirigiste culture produces verbose rhetoric, which moves the
European policy debate in the wrong direction.
We then study how these problems play out in four important areas: employment
policies, culture and scientific research, foreign and defense policies, and fiscal policy. Finally, we
study the implications of the recently proposed European Constitution as a potential solution of these
two problems.
Alberto Alesina
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
aalesina@harvard.edu
Roberto Perotti
Universita Bocconi, IGIER
Via Salasco 5
20136 Milano, Italy
roberto.perotti@uni-bocconi.it

1

INTRODUCTION

What is happening in Europe? Is Europe building a federal state similar to the United
States, the “United States of Europe”? The answer is no. As article 1 of the recent draft
Constitution states, Europe is a union of independent countries. Nevertheless an unresolved
tension between those who would like the European Union to evolve into a super national
entity (the federalists or super nationalists) and those who would like it to stay a union of
independent governments (the intergovernmentalists) has shaped much of the history of
European institutions.
The natural starting point for a US scholar studying the process of European
integration would be the notion of “division of powers”. Europe has developed instead a
system of “institutional balance” based on overlapping jurisdictions: the legislative,
executive, and regulatory powers are shared by many institutions, so much so that the
distinction itself between legislative and executive acts is blurred - something that would
make James Madison turn in his grave.
It could hardly be otherwise. The European Union has been created gradually by a
group of established countries with different secular histories, including dozens of internecine
wars, and different institutions. Understandably the European countries were wary that a
single European institution would absorb too much of their own sovereignty; hence the
emphasis on balance. But institutional balance and overlapping jurisdictions also lead to turf
wars between institution, to confusion between the powers of member countries and of the
European institutions, and to lack of transparency. This is the first key problem we identify.
The second important aspect of the process of European integration is a clash of
different views of government, between a dirigiste attitude more common in Southern Europe
and parts of continental Europe, and an Anglo Saxon, more laissez fair attitude. When the
dirigiste attitude is kept in check, the result is not only policy inaction but also the production
of verbose rhetoric of social engineering.
The welcome process of “institutional clarification,” set in motion by the
Constitutional Convention is trying to address the first problem. However one should not
put too much faith into institutional design alone. The key issue is whether the European
government will be based on the dirigiste approach or on a more Anglo Saxon laissez-fair
one, perhaps with an added German sensitivity for federal systems. Consider this:: two key
players in Europe, France and Britain, are on the same side of the
federalist/intergovernmentalists debate, i.e. they are both intergovernmentalists; however, a
hypothetical Europe with France at the driving seat would look quite different than one with a
UK driver, regardless of the structure of institutions.
This paper is organized as follows. In Section 2 we describe the basic functioning of
the current EU institutions. In Section 3 we discuss the two problems mentioned above.
Section 4 illustrates the nature of these problems with some especially interesting examples.
Section 5 studies how the Draft Constitution would affect the two problems.. The last section
concludes.

2

CURRENT INSTITUTIONS
UNION

AND DECISION MAKING IN THE

EUROPEAN

The European Council of December 2001 in Laeken set up a Convention with the
task of integrating the treaties that regulate the functioning of the EU; this mandate evolved
into the preparation of a draft Constitution. The Convention started its work in February 2001

and delivered a draft Constitution in June 2003. This draft was to be examined and possibly
amended in an intergovernmental conference, started in October 2003; the text approved by
the intergovernmental conference was then to be ratified by all the 25 members of the
European Union. However, negotiations over the draft Constitution broke down in midDecember 2003 over the reform of the system of allocation of voting rights. At the time of
writing (end of January 2004) we still do not know what will happen, hence we present a
picture of the EU institutions as they are now.
With heartfelt apologies, we need to start with some Euro-jargon, which is
indispensable to understand the peculiar institutions of the EU. The EU is an umbrella
organization that comprises three parts, or “three pillars.” The first pillar is the European
Communities (EC), consisting of the three communities established in the fifties and sixties.1
At the heart of this pillar are the “four freedoms of movement”: of persons, goods, capital,
and services, plus single market and competition issues; this pillar also covers a number of
other issues, including agriculture, competition, and trade, and recently also visa and asylum
policies. The other two pillars are part of the EU, but not of the EC. The second pillar
includes the Common Security and Foreign Policy (CSFP). The third pillar, Justice and
Home Affairs, now includes mostly police and judicial cooperation in criminal matters.
There is a fundamental difference between the first pillar and the other two. The EU
institutions can make legislation which is directly applicable and has primacy over individual
members’ law for first pillar issues. In contrast, any decision concerning the two other pillars
requires unanimity, and must be approved by national Parliaments to become applicable in
member states.
We now turn to a brief description of the main roles of each EU institution. In so
doing, we will use the following abbreviations: “Council” for “Council of the European
Union”; “Commission” for “The Commission of the European Union”; “EP” for “European
Parliament”; and “DC” for “Draft Constitution”; “QMV” for “Qualified Majority Voting”.

2.1

THE EUROPEAN COUNCIL

The European Council, which should not be confused with the Council of the
European Union to be introduced below, is the forum where the heads of state of the
European Union and the President of the Commission meet to discuss general issues. It has
no formal decision-making power, yet it is the most influential body: it is here that all the
major policy guidelines are set and that all decisions on the big issues are taken. The
European Council meets at least every 6 months and it takes all decisions unanimously. Its
presidency rotates every six months between all the EU members.
2.2

THE COUNCIL OF THE EUROPEAN UNION

This body has both executive authority, which it has in large part delegated to the
Commission, and legislative authority. All regulations and directives (the two most
important legislative acts of the EC) must be approved by the Council, either jointly with the
EP or after consultation with it.
The Council is composed of one representative per country, usually the national
minister in charge of the issue under discussion. Hence, although it is a single institution, the
1

The three communities of the European Communities are the ECSC (European Community of Steel
and Coal, 1952; the EAEC (European Atomic Energy Community), 1958; and the European Economic
Community, later European Community, 1958. The two latter communities were created by the Treaty of Rome
of 1958.

2

Council has several incarnations. One of the most visible is ECOFIN, the meeting of the
finance ministers to discuss, monitor and coordinate budgetary matters. In total, the Council
meets between 80 and 90 times in a typical year. The Council decides by unanimity in the
most sensitive areas (including some first pillar issues), and in most cases by Qualified
Majority Voting. The current QMV procedure assigns a certain number of votes to member
countries as a function of their population size, but weighted in a way that favors small
countries relative to strict proportionality.
2.3

THE EUROPEAN COMMISSION

The Commission has several roles. Among the most important are:
1) Right to initiate legislation: The Council and the EP cannot approve any piece of
legislation if it has not been proposed by the Commission.
2) Executive power: The Commission monitors the implementation of the main
legislation adopted by the EU.
3) Regulatory power: Mostly in the area of public undertakings and public service
undertaking.
4) Power of surveillance of European law: The Commission is the “Guardian of the
Treaty”: if it detects infringements to the Treaties, after some attempts at resolving them it
refers the matter to the European Court of Justice.
5) “Watchdog of the EMU”: The Commission monitors compliance with the
economic policies agreed on at the beginning of each year, and recommends various types of
actions to the Council in case of non-compliance.
The Commission and its President are first nominated and then appointed by member
countries after approval by the EP. Currently, each country has 1 commissioner, except that
the 5 largest countries have 2, for a total of 20 commissioners.
A common view is that the Commission is an unelected, unaccountable body, the
quintessential technocratic institution. This picture is only partially correct. The
Commission is accountable collectively to the EP: if the latter passes a motion of censure, the
Commission must resign en bloc. Commissioners are not individually politically accountable
to the EP, but the president of the Commission can dismiss a commissioner, if a majority of
the commissioners agrees.
The Commission was designed initially as a European “think-tank”, whose role was
precisely to propose legislation to the bodies with true legislative power (see Devuyst
(2003)). As a think-tank, its independence was paramount, and the lack of accountability a
plus. But as the process of European integration progressed incrementally, the Commission
was entrusted with more and more tasks, including an important executive power. This
complicated the picture: independence and lack of accountability are appropriate for a think
tank, not for an executive body. As we shall see, these multiple roles of the Commission are
at the heart of much of the debate on institutional reform.
2.4

THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT

The EP is directly elected in all EU member countries for 5 years and shares the
legislative and budgetary authority with the Council. The Council’s opinion prevails in
matters of “compulsory spending” (mostly agriculture), while the EP’s position prevails on
the other matters – yet another example of the system of institutional balance. The EP is not
currently regarded as a particularly important body.

3

2.5

THE EUROPEAN COURT OF JUSTICE

The EU Court of Justice can “interpret” EU laws and seek its application. Court cases
can be initiated both by governments and private citizens. Contrary to the American practice,
its judicial rulings do not have legal stature in the EU. Still, the Court of Justice has acquired
a considerable status within the EU bodies; for instance, its involvement in competition
policy has been widely publicized.
2.6

DECISION-MAKING IN THE EU

There are two sources of legislation in the EU. The Treaties are the “primary” source:
they need to be ratified by all members’ governments. There are three main types of binding
“secondary” legislation: regulations, directives, and decisions.2 There are basically two
procedures to pass major legislation (regulations and directives) regarding the first pillar:
consultation and co-decision; a third procedure, cooperation, is intermediate between the two
and is being abolished by the Convention. In all cases, the Commission has the right of
initiative.
Consultation applies to the most sensitive first pillar issues: Common Agricultural
Policy, competition, taxation, guidelines for employment policies, industrial policy. The
power of the EP is limited to a consultative role, and unanimity is required in all issues except
agriculture and competition policy.
Co-decision applies to the remaining first pillar issues; it covers about 80 percent of
the main legislative decisions, in particular all the issues decided by QMV, except agriculture
and competition policy.
The co-decision procedure was introduced by the Maastricht Treaty in 1993 to
enhance the role of the EP. The Commission’s proposal must be accepted by both the EP (by
majority voting) and by the Council (by QMV, but unanimity is required in culture, social
security, and freedom of movement). If the Commission’s proposal is amended, an extremely
convoluted process is set in motion. Baldwin and Wagdren (2003) examine it and conclude
that it is impossible to even establish who has agenda setting power in this process.
2.7

SUMMARY

The construction of the EU is the result of a delicate balance between two types of
institutions and decision making methods: intergovernmental institutions, like the European
Council and the Council of Ministers, that provide a forum for each country’s demand, and
super national institutions, like the Commission, the EP, and the Court of Justice, whose
mandate and authority transcend the individual countries.
This dichotomy runs parallel to that between Community and intergovernmental
methods, and between small and large countries. Usually, small countries see the Council and
the European Council as dominated by the large countries; hence they tend to be staunch
supporters of the Commission.
The distinction also parallels closely that between first pillar on one hand and second
and third pillars on the other, and that between QMV and unanimity. Super nationalists
typically would like to extend the areas covered by the Community method and by QMV, at
the expense of unanimity. However, we believe that the juxtaposition QMV - unanimity is
overstated: in reality, the major countries can always exercise a veto power in matters of
importance, and small countries have no veto power even under unanimity, even though they
2

A regulation refers to all member countries, and is directly applicable. A directive is binding on the
objective, but leaves freedom to national legislation as to how to achieve these objectives. A decision applies to
specific individuals, firms or countries; it is binding and directly applicable to whomever is addressed.

4

may extort some rents by holding up a vote. Note also that the Luxembourg compromise
looms large on the Council’ s decision making process: 3 by this informal agreement, if QMV
applies and a country invokes its vital interests, the Council should try “within a reasonable
time to reach solutions which can be adopted by all Members of the Council while respecting
their mutual interests and those of the Community”.4 Thus, de facto all that the QMV does is
eliminating the veto power of small countries, which in any case are extremely unlikely to
exercise it, but it does not change the interactions between the largest countries. An example
is agricultural policy: although formally not subject to unanimity, no major decision would be
taken without the consensus of France and Germany.

3

PROBLEMS
We now illustrate the two problems we have identified:

Problem 1: Institutional balance based on a complex web of institutions with
overlapping jurisdiction.
Problem 2: A conflict between a dirigiste versus a more laissez faire approach to
government.

3.1

PROBLEM 1: OVERLAPPING JURISDICTIONS

Problem 1.A: Lack of clarity in the allocation of powers
The structure of decision-making at the European level leads to confusion about the
allocation of powers between the Commission (the supernational body par excellence) and
the Council (the quintessential intergovernmental body), and about the role and structure of
the European Council. One may argue that a system of overlapping jurisdictions can still
work well if accompanied by a smooth system of checks and balances, as it is arguably the
case in the US. . We will argue instead that in Europe the confusion of roles has not been
resolved successfully.
Problem 1.B: The allocation of prerogatives between national governments and EU
institutions.
One consequence of the confusion about institutional prerogatives is that EU
institutions have encroached into national competencies. Obviously part of the “secular”
increase in the power of EU institutions has been by design and approved by all member
countries. But there is more than that. The theoretical literature on federalism provides a clear
principle for the allocation of responsibilities between national governments and the EU: the
latter should engage in those policy areas where economies of scale and externalities are
large, and heterogeneity of preferences amongst different countries are low.
This principle has not been applied coherently. The EU governing bodies are
increasingly involved in a variety of areas where it would not be unreasonable to argue that
3

In 1965, France blocked the working of the EC by practicing a policy of empty chair for six months,
because it believed that the common agricultural policy was going in a direction that would badly damage its
farmers. The impasse was resolved by the Luxembourg compromise, which is an informal agreement and not
part of any Treaty or law.
4
Even this agreement is not uncontroversial: France interpreted it as stating that unanimity would be
applied when it is invoked.

5

economies of scale or externalities are virtually non-existent, while divergence of preference
is large. For example Nugent (2000), Alesina and Wacziarg (1998), Berglof et al (2003),
and Alesina, Angeloni and Schucknecht (2002) document the large increase of EU
legislation in areas such as welfare and citizen protection, that are quite far from the original
mandate of EU institutions.
Problem 1.C: Lack of transparency and accountability.
The principle of institutional balance, and the ensuing convoluted nature of EU
governing institutions described above, make them prone to accusations of “lack of
legitimacy”, “democratic deficit”, and “lack of accountability”.. According to the latest data
from Eurobarometer, 74 per cent of EU citizens list as a priority for the EU “getting closer to
the European citizens, by informing them more about the EU”.
We believe that under the current institutional balance approach there is no solution to
the legitimacy and accountability problem. Implicitly or explicitly, the source of legitimacy
for EU institutions is taken to be the EP, on the ground that it alone represents the will of the
European people directly. But it is very unlikely that in the short and medium run the
European citizen will view the EP as their true representative.
In addition, it is not totally clear, even in theory, how much different bodies should be
accountable, and this confusion stems from the multiple roles played by the same body. Take
the Commission, for instance. If one focuses on its “think tank” role, one would want to make
it as independent as possible from the EP: there is nothing wrong with a technocratic think
tank - indeed, this is part of the definition itself of a think tank. But if one focuses on the
executive role of the Commission, clearly accountability becomes an important issue.
Depending on which side of the Commission one considers the most important - the
executive, regulatory or legislative – more accountability, politicization and legitimacy can
be good or bad.5

3.2

PROBLEM 2: DIRIGISME AND

RHETORIC

The second problem is the clash of cultures between dirigisme and laissez faire, and
the resulting widespread rhetoric. Although the divide between intergovernmentalists and
super nationalists has attracted most of the attention, we believe a second crucial divide is
that between two very different visions of policymaking, which will confront each other in
any given institutional setting. A dirigiste and regulatory approach to the economy, with a
heavy emphasis on coordination, intervention and quantitative targets, is still very pervasive.
This emphasis on “coordination” and “plans,” has had (so far!) a relatively limited impact
because the power of EU institutions in many policy areas are indeed limited yet. But
precisely because the scope for actual intervention is constrained, the result of this clash of
cultures is often inaction and a pompous rhetoric.
Two questions come to mind:, why is the rhetoric dirigiste and not laissez faire? And
why should we worry about it?
On the first question the answer is two fold. One has deep cultural roots: the
pragmatism of the Anglo Saxon culture versus the tendency to verbosity of Latin cultures.
However, we are no experts in cultural history, so we leave it at that. The second reason is
that it is natural to have more to say if one believes in social engineering, coordination,
public goals, market regulation than if one simply wants to let markets take their undisturbed

5

For a recent formal discussion of electoral accountability versus “experts” see Dewatripont Jewitt and
Tirole (1999a,b) and Alesina and Tabellini (2003).

6

course. A dirigiste frustrated by inaction is more likely to produce numerous white papers
describing his plans for a dream world.
The second question is more important. One view is that this rhetoric is irrelevant or
even useful because it allows well intentioned policymakers to “work” while dirigiste
bureaucrats are busy writing irrelevant white papers. We find this view naïve. An empty
rhetoric can become a justification for heavy and misplaced interventionist governments, and
it can mislead the public debate, generating unreasonable expectations in the public, thus
creating obstacles for well intentioned policymakers facing tough choices.

4

THE WORKINGS OF EU INSTITUTIONS

We now turn to a discussion of several examples of policy areas that illustrate the
problems we discussed above.
4.1

EMPLOYMENT POLICIES

In December 1991, all member countries except the UK agreed to a Charter of
Fundamental Social Rights, which was later ratified by the new UK Labor government. It
became a new chapter in the Amsterdam Treaty of 1997, making the enforcement of its rights
a priority of the Union’s economic policy. In fact, based on this background, the Luxembourg
Job Summit of 1997 launched the European Employment Strategy, with a series of
indications on a wide-ranging set of topics, from vocational training to improving the social
dialogue. The European Council of March 2000 in Lisbon (a meeting that has since reached
quasi-mythical status in Europe) set up a series of criteria and policy suggestions to reach “a
new strategic goal for the next decade: to become the most competitive and dynamic
knowledge-based economy in the world, capable of sustainable economic growth with more
and better jobs and greater economic cohesion”. It is interesting to read the targets for 2010
envisioned by the Lisbon strategy:
Box 1: The ideal “knowledge-based society”
- Employment rate: Overall 67% (2005), 70%; Women 57% (2005), 60%; older
workers 50%
- Long Term Unemployment prevention: Every young and adult unemployed to be
offered a new start before 6 or 12 months respectively
- Proportion of unemployed participating in active measures 20%
- Increase of effective average exit age: by 5 years
- Reduction of school drop out rate: 10% at EU- level and half 2000 percentage in
each Member State
- Raising educational attainments of 25-64 years olds: 80 percent
- Participation of adults in education and training: 15 percent at EU-level and no
Member State below 10 percent
- Coverage of childcare services 0-3: 33 percent
- Coverage of childcare services 3-6: 90 percent

7

To achieve these targets, the European Council introduced the new method of open
cooperation, which was essentially designed to allow some form of coordination based on
peer pressure in the absence of legal instruments in virtually all the areas touched by the
document. It consisted of a complicated system of coordination and monitoring of
employment policies. Each year, the Council issues the Employment Guidelines, plus the
Council Recommendations to the Member States on Employment Policies, in turn based on a
Commission recommendation. The national countries then submit a National Action Plan on
employment policies, which reports on the steps taken to implement the Employment
Guidelines. The Council then issues the Joint Employment Report, with a detailed assessment
of how the Member States responded to the recommendations of the Employment Guidelines.
One can disagree on what is the appropriate level of coordination of labor market
policies, but it is interesting to note three features of this strategy:. First, the insistence on
setting numerical targets (a practice reminiscent of the discredited industrial plans of the
sixties), moreover undifferentiated among EU countries. Second, the prescription of highly
controversial policies as self-evident “goods”: for instance, evaluations of training programs
have raised doubts on their cost-effectiveness, except in a few specific cases; yet there is no
mention of this. Third, the rhetoric: from the high-sounding declarations on the “knowledgebased society”, to a myriads of meaningless pompous statements. 6
One could think that this flurry of activities around the buzzword of “knowledgebased society” set in motion by the Lisbon process is largely an innocuous exercise in Euroverbosity. Still, we believe this exercise is not just a questionable use of time and money. No
government today takes the guidelines on employment policies as an even remotely binding
constraint; and we know of no country where the National Action Plans have any role in
guiding policy. Governments seem to participate because, after all the enthusiasm and the
media attention on the “Lisbon process”, they are caught in a bad Nash equilibrium in which
a withdrawal would qualify them as Euro-villains. Yet this Kafkian exercise has contributed
to set back the level of the debate and of understanding by the public by giving the
impression that some EU institution actually knows how to solve the problem of European
unemployment, if only national governments cooperated….
Problem 2, (dirigiste rhetoric) is truly rampant here: inability to act (as yet!) is
substituted by pompous verbosity.
4.2

CULTURAL POLICY

The EU funds research in Europe mostly through its Framework Programmes, of
which the latest one, the 6th, was launched in 2003. Its budget is € 17.5 bn over a period of
five years, or about 4 percent of the EU budget. The Framework Programme is adopted by a
co-decision of the Council and the EP, based on a recommendation by the Commission; the
co-decision sets out the “Thematic priorities” for all projects that want to be considered for
funding. In the 6th Framework Programme, there were 7 thematic priorities, for each of
which the Council decision details a list of research priorities. The last thematic priority,
“Citizens and governance in a knowledge based society”, covers social sciences: it has a
budget of only about € 200 mn. Despite its limited size, it is instructive to read some of its
research priorities, as laid out by the Council:
Box 2: What European social scientists should be doing
6

For instance, from the Commission recommendation for the Council recommendation on the Italian
employment policies of 2002: “[Italy should take] measures to increase labor market flexibility and modernize
work organization, while promoting the synergy between flexibility and security and avoiding marginalization
of disadvantaged persons”. Beautifully said.

8

according to the European Union
(i) Knowledge-based society and social cohesion
The building of a European knowledge society is a clear political objective for the
European Community. The research aims to provide the basis of understanding needed to
ensure this takes place in a manner which accords with specific European conditions and
aspirations.
— Improving the generation, distribution and use of knowledge and its impact on
economic and social development [….] Research will focus on: characteristics of knowledge
and its functioning in relation to the economy and society, as well as for innovation and for
entrepreneurial activities; and the transformation of economic and social institutions; the
dynamics of knowledge production, distribution and use, role of knowledge codification and
impact of ICTs; the importance of territorial structures and social networks in these
processes.
— Options and choices for the development of a knowledge-based society [….]
Research will focus on: features of a knowledge based society in line with European social
models and the need to improve the quality of life; social and territorial cohesion […]
— The variety of paths towards a knowledge society. [….] Research will focus on:
globalization in relation to pressures for convergence; the implications for regional variation;
challenges to European societies from a diversity of cultures and increased sources of
knowledge […](ii) Citizenship, democracy and new forms of governance
The work will identify the main factors influencing changes in governance and
citizenship, in particular in the context of increased integration and globalization and from the
perspectives of history and cultural heritage […]Research will focus on: relationships
between integration, enlargement and institutional change within the context of their
historical evolution and with a comparative perspective […]
The research activities carried out within this thematic priority area will include
exploratory research at the leading edge of knowledge on subjects closely related to one or
more topics within it. Two complementary approaches will be utilized: one receptive and
open—the other proactive.
These directives to European researchers are cast in sufficiently loose and
meaningless (what are the “receptive” and the “proactive” approaches to research?) terms that
they may well turn out to be harmless. Still, they denote a vision of “research policy” grossly
at odd with the model we believe is prevalent in most Anglo-Saxon countries: this includes a
notion of scientific innovation as, almost by definition, unpredictable; and a role of public
funding of research as encouraging innovation rather than imposing straightjackets on what is
admissible research.
Once again this is an illustration of Problem 2 above.

4.3

FOREIGN AND DEFENSE POLICIES

A. A brief history of European foreign policy…..
Foreign and defense policies are areas with obvious economies of scale. The
European countries started to talk seriously about foreign policy questions in the context of
European institutions in the early seventies. After a few false starts the Hague summit of
1969 created the “European Political Cooperation” which established regular meetings of
foreign ministers and diplomats to discuss issues of foreign policy and exchange
9

information.7 The result of this effort was unimpressive: Gordon (1997) notes that the
outcomes of the EPC were “mostly declaratory, always based on consensus and limited to
uncontroversial or peripheral issues”.
The next big step was the Maastricht Treaty of 1991-92 that created a Common
Security and Foreign Policy (CSFP). Despite some lip service to the Commission
involvement in the CSFP, it was clear from the very beginning that this branch of
policymaking was solidly in the hands of member countries national governments. Between
1994 and 1997 the EU adopted 66 common positions on just about any foreign policy issue
and the CFSP issued a flurry of declarations, 163 only in 1998: Chris Patten, the current
commissioner for External Relations, dryly noted that “they came usually a week or two
after they could influence events”8 .
But EU foreign policy failed miserably its first true test: Yugoslavia. Richard
Holbrooke (1999), the Clinton envoy negotiator in Yugoslavia, reveals the failure of the
Europeans diplomacy facing a home turf problem. The cause was twofold. First, the lack of
common purpose of European policy. Germany was traditionally closer to the Croats (their
ally in the Second World War) and France and Britain to the Serb (their ally). Second, the
reluctance of Europeans to use force. In one of the most famous episodes, unarmed Dutch
peace keepers (although it is far from clear exactly what peace they were trying to keep)
watched helplessly truckloads of Muslim civilians taken to their deaths by the Bosnian Serb
paramilitary forces in Srebrenica. According to Red Cross records, in the five days period
July 12 to 16 1995 the eventual death toll of civilians in Srebrenica was 7,079. In fact, the
Dutch peace keepers were even taken prisoners, becoming an obstacle to further action to
prevent atrocities: while the massacre was taking place “the Dutch government refused to
allow air strikes until all its soldiers were out of Bosnia….. The other Europeans had reached
their limits; with their soldiers also at risk they were not going to engage in any action that
endangered the Dutch” The Americans had a very hard time extracting from their allies a “go
ahead” for the bombing; in the end they took the initiative unilaterally.
Partly as a response to this failure, the Treaty of Amsterdam created a “High
Representative for the CFSP,” with the purpose of forging and carrying out a common
position on foreign policy. This position has been filled since its creation by the former
Spanish foreign minister Javier Solana. It has become something of a cliché in Europe to
mention this position and the word “success” in a single breath. This obviously depends on
one’s standards. It was widely reported that during the most serious test of the European
foreign policy after the Balkan crisis, the Iraq crisis, Javier Solana had serious problems even
getting through to his counterpart Colin Powell. Obviously there was little point in talking to
the exponent of a common foreign policy position that did not exist.
The one achievement of the position that is invariably mentioned is the
reconstruction phase in the Balkans, where the differences between European countries had
long been resolved by the American-led conflict itself. At the moment, this position coexists
with the Commissioner for External Relations, with an ill-defined division of labor. Once
again, this is a recipe for institutional turf war, which manifested itself clearly during the runup to the Iraqi conflict.
B. …and of European defense policy
A strong and powerful foreign policy needs a strong military, and European countries
are too small to achieve a credible military strength individually. But progress towards closer
military cooperation and integration has always been hampered by two clearly contrasting
views of this force: as complementary to NATO (Britain) or as substitute for or even rival to
7
8

For more details on the EUP see Nutall (1992)
A cited by Evert (2002).

10

NATO (France, and possibly Germany). This, in turn, is closely linked to two alternative
views about the common foreign policy.
With the fall of the Berlin Wall and the revival of the “stronger Europe” position,
inevitably the relation between NATO and any European defense policy became the key
issue. In 1991 in Maastricht the two views could not be reconciled and the compromise was a
declaration that the Western European Union (created in 1948 as a first step towards closer
military cooperation) was “the European pillar of the Atlantic Alliance” and “the defense
arm of the EU”, although the practical implications of this declaration were far from clear. In
the same year, the Europeans created also a “European Security and Defense Policy (ESDP)
within NATO.
The Europeans also realized that their first need would have been a Fast Response
Force to be deployable in a short time in case of a crisis. The Helsinki Headline Goal was to
create a force of 60,000 deployable in 60 days and to be maintained for at least a year. The
Clinton’s administration position towards the FRF and ESDI was summarized in the famous
“3 D’s”: any European common defense policy should not duplicate NATO assets, should not
discriminate against NATO members that are not part of the EU, and should not entail actions
that would decouple Europe from the US.
The Bosnian crisis was also a watermark for the European defense policy: the
Europeans realized that without NATO support they would have not been able to wage a
campaign of military significance, hence the key problem switched from “how to exclude
NATO” to “how to integrate into NATO”. Hence, between 1994 and 1996 the NATO
countries’ agreed to the creation of combined joint task forces between NATO and the WEU;
and by the Berlin agreement of 1996, the latter could use NATO assets for mission of the
joint task force. The Clinton administration position was that allowing access to NATO assets
would have prevented duplication of NATO military headquarters and military staff
However, the Berlin agreement quickly proved of little use. As Shacke (2002) argues,
the European quickly realized that the key problem was not access to NATO assets, but
access to US assets: if the US was not committed to a mission, having access to NATO assets
without the US contribution would not allow putting together missions of military
significance.
In fact, at the end of November 2003 France, Germany and the UK finally seemed to
have come to an agreement on a common defense policy. Its core provisions were the
possibility of military operations under the label of the EU, a move long resisted by the UK.
However, no sooner was the deal announced that the usual variety of interpretations surfaced:
the UK insisted that these EU operations would not undermine NATO’s role as the primary
military organization in Europe; France and Germany interpreted instead the deal as a first
move towards independence from NATO.
C. Is a European defense and foreign policy feasible?
In our view, a CSFP will be impossible in Europe for many years to come, for
essentially four reasons. First, the persistent divergence of preferences among European
countries on goals and means in foreign policy. Those in favor of a common European
foreign policy typically refer to the generally wide support amongst European citizens for a
common foreign policy: according to the latest data from the Euro barometer about 70 per
cent of European citizens feel that the EU should be more involved in foreign policy.9 But
these polls do not say “which” foreign policy the citizens of different countries favor. In fact,
the fault lines on foreign policy run very deep in Europe. It is easy for a US commentator to
underestimate the extent to which the support for a common foreign policy is driven by
cultural anti-Americanism in continental Europe. A recent survey sponsored by the European
9

Eurobarometer, March May 2003.

11

Commission has found that Europeans believe that the United States is second only to Israel
and North Korea (in this order) as an enemy of world peace. Anti-Americanism is instead a
minority position in Anglo-Saxon countries and in the former communist countries that will
soon become members of the EU. It is difficult to think how these two divergent views of
foreign policy could be reconciled in a common foreign policy.
Second, and yet again, the all-pervasive principle of institutional balance. Foreign
policy in the US is clearly the domain of the executive, particularly during a crisis. For
instance, once the executive has decided to go to war, there is very little Congress can do
politically to stop the President. Even if all European countries decided to give up their
sovereignty in issues of foreign policy – an unlikely event as we have seen - , different EU
institutions would still want to have a say, and they are entitled to do so under the DC.
Third, unwillingness to spend on defense. The US defense budget is the largest in the
world, and greater than the combined spending of the next 25 countries. Europe spends about
2 per cent of GDP in defense, the US about 3.5 and growing. But these numbers
underestimate the differences in military capabilities on the two sides of the Atlantic. For
most of the post war period the US spent much more than Europe on defense, building an
enormous advantage in terms of stock. Some experts (Evert (2002)) argue that the difference
in technological level of the US versus European armies is such that if Europe does not catch
up quickly, the two militaries would not even be able to “communicate” properly. US
spending is also geared towards more modern and lethal weapons: the US spends about
$26,800 in defense R&D per soldier, as opposed to about $4,000 in the EU.10
As a result of this investment in extraordinarily expensive technology, the US has a
full control of the commons, i.e. the sea, the air and the space, as Posen (2003) documents. A
single nuclear sub marine which is key for sea control costs between 1 and 2 billion dollars.
The Marine Corps alone has more military personnel than the combined land and air forces of
the United Kingdom. It is extremely unlikely that Europe can come even close to such
powerful military given the already heavy burden of its public sector.
Fourth, the aversion of important EU members to engage in military actions and put
men and women on the ground. As Posen (2003) notes one area in which the US is not as
strong is in the size of its ground troops, so it becomes especially difficult for the US to
engage an enemy in its own territory. Europe could in principle provide help in this
dimension, but based on previous experiences in Yugoslavia it is unclear whether the
European public opinion and European governments would tolerate loss of European lives. In
addition, the result of the large investment in technology by the US is a great reduction of risk
to military personnel. Hence, currently to achieve the same military objective EU forces face
much larger risks than the US forces; as Schacke (2002) notes, this reinforces the
unwillingness of European countries to put men and women on the ground - a catch-22
problem for Europe.
D. Summing up
The history and recent developments of foreign policy at the European level reflect in
many ways the two problems above. First, Problems 1.A - the turf war between European
institutions – and 1.B – the fuzzy allocation of powers between national governments and
European institutions. Second, Problem 2, which manifests itself not so much in dirigisme,
impossible given the disagreement between members, but in the verbosity that and still
largely characterizes the debate on the issue.

10

Schake (2002), citing John Dowdy of McKinsey in “Impotent Europe”, the Wall Street Journal
Europe, September 21 2001.

12

4.4

THE MAASTRICHT TREATY AND THE STABILITY AND GROWTH PACT

A. What is (or was) it?
The Maastricht Treaty, in effect since 1993, established that EU members wishing to
qualify for EMU (the European Monetary Union) had to show sufficient budget discipline by
1998. Specifically, by that date the budget deficit and government debt had to be below 3 and
60 percent of GDP, respectively. The same limits applied to EMU members even after
1998;11 however, “exceptional and temporary” deviations from the 3 percent deficit limit
were allowed. De facto, the debt requirement was never enforced; hence we will focus on the
deficit criterion. The Stability and Growth Pact of 1997 (effective from January 1st 1999)
was then designed to give concrete content to several aspects of the Maastricht Treaty
regarding economic policies in the EMU. A recent vote of the Council in November 2003
suspended the application of the Pact to France and Germany despite their open violation of
it; thus, at the time of this writing the Pact may be declared officially dead soon. Still, it is
instructive for our purpose to revisit its birth, life, and death.
Let’s begin with what the Pact is. It first introduces the notion of “appropriate
medium-term budgetary objective of positions close to balance or in surplus” that each EMU
country should follow, although it quickly became clear that there was no agreement on the
interpretation of this notion. The Pact then tries to give operational content to the notion of
“exceptional and temporary” deviation of the deficit from its 3 percent limit. This can result
from a recession of at least 2 percent of GDP; however, a country can also argue that a
smaller recession constitutes a justifiable cause, although member countries were asked to
commit not to make such a case if GDP falls by less than .75 percent.
The Treaty and the Pact also put in place a system of multilateral surveillance similar
to that for the Lisbon process12 . Each year, acting on a recommendation by the Commission,
the Council adopts the Broad Economic Policy Guidelines; each EMU member submits a
Stability Programme with its medium terms objectives for the budgetary position; and again
on a recommendation by the Commission, the Council then delivers an opinion on each
Stability Programme. In case of actual or expected violations, an Excessive Deficit
Procedure is started; this long process can lead to a series of recommendations and warnings
of increasing severity, until refundable, non-interest bearing deposits of up to .5 percent of
GDP can be imposed in case of repeated non compliance.
B. Why was it adopted?
Economists have long tried to find an economic rationale for the budget deficit
provisions of the Maastricht Treaty and of the SGP, with little success. In fact the motivation
for the MT and the SGP was largely political. Germany was about to surrender control of its
currency, and feared that this would endanger its long-cherished monetary stability. As a
consequence, it wanted to make sure that it would not have to share membership of the EMU
with countries whose economic policy was, in some sense, grossly mismanaged. The budget
deficit and government debt were the two best observable proxies for the somewhat hard to
define notion of economic mismanagement.

11

They also apply to EU members that are not EMU members (Denmark, Sweden, and the United
Kingdom): however, for these countries there are no sanctions in case of violations of these rules.
12
In fact, it has been decided recently that the Employment Guidelines and the Broad Economic Policy
Guidelines would be “coordinated”.

13

C. How has it worked?
The run up to the monetary union has coincided with a sharp reduction of European
deficits. For some countries (especially Italy and Greece) the threat of exclusion from the
initial phase of the monetary union acted as a critical incentive; but during the nineties the
world business cycle was also favorable, making it easier to achieve fiscal virtue.. As the
pressure to converge to the Euro vanished and the world economy turned sour, maintaining
the Pact has proven challenging. The Pact came under attack from several political and
academic quarters on two grounds. First, the Pact prevents countries from using fiscal policy
for anti cyclical purposes, exactly when they need the fiscal instrument the most, namely
when they have given up the monetary instrument. Second, the Pact has forced cuts on
growth enhancing public investment. Gali and Perotti (2003) show that both criticisms do not
stand up to careful scrutiny.
D. An evaluation.
The biggest problem with the implementation of the Maastricht Treaty and the Pact is
that they have opened the door for an expansion of the powers of the Commission far beyond
those initially envisioned; and that these enhanced powers almost invariably express
themselves as an attempt at coordinating and fine tuning the fiscal policy of member to an
extent that is clearly beyond the expertise and capabilities of any institution.
The best, and admittedly extreme, illustration of this is the highly publicized
reprimand to Ireland. In 2001, Ireland was coming from a decade of unprecedented growth
(in fact, the highest growth rate in the world, with the possible exception of China), coupled
with the highest budget surplus and the lowest public debt burden in the Euro zone. Starting
from a surplus of 4.5 percent of GDP, in its Stability Programme of 2001 the Irish
government proposed a reduction in the cyclically adjusted surplus by .3 percentage points
in 2001, and by a negligible amount in 2002. This was to be achieved mostly by reducing
income and indirect taxes and by slightly increasing government investment, a reversal of the
indications in the Stability Programme of a year earlier. The ECOFIN Council of February
2001 issued an unprecedented reprimand to Ireland with the following motivation: “.... the
Council considers that the stimulatory nature of the budget for 2001 poses a considerable risk
to the benign outlook in terms of growth and inflation…. [… ] the strategy of inducing labor
force increases though an alleviation of the direct tax burden, which was recommended in the
2000 Broad Economic Policy Guidelines … may have become less effective than in the past,
because it took place in the context of an expansionary budgetary policy… Further, while
indirect taxes cuts have a once-and-for-all effect on the price level, they probably have no
lasting effect on the rate of inflation but clearly further stimulate demand” (Official Journal C
077, 9.3.2001, p.7).
To be fair, nothing serious has happened after this incident, which however kept Irish
and European officials frantically busy for weeks; yet, this example illustrates what is wrong
with the implementation of the Pact, and more generally with much of the dirigiste culture of
the institutions involved with economic policy. In particular, a seemingly unlimited
confidence in their ability to determine the quantitative consequences of infinitesimal
changes in this or that type of expenditure or tax. Notice also in the passage above the rather
exotic statement about the cross derivatives of inflation to taxes and change in the budget
deficit, and other statements inconsistent with each other.
A second manifestation of the attempt at economic dirigisme is in the insistence on
coordination of member states’ economic policies, as illustrated in a recent proposal for an
overhaul of the European Union by the Commission: “Policy co-ordination should make it
possible to attain a common assessment of the economic situation, agree on the orientation of
the policy response and monitor its implementation. It should be regular, not limited to
14

exceptional circumstances…. The instruments of economic policy coordination,
particularly the major economic policy guidelines and the opinions on the stability and
convergence programmes should be drafted on the basis of proposals from the
Commission rather than mere recommendations from which the Council may depart by
qualified majority.” (European Commission (2002), p.7, emphasis in the original). .
E. The (near) death of the Pact
On November 25 of 2003 the Council met to decide on the cases of France and
Germany, which had been clearly breaking the 3 percent limit for some time. It was a clear
cut case of violation, much more serious than Ireland. The Council rejected the
recommendations by the Commission that these two countries should implement urgent
measures to reduce the cyclically adjusted deficit by .4 and .8 percentage points of GDP,
respectively. Instead, with a decision of doubtful legal basis, it voted to “hold the Excessive
Deficit Procedure in abeyance” for these two countries. This unprecedented and very visible
decision to a large extent killed the Pact and lead to a very harsh exchange of accusations
between Commission and Council: in fact, at the time of writing (end of January 2004) the
Commission is suing the Council at the European Court of Justice over the issue. Clearly,
there is no chance that the Pact can be applied in the future to any country after it was so
overtly suspended in the case of the two largest countries of the Union. This event has proven
that, whatever sovereignty large countries are willing to cede to the Commission in matters of
importance like fiscal policy, they will take it back – legally or less legally if necessary for a
sufficient number of them. It is probably more constructive to simply recognize this point of
realpolitik, declare the Pact dead, and return fiscal discretion to the national governments.
The heavy involvement of the Commission in the minute fiscal decisions of member
countries is unwarranted, confusing and counterproductive.
The Commission could still have an important role, but one that is more reminiscent
of its original role as think tank of EU institutions: it would require national governments to
be as explicit as possible about what they are doing in fiscal matters, it could act as a
watchdog that flags creative accounting (broadly defined to include unreasonable
projections), and that presents the likely scenarios on the basis of its own assessment of
demographic and other trends etc. This task is important, because it would enforce a process
that relies mostly on peer pressure and bad publicity to achieve whatever fiscal discipline the
EU governments decide is desirable.
F. Summing up
The life and death of the Pact are illustrations of both Problems 1 and 2. We have
seen the extraordinary amount of dirigiste rhetoric that has accompanied several parts of the
life of the Pact. Its recent life is also an example of the fuzzy allocation of powers between
European institutions – Problem 1.A – and between European institutions on one hand and
member states on the other – Problem 1.B.

5

SOLUTIONS?

We now briefly describe how the draft Constitution would affect the problems we
have illustrated above. This document - which is several hundred pages long - is divided in
three parts. Part 1 describes the nature, competences and institutions of the union in general

15

terms. Part 2 contains a list of fundamental rights. Part 3 contains a very long list of Protocols
and Annexes regarding the functioning of the Union.
5.1

PROBLEM 1 AND

THE DRAFT CONSTITUTION

Problem 1.A
The rotating presidency is abolished, and a chairperson of the EU is chosen by the
European Council for a period of two and one-half years. The new President will also
represents the EU abroad “at a comparable level”, hence in meetings with, say, the US
President. In deference to the principle of institutional balance, the DC also envisions some
marginal enhancement of the power of the Commission President.
In the area of the Common Security and Foreign Policy (CSFP) the DC creates a new
position, the “EU minister of foreign affairs”, which combines the positions of the High
Representative for CSFP and of the Commissioner for External Relations. An agent of the
Council, he will chair the meetings of foreign ministers and will be accountable to member
states, not to the Commission. Still, and again in deference to the principle of institutional
balance, the DC stipulates that “with the exception of CFSP…. [The Commission] shall
exercise the Union’s external representation”. Combined with the important external role
attributed to the new President of the EU, this tri-partite assignment of responsibilities for
external relations again appears a recipe for turf wars.
Overall, these changes appear to strengthen the European Council at the expense of
the Commission. As such, they are the result of a clear intergovernmental choice; in fact, they
were supported by the five largest countries and by Denmark and Sweden, and opposed by all
other countries and by the Commission..
But other changes might well go in the opposite direction. A provision with possibly
important consequences is the change in the Qualified Majority Voting (QMV) procedure in
the Council. In particular, the new QMV system envisioned by the DC greatly simplifies the
procedure and de facto reduces the threshold of votes for a qualified majority.
Thus, although the flavor of the DC is certainly not favorable to the Commission, it is
hard to predict whether, in practice, the Commission will gain or lose power relative to the
other institutions. And perhaps we should not care too much. In our view, the balance of
power within the EU is driven more by the political climate and the influence of the various
countries and coalitions than by the institutional changes that are currently on the table.
Consider the history of the Commission. In the seventies and eighties, the Commission
played a key role as provider of the impetus for ever increasing integration. The importance
of the Commission has decreased in the nineties, for several reasons. Undoubtedly, some
Euro-fatigue set in, as many countries wanted to take a breather after decades of breathtaking integration; the Franco-German entente, that had provided the political backing for
most Commission initiative, basically dissolved with German reunification, for political
reasons but also for personal reasons (Schroeder and Chirac never managed to replicate the
chemistry that bonded Kohl and Mitterrand); the Santer Commission was embroiled in
accusations of corruption, and had to resign in 1999; its successor, the Prodi Commission,
has been beset by leadership and image problems in many countries; and the Commission
itself has ruffled many feathers, by continuing to claim powers in areas in which no major
member state will relinquish to a super national institution.
Problem 1.B
One important goal of the DC should have been to clarify the division of
responsibility between the EU and national governments and to limit the EU role. Indeed, in
16

an effort to satisfy the intergovernmentalists, the DC now goes into lengthy discussions of the
role of the EU versus national governments in all policy areas, with a rich array of
distinctions between exclusive and shared competences. The DC lists five areas where the EU
has exclusive competence: monetary policy, commercial policy, customs union, conservation
of marine biological resources, certain international agreements. But the DC also lists 10
areas where the EU shares competence with Member States, including such broad and
loosely defined areas as “economic, social and territorial cohesion”, and “freedom, security
and justice”. Moreover, the DC gives a very generous interpretation of the notion of shared
competence: “Member States shall exercise their [shared] competence to the extent that the
Union has not exercised, or has decided to cease exercising, its competence” (art. 11). The
DC also provides for an unspecified “supporting, coordinating or complementary action” in
five more areas, including industry, culture, and education and vocational training (art. 16).
Finally, the DC states rather cryptically that “the Union shall have competence to promote
and coordinate the economic and employment policies of Member States” (art. 11). These
provisions are unfortunate. A legitimate interpretation of all this language is that it intends to
leave the door open for future more or less veiled extensions of competences on virtually all
possible areas one can think of.
Part 3 of the DC, probably read in its entirety by very few courageous Europeans, (a
group that does not include the authors of this paper), is essentially a collection of documents
describing in minute details the functioning of the Union in all policy areas, from agriculture
and fisheries to transportation, from judicial cooperation to humanitarian aid. This is probably
the part of the Constitution that, because of its level of detail and sheer length, has raised the
most eyebrows. Somewhat surprisingly, this was included largely at the insistence of
conservative governments and parties, who thus wanted to make sure that the competences
and, implicitly, the limits to the EU institutions were clearly enshrined at the constitutional
level.13 However, this attempt largely failed: the ambiguous wording of Part 1 of the
Constitution can be used to justify any de facto allocation of competences to EU institutions.
Problem 1.C
Here the DC has achieved some progress. It does away with the confusing partition of
EC and EU. All Treaties and laws now fall under the heading of EU; and, importantly, the
EU as a whole has now a separate legal personality. In principle, a legal personality means
that, like pillar 1 legislative acts, pillar 2 and 3 legislative acts do not have to go through
approval of each parliament to become national legislation. A legal personality also means
that the EU can be represented as a separate legal entity in international forums. But since
these decisions, and foreign policy, are subject to unanimity in most cases, the practical
implication of this is as yet limited.
5.2

PROBLEM 2 AND THE DRAFT CONSTITUTION

The DC has taken several steps back on this problem. It begins with an
embarrassingly Eurocentric and historically inaccurate statement that “Europe has brought
forth civilization”. We thought that civilization (whatever that means) was born in
Mesopotamia, Egypt or may be China.
After this rather inauspicious beginning, Part 2 contains 54 articles of fundamental
rights, many of which include several related rights. We counted at least 91 separate rights
in these 54 articles. We doubt that many of them would rise to the dignity of a “right” in most
constitutionalists’ views. A highly cited one is the right of access to free placement service.
13

This view was expressed to us by a senior participant in the Convention.

17

This is one of the 11 articles under the chapter of social solidarity, with many very specific
welfare rights spelled out. On the other hand Article 17 stresses that “the use of property may
be regulated ……for the general interest”. One could go on but it is quite clear that Part 2 of
the DC is deeply rooted in a Continental European tradition as opposed to an Anglo Saxon
one and shows a tendency to micromanagement.
This part of the DC certainly gives ample justification for future dirigiste
policymakers to involve the EU in the minutiae of social policy.

6

CONCLUSIONS

Two are the problems that plague the current institutions of the European Union. One
is the effect of overlapping jurisdictions, resulting from layers and layers of agreements
reached with a heavy emphasis on balancing. The second is a tendency of dirigisme and
excessive faith in government intervention and policy coordination that also manifests itself
in pompous and empty rhetoric.
The DC is trying to solve the first problem. The glass is half empty and half full The
second problem, that we feel is probably more important, has to do with “culture” and visions
about the role of government. In this respect the DC adds to the problems.
These views should not be taken as saying that the European integration project is
intrinsically wrong. On the contrary there are many benefits form internalizing externalities
and economies of scale that can be gained with a super national structure. In fact those areas
where the two problems have been avoided have been a success for Europe. We offer two
examples. One is the European Central Bank (ECB) and the common monetary policy. Here
institutional complexity and turf war have been avoided14: the ECB is a truly independent
institution, and there is no confusion about who does what. The traditional European
verbosity has also largely been avoided: rather than listing many objectives, from full
employment to exchange rate stability and growth, the ECB has a clear objective of price
stability (intelligently interpreted by the ECB as some form of inflation targeting). The result
has been a success.
The second example is single market and competition policy. As Olivier Blanchard
explains in this issue, anytime in this area the EU has managed to take a pro-market attitude,
dismantling government subsidies and impediments to internal trade, it has had a beneficial
effect. But, again, no institutional engineering has been able to prevent France and Germany
from protecting their farmers, at the expense of the farmers of developing countries – all this,
of course, accompanied by a heavy barrage of third world rhetoric.

14

One exception is a turf war between the ECB and national Central Banks on issues of banking
supervisions.

18

REFERENCES
Alesina, A., I. Angeloni and L. Schuknecht (2002). What does the European Union do? NBER
Working paper.
Alesina, A., and G. Tabellini (2004). Bureaucrats or politicians?” NBER Working Paper
Alesina, A., and R. Wacziarg (1998). Is Europe going too far? Carnegie Rochester Conference,
Journal of Monetary Economics.
Baldwin R. and M. Wigdren (2003) Decision Making and the Constitutional Treaty: Wills the IGC
discard Giscard? unpublished
Berglof, E., B. Eichengreen, G. Roland, G. Tabellini, and C. Wyplosz (2003). Built to last: A
political architecture for Europe. CEPR, London.
Dewatripont M. I. Jewitt and J. Tirole (1999a) “The economics of career concerns part I” Review
of Economic Studies, 66 183- 198
Dewatripont M. I I. Jewitt and J. Tirole (1999b) “The Economics of career concerns part II” Review
of Economic Studies 66, 199 -217
Devuyst, Youri (2003): “The European Union at the Crossroads”, P.I.E. Peter Lang, Brussels
Evert, S. (2001). Unilateral America, lightweight Europe? CER Working Paper.
Evert, S. (2002). Shaping a credible EU foreign policy. Unpublished manuscript.
Evert, S., and D. Keohane (2003). The European Convention and EU foreign policy: Learning from
failure. Survival, 167-86.
Gali J. and R. Perotti (2003) Fiscal Policy and Monetary Integration in Europe Economic Policy,
forthcoming
Gordon P. (1997) Europe’s uncommon foreign policy International Security 74-100
Heyman P. (2001) Dealing with terrorism International Security, 24-38
Holbrooke, R. (1999). How to end a war. Random House.
Kagan, R. (2002). Power and weakness. Policy Review, n. 113.
Keohane, D. (2003). The way forward for European defense. CER Bulletin.
Klau, T. (2003). France and Germany: A remarriage of convenience. The Brookings Institution.
Nutall S. (1992) European Political Cooperation Oxford University Press, Oxford UK
Posen B (2003) Command of the Commons The military foundations of US hegemony International
Security 5-46.

19

Schake, K. (2002). Constructive duplication: Reducing EU reliance on U.S. military assets. CER
Working Paper.
Siendentop, L. (2000). Democracy in Europe.

20

