                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                            TIME-INCONSISTENCY AND WELFARE

                                           Jay Bhattacharya
                                           Darius Lakdawalla

                                         Working Paper 10345
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w10345


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      March 2004




We have benefited from discussions with Steve Garber, Michael Grossman, Jim Hosek, David Loughran,
John Romley, Neeraj Sood, Eric Talley, and participants at the Spring 2003 NBER Health Economics
Program Meeting. Lakdawalla is grateful for the financial support of RAND’s Institute for Civil Justice. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

©2004 by Jay Bhattacharya and Darius Lakdawalla. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.
Time-Inconsistency and Welfare
Jay Bhattacharya and Darius Lakdawalla
NBER Working Paper No. 10345
March 2004
JEL No. I1, H2, D6

                                            ABSTRACT

Self-control devices, such as rehabilitation programs, group commitment, and informal fines, can

make time-inconsistent smokers better off. Health economists have used this result to argue in favor

of cigarette taxes that restrain smoking. However, taxes alone are not Pareto-improving overall,

because they benefit today’s smoker at the expense of her future selves, who have less demand for

self-control. We suggest an alternative class of taxation policies that provide self-control and benefit

a smoker at every point in life. Smokers could be allowed to purchase “smoking licenses” when they

start to smoke, and in exchange commit their future selves to face compensated cigarette taxes. We

show that this scheme – which could be made voluntary – improves the welfare of current and

future smokers, generates positive revenue for the government, and can be made incentive-

compatible. Similar schemes can also be envisioned to address problems of time-inconsistency

in other contexts.

Jay Bhattacharya
Stanford University
Center for Primary Care and Outcomes Research
117 Encina Commons
Stanford, CA 94305-6019
and NBER
jay@stanford.edu

Darius Lakdawalla
RAND Corporation
1700 Main Street
Santa Monica, CA 90407
and NBER
darius@rand.org
1       Introduction

Traditional intertemporal economic models feature agents that fully account

for the effects of current decisions on future outcomes and constraints. Such

agents make time-consistent decisions in the sense that today’s plans for fu-

ture consumption will not change tomorrow. Government intervention aimed

at changing intertemporal prices can only harm them.

    In recent years, this view has been challenged by economists who argue

that people make time-inconsistent decisions, in various intertemporal con-

texts including savings, health investment, and smoking.1 While the analysis

of time-inconsistency has a long history in economics, Laibson (1994, 1997)

rekindled interest in it as a means of understanding anomalies in intertem-

poral decisionmaking.2 Since time-inconsistent agents do not make intertem-

porally optimal decisions, government manipulation of relative prices could

potentially improve welfare. At a minimum, time-inconsistency challenges

the received doctrine of laissez-faire in competitive markets.

    However, this theoretical result does not so easily translate into policy

prescriptions. Since a time-inconsistent individual has different preference

orderings at different points in her life, she also has different preferences for

policy. The Paretian approach to this problem adopts only those policies

that make an individual better off at all points in time; we will call such

    1
    See Lowenstein and Prelec (1992) for a start.
    2
    See Strotz (1955) and Phelps and Pollak (1968) for early work by economists on
myopic behavior.


                                        1
policies Pareto self-improving.3 While nearly all economists would agree

that a Pareto self-improving policy ought to be adopted, it is extremely

difficult to find a tax or subsidy policy that is Pareto self-improving for a

time-inconsistent agent. The value of a tax is as a commitment device, but

the value of such a device decreases with age. For example, an agent at the

end of life has little or no interest in future commitment, even though she

may have clamored for it 40 years earlier. This vexing result obtains even

though time-inconsistent agents make demonstrably inefficient decisions.

    In the face of this problem, economists have chosen to depart from the

Pareto criterion in various ways. For instance, in their analysis of smoking

and cigarette taxation Gruber and Koszegi (2004, 2001) have advocated a

“dictatorship of the present” that privileges the preferences of the current

period self over all future selves; the same approach is suggested by Crop-

per and Laibson (1998) in the context of policy evaluation. Alternatively,

O’Donoghue and Rabin (1999) choose to privilege the “long-run self” who is

constituted by equally weighting the preferences of all temporal selves. These

or other approaches are reasonable and defensible, but they lack the incon-

trovertibility of the Pareto criterion, because the researcher must ultimately

make a judgement about which self or selves to favor.

    A more attractive approach is to characterize policies that are Pareto

   3
     To our knowledge, Phelps and Pollak (1968) are the first authors to adopt a Pareto
criterion in an analysis of time-consistency, although they focus on an intergenerational
version. Goldman (1979) implicitly assumes such a criterion for time-inconsistent agents,
while Laibson (1994) discusses it in the context of a time-inconsistent savings model.


                                           2
self-improving for time-inconsistent individuals; this is the strategy we adopt

in this paper. In particular, we propose a scheme of “consumption licenses”

that we show to be Pareto self-improving. These can be used to improve

the welfare of time-inconsistent smokers and addicts, to encourage more ef-

ficient savings behavior by time-inconsistent individuals, or to ameliorate

other problems of time-inconsistent decisionmaking.

   Taxes or subsides alone are too blunt to be Pareto self-improving. Since

the demand for taxes and other self-control devices declines as time-horizons

shorten, it is inevitable that selves close enough to the end of their lives will

be hurt by taxes, even though younger selves may benefit. Cross-sectionally,

any given level of taxation is likely to benefit younger consumers at the

expense of older consumers. The solution to this problem is to shift the

cost of taxation entirely onto the people with the highest willingness to pay,

namely the youngest selves, while continuing to target the effect of taxation

toward the future selves.

   Consider the example of cigarette taxation for time-inconsistent smokers.

Suppose an individual were allowed to purchase a smoking “license” early in

life if she chooses to be a smoker. This license binds her to face a compen-

sated cigarette tax in the future. While the future self is forced to face a

tax that she did not choose, she is exactly compensated for it by means of a

lump-sum transfer that is fixed in advance. This leaves the future self indif-

ferent between having the license and not having it. Moreover, the current



                                       3
self values taxation as a self-control device and is willing to pay for it. She is

better off with the license, even though she paid for it. This scheme improves

the welfare of a time-inconsistent individual at every point in time and gen-

erates revenue that can be used for administrative costs, general revenue, or

for further welfare improvement. The government is creating a market in

which the current self can pay to restrain the future self. The creation of

this market generates social surplus. As discussed in our conclusions, similar

schemes can be envisioned for encouraging retirement savings or mitigating

other problems of time-inconsistency.

   An important advantage of this system is that any time-inconsistent

smoker would voluntarily opt in for some positive license fee and tax. As

a result, it can be selectively applied to smokers with a self-control prob-

lem, without affecting clear-sighted rational addicts. Moreover, smokers with

more severe self-control problems can choose to pay the highest license fees

and tax rates. The costs of these Pareto self-improving schemes lie in difficul-

ties of enforcement and compliance; in Section 5 we discuss the construction

of incentive-compatible licenses and mechanisms for enforcement. As we dis-

cuss there, cheating in our scheme is relatively easy to observe ex post, and

this affords the government some leverage in deterring such behavior.




                                        4
2       Time-Inconsistency and Welfare

Loosely speaking, time-inconsistency under-weights the future in favor of the

present. A myopic individual lacks intertemporal integrity in the sense that

her preferences today conflict with her preferences tomorrow. But what does

it mean to make a time-inconsistent individual better off when her different

temporal incarnations disagree about what is better or best?

    It is problematic that the different incarnations of a myopic individual

can express meaningful preferences about only current and future consump-

tion.4 Different temporal selves thus make decisions over different commodity

spaces. The difficulty with defining a welfare criterion in this context is well

described by Goldman (1979):

           The question of Pareto efficiency is especially vexing... If we

        were to identify the players...by both calendar time and the his-

        tory of actions prior to the times of their decisions, then Pareto

        comparisons under alternative histories become impossible since

        the set of players changes.

There is an obvious way around this difficulty that several authors, including

Goldman (1979), have adopted. We can define a Pareto self-improving inter-

vention as an intervention that makes every temporal self at least as well off

as before the intervention. Just as in the traditional inter-personal Pareto
    4
    Preferences are “meaningful” here if they can be acted upon. While some may wish to
change the past and may sincerely regret errors made, past consumption decisions cannot
be undone.


                                          5
criterion, the Pareto self-improvement criterion avoids the problem identified

by Goldman (1979) by evaluating each self on her own terms.

   Different authors have argued for other welfare criteria, all of which nec-

essarily privilege different temporal selves over others. Cropper and Laibson

(1998) assume that “the goal of the government at time t is to maximize the

well-being of self t.” This approach is also adopted by Gruber and Koszegi

(2001). Caplin and Leahy (2000) call this welfare criterion the “dictatorship

of the present,” since it calls for government policy to support the interests

of the current self even if future selves disagree.

   O’Donoghue and Rabin (1999), on the other hand, advocate maximizing

the welfare of the “long-run” self.5 This involves positing the existence of a

fictitious period zero self, who makes no decisions but weighs the utility of all

the other myopic selves equally. O’Donoghue and Rabin argue that because

myopic individuals have present-biased preferences, their welfare ought to

be evaluated in a future-oriented way. The long-run preference criterion

accomplishes this goal, but like the “dictatorship of the present” welfare

criterion, it may condone an intervention even if some selves are made worse

off. However, as O’Donoghue and Rabin point out: “When applied to inter-

temporal choice, the Pareto criterion often refuses to rank two strategies even

when one is much preferred by virtually all period selves, while the other is

preferred by only one period self.”

   5
     Gruber and Koszegi (2001) consider both dictatorship of the present and long-run
welfare criteria.


                                         6
    Clearly, adopting a Pareto self-improvement criterion limits the set of in-

terventions that can be said to improve outcomes for the time-inconsistent

relative to the more paternalistic criteria. Nonetheless, a major theme of

our paper is that even with such a restrictive welfare criterion, there are still

interventions that can be said to improve outcomes for the time-inconsistent.

Moreover, a Paretian criterion has well-known advantages worth restating.

It avoids privileging the welfare of one self over another, and a Pareto self-

improving intervention has the virtue that it could be voluntarily chosen.

Finally, the policies developed under the Pareto self-improvement criterion

would be adopted under the “dictatorship of the present” and long-run wel-

fare criteria as well. This suggests a viable research strategy: search first for

interventions that satisfy Pareto self-improvement, and relax welfare criteria

accordingly if this fails to be fruitful.



3     A Model of Time-Inconsistency

In traditional intertemporal economic models, future returns are discounted

exponentially; if tomorrow’s return is discounted at a rate β ∈ (0, 1), then the

day after tomorrow’s return is discounted at a rate β 2 , and so on. Adapting

an approach to intergenerational discounting from Phelps and Pollak (1968),

Laibson (1994) incorporates time-inconsistency into this framework by in-

troducing a second discounting parameter—δ ∈ (0, 1)—that applies to all

future returns, except those in the immediate future. A time-inconsistent

                                            7
agent discounts tomorrow at β, the next day at βδ, and the next day at β 2 δ.

Heuristically, myopic agents discount the future “too much,” at the rate δ.

   We lay out our “consumption license” proposal in the context of smoking

behavior, or more generally, addiction. However, we discuss in our conclu-

sion how our results for smoking licenses have natural applications to savings

and other problems of time-inconsistency. We analyze a finite-period model

to bring into relief the problem that individuals at the end of life have very

different demands for self-control than their earlier incarnations. For pur-

poses of clarity and tractability, we limit this model to three periods, the

minimum length necessary to illustrate time-inconsistency. In each period,

individuals allocate their (constant) income to cigarettes, other non-addictive

consumption goods, and saving. We allow both borrowing and lending.

   We model time-inconsistency as hyperbolic discounting: next period’s

utility is discounted by some factor βδ, while the following period’s utility

is discounted by β 2 δ. While β < 1 for all individuals, δ < 1 for the time-

inconsistent, and δ = 1 for the time-consistent. Let the time-inconsistent

smoker’s period utility at time t be given by ut . Since there are three periods,

there are three selves, each with a different utility function, Ut :




                                        8
                                           U3 = u3                           (3.1)

                                  U2 = u2 + δβu3                             (3.2)

                         U1 = u1 + δβu2 + δβ 2 u3                            (3.3)


   We consider a general period utility function that satisfies the conven-

tional assumptions of addiction. Period utility ut depends on consumption

ct , the stock of addiction St−1 , and cigarettes smoked at . We make the usual
                                                                   ∂ut
assumptions that addiction lowers the level of utility, so that   ∂St−1
                                                                          < 0, but
                                                             ∂ 2 ut
that it raises the marginal utility of smoking, so that    ∂St−1 ∂at
                                                                       > 0. Each

period, individuals receive income I and choose their net savings vt , which

can be negative if they choose to borrow. All debts must be cleared in the

final period. The stock of addiction depreciates at the rate γ and evolves

according to:



                            St = (1 − γ)St−1 + at .                          (3.4)

   In the terminology of Laibson (1997), there are (at least) two fundamen-

tally different types of time-inconsistent individuals, sophisticates and naifs,

distinguished by their extent of self-awareness. A sophisticated agent realizes

that she will betray herself in the future, and thus undertakes actions now

which restrict future behavior. A naive agent betrays her old selves each


                                       9
period, but makes plans and choices blissfully unaware that she will betray

herself again.

    In this paper, we focus our attention on sophisticates because there are no

Pareto self-improving interventions that naifs would condone ex ante. Time-

inconsistent individuals who do not understand their self-control problem

never have positive demand for self-control devices; therefore, taxes and other

such devices never improve their utility, at least according to the myopic

preferences they themselves possess.

    Matters are a bit more complicated than this, however, because the life-

time utility of naifs can be unambiguously increased by assigning them the

consumption path chosen by sophisticates. This is because their actual pref-

erences match those of sophisticates, but naifs themselves fail to account for

this. Nonetheless, ex ante, naifs would reject an offer consisting of a sophisti-

cate’s consumption path, because they misunderstand their own preferences.

The welfare of a naif compelled to accept the sophisticate’s consumption

bundle would be retrospectively Pareto self-improved in the sense that she

could observe at the end of her life that she had been made better off. How-

ever, prospectively (i.e., when offered the bundle) she would not feel as if

her welfare would be improved by the new bundle. The Paretian analysis

in neoclassical economics is concerned with prospective, or forward-looking,

welfare.6 As a result, it is not possible to Pareto self-improve the welfare of

   6
     Caplin and Leahy (2000) take issue with the focus of neoclassical theory on forward-
looking behavior, and argue that preferences at any point in time are best specified over


                                           10
a naif by assigning her the sophisticate’s consumption bundle, or by provid-

ing a self-control device that would be valued by a sophisticate. The policy

implications of naive time-inconsistency are discussed further in Section 6.

    Sophisticated agents who understand their self-control problem take steps

to combat it, although their measures are imperfect, and their utility can be

enhanced by the provision of self-control devices. Optimal life-cycle decisions

for sophisticates represent a subgame-perfect equilibrium, which can be de-

rived via backwards induction. Accordingly, we begin our analysis of the

problem in the third and final period, where the individual takes as given

the stock of addiction S2 and net savings v2 , chosen in the previous period.

She solves:



                              max u3 (v2 + I − pa3 , S2 , a3 )            (3.5)
                                a3


Optimal smoking in the final period satisfies:


                                          ∂u3 ∂u3
                                     −p      +    =0                      (3.6)
                                          ∂c   ∂a

This defines a policy function a3 (S2 , v2 ) that the period 2 agent takes as

given, according to the following problem:




an individual’s entire life, including the past.


                                              11
max u2 (v1 + I − v2 − pa2 , S1 , a2 ) + βδu3 (I + v2 − pa3 (S2 , v2 ), S2 , a3 (S2 , v2 ))
v2 ,a2


                               s.t. S2 = (1 − γ)S1 + a2

                                                                                     (3.7)


Exploiting the first order condition that characterizes the policy function a3 ,

the first order conditions for period 2 smoking and savings simplify to:



                                 ∂u2 ∂u2      ∂u3
                            −p      +    + βδ     =0
                                 ∂c   ∂a      ∂S                                     (3.8)
                                         ∂u2      ∂u3
                                             = βδ
                                         ∂c       ∂c

So far, none of these first order conditions departs from the time-consistent

conditions, because this is essentially a two-period model.

    With the solutions to these later problems in hand, we can character-

ize the behavior of the self in period 1, and observe the effects of time-

inconsistency on smoking and savings. The period 1 self takes as given the




                                           12
policy functions of the later selves and solves:


 max u1 (I − pa1 − v1 , S0 , a1 )+
 a1 ,v1


           βδu2 (I + v1 − v2 (S1 ,v1 ) − pa2 (S1 , v1 ), S1 , a2 (S1 , v1 ))+

          β 2 δu3 (I − pa3 (S1 , v1 ) + v2 (S1 , v1 ), (1 − γ)S1 + a2 (S1 , v1 ), a3 (S1 , v1 ))

                                     s.t. S1 = (1 − γ)S0 + a1

                                                                                           (3.9)


The optimal savings and smoking conditions illustrate the nature of time-

inconsistency in this framework.

                                     T ime−Consistent F OC
                    z               }|                  {
                       ∂u1 ∂u1      ∂u2    2 2        ∂u3
                    −p    +    + βδ     + β δ (1 − γ)     +
                       ∂c   ∂a      ∂S                ∂S
                                      Self −Discipline Incentive                          (3.10)
                            z            µ }|                 ¶{
                                          ∂u3 dS 2   ∂u3 ∂v 2
                            β 2 δ(1 − δ)           +             =0
                                          ∂S dS1     ∂c ∂S1



      T ime−Consistent F OC      U nder−Saving Incentive     Over−Saving Incentive
          z    }|    {           z          }|          {    z   }|         {
          ∂u1      ∂u2                       ∂u3 ∂a 2                ∂u3 ∂v 2             (3.11)
              − βδ            = β 2 δ(1 − δ)          + β 2 δ(1 − δ)
           ∂c      ∂c                        ∂S ∂v1                  ∂c ∂v1

Equation 3.10 characterizes the optimal smoking decision, while equation

3.11 characterizes optimal savings. The first four terms in equation 3.10 rep-

resent the lifetime marginal utility of smoking in a standard time-consistent

problem: this includes the current net marginal utility of smoking, plus the


                                                 13
future marginal disutility of building up an addictive stock. The last term,

which is zero for a time-consistent individual with δ = 1, represents the

attempt of a time-inconsistent agent to discipline his future selves.

    Self 1 recognizes the negative impact of self 2’s smoking decisions on the

capital stocks inherited by self 3; the negative impact is summarized by the

term in large parentheses.7 Self 1 would like self 2 to pass more capital goods

onto self 3; instead, self 2 chooses to pass along fewer capital goods (savings)

and more capital bads (addiction). Since self 1 knows this, she disciplines

self 2 by cutting back on smoking today and thus giving self 2 less incentive

to smoke. This shifts some of self 2’s investments out of smoking and into

savings and consumption.

    While the sophisticated agent cuts back smoking to discipline her future

self, the net effect of time-inconsistency on cigarette consumption is ambigu-

ous because of its effect on savings. For a rational individual, the right-hand

side of 3.11 would be zero, but the sign for a time-inconsistent individual is

ambiguous. There are two offsetting effects, which appear on the right-hand

side. On the one hand, the period 1 self would like to encourage more sav-

ings in period 2 by saving more herself. This is the “Over-Saving Incentive,”

by which the time-inconsistent agent saves more than the time-consistent

agent. On the other hand, saving more today will allow the period 2 self to

smoke more; this “Under-Saving Incentive” gives the period 1 self incentives

   7           dS2                             ∂a2
     The term dS 1
                     (which equals (1 − γ) +   ∂S1   > 0) represents the total derivative of S2
with respect to S1 .


                                               14
to withhold savings. This incentive to withhold savings translates into an in-

centive to smoke more for the myopic agent. Therefore, it is unclear whether

the myopic agent smokes more or less than the rational agent. It is likewise

unclear whether a myopic addict saves more or less than a rational one.



4       Smoking Licenses

Absent any government intervention, the period 1 self undertakes costly

activities—namely cutting back consumption—to promote self-control in fu-

ture periods. This is why she is willing to pay for a licensing scheme. In

particular, suppose that the period 1 self can purchase a smoking license,

at some fee φ. This commits the period 2 self to a cigarette tax τ , but also

entitles her to receive a lump-sum transfer of q = τ a2 . Finally, to ensure that

the scheme is strictly welfare-improving for the periods 2 and 3 selves—as

opposed to just welfare-neutral—we allow a small positive payment ² made

in period 3 to participants.8 The period 1 self is willing to give up resources

in exchange for a higher relative price of cigarettes in period 2, even though


    8
     This scheme is somewhat similar to one envisioned by O’Donoghue and Rabin (2003).
To solve the problem of heterogeneous preferences across people, they propose that the
government charge a one-time fee in exchange for the right to purchase either the ad-
dictive or non-addictive commodity, alongside a slightly higher one-time fee in exchange
for the right to purchase both commodities. Time-consistent consumers would choose the
more expansive license, while time-inconsistent consumers, wanting a self-control device,
would choose to buy the license for the non-addictive good only. However, such licenses
are not generally Pareto self-improving for time-inconsistent agents, except in particular
circumstances. From the point of view of later selves, binding restrictions are imposed
without any offsetting compensation.


                                           15
self 2’s welfare is unchanged.

   In equilibrium q = τ a2 , but q is set in advance of period 2 and is thus

taken as given by the period 2 self, who faces the following problem:


             maxu2 (I + v1 − v2 − p(1 + τ )a2 + q(τ ), S1 , a2 )+
             v2 ,a2


                      βδu3 (I − pa3 (S2 , v2 , τ ) + v2 + ², S2 , a3 (S2 , v2 , τ ))    (4.1)

                      s.t. S2 = (1 − γ)S1 + a2


Since compensated (Hicksian) demands are always downward-sloping, a com-
                                                                    da2
pensated cigarette tax will lower smoking, so that                  dτ
                                                                          < 0. In addition, a

compensated cigarette tax will promote savings. Formally, the first order

conditions for this problem are:



                                         ∂u2 ∂u2       ∂u3
                           −p(1 + τ )       +     + βδ     =0
                                         ∂c   ∂a       ∂S                               (4.2)
                                              ∂u2      ∂u3
                                            −     + βδ     =0
                                              ∂c       ∂c

   A compensated tax change has no first-order impact on consumption,

because q(τ ) − p(1 + τ )a2 ≡ −pa2 , regardless of τ . Using this result simplifies

the comparative statics and allows us to derive the Hicksian elasticities:




                                                16
                                      2          2
                        da   p ∂u2 ( ∂ u22 + βδ ∂∂cu22 )
                           = ∂c ∂c                       <0                       (4.3)
                        dτ                D
                                        2
                         dv    − ∂u  2 ∂ u2 2
                                  ∂c ∂c2
                                            p (1 + τ )
                            =                            >0                       (4.4)
                         dτ                D


D is the positive Hessian term associated with the maximization problem.

Note that we are not considering the effect of the period 3 payment ², because

we are assuming it to be sufficiently small.

   Even though the compensated tax alters the allocation of resources, it

does not affect self 2’s utility: the first order impact of the compensated tax

on self 2’s consumption is zero. The small transfer ² thus makes the agent

strictly better off from both the self 2 and self 3 perspectives. The period

1 self will also be better off with some nonzero tax, as long as the agent is

time-inconsistent. The impact of the compensated tax on this self’s utility

can be derived by differentiating the following with respect to τ :9




   9
      In the objective function below, we have substituted the compensating transfer q =
pτ a2 (S1 , v1 , τ ).


                                          17
   maxu1 (I − pa1 − v1 − φ, S0 , a1 )+
    a1 ,v1


             βδu2 (I + v1 − v2 (S1 , v1 , τ ) − pa2 (S1 , v1 , τ ), S1 , a2 (S1 , v1 , τ ))+

             β 2 δu3 (I − pa3 (S1 , v1 , τ ) + v2 (S1 , v1 , τ ) + ², S2 , a3 (S1 , v1 , τ ))   (4.5)

    s.t. S1 = (1 − γ)S0 + a1

             S2 = (1 − γ)S1 + a2 (S1 , v1 , τ )


From the period 1 self’s perspective, the marginal utility of the compensated

tax is:

                            Smoking P revention           Savings P romotion
                        z           }|            {   z  }|         {
                                     ∂u3 ∂a 2                ∂u3 ∂v 2
                        β 2 δ(1 − δ)          + β 2 δ(1 − δ)          ≥0                        (4.6)
                                     ∂S ∂τ                   ∂c ∂τ

The marginal utility is exactly zero for a time-consistent individual whose

δ = 1, but strictly positive for a time-inconsistent individual with δ < 1. The

compensated tax shifts period 2 resources out of smoking and into savings.

Therefore, the marginal utility of licensing has two components. The “Smok-

ing Prevention” effect is the benefit to the period 3 agent of less smoking in

period 2. The “Savings Promotion” effect is the benefit of more period 2

savings.

   Since the scheme generates surplus for a time-inconsistent individual, the

government can sell licenses to such agents. The proceeds can be used to

cover the administrative costs of the program, and/or to generate public

                                                      18
revenue for any number of purposes. The license fee willingly paid by a

time-inconsistent agent satisfies:

                         Smoking P revention                Savings P romotion
                     z           }|            {     }| z       {
                                ∂u3 ∂a 2                 ∂u3 ∂v 2
                   β 2 δ(1 − δ)           + β 2 δ(1 − δ)
                φ<              ∂S  ∂τ                   ∂c  ∂τ   ,                          (4.7)
                                         ∂u1
                                                   ∂c


which is simply the dollar equivalent of the utility derived from the com-

pensated tax. The dollar-value of the compensated tax rises with the degree

of time-inconsistency (δ), the harmful future effects of smoking ( ∂u
                                                                   ∂S
                                                                      3
                                                                        ), the

tax-responsiveness of smoking and savings ( ∂a
                                            ∂τ
                                               2
                                                 and                    ∂v2
                                                                        ∂τ
                                                                            ),   and the extent of
                                               ∂u3
under-saving, which affects the ratio           ∂c
                                               ∂u1   .
                                                ∂c




5     Commitment and Enforcement

An important feature of the licensing scheme we propose is that it would be

voluntarily chosen by time-inconsistent agents, but refused by time-consistent

ones. In this way, the government could target commitment devices toward

those who need them and could avoid inflicting distortionary taxation on

others.

    The problem with any voluntary commitment device is that it affords

several opportunities to cheat. In this section, we discuss potential safe-

guards. Naturally, many of these problems disappear or become attenuated

in a mandatory licensing environment. Voluntary licensing schemes that of-


                                           19
fer some choice over different licensing schemes, on the other hand, will be

subject to potential cheating problems. For the period 2 self, there are incen-

tives to avoid the tax chosen by the period 1 self entirely, while pocketing the

transfer. For the period 1 self facing an array of license/tax combinations,

there are incentives to choose a tax and transfer scheme such that the tax

collected from the period 2 self does not equal the transfer. In both of these

situations, cheaters are difficult to observe ex ante, but considerably easier

to observe ex post. Therefore, ex post fines against cheaters can encourage

compliance. We characterize the size of the necessary fines.


5.1     Malfeasance in Tax Compliance

Even though self 1 may prefer the licensing and taxation scheme, self 2 still

has incentives to skip out on the taxes altogether. However, since the gov-

ernment knows the transfer amounts and can potentially keep track of taxes

paid, it can easily determine ex post who has paid less tax than promised.10

An individual who has paid less tax than he initially committed to can be

fined an amount in period 3. In our three-period model, a fine equal to

the total period 2 tax bill exactly offsets the gain from avoiding taxation.

Therefore, any negligible probability of additional sanctions will induce com-

pliance.

   From self 2’s perspective, the marginal utility of evading taxes altogether
  10
     This could be either because the individual evaded taxes or because she misreported
her future consumption.


                                          20
            ∂u2
is simply    ∂c
                (τ pa2 ).   There are no indirect effects of taxation, because from

self 2’s perspective, self 3’s decisionmaking is optimal; in other words, with

just a two-period horizon, there is no time-inconsistency. Similarly, the

marginal disutility associated with the fine of π = τ pa2 in period 3 is given

by: βδ ∂u
        ∂c
          3
            (τ pa2 ). Optimal decisionmaking implies that     ∂u2
                                                               ∂c
                                                                    = βδ ∂u
                                                                          ∂c
                                                                            3
                                                                              . There-

fore, from self 2’s perspective, the marginal disutility of the lost payment in

period 3 is exactly equal to the marginal utility of avoiding all taxes. Con-

sequently, any negligible probability of further sanctions is enough to induce

compliance.

   The results for this case are clean in part because period 3 is both the

end of the smoking license and the end of life. If, instead, the agent chooses

a license that expires before the end of life, the results would be complicated

by the fact that the fine in period 3 could serve a self-discipline function.

In this case, the results would depend on the extent of under-saving (which

influences the marginal utility of consumption in period 3 relative to period

2), and the disciplinary value of restricting income in period 3. One could

still rely on the useful fact that cheating is observable ex post; the difference

would be that the necessary fine would not always be exactly equal to the

monetary gain from tax evasion.




                                           21
5.2     Malfeasance in Taxation Choice

When individuals are heterogeneous in their demands, they can also cheat

by choosing the “wrong” tax and transfer bundle. In particular, suppose

there are light smokers and heavy smokers, where light smokers smoke less

in period 2 than heavy smokers: al2 < ah2 . For each type, there is an optimal

tax and transfer bundle. Define (ql , τl ) as the bundle for light smokers and

(qh , τh ) as the bundle for heavy smokers. We restrict the licensing fee φ to

be the same across types.11 Suppose further that, while these two types are

known to exist, no single individual can be identified as belonging to one

or the other type. Therefore, a light smoker can freely choose the heavy

smoker’s optimal bundle, and vice-versa.

    With time-inconsistent agents, either type of smoker can have incentives

to misrepresent herself. A heavy smoker may misrepresent himself to secure

a lower transfer to his future self. This reduces income and welfare in period

2, but this may be attractive to the period 1 self since it may restrain future

smoking. On the other hand, a light smoker may misrepresent himself in

order to secure a larger transfer in period 2 and thus generate a positive net

transfer for his future self. The positive income effect might outweigh the

disciplinary effects. Misrepresentation can have ill effects either by destroying

budget-balance or by allowing the period 1 self to lower the welfare of the

period 2 self. In either case, the result can be a policy that is not Pareto
  11
    Allowing different licensing fees would create more difficult problems of enforcement,
because it may not be possible to discern willingness to pay for the license even ex post.


                                           22
self-improving.

   To design an incentive-compatible licensing scheme, we will take advan-

tage both of the welfare-improving aspects of the optimal policy, and of the

fact that it is easy to observe, ex post, smokers who have chosen the wrong

bundle, because they will violate budget-balance. These ideas are similar to

those we use to construct an incentive-compatible licensing scheme in the

previous section.

   We need two safeguards. First, we will allow smokers in period 2 to

opt-out of the licensing scheme, as long as they forfeit a tiny “processing

fee” from their period 3 pay-out. Period 2 selves would never opt-out of

their optimal scheme, but they would opt-out of any scheme in which tax

payments exceed the bond posted. Faced with the possibility of period 2 opt-

out, the period 1 self will never choose a scheme under which tax payments

exceed the bond. On the other hand, to eliminate the choice of a scheme

where the bond payment is less than taxes, the government could adopt a

policy of fining agents who violate budget-balance in period 2. Under a few

conditions discussed below, this penalty is sufficient to force each type to

choose its proper bundle.

   Imposing a bit more structure on the model, we can show that the threat

of a period 3 fine, coupled with allowing opt-out in period 2, are enough to

induce the period 1 self to choose the correct bundle. For heavy smokers,

cheating means choosing the bundle (ql , τl ). Under this bundle, the transfer



                                     23
does not adequately compensate the period 2 self, because τl ah > τl al = ql .

Therefore, even if the period 1 self chooses it, the period 2 self will choose to

opt-out and forego a small processing fee, because this has a discrete negative

impact on the latter’s utility.

   For the light smoker, cheating means choosing the bundle (qh , τh ), which

involves a transfer that exceeds the individual’s tax payment. While self 2

would not choose to opt out of this scheme on her own, the threat of a fine

could cause her to do so. For self 2, the first-order benefit of remaining in the

fraudulent scheme is the extra consumption earned, τh (ah − al ). Since self 2

is time-consistent, it is straightforward to show that a fine of π = τh (ah − al )

is exactly enough to offset the value of cheating.12 Any negligible probability

of further sanctions (like imprisonment, for example) would be enough to

encourage self 2 to opt out rather than face the fine. Knowing this, self 1

would never willingly choose the incorrect bundle.

   The analysis above was aided by the time-consistency of self 2, which

is an artifact of a three-period problem. We conjecture that extending the

time horizon will not fundamentally change the mechanisms that guarantee

truthful revelation of type. With three periods, Pareto self-improving licens-

ing schemes all have the same structure: a license fee paid by self 1, a tax

on the addictive good imposed on self 2, and a fixed bond returned to self 2

that makes her indifferent to the tax. The main complication of a longer time


  12
       This amount plus interest could be imposed on self 3 with the same effect.


                                             24
horizon is that it increases the dimensionality of possible licensing schemes.

Self 1 would still pay a single licensing fee, but there would be a tax and

corresponding bond for each self up to the second to last self. Though for-

malization is more complicated, the nature of the licensing scheme would

still be the same. In exchange for self 1 purchasing the licensing fee, the tax

receipts imposed on each self after self 1 would exactly equal the value of the

bond paid by the government.

   Assume still that there are still only two types of smokers—heavy and

light. We conjecture that a mechanism like the one we outline above, ex-

cept extended to multiple periods, would prevent self 1 from misrepresenting

herself. Each self beyond the first would be provided with an opt-out incen-

tive from the license, and the government would have to check each period

that the bond did not exceed taxes collected. In a sense, extending the time

horizon makes the government enforcement job easier, since it provides for

more punishment opportunities. In addition to satisfying the usual condi-

tion that the monetary value of the fine has to be equal to the monetary

value of cheating, it must also be true that cheating overall does not act

as a self-disciplinary mechanism. If it does, the monetary value of the fine

has to exceed the monetary value of cheating. As in the three-period case,

it seems likely to us that mechanisms like this would lead in equilibrium to

truthful revelation of type by self 1, though a formalization of this argument

is beyond the scope of this paper.



                                      25
6     Practical Considerations

We have presented a view of the licensing scheme in a three-period model,

but the length of each period could vary arbitrarily. Its key feature is the

presence of an initial period with a licensing fee but no tax, a second period

with taxes and a lump-sum transfer, and a final period where the original

licensing fee is recovered as a lump-sum. Moreover, the assumption that

individuals buy the license in the initial period is also not necessary. People

could choose to opt in at any time. This may be especially useful if agents

realize over time that they have a self-control problem.

    Many state and local governments use cigarette taxation as a source of

revenue in itself. While the scheme we considered above is designed to be

revenue-neutral, rents could in principle be extracted from time-inconsistent

smokers, since they have a positive willingness to pay for a license. Another

possibility is the introduction of licenses as a voluntary supplement to exist-

ing cigarette taxation laws. Sophisticated time-inconsistent smokers would

willingly choose to purchase a license that binds them to a higher future price

of cigarettes. Time-consistent or naif time-inconsistent smokers are indiffer-

ent between purchasing a license or not. Small costs like a processing fee for

those who wish to be taxed would thus discourage them from obtaining one.

As such, a voluntary licensing scheme has the further advantage of differenti-

ating between time-inconsistent smokers with a demand for self-control, and

others without such a demand. Blanket taxation is not able to make this


                                      26
distinction.

   One of the most difficult parts of implementing any optimal tax system—

and this is no exception—is calculating the optimal tax schedule. The usual

approach (cf., Gruber and Koszegi, 2001) is to calibrate utility functions

and calculate optimal tax schedules. A similar approach could be taken

here, although it is clear that such calibrations are imprecise at best. Unlike

calibration or estimation exercises, taxes never have standard errors. In the

case of smoking licenses though, the standard calibration approach could

be complemented by a revealed preference approach that could be used to

refine the optimal fee schedule over time. If the government offers a schedule

of taxes and fees and finds that few smokers are taking up licenses, it can

(assuming that smokers are time-inconsistent) infer that the license fees are

set too high relative to the tax rates. To produce information about fees that

are set too low, it could offer smokers the chance to buy out of their licenses in

the second period, for some small but nontrivial amount of money. If fees and

taxes are set optimally, no smoker would willingly give up resources to opt

out of the scheme. Therefore, if many smokers are opting out, it provides

evidence that fees are set too low relative to taxes. A voluntary program

would also have other advantages. If some agents are time-consistent, they

are better off without a licensing scheme, or regulation of any kind.

   While the exact nature of the enforcement is probably best determined

elsewhere, it is worth discussing some implementation issues. License and tax



                                       27
information could be embedded—visually or electronically—in state drivers’

licenses and identification cards. Merchants would then be required to re-

quest identification from everyone, rather than just suspected under-age

smokers. Even though the scheme is Pareto-improving at every point in

time, enforcement and monitoring will be necessary, as the preceding section

discussed.

    Finally, it is worth returning to the problem of naif smokers. Licensing

does not (prospectively) Pareto-improve their utility, and they would also

refuse to opt into a voluntary scheme. This is one argument in favor of

mandatory taxes rather than voluntary licenses. However, even mandatory

taxes are blunt instruments for improving the welfare of naifs, because they

do not Pareto-improve the utility of any smoker from a lifetime perspective.

Another approach is to regulate directly the smoking of groups we believe to

be naifs, such as juveniles. A licensing policy is not mutually exclusive with

these kinds of direct regulations. It is important to emphasize, however,

that the justifications for these policies are by nature paternalistic rather

than Paretian, because society is determining that individual preferences are

inappropriate and misinformed.



7     Conclusions

Time-inconsistency destabilizes the conventional view that government reg-

ulation cannot improve individual welfare when markets are competitive.

                                     28
However, conventional solutions like taxes often fail to meet economists’ usual

Pareto criterion. A tax that an individual finds optimal early in life may be

welfare-reducing later in life, when the demand for self-control is lower. One

way to solve the problem is to collect the costs imposed by taxation and

shift them entirely onto the individuals with the highest willingness to pay,

namely the youngest individuals.

   The analytics of our discussion were focused on addiction and smoking,

but similar schemes can be used to deal with time-inconsistency in other con-

texts, like savings. For example, an individual could pay for a future “savings

subsidy” that would be coupled with a lump-sum surcharge on an individ-

ual’s income taxes. In practice, the government could allow tax-deductible

contributions to a retirement account of $X, and levy an exactly offsetting

surcharge on an individual’s income taxes. This raises the relative return to

savings in the future, but maintains budget-balance and welfare-neutrality

for the future self. Moreover, the current period self would be willing to pay

for the savings subsidy and thus generate additional revenue, either for the

administrative costs of the program or for general state revenues. The general

point is that government policies to improve the welfare of time-inconsistent

individuals ought to shift their costs onto the early selves with the highest

willingness to pay. An early payment coupled with future compensated taxes

is one way to accomplish this objective, and to do so in a manner consistent

with the Pareto criterion.



                                      29
   While we have focused on individual welfare, our results could be inter-

preted primarily in terms of public finance as well. Time-inconsistent agents

represent a type of arbitrage opportunity that governments can exploit. Our

analysis suggests the possibility of welfare-neutral revenue-raising schemes

in the presence of time-inconsistent agents. Put bluntly, time-inconsistent

agents can literally “pump money” into an economy, because they are will-

ing to pay for the creation of a market that permits enforceable trades across

time.

   Future research is needed to calculate the appropriate tax and fee sched-

ule for a licensing scheme. We discussed above the possibility of taking a

revealed preference approach to calculating this schedule. Indeed, the pol-

icy implementation for smoking could be preceded by a small-scale social

experiment designed to elicit the appropriate schedule from a representative

population of smokers. One of the advantages of licensing over taxes alone

is that it permits a revealed preference approach, precisely because it makes

smokers better off at all points during the life-cycle, rather than simply at

those points where the willingness to pay for self-control is at its peak.




References
Caplin, A., and J. Leahy (2000). “The Social Discount Rate.” Working
  Paper 7983. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research.
Cropper, M., and D. Laibson (1998). “The Implications of Hyperbolic Dis-
  counting for Project Evaluation.” Working Paper 1943. World Bank.

                                      30
Goldman, S. M. (1979). “Intertemporally Inconsistent Preferences and the
 Rate of Consumption.” Econometrica 47(3):621–626.

Gruber, J., and B. Koszegi (2001). “Is Addiction Rational? Theory and
  Evidence.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 116(4):1261–1303.

Gruber, J., and B. Koszegi (2004). “Tax Incidence When Individuals are
  Time-Inconsistent: The Case of Cigarette Excise Taxes.” Journal of Public
  Economics Forthcoming.

Laibson, D. (1997). “Golden Eggs and Hyperbolic Discounting.” Quarterly
  Journal of Economics 112:443–77.

Laibson, D. I. (1994). Hyperbolic Discounting and Consumption. Ph.D.
  thesis, Massachusetts Institute of Technology.

Lowenstein, G., and D. Prelec (1992). “Anomalies in Intertemporal Choice:
  Evidence and an Interpretation.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 57:573–
  598.

O’Donoghue, T., and M. Rabin (1999). “Doing It Now or Later?” American
  Economic Review 89(1):103–124.

O’Donoghue, T., and M. Rabin (2003). “Studying Optimal Paternalism, Il-
  lustrated by a Model of Sin Taxes.” American Economic Review 93(2):186–
  191.

Phelps, E. S., and R. A. Pollak (1968). “On Second-Best National Saving
  and Game-Equilibrium Growth.” Review of Economic Studies 35:185–199.

Strotz, R. H. (1955). “Myopia and Inconsistency in Dynamic Utility Maxi-
  mization.” Review of Economic Studies 23:165–180.




                                    31
