NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

TOWARDS AN EXPLANATION OF NATIONAL PRICE LEVELS
Irving B. Kravis

Robert E. Lipsey

Working Paper No. 1034

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge MA 02138
November 1982

The research reported on is part of the NBER's program in International
Studies. This paper was prepared for the International Association for
Research in Income and Wealth Special Conference on Purchasing Power
Parities, Luxembourg, September 21—24, 1982. It is part of the NBER's
studies of U.S. Trade Policy, Competitiveness, and Capital Mobility in the
World Economy (NSF Grant No. PRA—8116459) and draws to a substantial extent
also on work done under NSF Grant No. SES—7913980—A01 to the University of
Pennsylvania. We are indebted to Martin Shanin, Robert Levinson and Linda
O'Connor for statistical assistance and to James Hayes for the preparation
of the manuscript. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and do
not necessarily represent those of the National Bureau of Economic Research
or the National Science Foundation.

'BR Wo r< 1 ng

i per

1O34

Nove:nhtjr 1982

TOWARDS AN EXPLANATION OF NATIONAL PRICE LEVELS

ABSTRACT

The purpose of this paper is to call attention to the need for a theory
of comparative national price levels and to explore some of the elements

that seem to belong to such a theory. Most theoretical discussions have
maintained that national price levels tend towards equality and focus on

presumably temporary divergences from equality. Yet strong evidence has
been accumulating that there are large and long—standing differences in
price levels, the highest of which are more than twice those of countries
with the lowest prices.

Long—run price level differences are most clearly related to levels of
real per capita output, with richer countries having higher price levels.

These differences have been explained as resulting from greater advantages
in productivity for the wealthier countries in goods production, mostly

tradable, than in services production, mostly nontradable. The differences
in relative productivity may be in total factor productivity or only In
labor productivity, reflecting the greater capital intensity of goods pro-

duction and possibly a higher elasticity of substitution between capital
and labor in goods production.

We find in the empirical analysis that a large part of the differences
in price levels can be explained by structural factors such as real GDP per
capita, the degree of openness of the economy, and the share of noritradable
goods

in output. The only non—structural factor emerging from a preliminary

analysis of several of these was the rate of growth of the quantity of money.
Kravis
Department of Economics
University of Pennsylvania

Robert E. Lipsey
National Bureau of Economic Research

Philadelphia, PA 19174

New York, NY 10003

(215) 898—5692

(212) 598—3533

Irving

B.

269 Mercer Street

Towards an Explanation of National Price Levels

I. Introduction

The main purpose of this paper is to call attention to the need for a
theory of comparative national price levels and to explore some of the elements that seem to belong to such a theory.'

It is overstating the case to claim that a theory of comparative price

levels does not exist, but the exaggeration is not great. As will be seen
in the next section, the theoretical discussions most prominent in the

literature have maintained that price levels tend towards equality. They
have thus directed attention to what have been regarded as temporary
divergences from equal (exchange—rate--converted) price levels, and diverted

attention away from the need to explain large and systematic differences in

national price levels that actually exist. The reality and extent of these
differences may be seen in the summary

data

presented in Table 1 (P. 9)

iir 1975 for the 34 countries included in Phase III of the International

Comparison Project (IcP). The figures indicate that GDP price levels in
high income countries were more than double those of countries with very
low incomes.

—

4-

—

II. Antecedents
The great majority of discussions of price levels by economists has
assumed that price level differences are evidence of disequilibrium and has
been concerned with the mechanism by which deviations from equilibrium are

erased. An early treatment ofprice levels along these lines may be found
in the course of David Hume's exposition of the factors determining the

distribution of specie. Hurne concentrated more on the mechanism by which
disequilibrium differences in price levels would be adjusted than on an
effort to describe the nature of the equilibrium levels themselves.

Indeed, he was sufficiently vague about the relationship between price
levels to have been subsequently interpreted by some writers as an early
advocate of the law of one price and by others as describing changes in

relative price levels as part of the adjustment process. (Collery, 1971,
pp. 25—26).

In the very large literature on the adjustment mechanism relying on
price elasticities, which may be regarded as a logical outgrowth of Hume's
work, the nature of the world price structure has seldom, if ever, been
clearly specified.

In much of this work the basic assumption has been that

changes in exchange rates could alter the price of one country's goods
relative to those of another country and consequently produce changes in

the balance of trade. But it has been rarely, if ever, specified whether
prices for identical goods do or do not have to be the same (after
allowance for transfer costs) in different countries (Kravis and Lipsey,
1978).

Price

levels also play a prominent role in the purchasing power parity

theory of exchange rates. Since the main thrust of the theory is that
exchange rates will adjust so as to equalize price levels (or changes in

—3—
price levels), price level differences are regarded as deviations from nor-

mal conditions. It is true that Cassel recognized that exchange rates
could deviate from purchasing power parity owing to an unequal impact of

the trade restrictions imposed by different countries on exports and
imports, and, in the short run, to capital movements and expectations

(Cassel, 1922, pp. 147—162; Holmes, 1967). But purchasing power parities
remained as the "normal" exchange rates (Cassel, 1922, p. 156) and even
these qualifications were often lost sight of in the writing of subsequent
supporters of the theory.

recent years, the purchasing pcer parity theory has been revived as
part of the monetary approach to the theory of the balance of payments.
In

Once again, the
Rather
role

a

main purpose of the theory was not to explain price levels.

"law of one price' was invoked to help demonstrate the dominant

of the supply of money in determining balance of payments deficits and

surpluses

and exchange rate changes. The law of one price, it may be

noted, has usually been held to apply particularly among the more
industrialized

sions

countries and particularly to traded goods. In some ver—

of the monetary approach, differences in the relative prices of home

oods were given a crucial though transient role in the adjustment mechanism (Frenkel and Johnson, 1976; Whitman, 1975),

Mention may also be made of a very different though less extensive
literature in which contrary assumptions were made about the possibility of

price level differences. The reference here is to writings on export—led
growth,

particularly those advancing the hypothesis of export—led growth

for advanced industrial countries. In one variant, the idea of export—led
growth

for such countries, with their varied exports, rests on the assump-

tion that relative national price levels are not necessarily determined as

—4—
variables hut rather that the price level can be used as a

endogenous

policy instrument. A widely held interpretation of the rapid recovery and
growth of western Europe after World War II was based on a reading of

events along these lines (Lamfalussy, 1963). Alternatively, cost—reducing
technological change may improve a country's price competitiveness and
though the price level is not held down as a matter of deliberate policy,
the result, under a system of fixed exchange rates, may be price—induced
export—led growth2 (Beckerman, 1965, p. 46).

Despite the dominant tendency to treat price levels as an incidental
facet of balance of payments and exchange rate problems, structural expla-

nations of price level differences did appear. The kernel of the idea that
price levels might be a function of real per capita income is found in a
statement by Ricardo that home goods would be more expensive "in those

countries where manufactures flourish" (Ricardo, 1817). A reasonably full
account of a real theory of comparative national price levels was set out
by Harrod (1939) in the 1930's and restated by Balassa (1964) and Aukrust

(1970) after World War ii. All these writers assumed that at least as a
first approximation internationally traded goods would tend to obey the law

one price. That is, local currency prices of of tradable goods were
proportional to exchange rates. Each set out in a fairly complex way what
of

has been called the "differential productivity model" (Kravis, Heston, and
Summers, 1978a). The essence of the model lies in differences in price
formation
traded

and in productivity for traded and nontraded goods. Prices for

goods are set in world maiiets while prices for nontraded goods are

determined

in the home market. With

similar prices for traded goods in all

countries, wages in the industries producing traded goods in each country
will depend on productivity. The wage level established in the traded

—5—
goods industries prevails also in the nontraded goods industries, but
international productivity differences are smaller for such industries.
This means that in poor countries the low wages established in the low—
productivity traded goods industries will apply also to the not—so—low productivity

nontraded goods industries. The consequence will be low prices

In low incon countries for nontraded goods. Since the price level is a
weighted average of traded and nontraded goods prices, price levels will
tend to be lower in low income than in high Income countries.
Harrod

(1939, P. 62) also stressed an additional point of great importance:

retail prices (and by implication final product prices for all commodities)

are amalgams of prices of traded and nontraded goods. Indeed, it is not
easy to think of a traded good that reaches its final purchaser without the
addition of nontraded services such as distribution and local transport.
This substantially widens the possible gap for differences in national

price levels. Jones and Purvis (1981) have recently explored this source
of differences in national price levels more systematically. They put
forth a model in which each country transforms imported inputs into final

goods by adding nontraded inputs. The imported inputs are obtained in
•.xchange for exports which are used as inputs for the production of final
goods in other countries; in these countries final products are produced by

adding nontradable factors to these imports of intermediate goods. Even if
the law of one price is assumed to apply to "middle products" —
—

inputs
final

it

the

traded

does not necessarily follow that the same law will hold for

product prices.4

Balassa

(1964)

and Clague and Tanzi (1972) were among the first to draw

on new statistical studies of purchasing power and of comparative levels of
real per capita GDP which provided direct comparisons of price levels.

—6—
These studies began to appear in the 1950's; the most recent is the source

of the data in Table i.5 For the most part this work concentrated on the
empirical problems of measurement rather than on explanation of the differences observed.6

The availability of more reliable comparisons of real per capita GDP
for a limited number of countries naturally raised the possibility of using
the relationship between exchange—rate—converted (nominal) and purchasing—
power—converted (real) CDPs to extend the real comparisons to other

countries. At first these short cut methods simply turned on the relationship of nominal (n) to real (r) GD? as revealed in the benchmark
studies; this relationship was used to estimate r from the n of each non—

benchmark country.7 Subsequently, searches were undertaken for factors
other than n which could explain r.8 Although these efforts were usually
cast in terms of a search for the relationship between real GD? per capita
and exchange—rate-converted GDP per capita, relative price levels are
implied by this relationship.

III. Defining National Price Levels for Comparative Purposes
These relationships may be clearly seen by calling attention to the
basic approach to international income and product comparisons used in

Gilbert and Kravis and all the major ensuing studies. The comparisons rest
on the identity: price (F) times quantity (Q) equals expenditure (PQ). For
a pair of countries, j and b (the latter the numeraire country), for a
single good:

li..9i= PjQ
(1) 1b

Qb bQb

—7-where the Ps are in each country's own currency. If a quantity conparison
(QJIQb) could easily be made for each good in a way that would Involve
identical or at least equivalent qualities, deriving comparative GDPs would
then simply be a matter of finding a suitable method of aggregating the

quantity ratios. In practice quantity comparisons are very difficult to
make, owing in no small degree to the fact that the most disaggregated
data with which it Is feasible to work in international comparisons of GDP
relate not to individual products but to detailed categories (e.g., men's

footwear) which contain a variety of products and sometimes a quite hetero—

geneous collection (e.g., women's dresses). For most detailed categories,
the matching and sampling problems become much more manageable if one tries

to obtain a sample set of price comparisons (j/b).9 Thus the typical
procedure in international GDP comparisons is to get an average j'b ratio
for each category, and, taking advantage of (1), to derive the Qj'Qb ratio

by dividing the price ratio into the expenditure ratio. The expenditures
are available (or at least obtainable) from each country's national
accounts data.

In the absence of such a comparative price study, the Ps and Qs are

nknown, and all that can be done for comparative purposes is to convert
the expenditures to a common currency via the exchange rate. For example,

where PQ =

GDP

in own currency, and ej/b is the number of units of j

currency that are required to buy one unit of b's currency on the foreign
exchange market, a CDP comparison is obtained by:

(2) EPQ
E bQ b

÷ ej/b

n

— 8—
This indeed is still the most common way of comparing GD? among countries;
it is used, for example, in the standard compilations of comparative GDPs

published by the United Nations and the World Bank. This approach Impli-

citly assumes that "j/b

el/b; that is, the relative purchasing powers of

the currencies are reflected in the exchange rate.

If the latter equality holds, exchange—rate converted prices in the two
countries are equal; there is only a world price level and national price

levels are all the same. In fact, the equality does not hold; the
purchasing power of a currency relative to a numeraire currency may in certain cases be two or three times the exchange rate (see Table 1), and comparisons based on exchange rate conversions are often far from the mark.

If j'b > el/b prices in j are higher than in b and an exchange rate conversion will overstate j's real GD? relative to b's; if j/b < el/b prices
in j are lower than in b and an exchange rate conversion will understate

i's real GDP (r). If j/b is known for every category of GDP, r can be
obtained:

(3) EPQ

bQb

/b =

r

where the purchasing power parity j/b is an appropriately weighted
average of the
is expressed in terms of units of i's currency per unit of b's.

Prices may be more conveniently compared by dividing the j/b or the PPPs
by the exchange rate:
(4)

...J...

el/b =

PLj/b

where PLj/b is i's price level expressed as a ratio of b's. PL may be compared for both detailed category

levels

and for aggregations such as GD?.

—9.-.

TABLE 1

National Price Levels for 34 Countries Classified by Real GDP per Capita, 1975
(U.S.

Income
Class

No. of
Countries
(1)

100)

Nominal
GDP per
Capita

GDP
Price
Level

(Mean)
(4)

(Mean)

9.0

3.7

40.7

Real GDP yer Capita
Mean
Range
(2)

(3)

(5)

1

8

Less than 15

2

6

15—29.9

23.1

12.1

51.7

3

6

30-44,9

37.3

24.2

64.5

4

4

45—59.9

52.4

38.7

73.6

5

9

60—89.9

76.0

82.3

107.4

6

1

90 & over

100.0

100.0

100.0

Notes:

Col. (1): The countries in each class are:
1. Malawi, Kenya, India, Pakistan, Sri Lanka, Zambia, Thailand,
Philippines
2. Korea, Malysia, Colombia, Jamaica, Syria, Brazil
3. Romania, Mexico, Yugoslavia, Iran, Uruguay, Ireland
4. Hungary, Poland, Italy, Spain
5. U.K., Japan, Austria, Netherlands, Belgium, France
Luxembourg, Denimark, Germany

6. U.S.A.

Cols. (2) and (3): GDP converted to dollars at purchasing power parities
Col. (4): GDP converted to dollars at exchange rates
Col. (5): PPP for GDP divided by the exchange rate. See Section III of text.
Means of columns (3) — (5) are simple arithmetic averages.
Source: Kravis, Heston, and Summers (1982).

— 10 —

The use of the national accounts framework provides the answers to some
important conceptual questions that plagued early efforts to produce an
operational definition of the •general price level" (Snyder, 1928;

Keynes, 1930, pp. 76—94). What prices to include and what weights to
assign to each price fall into place once it Is decided to base the comparisons on the national accounts concept of final expenditure on CDP.
Each price is, in principle, the weighted national average price; that is,
It Is the

that Is embedded in the national accounts expenditure figure

PjQ. The weights are determined by relative importance In expenditures on
GDP. There are to be sure problems about how the weights of the different
countries will enter into the weights used in the comparison, but at least
the conceptual problem of what data to start with at the country level Is
clearly resolved.'0

The concept of a national price level is a relative one; the prices of
the goods comprising the GDP of any country In any period have no absolute

meaning. There Is no meaningful average price of a unit of GDP. The concept of a national price level Is of Interest only when it is Intended to

compare price levels in two or more different situations. The reference
for the study of the price level of a given country is some other

country or group of countries. The average price comparison that Is sought
is between sets of prices separated in space.

The difficulties posed for the comparison of national price levels by
the existence of different currency units, Is, as indicated in (4), cir—
cuinvented by converting the price or purchasing power parity relationship

to a price level comparison by dividing by the exchange rate. The fact
that national price levels can be compared only by converting prices to a

common currency by means of exchange rates calls attention to the very close

— 11 —

connection between price levels and exchange rates. The economic links
will be discussed further on, but some aspects of the statistical
constructs that link

the

two variables may be usefully treated at this

point.

In the literature on the determination of exchange rates and also in
that dealing with purchasing power parity theory the term "real exchange

rate" is often encountered. The reference is usually to an index of
exchange rate changes (for currency j relative to a numeraire country,

b) corrected for relative price changes.'1 That is, country i's index of
the real exchange rate (IRER) in year t, taking year o as a base and country
b as the nuineraire country, is:

(5)

IRERl =

p

e9

The IRER involves the same terms as the index of relative price levels
converted to a common currency (IRPL), but the two are not identical.
IRPL, the index of price level movements adjusted for exchange rate

hanges, is the reciprocal of the IRER. For country
b in the year t,

taking

the year 0

et\
(6)

The
on

IRPLt.

e0

I

as

j

relative to country

the base year, IRPL is:

Pt

b
p°
b

concept of price levels used in the present study (PL) is based

the price level in a given country during a

given

period, taken

— 12

relative

—

to the price level of a numeraire country at the same period of

time. PL is formed by the numerator terms in (6):

(7)

PLt =

(pt

j

r

et)

j

j

÷ Pt
b

The terms to the right of the equal sign correspond, of course, to the form
given in (4), pt/pt + et

For present purposes, the b in (7) refers to a single numeraire

country, the U.S. The choice of the U.S. as a numeraire rather than some
other country does not affect the results except in a trivial scaling
sense. 12

Elements

IV.

in a Theory of National Price Levels

The elements that determine differences in the national levels of
prices during a given period of time may be classified in different ways.

A distinction might be made, for example, betweewn real and monetary fac-

tors or between long run and short run influences. Another classifIcation
that suggests itself is one that would divide the influences according to
which of the two factors that enter into the formula for the price level
(7) they affect —

i.e.,

those that operate on the relative domestic price

level (the PPP) and those that work through the exchange rate. From a
general equilibrium standpoint this may be viewed as a misleading dicho—
tomy since PPP and exchange rates jointly determine relative price levels
and are determined by them in an interdependent set of relationships.'3
The simple monetarist approach to the balance of payments, for example,
holds that price levels are the same everywhere (with exceptions for

nontradables, in some versions). A policy designed to alter the domestic—

— 13 —

currency price level will merely produce compensating changes in the

from the standpoint of the individual country. However, it
has already been established that in the real world price levels are not
exchange—rate

the same in different countries, and it

possibility

is

preferable to leave open the

that some Influences may operate on exchange rates with an

incomplete or delayed adjustment in domestic—currency price levels, and
others on domestic—currency price levels with an incomplete or delayed
adjustment in exchange rates.'4
The twofold classification used in the exploratory empirical work which
follows does not rest squarely on this distinction, but embodies some

aspects of it. Influences on the price level (PL) are viewed as consisting
of long run factors that determine the underlying price level and of short

run factors that cause deviations from the basic level. The long run

fac-

tors are regarded as real variables, and the short run factors are mainly
monetary variables.

Long

run structural factors. The long run factors are structural

variables that characterize the comparative economic framework of the
country.

One key structural variable, real per capita CDP, has already

:een shown to be positively correlated with the price level. Other structural characteristics that merit examination for possible links to price
levels are the industrial composition of GDP and factor endowments,
including the skill composition of the labor force and the distribution

of the labor force across industries. The size of the country and the
influence this has in leading It to more or less participation in inter-

national trade are also relevant. These variables are for the most part
long run
time.

In

character in the sense that they change only gradually over

— 14

—

As pointed out in the earlier discussion of the productivity differential model, some of these factors affect the price level primarily through
a

It

differential impact on the prices of tradable and nontradable goods.15
has long been a matter of casual empirical observation that service pri-

ces and the prices of nontradables generally are relatively cheap in 1cM

income countries. This is confirmed in the ICP studies. For the 34
countries included in the 1975 ICP benchmark study, classified by

increasing incon levels, the price indexes for tradable and nontradable
goods are as follows:

Income
Classa
1

2
3

4

5
6

aSee

GDP

Price Indexes
(U.S. = 100)
Tradablesb

Nontradablesc

40.6
51.7
64.7

60.0
70.7
86.6

24.9
37.2
46.5

73.5
107.5
100.0

97.9
118.5
100.0

53.4
96.7
100.0

Table 1 for income ranges and numbers of countries.

bFipl product commodities excluding construction.
cFinal product services and construction.
Source: Kravis, Heston, and Summers (1982), p. 196.

Of course, if tradable goods prices are linked more or less closely to
world price levels, but nontradables are cheap in low income countries, the
low income countries will be characterized by low price levels for GD? as a
whole, again a finding of the ICP studies evident in the above text table.
The productivity differential model ascribes low nontraded goods prices
to relatively high productivity in the poor countries' service industries,

industries that account for most nontraded goods (Kravis, Heston, and

Summers (1978a)). That is, although the productivity of poor countries is

- 15

-

low relative to that of rich countries in both service and commodity producing industries, the productivity differentials are smaller in the ser-

vice industries. Empirical evidence supporting this pattern of productivity differences was first offered by Kuznets through the use of sectoral
productivity ratios —

i.e.,

sectoral shares in output divided by sectoral

shares in employment.'6 Confirmation is found in Chenery and Syrquin's
"stylized" presentation of relationships for 101 countries covering the
period 1950—70 (Chenery and Syrquin, 1975, pp. 20—21; Chenety 1979, p.
20).17

Productivity in this model is usually interpreted in the Ricardian
sense, that is, as a partial productivity measure—-i.e. ,

output

per unit of

labor input. This explanation of differences In service/commodity price
ratios between rich and poor countries could be reconciled with an explana-

tion based on a standard factor proportions trade model. Using the latter
model we would explain the differences in service/commodity price ratios In
the same way that we explain differences in price ratios among tradable

goods: namely, the abundance and prices of the factors of production in
rich and poor countries.

The factor proportions explanation would run as follows. Service
industries are relatively labor intensive, on the average, in all

countries.18 Because capital is abundant in rich countries, labor is
highly productive and expensive. As a result, rich countries produce and
export

to poor (labor—abundant) countries capital—intensive tradables, and

poor countries produce and export to rich countries labor—intensive tra—

dables. Nontradables, however, must be produced by each country for its

own use. Since services (nontradables) are labor intensive, and since

labor is expensive in rich countries, the price of services tends to be

— 16

—

high in rich countries relative to the price of commodities, just as the
price of labor—intensive goods is high relative to that of capital—intensive

goods. We thus have an alternative explanation of the price structure that
does not require the assumption that productivity, with respect to all factors, or in the production function sense, is more similar between rich and
poor countries in services than in goods, and is even compatible with identical production functions in all countries.

Total factor productivity provides the test upon which the survival of
the differential productivity theory relative to this simpler explanation

depends. Some far-from—perfect data suggest that low income countries do
have a lesser disadvantage in services than in commodities with respect to
total factor productivity as well as for labor productivity:

Productivity Ratios, Lower Income Relative to Higher Income Countries
Services
Commodities
Labor
Labor Averageb
Averageb
Capital
Capital
Groupsa
1/VI

1.39

,28

.32(.55)

2.13

.48

.54(.89)

lI/VI

.99

.42

.46(.56)

1.05

.49

.54(.63)

.93

.53

.57(.63)

1.04

.57

.61(.69)

lIlly
See Table

1 for definitions of groups of countries.
bCapjtal and labor productivity combined with weights of .15 and .85, and
for figures in parentheses with weights of .25 and .75.

Source: Derived from Stern and Lewis data in Kravis, Heston, and Summers
(1983).

The reasons for these differences seem to be complex and cannot be

pursued here in any depth.'9 Kuznets (1957, p. 14f) mentions several factors affecting the supply and demand of the services and commodities and of

the types of labor that produce them, including, for example, the higher
incomes that some of the professions providing services may

be able to

— 17 —

extract

in low income countries that have relatively little national

investment in human capital. Another area of explanation may be found in
the differences In the diffusion of technology; that Is, the technological
gap separating productive practices in poor and rich countries may be
smaller in service production than in

commodity production, especially in

countries where backwardness in overpopulated rural areas may be a severe
problem.

A possible further explanation of the high relative prices of services
relative to commodities in developed countries Is that the elasticity of

substitution between capital and labor Is lower in service industries.20
If that Is the case, while in tradables industries, rich countries can

adapt to high labor prices by substituting capital for labor and thus
achieve higher labor productivity in tradables than poor countries even if
they are all on the same production function, the same possibility is not

available in nontradableg industrjes. There the substitution possibilities
are absent, or lower, and labor productivity differences are therefore also
absent, or lower.

Although we have described productivity differentials between tradables
and nontradables as a function of the level of per capita incon, there
could be other determinants of such differentials.

One country's tradables

sector may include a protected, backward agriculture, while another's may
be entirely

composed of hIghly efficient and competitive manufacturing.

One country's service sector may be filled with small, inefficient
retailing units protected by laws restricting mass retailers while
another's may permit vigourous competition which eliminates inefficient

units. Rational efficient growth should eliminate these intersectoral. dif-

ferences. But in

the meanwhile large dispersions in

sectoral

productivity

— 18 —

ratios

should, other things being equal, lead to high prices in the low

productivity sectors which would be more shielded from international

competition than high productivity sectors. Consequently, PL should vary
directly with the dispersion of sectoral productivity ratios of each

country. Unfortunately, it is difficult to develop accurate sectoral productivity measures for large numbers of countries, particularly for
industries subdivided into more than 8 or 10 branches.

Among the structural factors not related to the productivity differential model is the strength of the country's economic links

with

the rest of

the world, which we refer to as "openness.' For a country with a high
degree of openness a large proportion of tradables will actually be traded
and, other things equal, exports and imports will be large relative to GDP.

The degree of openness may affect the price level through its influence

on prices of the factors of production. The higher the degree of openness,
the higher the price of the abundant factor, abstracting from differences

in elasticity of factor supply. If services tend to be labor intensive
relative to commodities or tradables everywhere, the more open a labor—

abundant country, the higher its price of services and the higher its price

level, because openness would increase the price of labor. The more
capital—abundant

a

country, the higher the price of capital and the lower the

relative price of services and the overall price level. If low
labor

open

incomes

and

abundance are associated with low elasticities of labor supply, the

effect of a high degree of openness in producing a high price level would

be enhanced. This would not be the case, however, in surplus labor econo—
mies with very high labor supply elasticities and comparative advantage in

labor—intensive industries. In comparisons with the U.S., however, if the
U.S. is the most labor—scarce (capital—abundant) of all countries, the

— 19

effect of openness should be positive on all countries' price levels.

However, the effect should be stronger on the price levels of low income
countries, with the possible exception of the surplus labor economies.

The productivity differential model as described above points to
variables such as real per capita GDP (r) that attempt to capture the
direct Impact of the operation of the model, or to measures of relative

productivity in commodity and service production. An alternative
suggestion, first made by Clague and Tanzi (1972) and recently implemented
in a more plausible way by Isenman (1980) is to try to use the relative
quantity or prices of skilled labor to reflect differential productivity.
Isenman assumes that services are intensive in skilled personnel, and a
relatively large proportion of educated or highly skilled personnel or low

incomes for educated and skilled personnel would therefore have a negative
influence on a country's price level.

A number of other structural factors have been suggested. The role of
trade restrictions in tending to lower the price level of a country whose
exports are depressed by partner country restrictions to a greater degree

than it curbs its imports has already been mentioned in connection with

Cassel's work. Usher (1968, pp. 108—113) has offered a somewhat broader
treatment of this influence, and Clague (1980) has modelled the rela-

tionship. Clague and Tanzi (1972) argue that a country rich in natural
resources is apt to have a higher price level, other things (including r)
being equal, because abundant resources relative to human skills should
make commodity prices (which tend to be resource intensive relative to

services) relatively cheap and service prices relatively dear. Tradable
natural resource products will sell at or near world price levels, and high

service prices will lead to a high average price level for CDP. Usher

— 20 —

(1968, pp. 78f) pointed Out

that

transport costs might affect price levels

if their impact on home prices of exports and import goods was not

offsetting — as might be the case for a price—taking country distant from

world markets.2' Finally, Balassa suggested that a high share of tourist
expenditures (intensive in skilled labor) in exports would push the price
level up; so too would a high ratio of indirect to direct taxes, assuming
that the indirect taxes are also levied on the imports.22

Short run factors. By contrast to the relatively small literature
dealing with long run determinants of national price levels, relatively
short run influences have been the subject of close and extensive scrutiny

in the literature on exchange rate determination. The unexpected volatility of the nominal exchange rates of the main

currencies

since the end of

the Bretton Woods has led to a still on—going search for improved explana-

tions of exchange rate determinants.23 Some of this has been addressed to
the real exchange rate, which, as seen above, is the reciprocal of a time—

to—time index of relative price levels. It is clear that the volatility of
nominal exchange rates has been large relative to the movements of national

price levels (Flood, 1981; Aizenman, 1982). The implication is that there
short run factors that have a substantial impact on exchange rates

without necessarily involving offsetting adjustments in domestic—currency

price levels. If this is the case, short run variations

in price levels

(PL) may well be dominated by exchange rate influences.
The explanation of exchange rates which has the longest history, the
monetary approach, views the exchange rate as the relative price of two

monies, the price of each dependent on its supply and demand. Since the
law of one price is held to prevail, the exchange rate must equal the

— 21 —

purchasing power parity. Hence,
(8) el/b =

Given

the assumption that prices are determined by nominal money supply and

real money demand and that real money demand is determined by real income

and nominal interest rates (Dornbusch, 1980), changes in the exchange rate
are a function of these variables, as follows:

+

(9)

ej/b = F(mj/b,

The terms in

unit

+
u/b, ri/b)

(9) are in logs; and ej/b is the price in i's currency of a

of b currency, m the nominal money supply, i the nominal interest rate

and r the real income. The signs over the variables indicate that
increases in i's money supply or in interest rates relative to those of b

will raise the exchange rate (a depreciation) and a raise in j's real

income will have the opposite effect. The rise in interest rates and in
real income work through their impact on money balances, the former
decreasing the demand for money balances and thus raising prices and
causing a depreciation and the latter increasing the demand for money
balances with the opposite consequences.

The extensions of the monetary model to cope with the volatility of
exchange rates has led to formulations based on a view of the exchange rate

as the price of an asset, and to efforts to take account of the current

balance as the means through which shifts in asset holdings occur. This
avenue also led to the inclusion of expectations measured by interest rate
differentials or by the relationship of the forward to the spot rate, and
to attempts to take into account the effects of unanticipated events as
well.

Efforts to explain the volatility of exchange rates more specifically

— 22 —

include

the Dornbusch (1976) hypothesis that exchange rate changes

overshoot those required in the long run, as explained below.

Another line of explanation for the volatility of exchange rates rests
on the idea that current exchange rates reflect not only current supply and
demand conditions but also expectations about future market determinants

(Frenkel, 1976; Mussa 1976). The current price of foreign exchange is closely linked to its future price because like other financial assets foreign
exchange can be held at small storage cost and traded at small transactions

cost. Because of this link, changes in supply and/or demand conditions,
particularly unexpected changes based on new information, have magnified
impacts on exchange rates.

Various models of exchange rate determination differ too in their
treatment of relative prices —

across sectors and across countries. The

Dornbusch (1976) overshooting model does not assume any long—run inflation

differential between the country considered and the rest of the world. A
monetary expansion leads to an immediate depreciation of the exchange rate

to, or even beyond the equilibrium rate. The events that bring about that
depreciation take place in financial markets, while goods prices, which

wiil eventually rise to offset the ultimate depreciation, lag behind. In
this event there will be an initial fall in the exchange—rate—converted
price level of domestic goods and then a rise as their prices come finally
to rise in proportion to the money growth. In this model, the extent of

overshooting in the depreciation depends on the degree to which the money
growth reduces interest rates; a large reduction implies a large
overshooting since a low interest rate must be associated with expectation

of an appreciating currency. Thus we would expect to find low

price

levels, relative to those suggested by long-run influences, associated with

— 23 —

recent monetary expansion and low nominal interest rates.
Long—run differences in inflation rates, matched by differences in
nominal interest rates, are incorporated in a model offered by Frankel
(1979).

The short—run effects of money growth are similar to those in

Dornbusch, with money growth causing the same initial overshooting of

depreciation. The deviation of the exchange rate from purchasing power
parity is proportional to the differential in real interest rates and is

not associated necessarily with high or low nominal rates. Such a model
suggests both

monetary variables and real interest rates as explanatory

variables for

our analysis.

One

of the few models that allows for permanent

changes in relative

prices, and therefore in price levels, is what Dornbusch (1980) refers to

as an "extended Mundell—Fleming model." In this version, changes in demand
can bring about long—term changes in relative prices while monetary distur—

bances cause only short—term price level changes. The variables of
interest to us in this model include both monetary and fiscal policy
variables,

particularly in the form of unanticipated changes in policy, and

changes in real wealth,

as well as any other factors which cause shifts in

demand.

While these models do not explicitly introduce the dichotomy between
traded and nontraded goods, that distinction has become common in balance

of payments models, as, for example, in Bergias and Razin (1973) and Bruno

(1976). A recent article by Craig (1981) treats traded goods prices as
determined instantaneously by world prices, so that

an increase

in money

supply, which produces an excess demand for all goods, leads to "an increase
in imports and decrease in exports" but to a temporary increase in prices
of nontraded goods and therefore to a temporary increase in the price level.

— 24 —

Because the various theories present partial models that try to
simplify complex reality by focusing on a few key variables, they sometimes
produce opposite predictions about the effects of certain of these
variables.

The Keynesian theory, for example, predicts that higher real

income will

produce current account deficits and exchange rate

depreciation; the monetary approach, as noted above, sees the increase in
income as raising the demand for money balances and thus leading to a

current account surplus and exchange rate appreciation. If all the relevant variables were taken into account these differences might disappear.

For example, higher real income might indeed absorb more money balances if
the increase was due to real factors such as domestic expansion, but the
Keynesian prediction that higher real income would bring deficits and
depreciation would be correct if the monetary authorities more than met the

extra demand for money (Bilson, 1979). Another illustration is the effect
of an increase in the interest rate on the exchange rate; if the interest
rate rises because of a tight money policy, the exchange rate will appreciate, but if the cause is inflation the exchange rate will depreciate.

Given these complexities and the uncertainties of the present state of
kilo7ledge about exchange rate determination, the literature on the subject

will be used more as a guide to the search for variables affecting price
levels and to the interpretation of the behavior of these variables than as
a source for the rigorous specification of relationships.

Clearly an important influence on the price level in general or on the
price level for nontraded goods in particular that these models point to is
the growth in money supply, although with somewhat varying implications for

price levels. The nominal or real rate of interest is also involved in the

— 25 —

process, as an indicator of expectations regarding exchange rates and rates
of inflation.

There are in any case difficulties in the direct translation of
variables designed to trace only the movements of one country's exchange
rate over time to the explanation of the country to country structure of

price levels. One difficulty in transforming the intertemporal version of
the variables to an interspatial context is that it may not be justifiable
to carry over to an interspatial context the implicit assumption that a

variety of other influences can safely be ignored since they tend to be

relatively constant over time within a given country. For example, the
velocity of circulation, implicitly assumed to be constant in most time—to—
time analysis, may vary widely across countries.
Secondly, and not completely unrelated to this first complication, the
explanation is being sought for a wide variety of countries with different

exchange rate practices and with different degrees of market power. The
currencies of some countries such as the U.S. dollar, the U.K. pound, and
the Japanese yen, were in a managed float in the reference period 1975:
Others, such as the French franc and the Germany mark, were in a joint

1oat against the dollar and other outside currencies. Most of the developing countries were pegging their rates to the U.S. dollar, or to one of

the other major currencies, or to some composite of other currencies. It
is more difficult to describe simply the relative degrees of market power

of different countries. Obviously, a small country like Sri Lanka is more
likely to be a price taker than a large one like the U.S.; but a small

country whose exports are highly concentrated, like those of Sri Lanka, may

be

a large factor in the world market for some of its exports (tea, for

example, in the case of Sri Lanka).

— 26 —

The view we will take in the empirical work is to assume that the
structural determinants of price levels are constant over the whole period

or change only along a trend. We associate them with equilibrium differences in price levels and we do not expect such differences to show any ten—

dency to disappear. On the other hand, the short—term determinants of
price levels reflect mainly timing differences such as differences in the
speed with which traded goods prices and nontraded goods prices respond to
changes in domestic monetary variables or exchange rates or differences In
the speed with which domestic prices in general and exchange rates respond
to changes in these variables or in expectations about them.

— 27 —

V.

The Empirical Explanation of Price Levels

In this section we make a beginning exploration of a large uncharted

field. We confine our work here to a data set defined by the IC? coverage
of benchmark countries — 16 with a 1970 reference date and 34 for 1975.

The IC? data used here are price level estimates for GDP as a whole and for
traded and nontraded goods, and corresponding estimates of real per capita

quantities of GDP and of traded and nontraded goods. No attempt is made to
tackle the more extensive data set available by extrapolating the benchmark

estimates to other years and to other countries. By these means the data
set could include over 100 countries over a 20 or 30 year period.

Structural variables. We begin our empirical analysis of price levels
by testing the implications of the productivity differential model and the
factor proportions model, using as the independent variable explaining the

price level (PL), real GD? per capita. We then add to this a measure of
the openness of the economy, the nontradable share of GDP, and the share of

the labor force working in the nontradable sector. The coefficient for

reflect

real GDP per capita (r) may

the lower relative nontradables

'.ices plus construction) productivity associated with higher real

income.24 That is, countries with higher real income enjoy a larger margin
in productivity over lower income countries in tradables than in nontra—

dables. Or it may

reflect

the higher price of labor and therefore of

labor—intensive nontradable goods associated with higher real income.
In either case, the coefficient should clearly be positive.

The openness variable, as mentioned earlier, should reflect the effect

of strong ties with the rest of the world. Such ties, which cause trad—
ables prices to resemble those of other countries, should generally, we

— 28 —

argued earlier, cause them to be lower, relative to nontradable prices,
than they would be in the absence of such ties. In other words, openness
should raise the relative price of nontradables and thus the overall price
level.

The role of the share of nontradables in output or employment is a

little different, though related. If nontradables tend to be high—priced
in rich countries and low—priced in poor countries, a large share of
nontradables should tend to raise the price level of a rich country but

lower that of a poor one. In that case the share of nontradables should
be introduced in the form of an interaction between income per capita and

the nontradable share of output. The share of nontradables may be calcu—
lated either in own—prices or in international dollars. One would expect a
stronger positive correlation between PL and the own—price version of the
nontradables share.

Equation (10) gives a relationship between price level (PL) and real GDP
per capita (r), both relative to the United States, across 34 countries in
1975 (t—ratios in parentheses):25

(10)

FL = .3081
(7.6)

+ .0094 r
(11.6)

.801

S.E.E. = .1297

FL =

.7015

Neither the addition of a squared term in r nor the fitting of a logarith-

mic equation with or without a squared term, adds to the explanatory power
of the relationship.26

Assuming that the real income level of a country is a structural
characteristic we then test whether the relation between income and price
level has changed over the five year period for which we have some data,

1970,1973, and 1975. Equations (11), (12), and (13) are fitted to data for

— 29 —

the

identical group of 16 countries in the three years.

(11)

PL(75)

(5.1)

(12)

PL(73)

=
r2
S.E.E.

.2785 + .0094 r
(9.9)

PL —

(9.24)

PL

(13)

.1141
.7404

=
r2
S.E.E. =

.3307 + .0088 r
(6.7)

.866

.856
.1087
= .7248

i2 = .907

PL(70) = .3337 + .0064 r
(12.2)
(12.1)

S.E.E. = .0621
= .6071
PL

Equation (11) does not differ significantly from equation (10); that is,
restriction of the data to only 16 of the 34 countries does not change the

relationship. The tests clearly indicated that the equation for 1970 was
significantly different from those for both 1973 and 1975, but that the

observations in those two years could belong to the same relationship. We
thus conclude that there was a shift in the relation of price level to

income after 1970. However, the closeness and strength of the relationship
is evident in all of the equations: real income per capita explains most of
the differences in price levels.

Although the coefficients in the equations for 16 and 34 countries in

1975 do not differ substantially, the 2

is

much reduced by the addition of

the 18 countries. One difference in the two data sets is that while 8 of
the original 16 were OECD countries with developed economies and statisti-

cal systems, the additional 18 consisted of only 5 developed OED countries
and of 2 centrally—planned economies, and 11 developing countries. It may
be that the centrally—planned and developing countries do not fit the model
as well as the developed countries, or that the data for prices and nominal

— 30 —

income are sufficiently poorer to introduce large data errors, or that the
prices set in the centrally—planned economies depart further from the
structure of costs than in the other countries.

If there were structural factors other than income determining price
levels, as opposed to short—term influences, we might expect that the resi-

duals from the various equations would be correlated. That is, a country
with a high positive residual in 1970 would also show a high positive resi-

dual in other years. Between 1970 and the other two years we found little

correlation

=

.08 between 1970 and 1975 and .18 between 1970 and

1973). However, there was a statistically significant positive relationship

between the residuals in 1973 and 1975 (2 =

.70).

The lack of correlation

between 1970 and the later years suggests that there might be no other

structural variables, or at least none that was important. Instead there
may have been non—structural factors that affected countries' price levels
between 1970 and 1973 that persisted through 1975.

Despite these results that discouraged the search for further structural variables we did experiment with several. One was openness, a structural variable that had proved useful in previous efforts to estimate real

GDP from nominal CDP.27 The openness measure is the one used in Kravis,
Heston, and Summers (1978a), a ratio of trade (exports plus imports) to GDP.
This measure reflects not only the trade policy of a country but also its
size and the density of its population, both factors important in deter-

mining the trade output ratio. Other measures of openness designed to eliminate the effects of country size and density, described as residual

216), did not appear to be as
to price levels and were not used in the equations shown here.

openness" in Kravis and Lipsey (l982a, p.
related

closely

— 31 —

When openness (scaled with the U.S.100) is included with r as an indepen—

dent variable, the result for the 34 1975 observations Is as follows:

(14)

PL = .2374

+ .0090 r + .00024 OP

(5.0)

(11.7)

(2.5)

= .829
S.E.E. = .1204

PL = .7015

As we hypothesized earlier, openness is positively related to the price
level.

Two other structural variables that seemed theoretically promising were
the share of nontradable goods in GDP (nSH) and the share of nontradable

goods industries in total employment (LSH). Since the overall price level
is presumably determined by the price level for nontradable goods, a larger

nontradable goods sector should mean a higher than average price level for
rich countries ——

that

is, high for the per capita real income —— and a

lower than average price level for poor countries. We can test the role of
the nontradable goods share by adding to our equations a term for the share

of nontradable goods In nominal GDP (nSH) or an interaction term for the
share of nontradable goods and per capita real income (nSF!

Equations

(15) and (16).28

(15) PL =

—.0611

(16)

(0.5)

PL = .2909
(5.0)

+ .O068r + .00014 OP + .0100 (nSH)
(6.4)
(1.5)
(2.8)

+ .O015r + .00021 OP + .00014 (nSH.r)
(0.3)

(2.2)

(1.5)

.

r)

as in

2 == .859

S.E.E.

2 =

.1092

.836

S.E.E. = .1180

The share of nontradable goods adds to the explanation of PL in part by

diminishing the influence of income and OP. The effect on the openness
coefficient, in particular, is not surprising since a higher proportion of
nontradables in production is likely to mean a lower level of openness, as

— 32

—

we measure it. When the nontradables share is introduced in the form of an
interaction term, the product of the nontradable goods share and per capita
real GDP, as in equation 16, the R2 is reduced.

An alternative measure of the importance of the nontradable sector is
the proportion of the labor force engaged in the production of nontradable

goods. Labor force information, however, is not available for final product sectors such as were used in the ICP, but only, in international compilations for a large number of countries, for 9 industrial sectors, such

as manufacturing, retail and wholesale trade, etc. One way to see how

much difference it makes when the industrial classification is substituted
for the final product classification is to compare the ICP shares of

nontradable goods with nontradable goods shares as measured by the

industrial classification. In terms of own current prices, the correlation is quite high —

the

for a correlation involving 26 of the 34 ICP

countries for which an industrial breakdown of GDP Is found in World Tables,

1980 is 0.67.29 Furthermore, the substitution of the World Tables share
variable (nSHW) for the ICP variable produces a highly similar equation.

Equations (17) and (18) contain the same 26 countries but the first includes

RW and the second, corresponding to (15) but for only the 26 countries,

the IP

(17)

version

(nSH):

PL = —.2356 + .0062 r + .00024 OP + .0103 nSHW
(1.7)

(3.0)

(6.4)

(3.5)

R2 = .912

S.E.E. =

.0933

= .7315

(18)

FL = —.0923 + .0066r + .00017 OP + .0107 nSH

(0.8)

(6.7)

(1.9)

R2 = .904
.0974
FL = .7315

S.E.E. =

(3.1)

— 33 —

Equation' (17), based on the shares in terms of industrial origin, gives
a slightly closer fit, but the difference is clearly marginal.

Furthermore, very similar results to those of equation (18) for these 26
countries can be gotten from an equation including only real income per
capita and the nontradable share of output, as in equation (19):

(19)

PL = —.1294 + .0063r ÷ .0134 nSH
(1.1)

(6.1)

R2 = .893

(3.9)

S.E.E. = .1031

The similarity of (18) and (19) indicates that OP adds little, but

something, to the explanation of price levels in this form. Perhaps it
might be more appropriate to define OP in the form of the ratio of trade to
tradables production.

Given our structural explanations of the price level, the influence of
real income per capita should be larger on nontradable than on tradable

goods price levels. At the extreme, if there were pure tradable goods, and
if trade equalized prices, we would expect no relation at all between their
prices and income levels, and we would have to think of the observed dif—

-.ences mentioned earlier as reflecting the nontradable element in all
tradable goods. We test this supposition with 34—country data for 1975 by
relating the two price levels first to real incomes per capita:

(20)

PLNT =

.1239
(3.3)

(21)

PLT

=

+ .0102 r
(13.9)

.5408 + .0080 r
(10.0)

(7.4)

?2 = .853

S.E.E. = .1186
= .5542
PL
r2

.618

S.E.E. = .1737
= .876
FL

— 34 —

Our expectations are met in several respects. We explain the price levels
for nontradable goods more successfully, in terms of both.the degree of
correlation (i2) and the standard error of estimate, and the coefficient of

r (real per capita incon) is higher for nontradable goods, presumably
because in the tradable goods •equation it reflects the influence of r only

on

the nontradable component of these goods' prices.

Our earlier analysis of the
open

openness variable, which was that a more

econxny would tend to have tradable goods prices closer to world pri-

ces than

a more closed one, implies that there should be little relation

between openness and the residuals from Equation (21) but a stronger one

with the residuals of Equation (20). We test this proposition in
Equations (22) and (23) by adding an openness variable to Equations (20)

and (21). We find that openness has the expected positive coefficient in
each equation,

(14.5)

(1.2)

PLT

(23)

= .881

.0502 + .0098r + .00025 OP

PLNT

(22)

=

.4732

(2.9)

S.E.E. = .1068
= .640

÷ .0076 r + .0023 OP

(7.7)

(7.1)

(1.7)

S.E.E. = .1688

but the coefficients for openness are very similar in the two equations.

It does not, moreover, add more to the explanation of price level differen—
ces for nontradable goods than for tradable goods.

The residuals from the two pairs of equations (i.e., 20 and 21 and 22
and 23) were positively correlated (r2s were .40 and .34 respectively).

High

prices for tradable goods, relative to per capita income levels,

were

associated with high

prices for nontradable goods, as we would

expect if the tradable goods price levels reflected the nontraded

component of these goods. There were some outliers in this
relationship, however. Sri Lanka and India had the lowest price

— 35.-

levels for nontradable goods relative to tradable goods prices, given their

levels of r and OP. Not quite as low but still below average were the
relative nontradable goods prices of Luxembourg and the three centrally—

planned economies. At the other extreme, Syria, Thailand, Japan, and Kenya
had low prices for tradable goods and high prices for nontradable goods.
That relationship suggests that in these countries the productivity level
in nontradable goods is lower, relative to that in tradable goods, than we
would expect of countries at their levels of real income per capita.

In some countries both tradable and nontradable goods prices are high
or low in comparison to what we would expect from the levels of real income

per capita. That is, the residuals in the two equations are large and both
positive or both negative. In such cases we can say that exchange rates are
high or low relative to price levels. Jamaica, Zambia, Denmark, and
Ireland seemed to belong in the category of relatively high price levels
for both types of goods. Hungary, Uruguay, and the United States were all
on the low

side.

We also experimented with variables designed to measure the quality of
the labor force, such as enrollment ratios at various levels of schooling

ad numbers of teachers, but these contributed little or nothing to the
explanation of the variation in FL. We are left so far with real income
per capita, openness and the share of nontradable goods as the explanatory
variables, all positively correlated with the price level.
Nonstructural Influences.

price

We assume that Equations (17)

for

aggregate

levels and (22) and (23) for nontraded and traded goods price levels

represent the structural elements of price level determination.30 Since
the residuals from th 1970 and 1975 equations were not significantly correlated, we conclude tentatively that the differences between the equations

—36—

represent the effects of economic policy or other changeable characteristics of the economies, and we therefore attempt here to explain the
residuals by such factors.

The recent volatility of exchange rates has been so extreme that It
must have produced changes in the deviations of price levels from their
long run equilibrium levels since domestic currency prices for aggregate

output do not fluctuate that widely. The change in the exchange rate
regime between 1970 and 1975 brought exchange rate movements which were a

mixture of, initially, officially determined changes, presumably to remove
deviations from long—run equilibrium, and later, largely market—determined

changes, some of which may have created new deviations. Equation (24),
which relates the difference in residuals (from Equation (17) between 1970
and 1975 to exchange rate changes, shows that countries with comparatively
large increases in exchange rates (i.e., large currency depreciations) bet-

ween 1970 and 1975 tended to have their price levels fall relative to their
position on the per capita income scale:

(24)

RPL(75—70) = .1275 — .1202 XR75/70
(2.0)

where RPL(75—70) =

differences

(2.0)

r2 = .169
S.E.E. = .0684
n = 15

in residuals from the structural price

level equations in 1975 and 1970, and X.R75/70 = 1975/1970 ratio of exchange

rates.31

Starting from a period of fixed exchange rates, as we do with 1970 as
the first year, we can think of a chain of events as initiated by the

change in exchange rates. Then we expect that the immediate impact of a
currency depreciation from the standpoint of partner countries Is to lower
the prices of the depreciating country since prices do not move as rapidly

—37—

as exchange rates. As the depreciation begins to have its effects on the
depreciating country, through tendencies toward equalization In traded—
goods prices, its own—currency prices and hence PL (i.e., PPP/XR) will

rise. For these 16 countries over the period 1970—75, the rise (fall) in
domestic prices was not sufficient to negate completely the currency depre-

ciation (appreciation) and therefore PL did decline (rise). Or to put the
Implied causality differently, the rise (fall) in domestic prices brought
about a more than fully offsetting depreciation (appreciation) in the
exchange rate and hence a rise (fall) in XR is associated with a fall
(rise) in PL.

A different view, probably more appropriate for the second part of our
period, is to treat the exchange rate changes as intermediate steps in a

process beginning with differences in rates of growth of the stock of money

which affect both own—currency prices and exchange rates. In that case,
the change in deviations from long—run relationships would depend on the
speed with which own—currency prices and exchange rates respond to money

growth, as discussed above. If exchange rate changes more than offset the
concurrent price changes, countries with the most rapidly increasing money
'L'tock over the preceding few years will have relatively declining

deviations from long—run price levels. Little support for this proposition
is given by Equation (25):

(25)

RPL(75/70) = .0730

— .0281 MQ75/70

(.1.0) (1.0)

i.2 =

n =

0.002
15

This correlation is not significant, but the tendency for a negative coefficient to show up for the variable representing the stock of money in
equations in which the change in the residual price level is the dependent

— 38 —

variable

is quite persistent in alternative formulations of the money

variable.32

Changes in the money supply over this period were positively,

but not very strongly, associated with changes in the exchange rate (?2 =

.13 for the 1975/70 ratios). The weakness of the association may reflect
the initial change from fixed rates that were far removed from their

equilibrium levels. We are ignoring here the important distinction made in
the theoretical literature cited earlier between money supply growth that
is a continuation of the past rate and is already incorporated in the initial residual price level and unexpected changes In the rate of money
growth.

Thus far we have discussed changes in the residuals of the structural

equations for a common set of 16 countries between 1970 and 1975. The
effects of changes between 1970 and 1975 in exchange rates and, less
clearly In money supply, have been shown to be associated with the dif-

ferences in the two sets of residuals. If the changes in exchange rates
between 1970 and 1975 had not yet, by 1975, been fully absorbed into own—
currency price levels, of if the rates of money supply growth from 1970 to

1975 had not been reflected in exchange rates and in own—currency prices to
same degree, we should find that exchange rate changes or money growth
should help to explain the residuals from the structural equation for the
34 countries In the 1975 ICP comparison.

The residuals of the 1975 equation (RPL75) are related to exchange rate
changes from 1970 to 1975 as follows:33

(26)

RPL75 =

.0359 — .0290 XR75/70
(1.7)

(2.6)

-?2 =

.167

S.E.E. = .0899

a =31

— 39 —

This

equation again suggests a negative relationship between price

levels and exchange rate changes; the full effects of an appreciating
currency, at least during these years, were not absorbed in contemporary
price changes and exchange rate changes did not simply offset concurrent
price changes.

Equation (26) also does not support the idea that the 1970 to 1975
exchange rate movements performed the function of eliminating deviations
from long—run relationships that had been sustained by fixed exchange

rates. As a further test of this hypothesis we correlated the 1975/70
exchange rate changes with the 1970 deviations from the structural rela-

tionship (RPL7O). There was no relationship between the 1970 deviations
and the subsequent changes in exchange rates. Either the 1970 deviations
did not represent disequilibria or the subsequent changes in exchange rates
did not move exchange rates towards equilibrium levels.

When the residuals of the 1975 price level equation are correlated with
the change in the stock of money over the period 1970—75, the coefficients
of the money growth variable are negative for the GDP price level and for
the

(27)

prices of traded and nontraded goods:
RPL75 = .0596 — .0218 i475/70

(2.3)

(2.9)

(28)

RPLT75 = .0491

(29)

RPLNT75 .068 — .0193 NQ75/70

(1.1)

—

.0216 MQ75/70

(1.7)

(2.7) (2.8)

r2 = .20
S.E.E. = .0881

n =31

r2 = 0.06
S.E.E. = .147
r2 =
S.E.E. =

.18
.0828

— 40 —

It

is interesting to see in these equations that differences in money

supply growth accounted for more of the deviations of price levels from
their structural positions in the case of nontraded goods than in the case

of traded goods. Presumably international competition was a larger
influence relative to money supply in affecting traded goods prices.

Other monetary variables and the combination of those with the exchange
rate changes did not add to our ability to explain the 1975 residuals from

the structural equation. We therefore settle tentatively on the money
supply growth alone as the only nonstructural variable to include in

equations combining structural and nonstructural elements. The combinations are represented by equations (30) through (32).

PL75 = .2439 + .0067r +

(30)

(0.2)

(7.1)

.00018 OP + .O1O2nSH — .0214 MQ75/70
(2.2)

(3.2)

(2.7)

PLT75 = .4913 + .0075r + .00031 OP — .0207 NQ75/70

(31)

(6.6)

(7.8)

(2.5)

(1.6)

(32) PLNT75 = .1112 + .0099r + .00025 OP — .0192 MQ75/70
(2.6)

(18.1)

(3.6)

(2.6)

2 = .908
S.E.E. = .0926
n = 31

2 .727
S.E.E. = .151

R2 = .929
S.E.E. = .0858

As before, it is the price levels for traded goods that we have the
least success in explaining; the R2 for that equation Is the lowest and the

standard error of estimate the highest among the three equations. For both
traded and nontraded goods price levels and for the total price level, real
income per capita Is the major source of variation among countries but
openness, as measured by the ratio of trade to output,
cant.

is

always signifi-

Both high income per capita and a high degree of openness are

— 41 —

associated with high price levels. In addition, the share of nontraded
goods in output is significant in the equation for the total price level,

with a high share associated with a high price level. These are the long—
run or structural influences that we have identified. The strongest short—
term or nonstructural variable we have found is the rate of growth of
money, with a high rate of past growth associated with a low price level.

In other words, whatever the inflationary effect In domestic currency of a
rapid rate of money growth, it was more than offset during this period by
changes in exchange rates.

Much remains to be explained about the factors that determine differen-

ces in national price levels. In this first reconnaissance, we have done
little to explore what may

prove

to be substantial differences in the

operation of explanatory factors for different circumstances, particularly
for the difference between periods of fixed rates and periods in which

major currencies floated, between (since 1973) countries that have had
pegged rates and those that have managed floats, and between countries that

are price takers and those that are large enough to influence prIces. We
have ignored the interest rate link between money growth and exchange rate
changes, the distinction between expected and unexpected money growth, also

linked to interest rates, the relation of money growth to the demand for
money, and the role of capital flows, partly in response to interest rates
and partly autonomous, in determining exchange rates and price levels.
These are subjects for future study.

What seems very likely from our studies so far is that efforts to
explain changes in exchange rates over a moderately long period——say 5 or
10 years——are likely to be improperly specified if the structural factors
are ignored, even for Industrial countries if there are substantial

— 42 —

differences

among them in growth rates.

It also appears likely that the

search for better short cut estimates of real GDP per capita needs to take

into account short run influences. Such influences dominate the literature
on exchange rate determination but they have been largely ignored in the
much more limited literature on short cut methods.

— 43

—

Footnotes
1. A closely related use of such a theory, when expressed in equations
explaining relative price levels, is to pave the way for better
"short cut" estimates of real per capita GDP.
("Real" per capita
GDP's are converted to a common currency by purchasing power
parities, rather than by exchange rates). Benchmark studies such
as those relied upon in this paper will not soon, if ever, be feasible
for all the countries of the world.
If a comprehensive system of
real product comparisons is to be developed, therefore, short cut
methods will have to be applied to non—benchmark countries. Short cut
estimates are formed by extrapolating to other countries the relationships between real and exchange—rate—converted GDP found in benchmark
studies of purchasing power and real GDP such as those included in the
UN International Comparison Project (Kravis, Heston, and Summers, 1982).
2. Beckerman writes that "The role of exports in growth has been of
central importance in economic history, particularly in explaining
differential national growth rates in the second half of the nineteenth
century..." Export—led growth requires "competitive" exports and competitiveness is "basically a question of price and technological
superiority." Exports have also figured in the literature on the
economic growth of developing countries although explicit references to
the role of prices are infrequent. See I.B. Kravis, "Trade as a Handmaiden of Growth: Similarities Between the Nineteenth and Twentieth
Centuries," Economic Journal, December 1970.
3. The Harrod volume treats the subject in a chapter entitled "Comparative
Price Levels."
4. Indeed, Jones and Purvis show how under different assumptions with respect to the reactions of different countries to external shocks (e.g.,
two importers of a given middle product facIng a rise in itS world
price), the resulting price changes for the final product may vary from
one country to another. Among the factors producing the varying price
responses are country—to—country differences in technological flexibility
(i.e., the ease of substituting labor for the middle product), in the
share of labor and the middle product in the cost of the final product,
and the price elasticity of demand for the final product. It is hard
to see, however, how the factors pointed to by Jones and Purvis can
contribute to an explanation of the systematic relationship between the

price levels of various countries and their real per capita incomes observed in Table 1.
(of course, that was not their aim.)

5.

Gilbert and Kravis (1954); Gilbert and associates (1958); and a series
of three reports of the U.N. International Comparison Project, the
latest of which is Kravis, Heston, and Summers (1982a).

6. Though the OECD and U.N. studies included some analysis of price and
quantity relationships.

7. The first attempt at these "short—cut" methods appears to have been
made by Delahaut and Kirschen (1961).

— 44

Footnotes

8.

(continued)

Kravis, Heston, and Summers (1978a). For reviews of different short
cut methods, see Heston (1973), and Ahmad (1980).

9. The advantage of price comparisons over quantity comparisons is not
only that prices are easier to obtain —— one can go into a store and
ask —— but also that we are willing to assume that the price ratios
between countries for Items we cannot or do not sample are like those
we do sample. Quantity ratios, on the other hand, vary much more
widely among products, even within a given sampling stratum.
10. These are, of course, alternative ways each of these questions might
be answered. For example, the issue of which prices to include might
be resolved by selecting the set of prices entering Into the purchases
of consumers. However, such a criterion would leave out capital goods
and government seryices, both important components of total output.
If restricted to prices paid by households, the prices would exclude
publically financed services, the scope of which varies from one
country to another according to the extent to which such services as
health and education are financed Out of private or public purses.
Another possibility is to use the set of prices collected by the
statistical authorities for the country's wholesale price indexes,
but this choice has little to commend it. There is no clear conceptual
framework for wholesale price indexes. Furthermore, this set of
prices is apt to be biased toward adherence to the law of one
price relative to other goods because it includes a high proportion
of tradable goods. This bias may be reinforced by the tendency of
the indexes to overrepresent primary products and to underrepresent
highly differentiated manufactured goods.
11. In models based on small country assumptions, in which all tradables
prices are determined outside the country, the only possible effects
on relative prices of a small country's devaluation stem from changes
in the price of tradables relative to that of nontradables in the
small country. That change itself is sometimes described as the
"real rate of exchange" in balance of payments models. See, for
example, Bergias and Razin (1973) and Bruno (1976). The relation
between that definition and the one used here, which involves no
assumptions about the fixity of price relationships, depends on the
movement of tradables prices and of nontradables prices in the rest
of the world and on the share of nontradables in the country being
observed.

12. However, the results might be affected if use were made of "effective
exchange rates," each representing a trade—weighted average of a given
country's changes in its exchange rates vis—a—vis its trading partners.
The concept of an effective exchange rate is relatively simple to em—
ploy when the purpose is to explain exchange rate changes over time
for one country. Where, as in the present work, the focus is on a
large number of countries at once, the introduction of effective ex
change rates would bring substantial complications in forming the
explanatory variables. Also the disadvantage of using simple exchange

— 45 —

Footnotes

(continued)

rates may be offset by the fact that the inclusion of many countries
does cause some account to be taken of each country's exchange rate
relative to the currencies of a number of other countries, though in
not so precise or systematic a way.

13. Frenkel (1978), though recognizing that price levels and exchange rates
are best viewed as mutually endogeneous variables, finds that single
equation methods tend to support the line of causation running from
exchange rates to price levels rather than in the opposite direction
favored by PPP theorists.
14. Mussa (1982) suggests that monetary models are useful in explaining
nominal exchange rates and that models taking balance of payments
equilibrium as the final determinant of exchange rates are most
relevant to real exchange rates.
15. The productivity differential model bears a strong relationship to
"Scandinavian" models of price and wage—setting behavior which distinguish between "exposed' and "sheltered' sectors of the economy
(Aukrust, 1970). Prices in the exposed sector are set In international markets, these prices determine wage levels in all sectors,
and prices in sheltered sectors are set by markups over cost. The
exposed sectors are essentially tradables and the sheltered sectors
essentially nontradables.

16. Kuznets (1957). See p. 41 for the data and p. 33 for Kuznets' discussion of the meaning of sectoral productivity measures. See also
the revision reaching the same conclusions on the basis of later data:
Kuznets (1971, pp. 208—248). The latter part of this section (p. 236f)
considers the possible explanations for the observed intersectoral
differences.
17. Chenery and Syrquin (1975), writing about developing countries, do not
show data for high income countries. Kuznets' data comparing nonagricultural commodities with services cover the whole income range and
support the view that service productivity relative to commodity
productivity is lower in the very high income countries than in very
low income countries.
18. For example, capital/labor ratios for very low and very high income
countries are as follows:
Commodities

Low income
High income

4.39
21.91

(Kravis, Heston, and Summers, 1983).

Services
2.48
10.96

— 46

—

Footnotes (continued)

19.

For a further probing of the reasons for the relatively high service
productivity in poor countries, see Kravis, Heston, and Summers (1983).

20. A well—known example of this story is the explanation by Baumol and
Bowen for the rise in prices in the performing arts (Baumol and Bowen,
1966).

21. The countryts exports would be cheap at home and the effect on its
import prices might not be compensating as, for example, if its
exports were wage goods or if they embodied substantial imported
inputs. Usher (1968, p. 78f).

22. Cited by Clague (1980).
23. For recent reviews of this literature, see Bilson (1979); Dornbusch
(1980); and Isard (1978).
24. In view of the interdependence between PL and r, errors of measurement
in one produce equal and opposite errors in the other. In our
equations incorporating PL as a dependent variable and r as an
independent variable, the coefficient of r is biased towards —1.

25. The PL variable was scaled with U.S. =

1.0;

r with U.S. = 100.

26, If a logarithmic, form is desired because it explains percentage
differences in price levels, a squared term does improve the
explanation. The equation in logs relating price level to income
per capita is
ln PL = 3.99

—

.481 ln r + .141 ln r2

(7.92) (1.47)

R2 = .781

(2.80)

When the fitted values from this regression are exponentiated and
orre1ated with the original observations (in arithmetic form) the
is .800.

27. Kravis, Heston, and Summers (1978a).
28. The use of the share of nontradable goods valuing GDP and all its
components in international dollars also improved the results of
equation 14, though by not as much as the own—prices form of the

variable used in equations 15 and 16.

29.

Agriculture,

mining and manufacturing industries were regarded as

producing tradable products. Construction; electricity, gas and

water;

trade and finance; transportation and communication; public
administration; and other branches were considered as producing
nontradable goods.

—47—

Footnotes

(concluded)

30. An equation like (17) but without openness (equation 17') has almost
as strong a claim for representation of the aggregate price level,
particularly since in the 16 country data for 1970 it produces a
than the analogue of (17). The s for the 1970 and 1975
higher

equations based on the 16 Phase II countries are as follows:
Independent variables
1970
1975

r,nSH

r,OP,nSH

.927
.867

.921
.884

The coefficient of openness had a t—value below 0.1 in 1970 and the
coefficient of the nontraded goods share variable in the equation with
openness has a t—value of .9 in 1975. However, the choice between
these two equations makes little practical difference since their
residuals are very highly correlated ( = .98 for the correlation of

31. Exchange rates, expressed as U.S. dollars per local currency unit, are
annual average market rates taken from IMF International Financial
Statistics, 1981 Yearbook (row rf when available).
32. For changes in exchange rates and in the stock of money, the ratio of
1975 to 1970 seemed a natural starting point since we begin by comparing the residuals from the 1970 and 1975 equations. This limitation, if it is a legitimate one, does not apply to subsequent
materials where we try to explain the residuals of 1975 equations.
Experiments with changes in exchange rates and money stocks based on a
number of alternative periods generally yielded similar results. One,
1974—75 as a ration of 1972—73 values, tended to produce marginally
highers, but we retained the simpler formulation.
33. Actually 31 countries are included since some of the necessary data
were unavailable for 3 countries.

— 48

—

References
Ahmad, Sultan (1980), "Approaches to Purchasing Power Parity and Real
Product Comparisons Using Shortcuts and Reduced Information,"
World Bank Staff Working Paper No. 418, Sept.
Aizenman, Joshua (1982), "Modeling Deviations from Purchasing Power Parity
(PPP)," (Processed), (University of Pennsylvania, May).
Aukrust, 0. (1970), "PRIM: A Model of the Price and Income Distribution
Mechanism of an Open Economy, "Review of Income and Wealth, series 16,
no. 1.

Balassa, B. (1964), "The Purchasing Power Parity Doctrine: A Reappraisal,"
Journal of Political Economy, December.

__________ and Associates (1971), The Structure of Protection in Developing
Countries (Baltimore, Maryland: Johns Hopkins Press for the International
Bank for Reconstruction and Development and the Inter—American Development
Bank).
Beckerman, W. (1965), "Demand, Exports and Growth," in The British Economy
in 197, W. Beckerman and Associates, National Institute of Economic and
Social Research, Cambridge University Press.

Bergias, Eitan and Assaf Razin (1973), "Real Exchange Rate and Devaluation,"
Journal of
Vol. 3, No. 2, Nay.
Baumol, William J. and William C. Bowen (1966), Performing Arts——The Economic
Dilemma, Twentieth Century Fund, New York.
Bilson, J.F.C. (1979), "Recent Developments in Monetary Models of Exchange
Rate Determination," International Monetary Fund Staff Papers, June.
Bruno, Michael (1976), "The Two—Sector Open Economy and the Real Exchange
Rate," American Economic Review, Vol. 66, No. 4, March.
Cassel, G. (1922), Money and Foreign Exchange After 1914 (New York:
Macmillan).

Chenery,

H. (1979), Structural Change and Development Policy (Washington, D.C.:
Oxford University Press for the World Bank).

Chenery H. and M, Syrquin (1975), Patterns of Development, 1950—70 (Oxford:
Oxford University Press for the World Bank).

Clague, Christopher (1980), "Short Cut Methods of Estimating Real Income"
(processed) (College Park, Md., Department of Economics, University of
Maryland, Nov.).

Clague, C. and V. Tanzi (1972), "Human Capital, Natural Resources and the
Purchasing Power Parity Doctrine: Some Empirical Results," Economia

Internazional, February.

— 49 —

References (continued)
Collery, A. (1971), "International Adjustment, Open Economies, and the
Quantity Theory of Money," Princeton Studies in International Finance_,
No. 28 (Princeton, N.J.), pp. 25—26.
Craig, Gary A. (1981), "A Monetary Approach to the Balance of Trade,"
American Economic Review, Vol. 71, No. 3, June.

Delahaut, J.P. and E.S. Kirschen (1961), "Les revenus nationaux du monde
non communiste," Cahiers Economigues de Bruxelles, No. 10, April.

Dornbusch, R. (1976), "Expectations and Exchange Rate Dynamics," Journal of
Political Econopy, Vol. 84, No. 6.

_____________ (1980), "Exchange Rate Economics: Where Do We Stand,"
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1.

Flood, Robert P. (1981), "Explanations of Exchange Rate Volatility and
Other Empirical Regularities in Some Popular Models of the Foreign
Exchange Market," NBER Reprint No. 247, Carnegie—Rochester Conference
Series on Public Policy 15, 219—250, North—Holland Publishing Company.
Frankel, Jeffrey A. (1979), "On the Mark: A Theory of Floating Exchange
Rates Based on Real Interest Differentials," American Economic Review,
Vol. 69, No. 4, September.
Frenkel, Jacob A. (1976), "The Monetary Approach to the Exchange Rate:
Doctrinal Aspects and Empirical Evidence," Scandinavian Journal of
Economics, May, Reprinted in The Economics of Exchange Rates: Selected
Studies, edited by Jacob A. Frenkel and Harry G. Johnson, Addison—
Wesley Publishing Company.

_________________ (1978), "PurchasIng Power Parity: Doctrinal Perspective
and Evidence from the 1920's," Journal of International Economics, 8,
No. 2, May.

________________ (1981), "Flexible Exchange Rates, Prices and the Role of
'News': Lessons from the l97O's," Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 89,
No. 4, August.

Jacob A. and Harry C. Johnson, eds. (1976), The Monetary Approach
to the Balance of Payments (Toronto and Buffalo: University of Toronto
Press).

Frenkel,

Gilbert, Milton and Associates (1958), Comparative National Products and
Price Levels. Paris: Organization •for European Economic Cooperation.
Gilbert, Milton and I.B. Kravis (1954), An International Comparison of
National Products and Purchasing Power of Currencies: A Study of the
United States, the United Kingdom, France, Germany, and Italy, Paris:
Organization for European Economic Cooperation.

— 50 —

References (continued)

Harrod, R.F. (1939), International Economics (London: Nisbet and Co.:
Cambridge University Press).

Heston, Alan (1973), "A Comparison of Some Short—Cut Methods of Estimating
Real Product per Capita," Review of Income and Wealth, March.
Holmes, J.M. (1967), "The Purchasing Power Parity Theory: In Defense of
Gustav Cassel as a Modern Theorist," Journal of Political Econoy,
October.
International Monetary Fund (1980), Yearbook of International Financial
Statistics, 1980.

Isard, Peter (1978), "Exchange Rate Determination: A Survey of Popular
Views and Recent Models," Princeton Studies in International Financ!,
No. 42 (Princeton, N.J.).
Isenman, Paul (1980), "Inter—Country Comparisons of 'Real' (PPP) Incomes:
Revised Estimates and Unresolved Questions," World Development, Vol. 8.

Jones, Ronald W. and Douglas D. Purvis (1981), "International Differences
in Response to Common External Shocks: The Role of Purchasing Power
Parity," presented at the Vth International Conference of the University
of Paris—Dauphine on Money and International Monetary Problems, June 16—17.
Keynes, J.M. (1930), A Treatise on Money (London: Macmillan and Co., 1950
edition), Vol. 1.
Kravis, Irving B, (1970), "Trade as a Handmaiden of Growth: Similarities
Between the Nineteenth and Twentieth Centuries," The Economic Journab
Vol. LXXX, December.
Kravis, Irving B., Z. Kenessey, A. Heston, and R. Summers (1975), A System
of International Comparisons of Gross Product and Purchasing Power
(Baltimore, Md.: Johns Hopkins University Press).
Kravis, Irving B., A. Heston, and R. Summers (1978a), "Real GDP Per Capita
for More Than One Hundred Countries, Economic Journal, June.
_________________ (1978b), International Comparisons of Real Product and
Purchasing Power (Baltimore, Md.: Johns Hopkins University Press).
_________________ (1982), World Product and Income: International
Comparisons of Real GDP (Baltimore, Nd.: Johns Hopkins University
Press).

________________ (1983), "The Share of Services in Economic Growth", in F.G.
Adams and B. Hickman (Eds.), Global Econometrics: Essays in Honor
of Lawrence R. Klein, (M.I.T. Press).

— 51

References (continued)

Kravis, Irving B. and Robert E. Lipsey (1971), Price Competitiveness in
World Trade (New York: National Bureau of Economic Research).

_______________ (1977), "Export Prices and the Transmission of Inflation,"
American Economic Review, Vol. 67, No. 1, February.
_______________ (1978), "Price Behavior in the Light of Balance of
Payments Theories," Journal of International Economic, August.

____________ (1982a), "The Location of Overseas Production and Production
for Export by U.S. Multinational Firms," Journal of International
Economic, May.
____________ (1982b), "Prices and Market Shares in the International
Machinery Trade," Review of Economics and Statistics, February.
Kuznets, Simon (1957), "Quantitative Aspects of the Economic Growth of
Nations: II Industrial Distribution of National Product and Labor
Force," Economic Development and Cultural Change, Supplement to Vol. V,
No. 4, July.

______________ (1966), Modern Economic Growth: Rate, Structure, and Spread
New Haven: Yale University Press).

_____________ (1971), Economic Growth of Nations (Cambridge, Mass.:
Harvard University Press).

Lamfalussy, Alexandre (1963), United Kingdom and the Six: An Essay on
Economic Growth in Western Europe (Homewood, Illinois: R.D. Irwin).
Mussa, Michael (1976), "The Exchange Rate, the Balance of Payments, and
Monetary and Fiscal Policy under a Regime of Controlled Floating,"
Scandanavian Journal of Economics, May. Reprinted in The Economics of
Exchange Rates, edited by Jacob A. Frenkel and Harry C. Johnson,
Addison—Wesley Publishing Company.

______________ (1982), "Theory of Exchange Rate Determination,' Conference
on Exchange Rates: Theory and Practice, Bellagio, January.
Ricardo, David (1817), The Principles of Political Economy and Taxation
(London: J.M. Dent, 1911 Edition).
Snyder, Carl (1928), "The Measure of the General Price Level," Review of
Economic Statistics, February.
Stern, J.J. and J.D. Lewis (1980), Employment Patterns and Growth,
World Bank Staff Working Paper, No. 419, September.

— 52 —

References (concluded)

Usher, Dan (1968), The Price Mechanism and the Meaning of National Income
Statistics (Oxford: Clarendon Press).
Whitman, Marina V.N. (1975), "Global Monetarism and the Monetary Approach
to the Balance of Payments," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 3,
pp. 491—536.
World Bank (1980), World Tables.

