                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         CO-WORKER COMPLEMENTARITY AND
                      THE STABILITY OF TOP MANAGEMENT TEAMS

                                           Rachel M. Hayes
                                              Paul Oyer
                                            Scott Schaefer

                                         Working Paper 10350
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w10350


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      March 2004




We are grateful to the American Compensation Association’s Emerging Scholars Program and the General
Motors Center for Strategy Research at Kellogg for support. Thanks to Charles Himmelberg, Kevin Hallock,
three referees and various seminar participants for comments, and to Kevin Hallock for generously sharing
his data on layoff announcements by Fortune 500 firms. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2004 by Rachel M. Hayes, Paul Oyer, and Scott Schaefer. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Co-Worker Complementarity and the Stability of Top Management Teams
Rachel M. Hayes, Paul Oyer, and Scott Schaefer
NBER Working Paper No. 10350
March 2004
JEL No. J44, J63, M50

                                         ABSTRACT

We investigate the hypothesis that complementarities across co-workers (which may arise from
matching or investments in specific skills) affect the value of employment relationships between
senior executives and firms. We analyze the changes in the composition of top management teams
when a key member of the team (the CEO) departs. Our empirical analysis establishes several facts
that are consistent with co-worker complementarity being an important determinant of management
team stability.

Rachel M. Hayes
Graduate School of Business
University of Chicago
rachel.hayes@gsb.uchicago.edu

Paul Oyer
Graduate School of Business
Stanford University
518 Memorial Way
Stanford, CA 94305-5015
and NBER
pauloyer@stanford.edu

Scott Schaefer
Kellogg School of Management
Northwestern University
s-schaefer@kellogg.northwestern.edu
1      Introduction

People do not work in isolation. Most employees create value by combining their efforts and
talents with other individuals at the same firm. Doing so is most valuable if individuals combine
their skills with others who have complementary skills.
     In this paper, we explore the implications of co-worker complementarity for work groups in
firms. We first show that co-worker complementarity implies that when one of a complementary
pair of employees leaves the firm, the probability the other leaves the firm increases as well.
That is, complementarity implies contemporaneous association in employee turnover. We then
show that the magnitude of this change in the probability of turnover depends on the strength of
complementarities with the departing and incoming employees. Specifically, when one employee
leaves, the resulting change in the probability that another employee leaves is increasing in the
strength of the complementarity between them. Further, this change in probability is decreasing
in the strength of the complementarity between the employee and the departing employee’s
replacement.
     We examine these implications empirically using data on teams of top managers. Our
analysis centers on relationships between firms’ Chief Executive Officers (CEOs) and other
members of top management teams. We begin by observing that the unconditional likelihood
of non-CEO managerial turnover is 13.8 percent, but that this figure rises to 17.7 percent in
years when there is contemporaneous CEO turnover, and to 24.4 percent when the incoming
CEO has been employed by the firm for five years or less.1 In our empirical analysis, we assess
whether this pattern is consistent with the hypothesis of co-worker complementarity.
     Our main empirical strategy is to estimate a series of logit models that allow the probability
a manager leaves the firm to depend on characteristics of the firm, the manager, and the
firm’s CEO. We present three main empirical findings. First, the probability of non-CEO
turnover rises markedly around times of CEO turnover. Second, this increase in non-CEO
turnover around times of CEO turnover — a quantity we refer to as the “CEO/manager turnover
association” — is highest for managers whose tenure with the firm is similar to that of the

 1
     Throughout the paper, we refer to employees who do not hold the position of Chief Executive Officer as
     “managers” and employees who do hold the Chief Executive Officer position as “CEOs.” We reserve the
     term “executive” to refer to members of both groups.



                                                       1
departing CEO. For example, long-tenured managers are more likely (compared to short-tenured
managers) to depart the firm when a long-tenured CEO departs. Similarly, short-tenured
managers are more likely (compared to long-tenured managers) to depart when a short-tenured
CEO departs. Third, when an incoming CEO is relatively new to the firm, the CEO/manager
turnover association is highest for long-tenured managers. We argue that these results are
largely consistent with the idea of complementarities across individuals within top management
teams.
   Co-worker complementarity is not the only theory that can predict contemporaneous turnover
among members of top management teams. Other candidate theories include learning models
where corporate boards use correlated signals to update beliefs regarding executives’ abilities,
tournaments, and models where executives’ skills complement a particular strategy or set of
business practices. These are all potentially important, and we do not argue that co-worker
complementarity is the only factor driving the CEO/manager turnover association. Rather, we
argue that none of these theories can easily explain the empirical patterns unless one also allows
for complementarities across co-workers. We discuss versions of the tournament, correlated-
signals learning, and strategy complementarity models that omit co-worker complementarities,
and argue that these versions of the theories are not consistent with the data.
   We highlight several potential contributions of this work. First, we believe our paper to
be the first to quantify the effects of complementarities across specific individuals within firms.
Numerous previous studies have documented the value of sharing information and working
together. Gant, Ichniowski and Shaw (2002), for example, study the sharing of information
across jobs within a production process, but do not consider whether the identities of specific
employees within those jobs affect group productivity. Second, while there is a large body
of work on the implications of firm-specific human capital, relatively little has been done to
carefully identify the actual sources of firm-specific aspects of individual productivity. Our
results suggest that some specificity may be derived from complementarities with the firm’s
other employees. Third, while the large literature on CEO turnover has documented significant
links between firm performance and the likelihood of CEO departure (see Warner, Watts and
Wruck (1988) and Barro and Barro (1990)) and between board composition and CEO departure
(see Weisbach (1988)), research in this field has not, to date, carefully examined employment



                                                2
outcomes among a firm’s top non-CEO managers.2 Finally, more recent work in corporate
finance (see, for example, Weisbach (1995), Denis and Denis (1995), and Mulherin and Poulsen
(1998)) shows that various forms of organizational changes are more common after changes in
the CEO position. Our results suggest that managerial turnover is yet another dimension on
which organizational changes are associated with CEO changes, and that implementation of
organizational changes stemming from CEO turnover may require changes in the incumbent
top management team.
     The three studies most comparable to ours are Helmich and Brown (1972), Wruck and
Wruck (2002) and Fee and Hadlock (2004). Helmich and Brown study 208 changes in the
“President” position for evidence of associated turnover among other executives. They find an
association between outside succession and turnover among other executives, but make no com-
parison between firms experiencing turnover in the President position and firms experiencing
no turnover in this position. Wruck and Wruck (2002) study the formation of multiple groups
of top managers from within a single firm after a part of that firm is spun off. They show that a
top “line” manager from the part of the firm that is spun off is often teamed with a top “staff”
manager from the rest of the firm. This suggests a complementarity across line and staff jobs
within top management teams.
     In a contemporaneous paper, Fee and Hadlock (2004) also show that managerial turnover
is significantly higher near the time of CEO change. They interpret their results as consistent
with both a “team-specific human capital” model and a model where signals of managerial per-
formance are correlated. Our study (which makes use of a broader sample) leads us to conclude
the correlated signals model is not an important driver of the relationship between CEO and
managerial change. Our analysis also differs from theirs in that we examine the characteristics
of managers who join and depart top management teams, and explore the interactions among
those characteristics for evidence consistent with co-worker complementarity. Fee and Hadlock
instead emphasize how departure from a top management team affects an executive’s subse-
quent career. Thus, we view their paper as a study of labor market outcomes for non-CEO

 2
     Most existing work on employment outcomes for non-CEO managers uses this form of turnover as simply
     a broader indicator of change at the top of the organization. See Furtado and Rozeff (1987), Warner et al.
     (1988), Kaplan (1994a), Kaplan (1994b), Denis and Denis (1995) and Mikkelson and Partch (1997).




                                                       3
executives, and ours as an analysis of factors affecting the composition of productive groups
within organizations.
    Finally, we note that our analysis is similar in spirit to that found in the large literature on
the dynamics of job changes in labor markets. There, matching and specific skill acquisition
offer potential explanations for the fact that the probability of job change is inversely related to
the employee’s tenure with the firm. While the empirical patterns are largely consistent with
this explanation, the literature has not, to date, offered convincing direct evidence in favor
of these hypotheses (see Farber (1999)). Our analysis, which relies on matching or specific
skill acquisition to predict a positive CEO/manager turnover association, suffers from a similar
limitation. While we argue that the patterns in the data appear consistent with co-worker
complementarity, the difficulty of directly measuring such complementarities precludes a sharper
test.
    The remainder of our paper proceeds as follows: In Section 2, we develop a simple model
of co-worker complementarity and generate empirical implications. We describe our data and
present our empirical analysis in Section 3. In Section 4, we discuss other theories that can
predict a positive CEO/manager turnover association, and argue that these theories cannot
explain the findings unless co-worker complementarity is also present. We conclude in Section 5.


2       Co-Worker Complementarity and Turnover

In this section, we use a stylized model to derive implications of co-worker complementarity for
managerial turnover. Consider a firm that must employ two executives. Let f be a function
mapping the identities of the firm’s executives to firm profits gross of wages f : M × M → R.
Suppose the firm faces competition in the labor market, and let the outside wage for executive
mi ∈ M be denoted by wi0 .
    It is efficient for the firm to employ an executive if the surplus generated by this employment
match exceeds that of any other employment match. Thus, conditional on employing executive
m1 , it is efficient for the firm to employ executive m2 if

                                f (m1 , m2 ) − w20 > f (m1 , mj ) − wj0

for all mj 6= m1 , m2 ∈ M . If, on the other hand, the firm does not employ executive m1 , then

                                                  4
it is efficient for the firm to employ executive m2 if

                                      f (mi , m2 ) − w20 > f (mi , mj ) − wj0 ,

where mi is the next best alternative executive to m1 .
     To derive an empirical model from these relations, let w20 be a random variable with cumu-
lative distribution function G.3 Suppose further that the firm employs executives m1 and m2
in period t. Conditional on employing executive m1 in period t + 1, the probability of turnover
from t to t + 1 for executive m2 is given by

                                    1 − G f (m1 , m2 ) − f (m1 , mj ) + wj0 .
                                                                          


In words, executive m2 will leave the firm if the value of his outside opportunity increases
sufficiently so that the period t employment match is no longer efficient.4 If executive m1 is
not employed in period t, then the probability of turnover from t to t + 1 for executive m2 is
given by
                                    1 − G f (mi , m2 ) − f (mi , mj ) + wj0 .
                                                                          


Thus, the increase in the probability of executive m2 departure when executive m1 departs is

                  G f (m1 , m2 ) − f (m1 , mj ) + wj0 − G f (mi , m2 ) − f (mi , mj ) + wj0 .
                                                                                        
                                                                                                                 (1)

If executives m1 and m2 complement each other, then

                            f (m1 , m2 ) − f (m1 , mj ) > f (mi , m2 ) − f (mi , mj ).                           (2)

 3
     Our model here can be enriched in a variety of ways without affecting the basic insights. We could, for
     example, treat all wages as random variables, add search costs, or model the informational asymmetries
     that may affect external hiring. Also, one can interpret f more broadly as the sum of productivity and the
     value of on-the-job consumption. Complementarity, in the on-the-job consumption case, could stem from
     employees working with their friends, and the firm may be able to capture the benefits associated with this
     complementarity through reduced wages. Note that even if the firm cannot capture the benefits of such
     “cronyism,” it is still the case that efficient employment matches will depend on the extent of this co-worker
     complementarity.

 4
     This outside opportunity can be interpreted as leisure rather than work. It is efficient for an employment
     relationship to end in a “retirement” when the value of the employee’s leisure time is sufficiently high.



                                                          5
Because G is non-decreasing, it is straightforward to show that if m1 and m2 are complements,
then the probability of executive 2’s departure is (weakly) higher when executive 1 departs. The
intuition for this result is this: Executive 2 should be employed by the firm if this employment
match is efficient. If executive 1 departs, then the value created by executive 2 when employed by
this firm falls because of the lost complementarity between the two executives. This increases the
likelihood that the match between the firm and executive m2 is no longer surplus-maximizing,
and hence increases the likelihood of turnover.
     The co-worker complementarity reflected in (2) may arise from a number of sources. Execu-
tives may simply be endowed with skills that are complemented by those of another executive.
For example, an executive with operational skills may be well matched with another whose
talents lie in setting strategic direction. Alternatively, executives may learn to work with each
other over time, developing a stock of human capital that is specific to co-workers.5 As an
illustration of these effects from the management literature, Vancil (1987) emphasizes the im-
portance of “cohesion” among a top management team. As the team members “work together,
discussion becomes more efficient, a common data base evolves, a shared jargon develops, and
biases become clear. Managers who have been through many wars together can handle a heavy
agenda because they need not waste a lot of time trying to understand each other” (p. 119).
     Interpreting m2 as a non-CEO manager and m1 as a CEO, the quantity in (1) is exactly the
“CEO/manager turnover association” we defined above.6 This construct is our main object of
study in the empirical analysis below. The first hypothesis arising from our model of co-worker
complementarity is therefore that the CEO/manager turnover association is positive.
     We develop our second and third hypotheses by re-focusing on the inequality in (2). The
left-hand side of this inequality is the increase in the firm’s profit (gross of wages) when

 5
     Parrino (1997) analyzes how career outcomes for top managers are affected by accumulation of specific human
     capital.

 6
     Focusing on complementarities between CEOs and non-CEO managers seems natural given most firms’ hier-
     archical reporting structures. While the relationship between the CEO and each individual non-CEO would
     seem to be important, it is less clear that each manager-to-manager relationship is important. Our reasoning,
     however, can apply equally well to any two employees of a firm. We do briefly examine manager-to-manager
     complementarity below — see Section 3.3.




                                                         6
matching executive 2 rather than executive j with executive 1. Economically, it can be in-
terpreted as the effect of executive 2’s presence on executive 1’s productivity; this term there-
fore represents the quality of the match between executive 2 and executive 1. It is imme-
diate that the CEO/manager turnover association (that is, expression (1)) is increasing in
f (m1 , m2 ) − f (m1 , mj ). This comparative static leads to our second hypothesis: holding all
else fixed, the CEO/manager turnover association should be greater when the complementarity
between the manager and the departing CEO is stronger.
    The right-hand side of the inequality in (2) is the increase in the firm’s profit (gross of wages)
when matching executive 2 rather than executive j with executive i. It is the effect of executive
2’s presence on executive i’s productivity, and represents the quality of the match between these
two executives. The CEO/manager turnover association is decreasing in f (mi , m2 )−f (mi , mj ),
leading to our third hypothesis. Holding other factors constant, the CEO/manager turnover
association should be smaller when the complementarity between the manager and the incoming
CEO is stronger.


3     Empirical Analysis

3.1    Data

To conduct our empirical analysis, we augment the standard data source used in studies of
top management compensation with a number of hand-collected data items. Compustat’s
ExecuComp is a panel data set consisting of detailed information on executive compensation
for a broad cross-section of firms from 1994 to 2000. Throughout our sample period, publicly
traded firms in the U.S. were required to disclose (in their proxy statements) the identity and
pay of (1) all individuals serving as CEO for any part of the year, (2) the next four most highly
paid executive employees if their pay exceeded $100,000, and (3) up to two other individuals for
whom disclosure would have been provided had the individual been an employee of the firm at
the end of the fiscal year. Consequently, these disclosures provide a snapshot of the identities
and pay levels of each firm’s top executives at a given point in time. To facilitate inter-firm
comparability, we select the executive listed by ExecuComp as CEO and the next four most
highly paid executives, and refer to this set of executives as the firm’s group of “proxy-named



                                                  7
executives.”7
     We augment this data by hand-collecting information regarding each executive’s age and
employment history from firms’ annual reports. SEC rules require firms to identify executive
officers and certain other “significant” employees annually. We refer to the list of executives
and other significant employees disclosed in a given year as the firm’s “executive officer group,”
and we note that SEC rules require the group of proxy-named executives to always be a subset
of the executive officer group. For each employee in the executive officer group, we can observe
whether that employee has been with the firm for at least five years and, if not, how long the
employee has been with the firm. We define a variable “Tenure < 5 years” to take value one if
the executive has been an employee of the firm for less than five years, and zero otherwise.8
     In addition to collecting age and experience information, we use the executive officer group
to devise a measure of executive turnover. Constructing a turnover measure using only the list
of proxy-named executives is problematic because of the pay-rank criteria for inclusion in the
proxy. The criteria for inclusion in a firm’s executive officer group are, however, unrelated to
pay levels.9 While it is possible that an employee could be present in a firm’s executive officer
group in year t and remain an employee of the firm but drop out of the executive officer group

 7
     Unfortunately, ExecuComp makes a practice of “filling in” pay information for managers who did not appear
     in firms’ proxy statements in a given year. If, for example, a manager appears in a firm’s year t proxy
     statement and the firm reports pay information retroactively for years t − 1 and t − 2, then this manager will
     often be included by ExecuComp in the list of year t − 1 and t − 2 managers for that firm. Using the entire
     ExecuComp sample (which includes these filled-in executives) would bias our results, because a manager can
     be filled in for year t − 1 only if he or she does not leave the firm from year t − 1 to t. Restricting attention
     to only the CEO and the four most highly paid managers omits these cases.

 8
     In defining this variable, we take the length of time since the employee first became an employee of the
     firm. If, for example, an executive joined a firm as an employee is 1983, retired as an employee in 1994 but
     remained on the firm’s board of directors, and then became an employee again in 1996, then we would record
     this employee’s 1996 tenure as 13 years.

 9
     The group of executive officers, as defined in Rule 405 of the Securities Act of 1933, refers to employees who
     are “in charge” of a unit, division or function, or perform a “policy making function.” In our data, there are
     6,149 cases where a manager leaves a firm’s group of proxy-named executives. In 4,111 of these, the manager
     also left the firm’s executive officer group.




                                                           8
in year t + 1, this can happen only if there is a substantial change in the functions performed by
that employee.10 For each executive i listed in firm j’s year t group of proxy-named executives,
we define turnover as follows:
                                                     
                                                      0 if executive i is listed in firm j’s
                                                     
                                                     
              Non-CEO Manager Turnoverit =                   year t + 1 executive officer group
                                                     
                                                     
                                                         1 otherwise
                                                     

     We apply a different definition for CEO turnover, because an executive can leave the CEO
position but still remain a member of the executive officer group. For each firm j and year t,
we define CEO turnover as follows:11
                                    
                                    
                                    
                                     0 if the executive listed as firm j
                                    
                                    
                                       CEO at the end of year t is still
                CEO Turnovert =
                                    
                                    
                                       listed as CEO at the end of year t + 1
                                    
                                    
                                      1 otherwise
                                    

     Our final sample consists of 8,122 firm-years and 37,906 executive-years.12 We present
summary statistics for employee-level variables in Table 1 and for firm-level variables in Table 2.
Notably, the raw data on managerial turnover appears to offer strong support for our first
hypothesis. Table 1 reports that while the unconditional rate of non-CEO managerial turnover
is 13.8 percent, this rate jumps by nearly a third, to 17.7 percent, in years where there is also
CEO turnover. If the incoming CEO has been with the firm for less than five years, this rate

10
     There are cases where a manager leaves the executive officer group but remains a non-employee director of
     the firm. We are not aware of any cases where a manager is present in the executive officer group in year t
     and t + 2, but not year t + 1.

11
     Because ExecuComp occasionally lists a CEO who left during year t as the year t CEO, we hand checked
     each CEO departure to ensure we match the departure to the correct fiscal year.

12
     We were able to hand-collect complete age and employment history information for more than 96% of the
     executive-years in the original ExecuComp sample. Missing age and experience data are primarily due to
     missing annual reports on the SEC or 10kwizard web sites. Also, to limit the potential effect of outliers in
     our data, we drop the lowest and highest 1% of market and accounting returns. Inclusion of these firms in
     our analysis has no qualitative effect on our findings. We also drop firm-years where there is CEO turnover
     as a result of a merger or spinoff.



                                                         9
jumps to 24.4 percent. We turn next to assessing this CEO/manager turnover association using
regression analysis.


3.2      The CEO/Manager Turnover Association

We begin by documenting factors that are related to the probability of executive turnover. In
Table 3, we present results from estimating a series of logit models where the dependent variable
is a measure of executive turnover. In Column (1), we use our indicator for CEO turnover as
the dependent variable. In Columns (2) through (4), we use non-CEO managerial turnover as
the dependent variable.
     We include characteristics of both the firm and the individual executive as independent
variables. Firm-level variables include log assets, indicator variables for industry at the 2-digit
SIC code level, year indicators, indicators for the number of employees in the firm’s group of
proxy-named executives, and measures of industry-adjusted firm-performance. To construct our
measures of industry-adjusted firm performance, we begin with the firm’s shareholder return
and return on assets (which ExecuComp defines as net income before extraordinary items and
discontinued operations divided by total assets) in year t. We adjust for industry effects by
subtracting the mean stock return and ROA in that two-digit industry in that year, dropping
industry-years for which we have fewer than five firms.13 We then construct indicator variables
based on percentiles of industry-adjusted firm performance variables. For ease of presentation,
we present regressions that include indicator variables for quintiles of industry-adjusted firm
performance.14
     Executive-level variables include the fraction of the firm’s common stock owned by the exec-
utive, indicators for the executive’s rank (first through fifth) in salary and bonus compensation
among the firm’s group of proxy-named executives, an indicator for firm tenure less than five
years, and indicators for age categories. We define four age categories: below 55, 55 to 63, 64

13
     All results are robust to using medians, rather than means, in computing industry adjustments.

14
     An alternative would be to include industry-adjusted stock return and return on assets linearly in our re-
     gression. Our approach estimates a more flexible relationship between firm performance and the likelihood of
     executive turnover. Our qualitative findings are invariant to this specification choice. Results are also robust
     to using deciles of firm performance.



                                                         10
                            Table 1: Executive-Level Summary Statistics
                                                          CEOs          Non-CEO Managers
             Executive-years                              8,122              29,784
             Annual Rate of Turnover                      10.3%              13.8%
             Annual Rate of Turnover Conditional on                          17.7%
                Contemporaneous CEO Turnover
             Annual Rate of Turnover Conditional on                          24.4%
                Incoming CEO Tenure < 5 years
             Age
                   Mean                                    55.5                 50.6
                   Median                                  55                   51
                   Standard deviation                      7.49                 7.54
             Tenure < 5 years
                   Mean                                    0.17                 0.31
             Salary + bonus
                   Mean ($000)                            1,180                 554
                   Median ($000)                           850                  405
                   Standard deviation                     1,797                 630
             Shares Owned as a Fraction of Total Shares Outstanding
                   Mean (%)                                3.15                 0.43
                   Median (%)                              0.40                 0.04
                   Standard deviation                      6.97                 2.13




                                 Table 2: Firm-level Summary Statistics
                                          Mean     Standard Deviation     Median       Minimum   Maximum    N
Total assets (millions)                   $8,550        $32,361           $1,253         $14      $717B    8,122
Return on Assets (ROA — %)                 4.85           6.79             4.62         -40.00    24.00
Shareholder Return (RET — %)               18.1           43.5             12.2         -65.9     250.0
Size of proxy-named executive group        4.88           0.44              5             2         5




                                                   11
                              Table 3: Determinants of Executive Turnover
                                                                        CEO Turnover          Non-CEO Managerial Turnover
                                                                              (1)            (2)       (3)             (4)
Lowest ROA Quintile                                                          0.036          0.027     0.024           0.019
                                                                             (2.90)        (5.08)     (4.79)         (3.07)
Lowest RET Quintile                                                          0.065          0.023     0.020           0.019
                                                                             (4.90)        (4.69)     (4.20)         (3.26)
Age between 55 and 63                                                        0.043          0.063     0.060           0.058
                                                                             (7.67)        (14.30)   (14.04)         (11.45)
Age between 64 and 66                                                        0.268          0.282     0.272           0.217
                                                                            (16.59)        (17.21)   (16.94)         (12.81)
Age greater than 66                                                          0.140          0.131     0.125           0.104
                                                                            (10.13)        (8.19)     (7.95)         (6.13)
Fraction Ownership                                                           -0.004        -0.008     -0.007         -0.008
                                                                             (4.83)        (5.08)     (5.01)         (3.92)
CEO Tenure < 5 years                                                         -0.004         0.043     0.041           0.031
                                                                             (0.48)        (7.40)     (7.37)         (4.75)
Manager Tenure < 5 years                                                                    0.023     0.023           0.035
                                                                                           (5.60)     (5.61)         (5.90)
Manager Tenure < 5 years*Age between 55 and 63                                             -0.052     -0.050         -0.060
                                                                                           (4.46)     (4.34)         (3.63)
Manager Tenure < 5 years*Age between 64 and 66                                             -0.036     -0.042          0.015
                                                                                           (0.53)     (0.61)         (0.15)
Manager Tenure < 5 years*Age greater than 66                                               -0.139     -0.138         -0.110
                                                                                           (2.52)     (2.54)         (1.29)
CEO Age between 55 and 63                                                                  -0.011     -0.012         -0.011
                                                                                           (3.60)     (3.92)         (2.89)
CEO Age between 64 and 66                                                                  -0.028     -0.032         -0.023
                                                                                           (4.30)     (4.92)         (2.90)
CEO Age greater than 66                                                                    -0.032     -0.034         -0.030
                                                                                           (5.00)     (5.45)         (4.19)
Manager Tenure < 5 years*CEO Tenure < 5 years                                              -0.054     -0.053         -0.049
                                                                                           (5.24)     (5.28)         (3.37)
CEO Turnover                                                                                          0.046           0.048
                                                                                                      (9.91)         (10.04)


N                                                                            8,122         29,784     29,784         17,428

Column 1 dependent variable is an indicator for whether CEO leaves the CEO position from year t to year t + 1. Columns 2
through 4 dependent variables are indicators for whether the manager leaves the firm’s list of “Executive Officers” from year t
to year t + 1. Parameters are probability derivatives. Robust asymptotic t-statistics, adjusted for within-firm correlation, in
parentheses. Regressions include log assets, indicators for the executive’s compensation rank, the number of executives listed
in the firm’s proxy statement, year, 2-digit SIC industry, and second, fourth and fifth quintiles of industry-adjusted firm
performance. Columns 3 and 4 include indicators for whether the manager became CEO in year t + 1. In Column 3,
CEO Turnover indicates contemporaneous CEO turnover, while in Column 4 it indicates contemporaneous or prior year
turnover.                                                  12
to 66, and over 66.15 Coefficients estimated by logit models are difficult to interpret economi-
cally, so we instead present the derivative of the probability of CEO turnover with respect to
each independent variable.16 For indicator variables, we present the predicted change in the
probability the dependent variable changes from zero to one as the indicator changes from zero
to one.
     From Column (1), we see that age and firm performance are associated with CEO turnover.
The omitted categories for our firm-performance variables are the third (middle) quintiles; thus,
the positive and significant coefficients on Lowest ROA Quintile and Lowest RET Quintile
indicate that CEO turnover is more likely when the firm performs poorly relative to other firms
in its industry. CEO turnover is 3.6 (6.5) percentage points more likely when the firm’s return
on assets (stock return) is in the lowest quintile as compared to the middle quintile. While we
omit the coefficients on the remaining quintile indicators from the table, we find that firms in
the second quintile of stock performance are more likely by 2.7 percentage points (p-value =
0.02) to experience CEO turnover. The coefficients on none of the other performance variables
are statistically different from zero. Our omitted age category is 54 and younger, so results
indicate that CEOs become more likely to turn over as they get older. As many authors have
found, CEOs are most likely to turn over when around the standard retirement age. CEOs who
hold smaller percentage ownership stakes in their firms are also more likely to turn over.17
     In Column (2), we run a similar specification for non-CEO managers, but add a number
of independent variables that are not present in our CEO specification from Column (1). We

15
     We allow the ages 64 through 66 to be a separate category because many executives retire at around age 65.
     We experimented with various ways of defining age categories, but found similar effects.

16
     Probability derivatives are calculated at the median executive and firm characteristics, and the modal year
     and SIC code. For example, median non-CEO age is 51 years, so we compute non-CEO probability derivatives
     (for variables other than the age category indicators) by setting indicators for the 55 to 63, 64 to 66, and over
     66 categories to zero.

17
     We also tried including the value of restricted stock and unexercisable options held by an executive. Co-
     efficients on these variables were not statistically distinguishable from zero, and our other inferences were
     unaffected by their inclusion. While such grants are presumably made to increase the cost to employees of
     leaving the firm, their obvious endogeneity complicates the interpretation of these regression coefficients.




                                                          13
add variables relating to the characteristics of the firm’s CEO, including CEO age categories, a
variable for whether the CEO’s tenure with the firm is less than five years, and a CEO/manager
tenure interaction.
     We find these managers are more likely by 2.7 and 2.3 percentage points to turn over when
firm performance drops from the third to the first quintiles of return on assets and stock return,
respectively. The age category variables matter for these managers in much the same way they
do for CEOs. Further, the probability of managerial turnover is significantly higher when the
firm’s CEO has been with the firm for less than five years. This effect, however, holds for only
those managers who have been with the firm for more than five years. Specifically, a manager
who has more than five years’ tenure with the firm is 4.3 percentage points more likely to turn
over when the firm’s CEO has less than five years’ tenure compared to when the firm’s CEO
has more than five years’ tenure. However, the probability of turnover for a manager with less
than five years’ tenure with the firm is unrelated to the CEO’s tenure with the firm. (That is,
we cannot reject the hypothesis that the sum of the coefficients on Manager Tenure < 5 years
and Manager Tenure < 5 years*CEO Tenure < 5 years sum to zero.) Column (2) also shows
the probability of managerial turnover to be higher when the firm’s CEO is young, and that
the relationship between managerial tenure and turnover probability varies markedly with age.
The finding that the Manager Tenure < 5 years*Age greater than 66 interaction is significantly
negative may reflect that a firm and a manager past standard retirement age would be unlikely
to enter into a new employment relationship if both sides did not have a reason to believe that
the relationship would last for some amount of time. In unreported specifications, we found
this effect is not present for the CEO turnover regression in Column (1) of Table 3.
     In Column (3), we add the CEO Turnover variable. The coefficient on this variable is the
increase in the probability of managerial turnover when there is CEO turnover, compared to
the case of no CEO turnover. It is therefore the ceteris paribus calculation of the CEO/manager
turnover association we defined in Section 2.18 We find that CEO turnover from year t to year

18
     We also add an indicator for whether the manager takes over as CEO. This indicator predicts the dependent
     variable (remaining in the executive officer group) perfectly, so inclusion of this variable has the effect of
     dropping those executive-years where the manager becomes the firm’s CEO the following year. Hence, the
     correct interpretation of the coefficient on CEO Turnover is the following: conditional on the manager not
     being selected as the new CEO, how much does the likelihood of turnover increase when there is CEO


                                                        14
t + 1 is associated with an increase of 4.6 percentage points in the likelihood of managerial
turnover. This coefficient estimate is significantly different from zero at better than the one
percent level. The unconditional likelihood of managerial turnover is 13.8 percent, so CEO
turnover is associated with an increase by one-third in the likelihood of managerial turnover. We
conclude that the contemporaneous CEO/manager turnover association is both economically
and statistically significant.19
     Finally, in Column (4) we broaden our definition of CEO Turnover to take value 1 if the firm
experienced CEO turnover from year t−1 to t or from year t to year t+1. In this regression, we
also drop all managers who were new to the firm in year t. The coefficient on CEO Turnover
therefore reflects the increase in the likelihood of year t to t + 1 managerial turnover when
there was contemporaneous or prior year CEO turnover, conditional on the manager having
been in the group of proxy-named executives at the start of the prior year. The coefficient on
CEO Turnover is positive and significant at far better than the one percent level. Our estimates
suggest that CEO turnover in the contemporaneous or prior year increases the likelihood of
managerial turnover by 4.8 percentage points. We also estimated more flexible specifications
that allow contemporaneous and prior-year CEO turnover to have different effects on managerial
turnover. We were unable to reject the hypothesis that the effects of contemporaneous and
prior-year CEO turnover are the same. These two effects do differ significantly from the effect
of year t − 2 to t − 1 CEO turnover (as we found in unreported specifications). It appears,
therefore, that the effect of CEO turnover on the likelihood of non-CEO managerial turnover
persists for a period of around two years.
     We conclude that Columns (3) and (4) of Table 3 offer strong support for our first hypothesis
from Section 2 — that the CEO/manager turnover association is positive. Here, we find that this
association is positive, appears to have a duration of about two years, and is both statistically

     turnover?

19
     This, and all our main results, are robust to a number of alternative specifications. In an earlier version of this
     paper, we took the firm (rather than the individual non-CEO manager) as the unit of analysis and estimated
     a series of ordered logit models where the dependent variable was the number of non-CEO managers who
     turned over in a given year. Also, we estimated a model with firm fixed-effects (see Chamberlain (1980)) to
     verify that our results are not driven by firm-level heterogeneity in rates of managerial turnover.




                                                           15
and economically significant.


3.3     Effects of CEO and Manager Characteristics

Next, we explore our second and third hypotheses; namely, that the CEO/manager turnover
association is related to the extent of complementarities present between executives. To do
this, we rely extensively on our measures of executive tenure with the firm. Our reasoning here
runs parallel to that used in the literature on job changes. Models of matching of workers to
firms with uncertain ex ante match quality (see Jovanovich (1979b)) and accumulation of firm-
specific human capital (Parsons (1972) and Jovanovich (1979a)) both predict that worker/firm
complementarity should be increasing in tenure, and thus that the probability of job change
should be decreasing in tenure. Here, we reason that uncertain ex ante co-worker match quality
or accumulation of co-worker specific skills can lead to the same effect. That is, co-worker
complementarity should be increasing in the amount of time employees have worked together.
Hence, to examine our second and third hypotheses, we look at how the CEO/manager turnover
association varies with tenure of the departing CEO, the incoming CEO and the manager.
     We begin by asking whether the CEO/manager turnover association is related to character-
istics of the departing and incoming CEOs. In Column (1) of Table 4, we interact an indicator
for contemporaneous CEO turnover with our tenure indicator for departing CEOs.20 The point
estimate on the interaction is small, and is not statistically distinguishable from zero. While
CEO turnover leads to a substantial increase in the likelihood of managerial departure, the
magnitude of this effect does not — in this specification — appear to be related to the tenure
of the departing CEO.
     The tenure of the incoming CEO is, on the other hand, related to the CEO/manager turnover
association. As the Column (2) regression shows, managers are 5.3 percentage points more likely
to turn over when the incoming CEO has been with the firm five years or less compared to when
the incoming CEO has been with the firm for more than five years. This effect is significant at
better than the one percent level. The CEO/manager turnover association is not driven entirely
by short-tenured incoming CEOs, however. The CEO Turnover indicator remains significant

20
     We also experimented with interacting CEO Turnover with categories for the ages of the departing and
     incoming CEOs, but could find no pattern.



                                                    16
as well, with the probability derivative implying that succession of a CEO with greater than
five years tenure means a 2.4 percentage point increase in the likelihood of managerial turnover.
     In Column (3), we further explore how the CEO/manager turnover association is related
to characteristics of the incoming CEO. Specifically, we place incoming CEOs into one of four
categories:

     1. Incoming CEO was an employee of the firm in year t with tenure greater than five years.
        (538 events)

     2. Incoming CEO was an employee of the firm in year t with tenure less than five years.
        (169 events)

     3. Incoming CEO was a director but not an employee of the firm in year t. (43 events)

     4. Incoming CEO was not an employee or director of the firm in year t. (164 events)

We create indicator variables “Short-Tenured Employee,” “Non-Employee Director,” and “Ex-
ternal Hire” for the second through fourth categories, respectively, and interact these indicators
with our CEO Turnover variable.21
     Our estimates suggest that the probability of managerial turnover is higher by 7.0 percent-
age points when the new CEO was hired from outside the firm compared to the case where
the new CEO is a long-tenured insider. This difference is significant at better than the one
percent level. Managerial turnover probabilities are higher by 4.4 and 4.6 percentage points,
respectively, when the new CEO is a short-tenured insider and a director. These estimates are
significant at better than the one and two percent levels. While we can reject the hypothesis
that the coefficients on CEO Turnover*External Hire, CEO Turnover*Non-Employee Director,
and CEO Turnover*Short-Tenured Employee are all zero, we cannot reject the hypothesis that
the three coefficients are identical.

21
     Recall from footnote 8 that our tenure variable is defined with respect to the first date an individual became
     an employee of the firm. Hence, nearly half of the 43 instances where non-employee directors take over as
     CEO are cases where Incoming CEO Tenure < 5 years = 0, as these are cases where board members who are
     former employees take over as CEO. We tried partitioning our Non-Employee Director indicator on whether
     the director was a former employee or not, but gained no additional insight.




                                                        17
                        Table 4: Departing and Incoming CEO Characteristics
                                                                  Contemporaneous                Contemporaneous and Prior
                                                                      CEO Turnover                      Year CEO Turnover
                                                                (1)       (2)        (3)         (4)        (5)          (6)
CEO Turnover                                                   0.064     0.024    0.021        0.047       0.051        0.030
                                                               (7.94)    (3.80)   (3.28)       (8.14)     (5.65)        (5.52)
CEO Turnover* Departing CEO Tenure < 5 years                   0.008                           0.042
                                                               (0.35)                          (2.37)
CEO Turnover* Incoming CEO Tenure < 5 years                              0.053                             0.051
                                                                         (4.57)                           (4.39)
CEO Turnover* Short-Tenured Employee                                              0.044                                 0.031
                                                                                  (4.97)                                (2.23)
CEO Turnover* Non-Employee Director                                               0.046                                 0.011
                                                                                  (2.36)                                (0.48)
CEO Turnover* External Hire                                                       0.070                                 0.075
                                                                                  (2.90)                                (5.04)


N                                                              29,784    29,784   29,784       17,428     17,428        17,428

Dependent variables are indicators for whether non-CEO manager leaves the firm’s list of “Executive Officers” from year t to
year t + 1. Reported parameters are probability derivatives. Robust asymptotic t-statistics, adjusted for within-firm
correlation, in parentheses. Firm-level variables included in each regression are log assets, CEO age, and indicators for
quintiles of industry adjusted stock-market and accounting returns, 2-digit SIC indicators, year, number of individuals in
group of proxy-named executives, and year t CEO tenure. Executive level-variables are fraction ownership, compensation
rank, age categories, indicators for tenure less than five years and whether the manager became the next CEO, and
age/tenure, manager tenure/CEO tenure interactions.




                                                          18
     In Columns (4) through (6), we extend our indicator variables for CEO turnover to allow for
contemporaneous and prior year turnover.22 Inferences here are similar to those obtained from
Columns (1) through (3), with two exceptions. First, we do find an effect of departing CEO
tenure on managerial turnover. Departure of a short-tenured CEO in the current or prior year is
associated with a 4.2 percentage point increase in the likelihood of managerial turnover. Second,
if the incoming CEO is a non-employee director, then managerial turnover is not significantly
higher compared to when the new CEO is a long-tenured insider. Combined with the result
from Column (3), this finding suggests that when a non-employee director takes over as CEO
starting in year t, year t to t + 1 managerial turnover is lower than in the case where there is
no contemporaneous or prior year CEO turnover. Our more flexible specifications (unreported)
confirm this finding.
     To summarize, the main result arising from Table 4 is that managerial turnover is signif-
icantly higher when the incoming CEO has shorter tenure with the firm. This offers some
indirect support for our third hypothesis. When the match between the incoming CEO and the
manager is weaker (as captured by the incoming CEO having spent little time working at the
firm), the CEO/manager turnover association is larger.
     Our hypotheses can be more directly examined, however, by looking at the interactions
between executive characteristics. In Column (1) of Table 5, we interact our non-CEO manager
tenure and departing CEO tenure indicators with our CEO turnover indicator. We also include
the triple interaction among the three indicators. This specification allows us to determine
whether the length of overlap between manager and departing CEO work histories is related to
the probability of managerial turnover.
     To interpret this regression, note that the coefficient on the CEO Turnover indicator es-
timates the CEO/manager turnover association for the omitted categories of a long-tenured
manager and a long-tenured incoming CEO. The sum of the coefficients on CEO Turnover and
the CEO Turnover*Manager Tenure < 5 years interaction is the CEO/manager turnover asso-
ciation for the case of a short-tenured non-CEO manager and a long-tenured departing CEO.
The sum of the CEO Turnover and the CEO Turnover*Departing CEO Tenure < 5 years co-

22
     In cases where there was CEO turnover in both years, we use the characteristics of the contemporaneous
     departing and incoming CEO to define the interaction variables.



                                                      19
                       Table 5: Interactions Among Executives’ Characteristics
                                                                                   Contemporaneous          Contemporaneous and Prior
                                                                                     CEO Turnover               Year CEO Turnover
                                                                                     (1)        (2)           (3)             (4)
CEO Turnover                                                                        0.066     0.027         0.073            0.043
                                                                                   (7.49)     (2.82)        (8.64)           (4.74)
CEO Turnover* Manager Tenure < 5 years                                             -0.031     0.013         -0.033          -0.00006
                                                                                   (1.77)     (0.74)        (1.78)           (0.00)
CEO Turnover* Departing CEO Tenure < 5 years                                       -0.056                   -0.037
                                                                                   (1.84)                   (1.33)
CEO Turnover* Manager Tenure < 5 years* Departing CEO Tenure < 5 years              0.113                   0.112
                                                                                   (3.32)                   (3.06)
CEO Turnover* Incoming CEO Tenure < 5 years                                                   0.071                          0.071
                                                                                              (4.80)                         (4.30)
CEO Turnover* Manager Tenure < 5 years* Incoming CEO Tenure < 5 years                         -0.064                         -0.029
                                                                                              (1.88)                         (0.85)


N                                                                                  29,784     29,784        17,428          17,428

Dependent variables are indicators for whether manager leaves the firm’s Executive Officer group from year t to year t + 1.
Reported parameters are probability derivatives. Robust asymptotic t-statistics, adjusted for within-firm correlation, in
parentheses. Firm-level variables included in each regression are log assets, CEO age, and indicators for quintiles of industry
adjusted stock-market and accounting returns, 2-digit SIC indicators, year, number of individuals in group of proxy-named
executives, and year t CEO tenure. Executive level-variables are fraction ownership, compensation rank, age categories, an
indicator for tenure less than five years, and age/tenure, manager tenure/CEO tenure interactions.




                                                          20
efficients is the CEO/manager turnover association for the case of a long-tenured non-CEO
manager and a short-tenured departing CEO, while the sum of the four coefficients (including
the triple interaction) is the association when both executives are short-tenured.
   These probabilities are easier to compare when displayed in a two-by-two matrix, as in Panel
A of Figure 1. Rows correspond to different levels of non-CEO manager tenure, while columns
correspond to different levels of departing CEO tenure. In each cell, we enter the estimated
CEO/manager turnover association for that manager-tenure/departing-CEO-tenure pair. To
illustrate, the number in the lower-right cell (0.066) is our point estimate of the increase in the
probability of long-tenured manager turnover when a long-tenured CEO departs compared to
when there is no CEO turnover. The number in the lower-left cell (0.010) is the CEO/manager
turnover association for the case of a long-tenured non-CEO manager and a short-tenured
departing CEO. Arrows between adjacent cells indicate that the turnover probabilities in the
connected cells are statistically different from each other, with p-value listed in parentheses.
   Panel A of Figure 1 offers strong support for our second hypothesis. Note specifically that
the on-diagonal cells (those for which the CEO and non-CEO executives’ firm tenures are the
same) are highest in magnitude, and are significantly different from the magnitudes in the off-
diagonal cells. If a CEO and a manager have both been with the firm for five years, then CEO
departure is associated with an increase in the likelihood of manager departure of 6.6 percentage
points. If the departing CEO has been with the firm for less than five years, then the increase
in managerial turnover probability is only 1.0 percentage point. This is significantly different
from the case where both are long-tenured at better than the 7% level. If, on the other hand,
the manager has been with the firm for less than five years but the departing CEO has been
with the firm for more than five years, the increase in managerial turnover probability is just
3.5 percentage points. This is significantly different from the case where both are long-tenured
at better than the 6% level.
   The most striking result from the matrix is the very high CEO/manager turnover association
for the case where both managers are short-tenured. This association is significantly larger
than that for the case where only one is short-tenured at better than the 1% level. Within
our framework, one could construct either a matching or a specific-capital explanation for this
finding. One possibility is that short-tenured CEOs hire additional managers from outside only



                                                21
if they have strong reason to believe that those outsiders are good matches with themselves.
Alternatively, it may be the case that the short-tenured departing CEO and the short-tenured
manager accumulated specific skills by working together at another firm prior to joining the
present employer. We present some evidence on this second explanation in Section 3.4 below.
   To recap our main finding from Panel A of Figure 1, it appears that the match between
the tenures of the manager and the departing CEO plays an important role in determining
how CEO turnover is related to turnover of other managers. This result is consistent with
our hypothesis that the CEO/manager turnover association should be larger when the comple-
mentarity between the two executives is stronger. Recall also that in Column (1) of Table 4,
we found that the tenure of the departing CEO was unrelated to the CEO/manager turnover
association. The specification estimated there did not allow this effect to vary with the tenure
of the manager, and hence misses the true effect.
   We now consider our third hypothesis, which predicts that the CEO/manager turnover
association will be small when the incoming CEO/manager complementarity is strong. Re-
call that Table 4 shows that the CEO/manager turnover association is strongly related to the
tenure of the incoming CEO. We now explore whether this relationship varies with the tenure
of the manager. Our third hypothesis has three implications for this analysis. First, we expect
the smallest CEO/manager turnover association when both the incoming CEO and the man-
ager are long-tenured. Second, we expect the CEO/manager turnover association to be larger
for long-tenured manager/short-tenured incoming CEO combinations than for short-tenured
manager/short-tenured incoming CEO combinations. Finally, conditional on the incoming
CEO having long tenure, we expect a higher CEO/manager turnover association for short-
tenured managers than for long-tenured managers. We test these implications in Column (2)
of Table 5 by including a set of interaction variables relating to the tenures of the manager and
the incoming CEO. However, as with the Table 5 Column (1) regression, it is easier to interpret
our estimates by referring to a two-by-two matrix.
   As Panel B of Figure 1 indicates, the empirical patterns are consistent with all three of these
implications (although the third is not statistically significant). The CEO/manager turnover
association is smallest when the manager and the incoming CEO both have short tenures.
Further, while long-tenured managers are only moderately (2.7 percentage points) more likely



                                               22
to turn over when there is an incoming long-tenured CEO, they are substantially more likely to
turn over (9.8 percentage points) when there is an incoming short-tenured CEO. This difference
is significant at far better than the one percent level. Our finding from Table 4 — that non-CEO
managers are more likely to depart the firm when the incoming CEO is relatively new to the
firm — appears to be driven by departure of managers who have been with the firm for more
than five years. Finally, while we do find that short-tenured managers are more likely to turn
over (by 4.0 percentage points) when there is a long-tenured incoming CEO, this magnitude is
not significantly larger than that for long-tenured managers (2.7 percentage points).
   In Columns (3) and (4) of Table 5, we repeat this analysis using contemporaneous and prior-
year CEO turnover. A similar pattern, with somewhat lesser statistical significance, is observed.
Specifically, we again find that match between tenures of a manager and a departing CEO is
important. Also, new incoming CEOs appear to affect turnover probabilities for long-tenured
managers only.
   We ran additional specifications combining the explanatory variables in Columns (1) and (2)
of Table 4, and including the four way interaction between CEO Turnover, Manager Tenure
< 5 years, Departing CEO Tenure < 5 years, and Incoming CEO Tenure < 5 years. This al-
lows the construction of a three-dimensional analogue to the matrices in Figure 1, where the
three dimensions are non-CEO manager tenure, departing CEO tenure, and incoming CEO
tenure. Estimation of this model confirms that both effects identified above — that (1) the
CEO/manager turnover association is greatest when the manager and departing CEO have
matching tenures, and (2) short-tenured incoming CEOs increase departure probabilities for
long-tenured managers — are present in the data when controlling for the other.
   Finally, we note our reasoning from Section 2 can be applied not just to CEO/manager
relationships, but also to manager/manager pairs. To examine our main hypotheses in the
manager/manager context, we dropped all managers holding the title “President,” “Chief Op-
erating Officer,” or “Chief Financial Officer” from our sample of non-CEO managers. We then
constructed an indicator variable for high-ranking managerial turnover, where a manager is
considered to be of high rank if he holds one of the three positions listed above. Using speci-
fications similar to Column (3) of Table 3, we found that high-ranking managerial turnover is
significantly associated with low-ranking managerial turnover, even when restricting the sample



                                               23
Figure 1: Number in each cell is the estimated CEO/manager turnover association. Arrows indicate
that the difference between the two estimates is statistically significant, with p-values in parentheses.
Panel A and B associations can be computed directly from the regressions in Columns (1) and (2),
respectively, of Table 5.




          Panel A: CEO/Manager Turnover Association as a Function of Manager and
                     Departing CEO Tenure (From Table 5, Column 1)


                              Departing CEO              Departing CEO
                              Tenure < 5 years           Tenure ≥ 5 years


     Manager Tenure
       < 5 years
                                   0.092         -
                                                  (1%)
                                                             0.035
                                     6                          6
                                     ?(1%)                      ?(8%)
     Manager Tenure
       ≥ 5 years
                                   0.010         -
                                                  (7%)
                                                             0.066




          Panel B: CEO/Manager Turnover Association as a Function of Manager and
                      Incoming CEO Tenure (From Table 5, Column 2)


                               Incoming CEO               Incoming CEO
                              Tenure < 5 years           Tenure ≥ 5 years


     Manager Tenure
       < 5 years
                                   0.047                     0.040
                                     6
                                     ?(7%)
     Manager Tenure
       ≥ 5 years
                                   0.098         -
                                                  (1%)
                                                             0.027




                                                   24
to firm-years where there is no CEO turnover. Further, we find a similar pattern to that in
Panel A of Figure 1 with regard to tenure matches between high- and low-ranking non-CEO
managers, albeit without statistical significance.
     We conclude that the evidence in this subsection supports our second and third hypotheses.
Departing CEO tenure does have a substantial impact on the probability of managerial depar-
ture, but this effect differs according to whether the manager in question has an employment
history that overlaps with the departing CEO. Further, succession of a short-tenured CEO does
affect the probability of managerial departure, but only for long-tenured managers.


3.4      Incoming Non-CEO Managers

Next, we briefly examine the characteristics of incoming non-CEO managers. Our objective
here is to look for evidence of complementarity between CEOs and managers who are new to
the firm. As we discussed above, one potential explanation for our Figure 1 Panel A result is
that short-tenured CEOs and short-tenured managers accumulated specific skills by working
together at another firm prior to joining the present employer.
     To do this, we look at the characteristics of managers who enter a firm’s group of proxy-
named executives. Specifically, we examine the likelihood a manager who joins the proxy group
has been with the firm for less than five years; that is, we study the “short/join probability,”
defined as

        Prob[ manager is short-tenured | manager joins group of proxy-named executives ].

In our data, there are 4,711 cases where a manager makes his first appearance in a firm’s group
of proxy-named executives.23 Of these, 54.5% have tenure at their firm of less than five years.
Therefore, the short/join probability over our entire sample is 54.5%.
     Given our co-worker complementarity hypothesis, we would expect the short/join proba-
bility to be high when a short-tenured manager becomes CEO. Similarly, when a long-tenured

23
     One source of bias in our measure is that we do not observe groups of proxy-named executives for years prior
     to 1994. Hence, a manager who is in the group of proxy-named executives in 1993 and again in 1995 will be
     treated by our measure as being new to the group of proxy-named executives in 1995. As a robustness check,
     we re-defined our measure of “joining” to include any manager who is present in a group of proxy-named
     executives in year t but not year t − 1. This had little effect on our findings.



                                                          25
manager is promoted to CEO, we would expect newcomers to the top management group to
be likely to come from inside the firm (that is, we expect a low short/join probability.) Both
of these patterns are found in the data.
     We first examine how the short/join probability is affected by CEO turnover. We find that,
if there was CEO turnover from year t to year t + 1, then managers who join the firm’s group
of proxy-named executives in year t + 1 are actually less likely to be short-tenured. Of the
701 managers who joined their firms’ proxies in the year after CEO turnover, 346 (49.4%) had
tenure less than five years. A chi-squared test rejects the hypothesis (at better than the 1%
level) that the short/join probability is the same when there is CEO turnover compared to
when there is no turnover.
     When the incoming CEO is relatively new to the firm, however, the short/join probability is
higher. Our sample contains 253 managers who join their firm’s proxy-named executive groups
in the year after a short-tenured executive becomes CEO; of these, 149 (58.9%) had been with
the firm for less than five years. On the other hand, we have 448 managers who join the proxy-
named executive groups in the year after a long-tenured executive becomes CEO; of these, only
197 (44.0%) had been with the firm for less than five years. We can reject the hypothesis that
the short/join probability is the same after short- and long-tenured CEO succession at better
than the 1% level.24
     These findings raise the following question: To what extent do new CEOs bring non-CEO
managers with them from prior places of employment? That is, do top management teams
tend to move en masse from one firm to another? To answer this question, we revisit firms’
proxy statements and annual reports and collect information (where available) regarding the
prior place of employment for all short-tenured CEOs in our sample. We collect the same
information for short-tenured managers who join the firms’ groups of proxy-named executives
under these CEOs.
     We find little evidence that short-tenured CEOs bring managers from their prior places
of employment. Of the 510 short-tenured, new-to-proxy managers who are paired with short-

24
     We observe a similar pattern with respect to departing CEOs, but lose statistical significance. Specifically,
     the short/join probability is 48.7% when a long-tenured CEO departs, but 56.5% when a short-tenured CEO
     departs. The p-value from a chi-squared test is 0.138.




                                                        26
tenured CEOs, we are able to locate prior-employer information for both the manager and the
CEO in 445 cases. In only 43 (9.7%) of these cases did the manager and the CEO share the
same prior employer.25 Thus, it appears that while new CEOs are disproportionately likely to
hire managers from outside the firm, these managers are quite unlikely to have the same prior
place of employment as the CEO. This result suggests that accumulation of specific human
capital at a prior place of employment does not play a significant role in explaining our results
from Panel A of Figure 1. If the large CEO/manager turnover association for the case of a
short-tenured departing CEO and a short-tenured manager reflects co-worker complementarity,
then it is likely attributable to effective matching in the managerial labor market as opposed
to specific skill acquisition.


4      Other Theories of Associated Turnover for Top Executives

As we discussed in the introduction, co-worker complementarity is not the only theory that can
predict contemporaneous turnover among members of top management teams. Other candi-
dates include learning models where corporate boards use correlated signals to update beliefs
regarding executives’ abilities, tournaments, and models where executives’ skills complement a
particular strategy or set of business practices. In this section, we discuss each candidate theory
in turn. We first sketch how the theory can generate a positive CEO/manager turnover associ-
ation. We then discuss any additional implications of each theory, and report our attempts to
evaluate these implications using our data.


4.1      Learning

CEO and managerial turnover may be associated if boards of directors use positively correlated
signals to update beliefs regarding these executives’ abilities. Hermalin and Weisbach (1998),

25
     This number reflects 39 unique firms, as there are four cases where two managers follow a CEO from one firm
     to another. As an example, recall 1996 appointment of Gil Amelio as CEO of Apple Computer. Amelio had
     previously been employed as CEO of National Semiconductor, and managers George Scalise and Ellen Hancock
     entered Apple’s group of proxy-named executives from National Semiconductor under Amelio. Notably, three
     other managers entered Apple’s group of proxy-named executives under Amelio: one each from IBM, Texas
     Instruments and ADP.



                                                       27
for example, consider a setting where a board and a CEO are symmetrically uninformed re-
garding the CEO’s ability at the time of hiring. The board uses any information it receives to
make inferences regarding ability, and fires the CEO if its belief about the executive’s ability
falls below some critical level at which the board prefers to hire the best alternative CEO.
A straightforward extension of such a model would allow boards to make simultaneous in-
ferences regarding the abilities of both CEO and non-CEO managers. If the signals used to
make inferences regarding these managers are positively correlated (as would be the case if firm
performance is used to assess both), then the board’s assessment of the ability of non-CEO
managers is likely to be low relative to the next alternative manager around times of CEO
turnover.
     While learning models have many implications, one important prediction here is that the as-
sociation between CEO and managerial turnover should depend on firm performance. Because
it is unlikely that learning is behind CEO turnovers that are accompanied by good firm perfor-
mance, the likelihood of managerial turnover should be lower around such events.26 To examine
this issue, we interact CEO Turnover with industry-adjusted firm-performance variables. We
can then test the joint hypothesis that the CEO Turnover/firm-performance-indicator interac-
tions are non-zero. We estimated a number of such models, but in none of them could we reject
the hypothesis that the CEO/manager turnover association is unrelated to firm performance.
For example, we estimated the model in Columns (3) and (4) of Table 3 including interactions
between CEO Turnover and our firm performance indicators. In these regressions, none of the
coefficients on the performance/CEO turnover interactions are individually significant, and we
cannot reject the hypothesis that all are zero. In addition, we cannot reject the hypothesis that
the coefficients on the interactions between CEO turnover and just the two lowest performance
quintiles are zero. This result suggests that the learning hypothesis does not, by itself, appear
to offer a strong justification for the positive CEO/manager turnover association.

26
     Note, however, that good firm performance should lead to increases in the estimated ability of all executives,
     which could result in improved outside options for all executives. If CEOs and managers are all more likely to
     be hired away when firm performance is good, then turnover can be associated with good firm performance.
     In our logit model, this effect would manifest itself as a higher CEO/manager turnover association when
     firm performance is in the highest quintile. We expect few such events are present in our data, because
     CEO-to-CEO job movements are rare.



                                                        28
   This conclusion stands in contrast to Fee and Hadlock (2004). They conclude, on the basis
of the fact that the CEO/manager turnover association is positive, that “this evidence appears
consistent with managers being evaluated, in part, as a group.” They also argue that this
same result is consistent with “team-specific human capital.” However, they make no attempt
to distinguish between these ideas. In addition, although they never discuss the implications
of this analysis for the learning hypothesis, they do find that the CEO/manager turnover
association is quite similar whether or not the firm’s performance is bad leading up to CEO
turnover (see their Table 6). We believe the correlated signals hypothesis does not survive
closer inspection of the CEO/manager turnover association in this paper or in Fee and Hadlock
(2004).


4.2   Tournaments

Following Lazear and Rosen (1981), a large literature studies the role of promotion tournaments
in providing effort incentives in firms. Managers who narrowly miss out on being selected as
the next CEO do occasionally depart the firm, as some recent high-profile examples attest. If
this effect is common, then the CEO/manager turnover association could reflect the decisions
of tournament losers to leave.
   We argue, however, that it is not obvious that tournament theory predicts a positive
CEO/manager turnover association in the absence of co-worker complementarity. Specifically,
there is nothing in the theory that requires the “loser” of the tournament to be employed by
a different firm subsequent to the resolution of tournament uncertainty. If the loser’s skills
are more highly valued at the original employer than elsewhere in the economy (as one might
expect if firm-specific human capital is present), then it is efficient for the loser to remain with
the original employer.
   In order for tournament theory to explain the CEO/manager turnover association in the
absence of co-worker complementarity, one must answer the question of why it is efficient
for tournament losers to depart the firm. We argue there are at least two potential ways of
answering this question. First, the CEO job is unique in that firms typically need exactly one
such employee, and that an employee’s marginal product in this job is higher than in any other
job in the firm. Hence, it is imaginable that a tournament loser’s marginal product could be



                                                29
higher as a CEO of another firm than as a manager for his original employer. This would then
cause tournament losers to be bid away by other employers. Second, the presence of a qualified
successor (in the person of the tournament loser) may undermine the productivity of the newly
selected CEO.27
     We emphasize two implications of this theory. First, tournament theory suggests that the
increase in the likelihood of managerial departure around times of CEO turnover should be
larger for those managers who are participants in the promotion tournament. This would lead
us to expect the CEO/manager turnover association should be larger for executives who are
not close to retirement age, as these are presumably the managers who are competitors in the
promotion tournament. Second, in the absence of some form of co-worker complementarity,
tournament models do not by themselves suggest a link between the CEO/manager turnover
association and the characteristics of the departing or incoming CEOs.28
     Neither implication fits strongly with our findings. While Table 3 does show that managerial
turnover is more likely when the firm’s CEO is young, we could not find any evidence that
managerial age is related to the increase in the likelihood of turnover around times of CEO
turnover. We experimented with a number of specifications where we interacted age, both
linearly and with a variety of formulations of age categories, with CEO Turnover, but could
find no relationship. Similarly, Table 4 and Figure 1 contradict the second implication.
     We therefore conclude that, in the absence of some form of co-worker complementarity, tour-

27
     The 2001 CEO succession tournament at General Electric provide an example of both phenomena. After
     Jeffrey Immelt was named the tournament winner, Bob Nardelli and James McNerney were quickly hired as
     CEOs of Home Depot and 3M, respectively, at salaries comparable to that earned by Immelt at GE. It seems
     unlikely these managers could have been as valuable to GE as non-CEO managers as they were to their new
     employers as CEO. GE fired both Nardelli and McNerney at the time Immelt was promoted. Explaining
     this decision, departing CEO Jack Welch (2001) wrote of his successor, “I don’t want him looking over his
     shoulder.”

28
     While selection of an outsider as CEO may make managers worse off if it indicates an increased willingness
     on the part of the firm to hire from outside, this does not by itself imply that outside CEO succession
     should have a greater effect on managerial turnover than inside CEO succession in the absence of co-worker
     complementarity. If it is efficient to retain managers after naming an outsider to the CEO job, the firm can
     renegotiate compensation contracts with these managers in order to do so.




                                                       30
nament theory cannot by itself fully explain the empirical patterns in CEO/manager turnover
associations. This does not, of course, imply that our findings are inconsistent with tournament
theory. Related work by Hermalin and Weisbach (1988) finds that insiders are disproportion-
ately likely to be added to corporate boards just before CEO turnover, and disproportionately
likely to leave just after. They intrepret this as consistent with tournament theory, as boards
promote insiders prior to a CEO change in order to learn about the contenders, and then de-
mote (or fire) all but the winner. Their finding that CEO turnover is associated with departure
of incumbent managers from the board is also consistent with co-worker complementarity. One
point of differentiation between the studies is that we examine career outcomes for all non-CEO
managers, not just those who are likely contenders for the CEO job. Tournament effects may
be less prevalent in our sample as a result.


4.3      Skills that Complement Strategy

CEO and managerial turnover may be associated if executives invest in or possess skills that
complement the firm’s strategy or business practices. Under this hypothesis, a firm that seeks to
change its strategy will place a reduced value on its incumbent managers. The key implication
of this hypothesis is that the CEO/manager turnover association should be stronger when there
are subsequent changes to the firm’s strategy or business practices.
     To examine this assertion, we estimated a number of models in which we allowed the
CEO/manager turnover association to vary with indicator variables for subsequent reductions in
assets or employment. Research on organizational changes following CEO turnover has shown
that CEO turnover is associated with subsequent asset sales and employment reductions. We
also obtained data on Fortune 500 firms’ (a subset of our main sample) layoff announcements,
and asked whether the pattern of top management turnover was related to these events.29 We
could not find any evidence supporting the proposition that the CEO/manager turnover asso-
ciation is related to subsequent changes in strategy. We also note that while asset sales and
layoffs are somewhat rough measures of changes in firms’ strategies, we could also find no rela-
tion between the CEO/manager turnover association and firm performance. If firms are more
likely to change their strategy when they perform badly, then this hypothesis would lead one

29
     Our layoff data is that studied by Hallock (1998) and Billger and Hallock (2000).



                                                       31
to expect poor firm performance to lead to a stronger CEO/manager turnover association.


5    Conclusion

In this paper, we have presented an empirical analysis with three main findings. First, the
probability of non-CEO managerial turnover is higher around times of CEO turnover. Second,
the CEO/manager turnover association is highest for managers whose tenure with the firm is
similar to that of the departing CEO. Third, when an incoming CEO is relatively new to the
firm, the CEO/manager turnover association is highest for long-tenured managers.
    We interpret our results as supporting the hypothesis of co-worker complementarity. Such
complementarities could arise either through matching or through investment in specific skills.
While it is difficult make sharp distinctions among these two hypotheses, the limited evidence
available does point to the importance of matching in managerial labor markets. Relying solely
on the specific investment hypothesis, it is difficult to explain our findings that (1) short-
tenured non-CEO managers are substantially more likely to depart when short-tenured CEOs
leave, and (2) incoming non-CEO managers are unlikely to have worked previously with new
CEOs. Specific investment could underlie some of our other results, however.
    Because our analysis has focused on turnover, we cannot isolate who captures the value
of co-worker complementarity. These complementarities clearly lead to quasi-rents, and thus
raise the possibility that either firms or employees could capture the associated benefits. A
different empirical design would be necessary to determine the exact extent to which firms
benefit from higher managerial productivity and to what extent managers capture the benefits
through cronyism.




                                              32
References
Barro, J. R. and Barro, R. J.: 1990, Pay, performance, and turnover of bank CEOs, Journal of Labor
    Economics 8, 448–481.

Billger, S. and Hallock, K.: 2000, Mass layoffs and management turnover. Working Paper, University of
    Illinois.

Chamberlain, G.: 1980, Analysis of covariance with qualitative data, Review of Economic Studies
    47, 225–238.

Denis, D. J. and Denis, D. K.: 1995, Performance changes following top management dismissals, Journal
    of Finance 50, 1029–1057.

Farber, H. S.: 1999, Mobility and stability: The dynamics of job change in labor markets, in O. Ashen-
    felter and D. Card (eds), Handbook of Labor Economics, Vol. 3, North-Holland, Amsterdam.

Fee, C. E. and Hadlock, C. J.: 2004, Management turnover across the corporate hierarchy, Journal of
    Accounting and Economics p. Forthcoming.

Furtado, E. P. H. and Rozeff, M. S.: 1987, The wealth effects of company initiated management changes,
    Journal of Financial Economics 18, 147–160.

Gant, J., Ichniowski, C. and Shaw, K.: 2002, Working smarter by working together: Connective capital
    in the workplace. Working Paper, Carnegie Mellon University.

Hallock, K.: 1998, Layoffs, top executive pay, and firm performance, American Economic Review
    85, 711–723.

Helmich, D. L. and Brown, W. B.: 1972, Successor type and organizational change in the corporate
    enterprise, Administrative Science Quarterly 17, 371–381.

Hermalin, B. E. and Weisbach, M. S.: 1988, The determinants of board composition, RAND Journal of
    Economics 29, 589–606.

Hermalin, B. E. and Weisbach, M. S.: 1998, Endogenously chosen boards of directors and their moni-
    toring of the CEO, American Economic Review 88, 96–118.

Jovanovich, B.: 1979a, Firm specific capital and turnover, Journal of Political Economy 87, 1246–1260.

Jovanovich, B.: 1979b, Job matching and the theory of turnover, Journal of Political Economy 87, 972–
    990.

Kaplan, S. N.: 1994a, Top executive rewards and firm performance: A comparison of Japan and the
    United States, Journal of Political Economy 102, 510–546.

                                                 33
Kaplan, S. N.: 1994b, Top executives, turnover, and firm performance in Germany, Journal of Law,
    Economics and Organization 10, 142–159.

Lazear, E. P. and Rosen, S.: 1981, Rank-order tournaments as optimum labor contracts, Journal of
    Political Economy 89, 841–864.

Mikkelson, W. H. and Partch, M. M.: 1997, The decline of takeovers and disciplinary managerial
    turnover, Journal of Financial Economics 44, 205–228.

Mulherin, J. H. and Poulsen, A. B.: 1998, Proxy contests and corporate change: Implications for
    shareholder wealth, Journal of Financial Economics 47, 279–313.

Parrino, R.: 1997, CEO turnover and outside succession: A cross-sectional analysis, Journal of Financial
    Economics 46, 165–197.

Parsons, D. O.: 1972, Specific human capital: An application to quit rates and layoff rates, Journal of
    Political Economy 80, 1120–1143.

Vancil, R. F.: 1987, Passing the Baton: Managing the Process of CEO Succession, Harvard Business
    School Press, Boston.

Warner, J. B., Watts, R. L. and Wruck, K. H.: 1988, Stock prices and top management changes, Journal
    of Financial Economics 20, 461–492.

Weisbach, M. S.: 1988, Outside directors and CEO turnover, Journal of Financial Economics 20, 431–
    460.

Weisbach, M. S.: 1995, CEO turnover and the firm’s investment decision, Journal of Financial Economics
    37, 159–188.

Welch, J.: 2001, Jack: Straight from the gut, Warner Books, New York.

Wruck, E. G. and Wruck, K. H.: 2002, Restructuring top management: Evidence from corporate spinoffs,
    Journal of Labor Economics 20, S176–S218.




                                                  34
