                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




           EQUITY STYLE RETURNS AND INSTITUTIONAL INVESTOR FLOWS

                                            Kenneth A. Froot
                                              Melvyn Teo

                                          Working Paper 10355
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w10355


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      March 2004




We thank State Street Corporation, Atindra Barua, and Jessica Lo for help with the data, Harvard Business
School Division of Research for financial support, and Jeremy Armitage, Paul O'Connell, Tarun Ramadorai,
and Andrei Shleifer for many helpful comments and suggestions. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2004 by Kenneth A. Froot and Melvyn Teo. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
Equity Style Returns and Institutional Investor Flows
Kenneth A. Froot and Melvyn Teo
NBER Working Paper No. 10355
March 2004
JEL No. G12, G14

                                            ABSTRACT

This paper explores institutional investor trades in stocks grouped by style and the relationship of

these trades with equity market returns. It aggregates transactions drawn from a large universe of

approximately $6 trillion of institutional funds. To analyze style behavior, we assign equities to

deciles in each of five style dimensions: size, value/growth, cyclical/defensive, sector, and country.

We find, first, strong evidence that investors organize and trade stocks across style-driven lines. This

appears true for groupings both strongly and weakly related to fundamentals (e.g., industry or

country groupings versus size or value/growth deciles). Second, the positive linkage between flows

and returns emerges at daily frequencies, yet becomes even more important at lower frequencies.

We show that quarterly decile flows and returns are even more strongly positively correlated than

are daily flows and returns. However, as the horizon increases beyond a year, we find that the

flow/return correlation declines. Third, style flows and returns are important components of

individual stock expected returns. We find that nearby style inflows and returns positively forecast

future returns while distant style inflows and returns forecast negatively. Fourth, we find strong

correlations between style flows and temporary components of return. This suggests that behavioral

theories may play a role in explaining the popularity and price impact of flow-related trading.

Kenneth A. Froot                                       Melvyn Teo
Harvard Business School                                Singapore Management University
Morgan 391                                             School of Business
Boston, MA 02163                                       469 Bukit Timah Road
and NBER                                               Business Building
kfroot@hbs.edu                                         #03-36 Singapore 259756
                                                       melvynteo@smu.edu.sg
        Investors use concepts of investment styles to characterize their portfolios and
patterns of trade. Popular styles (e.g., technology stocks, growth stocks, cyclical stocks,
etc.) are widely followed both because they help summarize what happened in the
marketplace, and because they represent factors across which investors attempt to
diversify. Investment fund mandates often explicitly designate style exposures. These
pools are then used for asset allocation by principal investors and agents responsible for
asset allocation. Judging from its popularity in common parlance and the press, style
rotation should be an important source of trading for many investors as mandates change
or as principals reallocate their portfolios.
        Two natural questions to ask about style trading are whether institutional
investors do indeed trade on the basis of commonly used style concepts, and, if so,
whether such style-driven trading affects prices. Clearly, in a classical finance world,
investors would group and trade assets in style categories if and only if the style
categories were related to underlying fundamentals. For example, if firm size was related
to underlying exposure to some fundamental factor then size might appear as a factor that
explains investor reallocation.
        Alternatively, if an investor group experiences non-fundamental sentiment shocks
organized around style, then stocks with common (dissimilar) styles should experience
common (dissimilar) shocks. Naturally, these demand shocks will translate into trading
by investors affected by these shocks. Relative to fundamentals, nearby style segment
returns will exhibit excess comovement, while distant style segment returns will exhibit
insufficient comovement. Moreover, if the demands are not based on intrinsic sources of
value, these excess or insufficient price comovements will disappear at long horizons.
        In addition, if style-based investors are also positive feedback traders then they
buy into styles that performed well in the past. This generates style-related momentum at
relatively short horizons. If rational investors are present and exploit this behavior, style
reversals also emerge. Note that these style-level continuations and reversals are distinct
from their stock-level counterparts (see Barberis and Shleifer, 2003).
        The empirical implications of a style investing story have been traced out across a
number of fronts. Harvdouvelis, La Porta, and Wizman (1994) find that closed-end
country funds in the U.S. move too much with the U.S. market relative to their NAVs.



                                                2
Barberis, Shleifer, and Wurgler (2003) show that stocks entering (leaving) major indexes
witness increases (decreases) in comovement with the index. Froot and Dabora (1999)
study “Siamese twin” firms (like Royal Dutch and Shell), which share cash flows but are
traded in different locations by different clienteles. Their prices comove too little with
each other but too much with the market of their main clientele.          Moskowitz and
Grinblatt (1999) and Asness, Liew, and Stevens (1997) successfully apply momentum
and reversal strategies to industry portfolios and country portfolios respectively.
Lewellen (2002) finds that momentum strategies using size and book-to-market portfolios
are at least as profitable as individual stock momentum. Chen and De Bondt (2003)
uncover evidence of style momentum within the S&P 500 index. Teo and Woo (2003)
document strong evidence of style level reversals for stocks grouped into value/growth
and small/large styles at annual horizons.
       This paper is an investigation of the empirical importance of style in institutional
trading patterns and returns. We examine five exhaustive style dimensions, four of which
are alternative sorts of purely US stocks.       The four dimensions are small/large,
value/growth, cyclical/defensive, and sector/industry. We also examine an international
style dimension using returns and flows across countries. To do all this, we pair daily
returns with high-resolution information on aggregated institutional investor flows from
State Street Corporation, based on their custody assets of about $6 trillion. We ask: how
important are these style designations for trading patterns?; Is the evidence robust to
changes in the definition of style categories?; How do these style segments interact with
style-related prices?; and, are returns of and flows into style segments important for
understanding the returns of and flows into individual stocks?
       Our paper builds on and differs from the above-mentioned studies on style
momentum and style reversals in several ways.         The simultaneous examination of
different style dimensions allows us to compare and contrast style effects across various
style categories. For example, Cavaglia, Brightman, and Aked (2000) suggest that the
importance of country style has diminished relative to that of the sector/industry style.
Our multi-dimensional style classification allows for a test of this. Further, the high
frequency institutional flow data lets us examine short-term style momentum. This is
particularly interesting as Teo and Woo (2003) suggest that style momentum occurs at



                                             3
frequencies of less than a quarter. The inclusion of stock flows, stock returns, and stock
characteristics in our controls allows us to abstract away from stock-level stories of return
predictability and to establish the style-level explanation.
         We find that there is strong evidence that institutional investors organize and trade
stocks according to style. This is true for four of the five styles that we examine. The
fifth -- our measure of cyclical/defensive segments -- does not seem to isolate unusual
trading patterns among professional investors. We also find that size, value/growth, and
industry/sector styles have increased importance over time relative to a country/region
style.
         We also find a positive relationship between style flow and style returns at daily
frequencies. This relationship becomes even more positive as horizons are stretched to a
quarter, where positive, noncontemporaneous correlations become important. However,
at frequencies of a year or more, negative noncontemporaneous correlations take over.
Related to this, we find that at horizons less than a quarter, own-style segment returns and
flows forecast stock returns positively. But at horizons of a quarter and beyond, own-
style segment returns and flows forecast stock returns negatively. As would be expected
under the sentiment story, this relationship is reversed with distant style segments flows
and returns.
         These results fit closely with those of Froot and Ramadorai (2003) who
investigate the relationship between currency returns and flows. They, like us, find
evidence that flows are strongly related to temporary return components. This is a crucial
empirical prediction of the style-investing story of Barberis and Shleifer (2003). They
show that the interaction between positive feedback style switchers and rational
arbitrageurs induces style-level continuations at short horizons and reversals at longer
horizons. Our findings also complement those of Teo and Woo (2003) and Kumar
(2002). Teo and Woo (2003) fail to find strong evidence of momentum at quarterly
horizons because style momentum occurs at weekly and monthly horizons and moves
toward reversal at quarterly horizons. Kumar (2002) uses retail investor data to examine
the interaction of style-switching and relative style returns. He finds positive evidence of
style-driven trading, though he does not investigate implications at the individual stock
level.



                                              4
       It is also interesting to relate our findings to the extant literature on institutional
investors. Grinblatt, Titman, and Wermers (1995), Daniel, Grinblatt, Titman, and
Wermers (1997), Carhart (1997), Nofsinger and Sias (1999), and Grinblatt and Keloharju
(2000), find that institutional investors tend to be positive feedback or momentum traders,
in that they tend to buy stocks that performed well in the past. Our study extends this
result by showing that institutional investors are also momentum traders at the style level.
That is, they buy into groups of stocks that have performed well in the past even if some
of the stocks have not individually performed well.
        Nofsinger and Sias (1999) and Froot, O'Connell, and Seasholes (2001) find
evidence that flows into U.S. and international stocks are positively correlated with future
own-country returns. We document a similar anticipation effect at the style level. Size,
value/growth, and sector segments which experience strong flows show future positively
correlated returns. Furthermore, we find that these style-level anticipation effects are
distinct from anticipation at the stock level. Gompers and Metrick (2000) report that
institutional investors display an unconditional preference for large stocks. Our size
results qualify this statement by showing that institutional investors have relatively
stronger preferences for large stocks when recent large-stock returns have been high
relative to small-stock returns.
       The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section I describes the data.
Section II examines the results in 5 subsections. There, we investigate: the reallocation
propensities across style segments for different style classifications; the contemporaneous
correlations between style returns and flows across different time horizons; the non-
contemporaneous relationship between style returns and flows; the impact of past style
returns and flows on stock returns; and the dynamic flow/return relationship framed as a
vector autoregression. Section III concludes and suggests avenues for further research.


I. Data and Definitions of Styles


       We track the investment flows of a group of large, institutional investors, with
approximately $8 trillion in assets.      The data are from State Street Corporation
(henceforth SSC), and represent complete accounts of all equity transactions for all


                                             5
included portfolios. SSC is the largest US master trust custodian bank, the largest US
mutual fund custodian (with nearly 40% of the industry's funds under custody), and the
world's second largest custodian. It has approximately $8 trillion in institutional assets
under custody. SSC records all transactions for these assets. The data are filtered to
remove test and error transactions, and transactions which contain missing data fields.
While SSC records all information at the trade level we aggregate the purchases and sales
each day to calculate the daily net inflows – the difference between dollar purchases and
dollar sales –into each stock. This high-resolution flow database represents a substantial
improvement over that used in Froot, O'Connell, and Seasholes (2001) in several
respects: trades are recorded on a trade-date rather than on a settlement-date basis; trades
are grouped by stock rather than by currency of settlement (which Froot, O’Connell, and
Seasholes used as a proxy for the firm’s country of incorporation).                            Futures and
structured notes are not included, although some derivatives, such as ADRs are included
in the data. The sample period runs from January 3, 1995 to December 31, 2001. For
this study we focus primarily on flows in US equities, though for some purposes we
include information on global equities as well.1 Table I provides some summary statistics
from the US flow database broken down year by year. The consistently large number of
stocks spanned by the database and the high trading volumes suggest that the flow
database captures a sizeable portion of all trades in the US.
         The US equity returns and stock characteristic data are from the Center for
Research in Security Prices at the University of Chicago (CRSP) and COMPUTSTAT.
Our analysis covers all stocks traded on the NYSE, AMEX, and NASDAQ that are
ordinary common shares, excluding ADRs, SBIs, certificates, unit trusts, REITs, closed-
end funds, companies incorporated outside the US, and Americus Trusts.
         We work with several style dimensions – small/large capitalization, value/growth,
cyclical/defensive, sector, and global region. The first four of these apply to US stocks
only. The last applies to global stocks. Within each style dimension, we organize stocks
into deciles. Decile returns are calculated using a capitalization-weighted average; decile



1
  Notwithstanding the higher quality of the data, we ameliorate the effects of a small percentage of outliers,
which we define as daily stock flow observations where absolute net inflows are greater than 10 percent of
the stock market capitalization.


                                                      6
flows are the sum of constituent-stock dollar flows divided by decile total market
capitalization.
        Each stock is assigned to a style decile based on its prior year characteristics. The
details vary slightly across style dimensions. For the size dimension, deciles for each are
assigned as of July 1st based on the immediately prior June 30th market equity
capitalization. The assignment remains for the subsequent year through June 30, at
which point the stock is similarly reassigned based on capitalization at that time.              We
compute each decile’s return as the mean value-weighted return of all the stocks in the
decile. Breakpoints for size deciles are determined based on equal-capitalization size
decile cutoffs.2     Because institutional investors trade considerably less in very small
stocks deciles are more accurately measured using on equal capitalization than using
equal numbers of firms.
        To calculate value/growth deciles, we sort based on firms’ book-to-market equity
(BE/ME) values each July 1st of year t through June 30 of year t+1. The information used
is book equity in the fiscal year ending in calendar year t-1 and market capitalization in
December of year t-1. Following Fama and French (1992), the timing conventions both
size and BE/ME ensure that accounting variables are known before the sort. Breakpoints
for BE/ME are based on equal-capitalization decile cutoffs. They correspond closely to
Fama and French (1993) NYSE BE/ME breakpoints.3
        To calculate sector groups, we sort into sector deciles based on firm SIC codes as
of June 30th in year t using the Fama and French (1997) 10 industry portfolio
classification. Firms remain in that sector group until June 30th of year t+1, when the
procedure is repeated.
        Many professional investors say they group stocks according to their sensitivity to
the business cycle.      We call this style dimension cyclical/defensive.             To calculate
cyclical/defensive deciles, we sort stocks based on the correlation between stock return
this quarter and US GNP growth one year forward where one year forward includes the
current quarter and the subsequent three quarters. We do this each year in July in a


2
  Because our sample includes AMEX and NASDAQ stocks, we do not follow Fama and French (1993)
who use NYSE size breakpoints to determine the decile cutoffs.
3
  We note that our results are very similar when we use NYSE ME and BE/ME breakpoints to partition
stocks into ME and BE/ME deciles respectively.


                                                  7
backward looking way, based on previously observed values of GNP growth and return.
Because GNP data are only quarterly, for each year the correlations are computed only
for stocks that have a minimum of 5 years of history at that time. Each year, we then
assign stocks to equal-capitalization deciles based on the previous GNP/return correlation
measured over the last 5 years.
          To form regional groupings of firms, we use a stock’s country of incorporation.
We include stocks from 50 countries. For most of our analysis, we group these countries
into 10 exhaustive and mutually exclusive regions: US, Canada, Developed Europe
(including Euro, excluding United Kingdom), United Kingdom, Japan, Australia/New
Zealand, Emerging Europe, Emerging Asia, Emerging Latin America, and Emerging
Others.
          As in other cases, country/region flows are just dollar flows scaled by their
respective market capitalization (here we use MSCI total country market capitalization).
In aggregating the data to the country/region level, we truncate aggregate daily flows
using two filters. The first truncates daily country flow observations in excess of 5% of
the country market capitalization and the second truncates flows that are more than 5
standard deviations from the mean. We do not omit extreme country flows due to the
limited number of cross-sectional observations. Also, the stricter truncation rules in the
country case reflect the fact that country flows are more aggregated than stock flows and
hence should be better behaved. Country returns are from Datastream country price
indices, while region returns are value-weighted average returns of all constituent
countries.




                                             8
II. Empirical results


A. Styles and trading behavior: Reallocation propensities across style segments


       If styles are important to the way that investors group stocks, then style-based
trading should be relatively more important than other, random sources of trading.
Trading associated with styles could of course be related to fundamentals. However, if
there is some relation, it is unlikely to be a simple one. Since our flows measure the
reallocation toward large institutional investors and away from other investors, a
directional change in fundamentals is unlikely to consistently result in a reallocation
toward or away from institutional investors.       Froot and Ramadorai (2003) examine
currency flows in the context of a model of exchange-rate value, and find that there is
little relationship between flows and important fundamentals. However, they do find an
important positive relationship between flows and returns, suggesting that institutional
investors’ demands push prices.
       Of course, style-based trading may be in part or completely driven by investor
sentiment and noise, rather than fundamentals. This is more likely to be the case for style
dimensions that have less of an obvious relationship with fundamentals, such as size.
Country, sector, and cyclical/defensive designations are more likely to spring more from
an organization scheme based on fundamentals. For the size dimension, however, it may
be harder to argue that fundamentals are at the root of the attention given to differences in
firm size.
       In order to gauge the importance of style designations and how they vary over
time, we wish to measure the extent to which they explain trading behavior. The first
step in doing so is to construct measures sensitive to reallocation intensity. How much do
investors move money from small-cap to large-cap, or from value to growth, or from
manufacturing stocks to utilities? How much do investors move money across arbitrary
groupings of stocks? A measure of their re-allocation intensities across different style
categorizations should give a rough indication of the relative importance institutional
investors place on different categorizations compared with arbitrary categorizations.


                                             9
          We use a “reallocation intensity” statistic for computing trading across different
styles and arbitrary classifications. We define re-allocation intensity as the cross-decile
standard deviation of demeaned excess flow over and above expected flow based on
segment market capitalization:


                                                                                    0.5
                                                           ∑ Fi ,t
                                                                            2
                                                                                
                                      1  10                               
                              σ t ≡   ∑  Fi ,t − mi ,t  i
                                 f                                     
                                                                                                                (1)
                                      10  i =1         ∑ mi ,t          
                                                           i                


where Fi,t is the dollar flow into segment i at time t while mi,t is the market capitalization
of segment i at time t. Excess flows in each segment i are defined as the flows into
segment i less the expected flow based on segment market capitalization and the amount
of      total         market           capitalization    purchased              by        institutions   that   day,
Fi ,t − mi ,t   (∑ F )/ (∑ m ).
                  i   i ,t      i   i ,t


          A comparison of reallocation intensities across styles of stocks will give us a feel
for the relative importance of different style dimensions to institutional investors. In
addition, we can gain a sense of the absolute importance of style categorizations by
comparing style reallocation intensities with reallocation intensities when stock deciles
are arbitrarily determined.
          It is possible to evaluate what we can learn incrementally from using flow data.
To do so, we calculate cross-sectional standard deviations of returns for different
categorizations.             Much of the work below suggests that style returns are positively
correlated with style flows (suggesting that institutional investors, on average, take, rather
than provide, liquidity).                  As a result, one might expect to find that those styles with
greater reallocation intensities are also those with the greater cross-sectional return
variation. Of course, returns also contain components that are unrelated to flows. For
example, the public release of information may often result in price changes, but not
changes in the relative preferences of institutional versus other investors. Thus we might
expect cross-sectional return variation to be an imperfect proxy for cross-sectional
reallocation intensity.




                                                          10
        The cross-sectional standard deviations of weekly returns plotted in Figure 1 (top
panel) give rise to several broad observations. First, during our sample period cross-
sectional return volatility increases on average for all but the regional style dimension.
The appearance of a trend may be attributable to the low levels of index volatility in 1995
and the very high levels in the stock market boom and bust through 2002.                 The
dispersions of returns for the various domestic equity classifications are positively
correlated and increase over the 6-year sample period by a factor of about two.
Furthermore, one can identify positive shocks that commonly affect all series, such as the
Russia/LTCM shock in the fall of 1998, and the ‘echo-crash’ shock in the fall of 1997.
        Second, cross-sectional volatility of regional returns has fallen relative to the
volatility for sector, value/growth, and size categorizations. Before 1999, returns across
country segments were the most volatile, with volatility peaking at the time of the
Russia/LTCM crisis. By contrast, after 1999, return volatility across sector segments was
greatest. These findings echo those of Cavaglia, Brightman, and Aked (2000) who find
that sectors have become more important relative to the countries in driving cross-
sectional return volatility in recent years.
        Third, within the US market only, cross-sectional return volatility across sectors
has consistently been 30%-40% above comparable volatilities for other style dimensions.
The exception was in 2001, during the collapse of the NASDAQ bubble, when
value/growth return volatility rose above sector volatility.        Recently, value/growth
volatility has plummeted below that of size, with cyclical/defensive volatility moving
ahead of both.
        The reallocation intensities plotted in the bottom panel of Figure 1 use flows to
calculate a similar volatility statistic, given in equation (1). Several points are important.
First, as with return volatility, there is a mild upward trend in the trading intensity of
institutional investors in US stocks (size, value/growth, sector, and cyclical/defensive).
Second, there is visual evidence of a strong common factor in these US styles. This
common factor is evident even in randomly generated US deciles. It is, however, not
strongly shared with global reallocation intensities, which did not increase at the time that
stock prices began to fall in 2000. Third, the importance of country reallocation has
clearly fallen relative reallocation within the US market (i.e., sectors, size, value/growth



                                               11
and cyclical/defensive).         Investors traded relatively more intensively across country
segments prior 2000.
         Figure 1 provides no information on statistical significance. To remedy this, we
employ a simple Monte Carlo to determine, for each week, a benchmark level of
reallocation intensity. The benchmark we use is the median reallocation intensity across
1,000 draws in which all contemporaneously useable stocks are randomly assigned to 10
deciles whose market capitalizations match those of the style segments. We do this
independently for each day, and then formally test whether the reallocation intensity for a
given style dimension is statistically above the median, using a simple t-statistic across
days.
         Table II reports the results of these t-tests, performed for each year of the sample
and for the entire sample, for each of the four domestic-stock style dimensions.4 The
results suggest that trading patterns seem strongest in sector, then size and value/growth,
then considerably lower, cyclical/defensive. All styles are traded statistically more than
random groupings of stocks. The importance of style-based trading has grown; all styles
save one reach their highest level of significance in the last year of our sample, 2001.
Indeed, style-based trading has grown since 1999 even as prices and trading volumes
have fallen. Moreover, style-based trading is strong enough to be detectable in just over
a year, as is evident from the statistically significant annual reallocation intensities for the
size, value/growth, and sector style spectrums.
         Clearly the trading patterns across the cyclical/defensive segments are
significantly weaker than those for the other style spectrums. None of the year by year
reallocation intensities for cyclical/defensive are statistically greater than their random
counterparts. One reason for this may be that, while cyclical/defensive is important,
investors are more forward looking than currently modeled with the backward-looking
cyclical/defensive measure. That is they correctly guess the ability of stocks to forecast
GNP, and group stocks according to this forward-looking measure. This measure in turn
drives a lot of trading along these lines. To check this intuition, we compute a forward-
looking cyclical/defensive measure that uses the correlation between stock returns over


4
  These t-tests are performed by stacking the daily cross-sections over the entire subsample, and treating the
stack as a large cross-section.


                                                     12
the sample period and one year forward GNP growth. Next, we perform a similar
exercise with the reallocation intensities across the forward-looking cyclical/defensive
deciles. The results in Table II suggest that a forward-looking measure, which could
perhaps be proxied with various non-observables, drives much of investor reallocation.
The year by year reallocation intensities for the forward looking cyclical/defensive
measure are almost always statistically different from the monte carlo 50th percentile.
Nonetheless, for the rest of the paper, we shall continue to use the backward-looking
cyclical/defensive measure for consistency with the backward-looking nature of our
market equity and book-to-market derivations.
       One interpretation of the overall evidence in Figure 1 and Table II is that the
cross-sectional volatility of US fundamentals increased over time and relative to the
volatility of international fundamentals. However, this interpretation may not apply that
well to value/growth and size styles. These styles are likely to be less well differentiated
by fundamentals than by investor convention.
       A second interpretation is that there has been little change in fundamental
variation between value versus growth or small versus large cap firms, but considerable
change in the ability of investors to efficiently allocate their portfolio across these style
dimensions. Mutual funds, ETFs, and other basket mandates expedite these changes in
exposure. These mandates have become increasing specific and precisely targeted as
well. International reallocation has for a much longer period of time been facilitated by
funds and basket products. So it is not surprising that while that international reallocation
intensity has not fallen in absolute terms, it has declined relative to domestic styles.


B. Characteristics-based reallocation across style segments


       In the previous section, we find that institutional investors consistently reallocate
their funds across style segments, and that they do so with an intensity greater than
expected based on randomly-generated segments. This finding is interesting, but only of
limited value. It is limited because it does not clarify the pattern of reallocation across
deciles. For example, we would observe high trading intensity in a given dimension if
investors tend to buy deciles 1, 5, and 10 simultaneously, selling deciles 2-4 and 6-9 to do



                                              13
so. However, this pattern of reallocation doesn’t really fit with our idea of a “size”
spectrum. It suggests investors key off different or more complex factors than simply
size.    By contrast, if we find that investors buy deciles 1 and 2 simultaneously, selling
deciles 9 and 10 to do so, size does well as a means of explaining reallocations.
        If “size” does well in explaining that pattern of flows across size deciles it could
be because size is correlated with exposure to some underlying fundamental shock or
preference shock. Models of the former would include Brennan and Cao (1997), who
model far-away investors as having less precise information than nearby investors. As a
consequence, far-away investors rationally update their prior beliefs by more than near-
by investors, and therefore tend to buy in response to publicly announced fundamental
news. Institutional investors, may, for example be “farther” from small company stocks
and “nearer” large company stocks.                      Size-related flows could then be driven by
fundamentals.
        Alternatively, size may be correlated with exposure to a preference shock. In
Barberis and Shleifer (2003) a group of investors key off the relative returns of extreme-
style stocks, thereby grouping them together, even when there is no fundamental
motivation for doing so.                “Size” is a style because investors follow it, not because it
reflects relative fundamental risk exposures.
        If the styles we examine are driven by a single common factor, those investing in,
say, the large cap segment would be simultaneously selling the small cap segment. That
is, we would observe switching across segments which is more pronounced between
more distant segments. In this subsection we investigate and test whether the correlation
of flows between style segments is lower for more distant deciles.
        To examine this we first plot the 12 week moving average of excess flow for the
extreme size and value/growth deciles in Figure 2, where excess flow into decile i is
defined as Fi ,t − mi ,t   (∑ F )/ (∑ m ).
                             i   i ,t       i   i ,t   From Figure 2, we clearly see a strong negative

correlation between excess flows into the most distant deciles – i.e., small (ME1) versus
large (ME10), and growth (BM1) versus value (BM10). Further, this negative correlation
is evident throughout the entire 6 year sample. To confirm this we compute pairwise
correlations between weekly excess ME1 and ME10 flow and between weekly excess
BM1 and BM10 flow, as well as their associated t-statistics. The results in Table III


                                                          14
validate our initial observations. The correlation coefficient between small and large
excess flow is -0.44, that between value and growth excess flow is -0.34, and that
between the most cyclical and the most defensive deciles is -0.18. The first two are
statistically different not only from zero, but also from -0.11, the negative correlation
expected ex ante among randomized deciles of firms’ excess flows. The correlation
between cyclical and defensive is not statistically different from -0.11 however.
        Clearly, the single factor argument can be taken further. If there is a single factor
driving reallocation across a given style, then nearby styles should be less negatively
correlated (and may even be positively correlated) while distant styles should be strongly
negatively correlated. We therefore look for evidence of a gradual decrease in pairwise
correlations as the distance between style segments increases, computing pairwise
correlations for all pairs of size, value/growth, and cyclical/defensive segments. Table III
reports pairwise correlation coefficients averaged across equally-distant pairs (distance is
defined here as the difference in rank between the pair, i.e., the distance between deciles
2 and 8 is 6).
        The results in Table III provide strong evidence that investors use characteristics
similar to value/growth, small/large, and cyclical/defensive in determining trading
behavior.        Reallocation across deciles is broadly monotonic in book-to-market
(value/growth), and market capitalization (size). Specifically, the correlation between
deciles decreases almost monotonically as the distance between them increases. For
instance, the correlation between ME1 and ME2 is statistically positive at 0.26. This
decreases to -0.08 for the pair ME1 and ME5 and decreases further to -0.44 for the pair
ME1 and ME10. The t-statistics in Table III are against the null hypothesis that the
excess flows are random across deciles; under the null, these correlations are all -0.11.
        The effect is not confined to pairs that include an extreme decile. Table III shows
that the average correlation coefficient for all segments x deciles apart declines as the
absolute value of x rises. We also compute Spearman rank correlations to test formally
this result against the null hypothesis that the correlation coefficients and distance
measures are unrelated.       We easily reject this null hypothesis for the size and
value/growth styles.




                                             15
       Principle components analysis is another means of determining whether a single
or small number of factors drive a given style’s flows. We form the most important
principal components of each style’s flows and then report the fraction of variation of
segment flows that are explained by those components. We then test whether this R2 is
statistically greater than that found in randomly aggregated deciles. The results for the
top five principal components (sorted by their eigenvalues) are displayed in Table IV.
The reported numbers are the R-squares signed by the sign of the regression coefficient
estimates to give a better picture of the correlations between the principal components
and the segment flows.
       The results from Table IV suggest that a large portion of inter-decile reallocation
fits with sensible notions of style reallocation: the most extreme deciles have opposite
exposures to the most important principle components, while near-extreme deciles have
similarly-signed exposures to the nearby extreme.      For example, the main principal
component for size segment flow loads positively on the large style segments (ME8-
ME10) and negatively on the small style segments (ME1-ME3), acting as a proxy for
style-switching activity along the size spectrum. Similarly the most extreme deciles have
strongly opposite exposures to the second-largest principle component. The first and
second principal components explain 23.0% and 17.7%, respectively, of the cross-
sectional variation in returns.    The results are similar for the value/growth and
cyclical/defensive styles.
       If the deciles were comprised of randomly-assigned firms, we would not expect
these results. The randomly-generated deciles of existing firms from the Monte Carlo
yield an average exposure of zero, and suggest that the first and second principle
components contribute on average 20.5 and 16.0% of variation in cross-decile
reallocation. These R2 levels are below those estimated for our value/growth and size
style dimensions.
       Summing up, the results in the section provide evidence of style based investing
across value/growth, size, and, somewhat more weakly, cyclical/defensive dimensions.
We find that investors organize their trades along the size and value/growth dimensions
switching importantly between opposing ends of each spectrum.




                                           16
C. Correlations of styles flow and return: Evidence across different horizons.


       While the results from the previous section are consistent with the sentiment story
of Barberis and Shleifer (2003), there is nothing to rule out that the flows we observe are
correlated with the release of fundamental information. Indeed, without having explored
the interaction between return and flow, we cannot even rule out the view that the flows
we observe are totally unrelated to returns, and therefore of little consequence for
equilibrium.
       Thus, we turn to the relationship between style flow and return. Following Froot
and Ramadorai (2003), we divide the empirical possibilities into three hypotheses. First
is that the institutional investor flows we observe are uninteresting in that they are not
related to prices at any horizons or at any leads and lags. Fundamentals affect prices, but
flows do not, so we call this the “fundamentals-only view.” Second is that the flows
represent investors reactions to some form of fundamental information, whose
innovations permanently impact prices. Here flows appear to have permanent impacts on
returns; this is called the “strong flow-centric view.”   And third is that these investor
flows do impact prices, but in a transitory, rather than permanent, way.
       This last hypothesis – which Froot and Ramadorai (2003) call the “weak flow-
centric view” – is most consistent with sentiment-driven models of trading. Barberis and
Shleifer (2003) in particular, make a number of specific predictions for the
contemporaneous and non-contemporaneous correlations between flows and returns.
Their model predicts positive contemporaneous correlations because style investors take
liquidity from the market to satisfy their sentiment-driven demands. It predicts that
sentiment-driven flows will chase previous returns, and that flows can predict positively
short horizon returns. However, any such positive predictability does not survive to long
horizons. Current prices are unaffected by sentiment-driven flows from the sufficiently
distant past.   Consequently, at long horizons, flows and returns become unrelated:
permanent innovations to fundamentals are uncorrelated with sentiment driven flows, but
account for virtually all return variation.      For this to occur, non-contemporaneous
correlations between flows and returns must be negative at longer horizons. In sum, the




                                            17
weak flow-centric view predicts increasingly positive covariation between returns and
flows at short horizons, but as horizons grow longer, the positive covariation disappears.
       In this subsection, we examine correlations between the flows and returns of the
five style dimensions. By stacking the ten deciles of each dimension, we are able to use
the panel to gain power for relatively longer horizons.             We therefore measure
contemporaneous correlations over horizons ranging from 1 to 1000 trading days
(approximately 4 years). Broadly speaking, the strong flow-centric view suggests a
positive return/flow correlation at short horizons that remains equally and perhaps more
positive at long horizons. By contrast the weak flow-centric view predicts that the
positive return/flow correlation at short horizons is mostly undone at longer horizons.
       Figure 3 graphs the point estimates as well as the 90% confidence bounds for the
size, value/growth, cyclical/defensive, sector, and country/region style classifications
respectively. The 90% confidence bounds are derived from Monte Carlo simulations
assuming that returns and flows are i.i.d. processes with daily contemporaneous
correlations set equal to the observed daily correlations in the data. Details of this
methodology can be found in the Appendix.
        The figure shows that the short horizons contemporaneous correlations are
positive for all 5 style dimensions. In addition, all 5 show evidence of statistically
positive non-contemporaneous correlations at frequencies from a week to a month. This
is evident from the fact that the return/flow correlation rises above the 90% Monte Carlo
upper bound. Such non-contemporaneous correlation must arise from some combination
of positive trend-flowing (current style flows positively correlated with past style returns)
and anticipation (current style flows positively correlated with future style returns).
       The figures also suggest that the impact of some style flows is more permanent
than others. Value/growth and sector flows show relatively strong evidence that the
positive correlation observed at high frequencies remains in tact at lower frequencies.
There is no evidence of negative non-contemporaneous correlations. However, size
flows, and to a lesser extent regional flows, seem to show evidence of negative-non-
contemporaneous correlations. For size and region, there is little evidence that the long
horizon correlation between flow and return is positive. This may suggest that sentiment-
driven demand is relatively more important in size and regional flow styles than in



                                             18
value/growth and sector flows. Value/growth and sector segment flows may contain
more information about fundamentals than other style flows. The size and sector style
results accord with intuition, which suggests that the former should be relatively more
sentiment-driven, and less fundamentals driven, than the latter.
        In the subsequent sections, we explore further the impact of fundamentals on the
relationship between style flows and returns. Also, it will be instructive to determine if
the positive linkage we observe is due to positive feedback trading or to anticipation by
institutional investors or to both.


D. Non-contemporaneous correlations: style flows and future stock returns


        In the previous section, we document a strong positive non-contemporaneous
relationship between style flows and style returns.                Do these positive non-
contemporaneous correlations arise from trend-chasing (returns positive predicting flows)
or anticipation (flows positively predicting returns)? Evidence for the former has been
more abundant in the literature than evidence for the latter (see Froot, O'Connell, and
Seasholes, 2001; and Froot and Ramadorai, 2003).
        If sentiment-driven style flows are sufficiently large and persistent, they may both
affect prices and expected returns. Short-term price momentum and long-term price
reversals are consistent with the weak flow centric view, as style-driven investors slowly
reallocate back and forth between competing style segments, depending on their relative
returns. These effects are at the level of styles, not of individual stocks, and therefore
should be present after conditioning on standard own-stock characteristics.
        If our institutional investors behave like the style-driven investors in Barberis and
Shleifer (2003), nearby own-segment returns and flows should positively forecast stock
returns while distant own-segment returns and flows should negatively forecast stock
returns, after appropriate controls.
        In what follows, we approximate nearby own-segment returns and flows as those
of the decile portfolio (within a given style) to which a stock is assigned. We do this for




                                             19
each statistically-valid style (i.e., size, value/growth, sector, and region5). To see this,
consider a stock that is in the first size decile, the second value/growth decile, and the
third sector. We measure own-segment flows and returns using the value-weighted
returns and flows of each own-segment for each style separately.                     So for nearby own-
segments for this stock we would look to the returns and flows from the first size decile,
the second value/growth decile, and the third sector. At short horizons, we expect own-
segment flows and returns to forecast returns positively under both the strong and weak
flow-centric views. At longer horizons, however, we would expect this result to reverse
under the weak flow-centric view only.
         To approximate distant own segment returns, we form the intersection of all size,
value/growth, and sector segments that are not own-segment. We call the resulting
measures “conjugate” flows and returns, since they represent the total flows and returns
of collected non-own-segments. To continue with the above stock example, we would
compute the flows and returns on the combined portfolio consisting of all stocks that
were not in the first size decile, and not in the second value/growth decile, and not in the
third sector. This way we are assured to include in our conjugate segment measures only
stocks that differ across all dimensions from the own-stock. At short horizons, we expect
conjugate flows and returns to forecast returns negatively under both the strong and weak
flow-centric views. At longer horizons, we would expect this result to reverse under the
weak flow-centric view only, so that conjugate flows and returns predict individual stock
returns positively.
         The presence of these style-level anticipation effects can be most directly tested
by estimating a cross-sectional regression on stock returns with past returns and flows of
both stock and style. To this end, we estimate the following OLS firm fixed effects
regression6 on firm weekly stock returns for the set of firms that are frequently traded in
our sample (firms with trades for at least 150 days a year over the entire sample7). We
estimate two versions of this equation, one with a more extensive lag structure:

5
  We drop from this analysis the cyclical/defensive style because of the weak results obtained for that style
category in Sections II.A. and II.B.
6
  To check that the extreme data points are not driving our results, we also try estimating a FGLS panel
regression. Inferences do not change with this alternative specification.
7
  Firms with at least 150 trading days per year in the State Street Bank sample are chosen to adequately
measure the effects of flows. We also re-estimate the regressions on the subset of firms with at least 100


                                                     20
                    ri ,t = a1stock ri ,t −1 + d1stock f i ,t −1 + a1me ri ,me
                                                                            t −1 + d1 f i ,t −1 + a1 ri ,t −1 + d1 f i ,t −1 + a1 ri ,t −1 + d1
                                                                                     me me         bm bm         bm bm          ind ind       ind ind
                                                                                                                                                 f i ,t −1
                                                          + a1conj riconj
                                                                     ,t −1 + d1   f i ,t −1 + a1gconj ri ,gconj
                                                                              conj conj
                                                                                                          t −1 + d1
                                                                                                                   gconj gconj
                                                                                                                        f i ,t −1
                                                           + bchar
                                                              bm
                                                                   MEi ,t −1 + bchar
                                                                                bm
                                                                                     BM i ,t −1 + bchar
                                                                                                   roe
                                                                                                        ROEi ,t −1 + ε i ,t

                                                                                                                                                     ----- Model 1




                         ri ,t = a1stock ri ,t −1 + d1stock f i ,t −1 + a1me ri me
                                                                                ,t −1 + d1 f i ,t −1 + a1 ri ,t −1 + d1 f i ,t −1 + a1 ri ,t −1 + d1
                                                                                          me me         bm bm         bm bm          ind ind       ind ind
                                                                                                                                                      f i ,t −1
     + a2stock
          , 4 ri ,t − 2 ,t − 4 + d 2 , 4 f i ,t − 2 ,t − 4 + a 2 , 4 ri ,t − 2 ,t − 4 + d 2 , 4 f i ,t − 2 ,t − 4 + a 2 , 4 ri ,t − 2 ,t − 4 + d 2 , 4 f i ,t − 2 ,t − 4 + a 2 , 4 ri ,t − 2 ,t − 4 + d 2 , 4 f i ,t − 2 ,t − 4
                                   stock                       me me                      me me                       bm bm                      bm bm                       ind ind                    ind ind


+ a5stock
     ,12 ri ,t −5,t −12 + d 5,12 f i ,t −5,t −12 + a5,12 ri ,t −5,t −12 + d 5,12 f i ,t −5 ,t −12 + a5,12 ri ,t −5,t −12 + d 5 ,12 f i ,t −5,t −12 + a5 ,12 ri ,t −5,t −12 + d 5,12 f i ,t −5 ,t −12
                            stock                   me me                   me       me              bm bm                   bm        bm             ind ind                  ind      ind


                                                                 + a1conj riconj
                                                                            ,t −1 + d1   f i ,t −1 + a1gconj ri ,gconj
                                                                                     conj conj
                                                                                                                 t −1 + d1
                                                                                                                          gconj gconj
                                                                                                                               f i ,t −1
                                                       + a2conj
                                                            , 4 ri ,t − 2 ,t − 4 + d 2 , 4 f i ,t − 2 ,t − 4 + a 2 , 4 ri ,t − 2 ,,t − 4 + d 2 , 4
                                                                   conj              conj conj                   gconj gconj                 gconj gconj
                                                                                                                                                   f i ,t −2,,t −4
                                                     + a5conj
                                                          ,12 ri ,t −5,t −12 + d 5 ,12 f i ,t −5,t −12 + a5,12 ri ,t −5 ,,t −12 + d 5,12 f i ,t −5,,t −12
                                                                 conj            conj conj                gconj gconj               gconj gconj


                                                                  + bchar
                                                                     bm
                                                                          MEi ,t −1 + bchar
                                                                                       bm
                                                                                            BM i ,t −1 + bchar
                                                                                                          roe
                                                                                                               ROEi ,t −1 + ε i ,t

                                                                                                                                                     ----- Model 2


  where ri ,t is the return to stock i at week t in excess of the market, ri me
                                                                             ,t is the excess

  return to stock i's size segment, ribm
                                      ,t is the excess return to stock i's value/growth

  segment, riind
             ,t  is the excess return to stock i's sector segment, riconj
                                                                     ,t   is the excess return to

  stock i's domestic conjugate segment, and ri ,gconj
                                                t     is the excess return to stock i's global

  conjugate segment. The flow variables are defined analogously. ME, BM, and ROE are
  stock control variables for own-stock market equity, book-to-market, and return on
  equity, respectively. The time subscripts t-2,t-4 denotes that regressors are averaged
  across last 2 through 4 weeks (i.e., the remainder of the month following t-1), and time
  subscript t-5,t-12 denotes that regressors are averaged across last 5 through 12 weeks.
  Domestic conjugate segment attributes are taken over the set of firms not in the size,
  value/growth, and sector segments that the firm belongs to. Global conjugate segment
  attributes are taken over all the non-US countries/regions.
                   The coefficient estimates from the regressions are displayed in Table IV with t-
  statistics from standard errors corrected for cross-sectional heteroskedasticity (Beck and

  trading days a year, and the subset of firms with at least 200 trading days a year. The results in both cases
  are qualitatively very similar to the baseline case. In response to survivorship concerns, we also redo the
  analysis on firms with at least 150 trading days in any year. The results are robust to this adjustment.


                                                                                                             21
Katz, 1995). They are broadly consistent with the flow-centric views of style investing.
For Model 1, which only includes regressors lagged one week, own segment returns and
flows positively forecast weekly stock returns. The coefficients show, for example, that a
one standard deviation increase in value/growth previous-week return increases current-
week expected stock returns by 3.95 basis points. Likewise, a one standard deviation
increase in value/growth flow last week increases expected stock returns this week by
15.4 basis points. Similar results obtain for the size returns and flows, and the sector
segment returns and flows. Further the coefficient estimates for the conjugate variables
contrast with the coefficient estimates for the own segment variables. Conjugate returns
and flows, as well as global conjugate returns and flows negatively forecast stock returns.
A one standard deviation increase in conjugate returns one week ago is associated with a
2.85 basis point drop in expected stock returns this week. One possible interpretation is
that investors flock to the conjugate segments when conjugate segments post higher
returns than own segments, thereby driving down the price of the stock.
       Model 2 features regressors with three different horizons: Regressors lagged 1
week, lagged 2 - 4 weeks, and lagged 5 - 12 weeks. This way the model captures
variation over the last week, the last month (excluding the last week), and the last quarter
(excluding the last month). We restrict the coefficients on the aggregated lags to be
equal, to keep the number of variables down and their interpretability high. The results
from the longer lags of the independent variables broadly suggest that the positive effects
of own style variables and the negative effects of conjugate style variables are transient.
Longer lags of own segment returns and flows often negatively forecast stock returns. For
instance, a one standard deviation increase in average sector segment returns 5-12 weeks
ago is associated with a 6.95 basis point drop in expected stock returns this week.
Similarly, a one standard deviation increase in average sector segment flows 5-12 weeks
ago is associated with a 1.25 basis point fall in expected stock returns. The negative
effects are less dramatic for size and value/growth segments but a clear pattern emerges.
Either we see a fall in the strength of the coefficients as we increase the lag or we find
that beyond the first week lag, some of the coefficient estimates are negative. The
presence of reversals at the monthly or quarterly horizon is also evident with conjugate
and global conjugate segment returns and flows.



                                            22
       Note that the regression controls for the own stock returns and flows, and thus the
style effects we witness in Table V are over and above that generated by stock attributes.
Since we also control for the stock's book-to-market equity and market equity (Fama and
French, 1992). The results displayed in Table V suggest that the style effects persist after
controlling for these possible sources of fundamental risk. In addition, both models
include controls for ROE since according to Haugen and Baker (1996), controlling for
other firm characteristics, firms with higher profitability exhibit higher returns. We
follow Haugen and Baker (1996) and use Generally Accepted Accounting Principles
(GAAP) ROE instead of clean surplus ROE.
       We note also that the positive coefficient estimates on the past week’s own
segment flows suggest that institutional investors positively anticipate returns – positive
segment flows precede positive segment returns.        Hence some of the positive non-
contemporaneous correlations between segment returns and flows in the last section are
due to anticipation effects. To check the presence of positive feedback trading, we also
regress stock flow on the same list of regressors in Model 2. We find that institutional
investors do indeed positively chase returns at the style level, at least for the size and
value / growth classifications. So both positive feedback trading and anticipation must be
responsible for the positive non-contemporaneous correlations between segment flow and
returns.
       Overall, the results from this simple regression exercise suggests that the style
effects (short term style driven momentum, and to a lesser extent, longer term style
driven reversals) are consistent with sentiment based stories like Barberis and Shleifer
(2003). This is particular true when we consider the conjugate style results. The negative
coefficients on conjugates suggest that this is not a fundamentals story. It is hard to say
why it should be that when the fundamentals improve for one extreme (e.g., extreme
value), that they should get worse for the other extreme (e.g., extreme growth). The
sentiment based story explains this nicely. When extreme growth performs better than
extreme value, positive feedback style switchers pull money away from the extreme
value and plough those funds into extreme growth.
       It is important to square the panel regression results from this section with the
style return and flow correlation results from the previous section. There we found that



                                            23
the correlation between style return and flow increases as we approach the quarterly
horizon. Yet, in the simple panel regressions, we find that style level momentum starts to
give way to style level reversals as we approach the quarterly horizon. One reason for this
apparent dissonance is that we control for stock fundamentals in the panel regression.
That is we attempt to strip away from style flows that which affects the permanent
component of stock returns. Style flows have a more durable impact on style returns in
the correlation analysis precisely because they may contain some information about stock
fundamentals. We empirically check this by estimated regressions on stock returns with
just the style flow lags for size, value/growth, and sectors, one style at a time. We find
that the evidence for style level reversals is always less than that from the multivariate
regression (Model 2). One other reason for the apparent dissonance is that the correlation
contains information, not just on how lags of style flow affects style returns, but also
information on the contemporaneous relationship between style flow and return as well as
the impact of lags of style returns on style flows. That is,
                                            Cov(rt , ft ) + Cov(rt +1 , f t +1 ) + Cov(rt , f t +1 ) + Cov(rt +1 , f t )
        Corr (rt + rt +1 , ft + ft +1 ) =
                                                            Var (rt + rt +1 ) * Var ( ft + f t +1 )
Even if the term Cov(rt+1,ft) is negative, the presence of positive feedback trading and
price impact may result in a positive correlation between style flow and style return.
       The results thus far have focused on the short-term dynamics between stock
returns and style returns/flows. We find some evidence of style driven reversals at
quarterly horizons. To further a style-based sentiment story, it may be useful to
investigate the presence of style reversals at longer horizons. However, the nature of our
dataset (high frequency with a short time series) prevents us from fully doing so.
Nonetheless, in results not reported, we experiment with adding up to two years of annual
lags of style variables in our simple panel regressions. We find strong evidence of style-
level reversals with style returns at the one and two year horizons, but mixed evidence for
style-level reversals with style flows. This is broadly consistent with Teo and Woo (2003)
who also find stronger evidence for reversals with style returns. One interpretation is that
style flows contain more information about stock fundamentals (unrelated to stock
characteristics and past stock returns/flows) than style returns. Another interpretation is




                                                           24
that style level reversals do not fully occur until after two years. We shall revisit this
issue in the next section.




E. Style-Based Flow/Return Dynamics


Not withstanding the conjugate results of the last section, one critique of the simple
regression approach is that it does not fully account for the possibility that style flows and
returns may also affect the permanent component of returns that is not spanned by stock
characteristics and past stock returns/flows. To thoroughly distinguish from any
fundamentals based story, it will be important to isolate the effects of styles on the
temporary component of stock returns. It is to this that we now turn.


E.1. The VAR


       To further investigate the interaction between style returns, style flows, and stock
fundamentals, we apply Campbell's (1991) return decomposition to break stock returns
into a permanent cash flow component and a temporary expected return component.


                                                 ∞                             ∞
                    rt − Et −1rt = (Et − Et −1 )∑ ρ j et + j − (Et − Et −1 )∑ ρ j rt + j + κ t ,      (2)
                                                 j =0                         j =0




where ρ is the weekly discount rate which we set to 0.998, et is the clean surplus
accounting return on equity in period t, rt is the return of the stock in period t, and κt is
                                                                       ∞
the approximation error in period t. The term (Et − Et −1 )∑ ρ j et + j is the permanent cash
                                                                      j =0

                                                                             ∞
flow news component of returns, while the term (Et − Et −1 )∑ ρ j rt + j is the temporary
                                                                             j =0


expected return news component of returns.
       This decomposition proves useful in many situations.                          Campbell and Shiller
(1988) and Campbell (1991) use this decomposition on aggregate equity returns to show


                                                     25
that expected return news dominates cash flow news in the post-war period. In contrast,
Vuolteenaho (2002) finds using this decomposition that cash flow news dominate
expected return news for individual stocks. Cohen, Gompers, and Vuolteenaho (2003)
reach similar conclusions. They also document that institutional investors underreact to
cash flow news and do not follow naive positive feedback strategies.                         Institutional
investors buy when there is good cash flow news but sell when stock returns rises in the
absence of good cash flow news.                 Froot and Ramadorai (2003) derive a similar
decomposition for currency returns, although their exchange rate derivation does not
require any approximation, i.e., ρ = 1 and κ = 0 . Froot and Ramadorai (2003) use the
decomposition to show that institutional investor flows are positively correlated with the
temporary component but not with the permanent component of currency returns.
        Our primary aim is to investigate the effects of style returns and flows on stock
returns controlling for permanent cash flow shocks. The expected return regressions
using style flow from the previous section control for stock characteristics like book-to-
market and market equity. However, if we wish to distinguish between the strong and
weak flow-centric views, such simple controls are not enough. It is more appropriate to
use the decomposition above. The weak flow-centric view suggests that style flows
should be related to the temporary component of returns, while the strong flow-centric
view suggests that the style flows are related only to the permanent component of value.
As a result, we use a VAR to affect the above decomposition into permanent and
transitory return components.
        The state variables in our VAR are own-stock return and flow, size segment
return and flow, value/growth segment return and flow, sector segment return and flow,
US conjugate return and flow, and global conjugate return and flow. In addition, we
include in the VAR standard stock characteristics of log stock book-to-market equity, log
stock market equity, and log GAAP ROE. We include these characteristics in response to
the documented explanatory power of these variables on stock returns.8


8
  Fama and French (1992) find that high book-to-market stocks tend to reward investors with higher
returns. Banz (1981) document the existence of the size effect. Haugen and Baker (1996) show that firms
with higher profitability ten to have higher average returns after controlling for other firm attributes. We
follow Haugen and Baker (1996) and use Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (GAAP) ROE instead
of clean surplus ROE.


                                                    26
        Because the number of unrestricted VAR coefficients increases with the square of
the number of variables included in the VAR, we estimate a constrained system using the
lag structure of Model 1. The constraint is simple: all stock flow, stock return, and stock
characteristic coefficients are set to zero for the style attribute equations. Thus, we are
implicitly making the assumption that each stock has only a negligible effect on its
segment return or flow.
           The VAR system can be conveniently summarized by the following equation:


                                                    z i ,t = Γz i ,t −1 + u i ,t ,            (3)


where zi,t is a vector of firm-specific state variables describing the firm at time t, and ui,t is
an error term which is independent of information available at time t-1 and which has
covariance matrix of E[u t u t' ] = Σ . If we let the first variable in the vector be own-firm

excess return, and define e1' = [1 0 ... 0] and λ ' = e1' ρΓ( I − ρΓ) −1 , then as shown by
Campbell (1991), the temporary expected return component can be written as λ ' u i ,t and

the permanent cash flow component can be written as (e1'+λ ')u i ,t .

        The VAR impulse response allows us to identify how shocks affect expected
innovations. Specifically, the innovation in cumulative expected future changes k ≥ 1
periods forward is given by Φ (k)ut , where


                                      Φ (k )ut = (Γ − Γ k +1 )( I − Γ) −1 ut .                (4)


        We pick out cumulated expected changes in any VAR variable by pre-multiplying
by the appropriate selection vector.            For example, the innovation in the cumulated
expectations of the first variable, stock returns, is given by e1' Φ (k )ut . Analogously, the
innovation in cumulated expectations of the second variable, own-stock flows, is given
by e 2' Φ (k )ut where e 2' = [1 0 ... 0] . The total impulse response from a shock to
stock returns is the sum of the innovation in cumulative expected future return changes,
e1' Φ (k )ut , plus the shock itself, e1' ut , or


                                                        27
                                 e1' Ψ (k )u t = e1' (Φ (k ) + I )u t ,                  (5)


where Ψ (k ) = (Φ (k ) + I ) .


E.2. Results


        Our baseline results are displayed in Figures 4a and 4b, where we depict the
expected response of stock returns to shocks in the style variables. The impulse response
functions together with their associated standard errors are broadly consistent with the
regression results of the previous section. Own size, value/growth, and sector segment
returns and flows positively impact the stock returns, while conjugate and global
conjugate segment returns and flows negatively impact stock returns. Moreover the short
term impact on stock returns is statistically significant for all shocks except for the shock
to sector returns which generates an insignificantly positive impact on stock returns. This
mirrors the sector return coefficient estimate from Model 1 in Table V.
        The transient effect of style is evident in some cases. The three basis points
impact of a one standard deviation value/growth segment return shock on stock returns
diminishes and becomes insignificant beyond the first week. Likewise the negative
shocks generated by conjugate return and global conjugate return shocks become
attenuated after the first week. However, in almost every case, the shocks to style
variables appear to create permanent changes in stock return. For instance, a one standard
deviation size segment return shock leaves a permanent six basis point increase in
expected stock return in its wake. Similarly, a one standard deviation size segment flow
shock generates a permanent five basis point increase in expected stock return. This
suggests that the style variables may embody fundamental information about a stock and
is supportive of the strong flow-centric view.
        Fortunately, we can also use this approach to test for the presence of the weak
flow-centric view. We can examine the impact of our style variables on temporary
component of stock returns in isolation.           To this end, we plot the typical impulse
responses of stock returns to shocks in the style variables when there is no change in cash


                                                 28
flow news – i.e., when the unexpected return shock is entirely temporary in that it is
offset by a corresponding change in forecasted future return. We induce this shock by
setting the appropriate element of the VAR error vector to a one standard deviation value,
with other elements set to their conditional expectations (i.e., conditional on the style
variable element being at its one standard deviation value and cash flow news being equal
to zero). This ensures that we are measuring the effects of style on only the temporary
component of stock returns.
       The results displayed in Figures 5a and 5b are broadly consistent with the results
from the “naïve” approach in the previous subsection. A positive shock to own size,
value/growth, and sector segment returns and flows but with no corresponding change in
cash flow news, induces a positive shock to stock returns. Furthermore, the impact of
style return and flow shocks on stock returns is somewhat persistent in that stock returns
typically continue to rise beyond the first week. This is certainly consistent with the
weak flow-centric view. From Figure 6a, we see that the effect of an own-segment
return/flow shock begins to dissipate only after about 10 days, although full elimination
requires 300-400 weeks. The positive impacts of own-segment return shocks on stock
returns generally dissipate more slowly than the impacts of own-segment flow shocks.
       The conjugate segment return and flow results also agree with those using the
naïve approach. Following a positive shock to either conjugate return or flow, stock
returns decrease, even when setting cash flow shocks to zero. For example, a one
standard deviation shock to conjugate segment return with no change in cash flow news
is associated with a 10 basis point drop in expected stock return. This decline requires
about 500 weeks to dissipate. The impact of a shock to global conjugate returns does not
follow the sign of the naïve approach. Otherwise there is strong agreement between the
two approaches.
       In summary, the VAR based on the return decomposition gives essentially the
same results as the naïve approach of the previous subsection. In both cases, own-
segment style returns have a positive effect on stock returns. Also conjugate style returns
have a negative impact on stock returns. The negative impact of global conjugate return
and flow on stock returns, documented in the previous section, is not robust to controlling
for permanent shocks to stock price.



                                            29
III. Conclusions


           This paper provides evidence that institutional investors organize and trade stocks
in styles such value/growth, small/large, cyclical/defensive, sector/industries, and
countries/regions. The paper uses high quality, high frequency daily trade flow data from
State Street Corporation, covering all the trades of a very large and global group of
institutional investors.      We find strong evidence that investors reallocate intensively
across size, value/growth, and sectors, but not across what we call cyclical vs. defensive,
which sorts stocks on the basis of their past correlation with GNP growth up to one year
ahead.      All of these style classifications appear to be gaining in importance relative to
international reallocation.
           We also find a positive linkage between style returns and institutional style flows
at the daily level, and this linkage grows stronger as the horizon is increased to several
months. This positive relationship is predominantly, but not solely, due to positive
feedback trading at the style level. We find that institutional style flows anticipate style
returns as well. In fact, at weekly frequencies, own-segment style flows and returns
positively forecast stock returns, while distant-segment flows and returns negatively
forecast stock returns. These effects are reversed at the quarterly horizons and are robust
to controls for stock flows and returns as well as stock characteristics.
           These results are consistent with the weak flow-centric view, which suggests that
flows, at least in part, are related to temporary components of prices. This view is
supportive of several behavioral models, particularly that of Barberis and Shleifer (2003),
who posit that trend chasing investors switch toward better-performing styles, and their
interaction with rational investors produces short run momentum and longer run
reversion.
           Promising avenues for further research include investigating the emergence and
evolution of styles, the relationship between individual fund characteristics and their
style-related trades, and the trade-by-trade style-switching activities of institutional
traders.




                                               30
IV. References


Asness, Clifford S., John M. Liew, and Ross L. Stevens, 1997, Parallels between the
       cross-sectional predictability of stock returns and country returns, Journal of
       Portfolio Management 23, 79-87.
Banz, Rolf W., 1981, The relationship between return and market value of common
       stocks, Journal of Financial Economics 9, 3-18.
Barberis, Nicholas, and Andrei Shleifer, 2003, Style investing, Journal of Financial
       Economics 68, 161-199.
Barberis, Nicholas, Andrei Shleifer, and Jeffrey Wurgler, 2003, Comovement,
       Forthcoming in Journal of Financial Economics.
Beck, Nathaniel, and Jonathan N. Katz, 1995, What to do (and not to do) with time-
       series-cross-section data in comparative politics. American Political Science
       Review, 89, 634-647.
Brennan, Michael J., and H. Henry Cao, 1997, International portfolio investment flows,
       Journal of Finance 52, 1851-1880.
Campbell, John Y., 1991, A variance decomposition for stock returns, Economic Journal
       101, 157-179.
Campbell, John Y., and Richard H. Clarida, 1987, The dollar and real interest rates,
       Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy 27, 103-139.
Campbell, John Y., and Robert J. Shiller, 1988, The dividend-price ratio and expectations
       of future dividends and discount factors, Review of Financial Studies 1, 195-227.
Carhart, Mark, 1997, On persistence in mutual fund performance, Journal of Finance 52,
       57-82.
Cavaglia, Stefano, Chris Brightman, and Michael Aked, 2000, The increasing importance
       of industry factors, Financial Analysts Journal Sep/Oct 2000, 56, 41-54.
Chen, Hsiu-lang, and Werner De Bondt, 2003, Style momentum within the S&P 500
       index, Forthcoming in Journal of Empirical Finance.
Cohen, Randy, Paul Gompers, and Tuomo Vuolteenaho, 2003, Who undereacts to cash-
       flow news? Evidence from trading between individuals and institutions,
       Forthcoming in Journal of Financial Economics.


                                           31
Daniel, Kent, Mark Grinblatt, Sheridan Titman, and Russ Wermers, 1997, Measuring
       mutual fund performance with characteristic-based benchmarks, Journal of
       Finance 52, 1035-1058.
Fama, Eugene, and Kenneth French, 1992, The cross-section of expected stock returns,
       Journal of Finance 47, 427-465.
Fama, Eugene, and Kenneth French, 1993, Common risk factors in the returns on stocks
       and bonds, Journal of Financial Economics 33, 3-56.
Fama, Eugene, and Kenneth French, 1997, Industry costs of equity, Journal of Financial
       Economics 43, 153-193.
Froot, Kenneth, and Emily Dabora, 1999, How are stock prices affected by the location
       of trade? Journal of Financial Economics 53, 189-216.
Froot, Kenneth, Paul G. J. O'Connell, and Mark Seasholes, 2001, The portfolio flows of
       international investors, Journal of Financial Economics 59, 151-193.
Froot, Kenneth, and Tarun Ramadorai, 2003, Currency returns, intrinsic value, and
       institutional investor flows, Unpublished working paper. Harvard Business
       School.
Gompers, Paul, and Andrew Metrick, 2001, Institutional investors and equity prices,
       Quarterly Journal of Economics 116, 229-260.
Grinblatt, Mark, and Matti Keloharju, 2000, The investment behavior and performance of
       various investor-types: A study of Finland's unique data set, Journal of Financial
       Economics 55, 43-67.
Grinblatt, Mark, Sheridan Titman, Russ Wermers, 1995, Momentum investment
       strategies, portfolio performance, and herding: A study of mutual fund behavior,
       American Economic Review 85, 1088-1105.
Haugen, Robert A., and Nardin L. Baker, 1996, Commonality in the determinants of
       expected stock returns, Journal of Financial Economics 41, 401-439.
Hardouvelis, Gikas, Raphael La Porta, and Tierry Wizman, 1994, What moves the
       discount on country equity funds?, in Jeff Frankel, ed: The Internationalization of
       Equity Markets (University of Chicago Press, Chicago, Ill).
Kumar, Alok, 2002, Style switching and stock returns, Unpublished working paper.
       Cornell University.



                                           32
Lewellen, Jonathan, 2002, Momentum and autocorrelation in stock returns, The Review
       of Financial Studies 15, 533-564.
Moskowitz, Tobias, and Mark Grinblatt, 1999, Do industries explain momentum?
       Journal of Finance 54, 1249-1290.
Nofsinger, John R., and Richard W. Sias, 1999, Herding and feedback trading by
       institutional and individual investors, Journal of Finance 54, 2263-2295.
Teo, Melvyn, and Sung-Jun Woo, 2003, Style effects in the cross-section of stock returns,
       Forthcoming in Journal of Financial Economics.
Vuolteenaho, Tuomo, 2002, What drives firm-level stock returns? Journal of Finance 57,
       233-264.




                                           33
V. Appendix


        The methodology outlined below is analogous to that in Froot and Ramadorai
(2003). Standard errors for correlation estimates are constructed using the Monte Carlo
method.        These correlation estimates are computed between flows and returns for the
panel     of     N   segments           and      T         days,         ρ ( K ) = cor (r j ,t ( K ), F j ,t ( K ) ) ,   where

j = 1,..., N and t = 1,..., T at different return horizons K. Here, if T is the number of days
in the entire sample, and N the number of segments in the panel, we compute correlations
for all horizons K between 1 and T. This means that for given K, the correlation is
estimated using (NT/K) observations, where each observation is the sum of K time series
elements in each segment. When K=T, the panel correlation is an N×1 cross-section, with
each observation of flows representing the total net inflow over the entire sample period
for a segment and each observation of returns representing the total excess segment
return over the same period for the corresponding segment. When K=1,
ρ ( K ) = ρ (1) = cor (r j ,t , F j ,t ) , the daily panel correlation, computed using NT observations
for each of flows and returns.
         To compute standard errors using the Monte Carlo method, we assume flows and
returns are multivariate normal, with moments derived from our daily panel of flows and
                              N     T                              N     T
                          1                                 1
returns. Define µ f =
                         NT
                              ∑∑
                              j =1 t =1
                                          f j ,t , µ r =
                                                           NT
                                                                ∑∑ r
                                                                   j =1 t =1
                                                                                 j ,t   , and σ 2f , σ r2 , σ fr , respectively,

as the variance of daily flows computed across the panel, the variance of returns
computed similarly; and the covariance between the daily panels of flows and returns.
We draw ω f and ω r as simulated flows and returns, each a vector NTx1, from the

multivariate normal distribution:

                                   ω f       µ f   σ 2f                  σ fr  
                                     ~ N   ,                               
                                     ωr      µ r   σ fr                  σ r2  
                                                      
         Using these draws, we follow essentially the same procedure as above, treating
the draws as our flow and return variables, and computing correlations at different return
horizons K. We draw 10,000 such samples from the distribution and generate panel




                                                           34
correlations for each return horizon using these draws. The results are then sorted to
generate point-wise confidence intervals for our sample estimates at each return horizon.




                                           35
Figure 1: Volatility of returns and flows across style segments. The sample period is from
January 1995 to December 2001. The top sub-figure plots the cross-sectional standard deviation
in returns across each investment category. The middle and bottom sub-figures plot the
volatility of flows or the re-allocation intensity for each investment category. Re-allocation
intensity is a measure of institutional investor re-allocation across segments in a category. It is
the cross-sectional standard deviation of demeaned excess flow over and above expected flow
based on segment market cap (see Equation 1 in the text). Reallocation intensity is scaled by
market cap to parse out the effect of increasing market cap on flows.
Figure 2: Institutional investor flow into extreme size, value/growth, and cyclical/defensive
segments. The sample period is January 1995 to December 2001. The top sub-figure plots the excess
flows into firms in the smallest and largest market equity deciles. The middle sub-figure plots the
excess flows into firms in the lowest and highest book-to-market equity deciles. The bottom sub-
figure plots the excess flows into firms in the most defensive and most cyclical equity deciles.
Excess flow is flow in excess of expected flow based on the market cap of the segment relative to
the total market cap at each time period. 12 week (1 quarter) moving averages of the excess flows
are presented.
Figure 3: Contemporaneous correlation between returns and flows over various horizons for size, value/growth, cyclical/defensive, sector, and
country/region segments. The sample period is from January 3rd 1995 to December 31st 2001. Return is excess return over the value-weighted
US market portfolio. Flow is net inflow normalized by market equity. For each style, to calculate the sample correlation between flow and
return, adjacent observations in each decile are summed up to the appropriate horizon in a non-overlapping fashion. Then the ten flow and ten
return series are stacked and the correlation between the stacked flow and stacked return series is calculated. The procedure for calculating the
Monte Carlo bounds is in the Appendix
Figure 4a: Response of stock return to a one standard deviation shocks to own style variables. The sample period is from January 1995 to
December 2001. The impulse responses are generated from a VAR estimated with the following state variables: Stock return, stock flow, stock
ME, stock BM, stock ROE, size segment return, size segment flow, value/growth segment return, value/growth segment flow, sector return,
sector flow, conjugate return, conjugate flow, global conjugate return, global conjugate flow. Dashed lines denote +/-2 standard error monte carlo
bounds.
Figure 4b: Response of stock return to a one standard deviation shocks to conjugate variables. The sample period is from January 1995 to
December 2001. The impulse responses are generated from a VAR estimated with the following state variables: Stock return, stock flow, stock
ME, stock BM, stock ROE, size segment return, size segment flow, value/growth segment return, value/growth segment flow, sector return,
sector flow, conjugate return, conjugate flow, global conjugate return, global conjugate flow. Dashed lines denote +/-2 standard error monte carlo
bounds.
Figure 5a: Response of stock return to a one standard deviation shocks to own style variables with no cash flow news. The sample period is from
January 1995 to December 2001. The 1 standard deviation shock in a variable is induced by setting the corresponding element of VAR error
vector to the one standard deviation value. The other elements of the VAR error vector are set to their conditional expectations, conditional on
the variable element being equal to its one standard deviation value and cash flow news equals zero. Dashed lines denote +/-2 standard error
monte carlo bounds
Figure 5b: Response of stock return to a one standard deviation shocks to conjugate variables with no cash flow news. The sample period is from
January 1995 to December 2001. The 1 standard deviation shock in a variable is induced by setting the corresponding element of VAR error
vector to the one standard deviation value. The other elements of the VAR error vector are set to their conditional expectations, conditional on
the variable element being equal to its one standard deviation value and cash flow news equals zero. Dashed lines denote +/- 2 standard error
monte carlo bounds.
                                                                  Table I
                                      State Street Bank Daily US Flow Summary Statistics

Summary flow statistics from State Street Bank's custodian flow database. The sample period is from 1995 to 2001. The data are filtered to
remove test and error transactions, and transactions which contain missing data fields. This flow database represents a substantial
improvement over that used in Froot, O'Connell, and Seasholes (2001) as trades are recorded on a trade-date rather than on a settlement-date
basis.


  Year        Number of US stocks with flows        Number of flow days            Aggregated absolute value of daily flows (billions)
  1995                   6,036                           463,285                                         446
  1996                   6,816                           574,944                                         579
  1997                   7,342                           645,894                                         758
  1998                   7,426                           665,436                                         902
  1999                   7,192                           659,231                                        1,110
  2000                   7,100                           720,035                                        2,144
  2001                   6,051                           648,265                                        2,693
  Total                  10,259                         4,377,090                                       8,632
                                                                      Table II
                                                      Style Reallocation Intensities
T-statistics against the median of a randomly drawn monte carlo reallocation intensity sample. The sample period is from January 1995 to
December 2001. For each year and for each style (size, value/growth, cyclical/defensive, and sector) 1000 random monte carlo samples of
styles are drawn so that their market capitalizations match those of the actual styles. The reallocation intensity statistics associated with these
samples are calculated by looking at the stacked series of excess flows for all styles and for each year. Reallocation intensity is a measure of
variation in flows in excess of expected flows based on market cap. The t-statistic is calculated as the difference in reallocation intensity
between the actual style series and the 50th monte carlo percentile divided by the standard deviation of the monte carlo reallocations. The
same process is also repeated over the entire sample. The standard cyclical/defensive measure is calculated as the correlation between the
past stock returns with one year forward US gdp growth. Five years of stock returns are used. The forward looking cyclical/defensive
measure is calculated as the correlation between stock returns in the 1995-2001 period with one year forward US gdp growth.
                                                                                   style spectrum
year                                   size               value/growth           cyclical/defensive   cyclical/defensive            sector
                                                                                     (standard)       (forward looking)
1995                                   6.51                   0.79                       1.09                2.24                   8.09
1996                                   2.58                   1.80                       1.72                4.21                   6.46
1997                                   4.26                   3.05                       0.33                1.80                   4.64
1998                                   3.18                   2.73                       0.14                3.40                   4.21
1999                                   1.98                   3.46                       0.13                2.78                   1.62
2000                                   3.71                   2.01                       0.05                3.75                   5.42
2001                                   4.28                   4.52                       0.54                4.38                   9.34
entire sample                         117.77                  15.47                      2.89                93.19                  84.37
                                           Table III
  Flow correlations for size, value/growth, and cyclical/defensive segments
The sample period is from January 1995 to December 2001. Excess flow correlations between
various size (ME), value/growth (BM), and cyclical/defensive (CYC) segments Excess flow
is flow into a segment in excess of its expected flow given its market cap. Portfolio distance is
the difference in rank between portfolios, e.g., the distance between ME1 and ME5 is 4.
Correlations are reported for pairs of portfolios with at least 1 extreme portfolios (e.g., ME1,
ME10, BM1, etc.) The mean correlations between pairs of a certain distance for each
distance are also reported. The t-statistics against that of 1000 monte carlo style segment
samples are presented. The monte carlo style segment samples are drawn so that their market
caps match those of the actual style segments.
                        Panel A: Flow correlations between size segments
Portfolio
distance         corr with ME1       tstat  corr with ME10        tstat  mean corr mean tstat
1                      0.26         3.56          -0.10           0.07      -0.04        0.66
2                      0.12         2.16          -0.08           0.25      -0.07        0.43
3                      0.06         1.59           0.00           1.06      -0.05        0.56
4                     -0.01         0.92          -0.08           0.31      -0.05        0.56
5                     -0.08         0.24          -0.18          -0.69      -0.16       -0.53
6                     -0.31         -1.92         -0.24          -1.27      -0.28       -1.60
7                     -0.09         0.23          -0.15          -0.41      -0.19       -0.82
8                     -0.08         0.31          -0.24          -1.21      -0.16       -0.45
9                     -0.44         -3.19         -0.44          -3.19      -0.44       -3.19
Spearman's rho      0.88***                      0.77**                   0.83***

                Panel B: Flow correlations between value/growth segments
Portfolio
distance       corr with BM1     tstat   corr with BM10      tstat mean corr mean tstat
1                    0.08       1.85           0.33          4.18     0.01     1.15
2                   -0.21       -0.92          0.06          1.62    -0.09     0.18
3                   -0.16       -0.47         -0.02          0.86    -0.09     0.18
4                   -0.25       -1.38         -0.18         -0.71    -0.14    -0.29
5                   -0.14       -0.30          0.08          1.81    -0.06     0.49
6                   -0.27       -1.52         -0.15         -0.43    -0.20    -0.83
7                   -0.12       -0.09         -0.16         -0.45    -0.18    -0.67
8                   -0.34       -2.17         -0.23         -1.18    -0.28    -1.67
9                   -0.34       -2.23         -0.34         -2.23    -0.34    -2.23
Spearman's rho      0.63*                    0.82***                0.88***

              Panel C: Flow correlations between cyclical/defensive segments
Portfolio
distance       corr with CYC1 tstat corr with CYC10 tstat               mean corr mean tstat
1                    -0.13        -0.16         0.08             1.67         -0.09    0.19
2                     0.03        1.29          -0.05            0.58         -0.08    0.27
3                    -0.04        0.62          -0.19           -0.65         -0.06    0.44
4                    -0.01        0.88          -0.22           -0.92         -0.14   -0.32
5                    -0.09        0.18          -0.17           -0.52         -0.19   -0.78
6                    -0.21        -0.87         0.05             1.47         -0.08    0.30
7                    -0.12        -0.02         -0.26           -1.26         -0.18   -0.66
8                    -0.10        0.11          -0.09            0.21         -0.10    0.13
9                    -0.18        -0.57         -0.18           -0.57         -0.18   -0.67
Spearman's rho        0.48                      0.35                        0.5
Note: * Rho significant at the 10% level, **Rho significant at the 5% level
      *** Rho significant at the 1% level
                                        Table IV
                 Principal Components Analysis of Style Flows
The sample period is January 1995 to December 2001. Principal components analysis is
performed on weekly excess flow into size segments (ME), weekly excess flow into
value/growth segments (BM), and weekly excess flow into cyclical/defensive segments
(CYC) separately. Next the segment flows are regressed individually on the top five
principal components and the R squares from these regressions are recorded. The numbers
presented are the R squares signed by the sign of the coefficient estimate on the principal
components in the above-mentioned regressions. Significance is calculated relative to 1000
monte carlo style segment samples. These samples are drawn so that their market caps
match those of the actual style segments.
               Panel A: R squares from the regression of size segment flows
                      on principal components * sign of slope estimate
                                       PC1       PC2         PC3         PC4        PC5
ME1                                -0.401**     0.023      -0.013       0.015     -0.026
ME2                                 -0.247*     0.464      -0.001      -0.001     -0.078
ME3                                   -0.09     0.365      -0.031      -0.079     -0.046
ME4                                  -0.044    -0.251       -0.02      0.329*     -0.21*
ME5                                  -0.056    -0.003     0.845**       0.007      0.027
ME6                                  -0.007     0.141      -0.146       0.055    0.451**
ME7                                   0.084    -0.169       0.022      -0.394     -0.066
ME8                                   0.017   -0.232*      -0.078       0.077      0.108
ME9                                   0.021    -0.263      -0.072      -0.209      0.056
ME10                                0.804**     0.026       0.008       0.005     -0.001
% of cross-section explained
by principal component               23.057  17.658*       13.911      10.858      9.563

           Panel B: R squares from the regression of value/growth segment flows
                      on principal components * sign of slope estimate
                                     PC1         PC2         PC3         PC4         PC5
BM1                               -0.882**      0.004       -0.01         0           0
BM2                                -0.154    -0.401**      0.39**       0.001      -0.006
BM3                                 0.032      -0.008         0      -0.624**      0.205*
BM4                                 0.044       0.098      -0.159      -0.032     -0.332*
BM5                                 0.076    -0.386** -0.364*            0.06       0.019
BM6                                 0.011       0.006      -0.003      -0.126      -0.069
BM7                                 0.068      -0.033      -0.006      -0.003     -0.30**
BM8                                 0.025     0.538**       0.123       0.036       0.004
BM9                                 0.207     0.216**       0.064     0.11**        0.098
BM10                                0.231       0.023         0         0.341       0.164
% of cross-section explained
by principal component           27.542**      17.562      12.382     10.759      8.955
                                  Table IV (continued)
     Panel C: mean R squares from the regression of random ME / BM segment flows
          on principal components * sign of slope estimate (1000 monte carlo trials)
                                    PC1          PC2         PC3       PC4           PC5
RAND1                             -0.012       -0.009       0.016    -0.005         0.010
RAND2                              0.008        0.005      -0.012     0.006        -0.003
RAND3                             -0.012       -0.006      -0.002     0.019        -0.005
RAND4                             -0.004        0.009       0.012     0.004        -0.005
RAND5                              0.007        0.012      -0.004     0.004         0.001
RAND6                              0.005        0.006       0.001    -0.003         0.003
RAND7                             -0.021        0.012      -0.013     0.003         0.000
RAND8                             -0.006        0.016      -0.018     0.002        -0.003
RAND9                             -0.003       -0.023       0.002    -0.015        -0.004
RAND10                             0.002        0.002       0.002    -0.007         0.005
% of cross-section explained
by principal component            20.461       16.042      13.337    11.458        10.008
        Panel D: R squares from the regression of cyclical/defensive segment flows
                      on principal components * sign of slope estimate
                                     PC1        PC2          PC3         PC4       PC5
CYC1                               -0.047      0.011        -0.06       0.044       0
CYC2                                0.012      0.122      -0.257*       0.001    -0.048
CYC3                              -0.367*     -0.001       -0.007       0.372     0.125
CYC4                              0.545**      0.029        -0.19        0.02     0.029
CYC5                                -0.12      0.001       -0.005      -0.034   -0.558**
CYC6                               -0.073     -0.197       -0.074     -0.515**    0.108
CYC7                                0.217    -0.564**       0.046       0.038    -0.001
CYC8                               -0.013        0          0.144      -0.006    -0.157
CYC9                               -0.091      0.014      0.395**       0.002     0.013
CYC10                               0.125     0.37**        0.235      -0.068     0.067
% of cross-section explained
by principal component             17.899     15.715       13.469      12.438    10.252
        Panel E: mean R squares from the regression of random CYC segment flows
          on principal components * sign of slope estimate (1000 monte carlo trials)
                                     PC1          PC2          PC3     PC4           PC5
RAND1                              -0.012       -0.009        0.016  -0.005         0.010
RAND2                               0.008        0.005       -0.012   0.006        -0.003
RAND3                              -0.012       -0.006       -0.002   0.019        -0.005
RAND4                              -0.004        0.009        0.012   0.004        -0.005
RAND5                               0.007        0.012       -0.004   0.004         0.001
RAND6                               0.005        0.006        0.001  -0.003         0.003
RAND7                              -0.021        0.012       -0.013   0.003         0.000
RAND8                              -0.006        0.016       -0.018   0.002        -0.003
RAND9                              -0.003       -0.023        0.002  -0.015        -0.004
RAND10                              0.002        0.002        0.002  -0.007         0.005
% of cross-section explained
by principal component             20.461       16.042       13.337  11.458        10.008
Note: * Significant at the 10% level, ** Significant at the 5% level
                                             Table V
    OLS Firm Fixed-effects Panel Regression of Individual Stock Returns
Sample period is from January 1995 to December 2001 and consists of 291,455 firm-days. The
dependent variable is individual stock return. The independent variables are weekly lags of
stock returns and flows, size segment returns and flows, value/growth segment returns and flows
sector flow, sector segment returns and flows, conjugate return and flow, global conjugate return
and flow, as well as stock BM, ME, and ROE. Flows are net inflows normalized by market
equity. Returns are excess of the US market. All segment flows and returns are value-weighted.
Conjugate flow is the value-weighted flow of all the stocks not in the size segment,
value/growth segment or sector of the stock. Global conjugate flow is the value-weighted flow
of all countries excluding the United States. The conjugate return variables are defined
analogously. The t-statistics in parentheses are from standard errors corrected for cross-sectional
heteroskedasticity (Beck and Katz, 1995).
Independent variables             Model 1                            Model 2
(Coefficient * std dev)         lag =1 week         lag =1 week lag = 2-4 week lag = 5-12 week
 Units = basis pt of return
Size segment return                   4.1                 0.5            6.8              4.4
                                    (3.23)               (0.4)         (5.13)            (3.1)
Size segment flow                    5.25                2.95           -1.4             11.6
                                    (4.22)              (2.19)        (-0.89)           (7.24)
Value/growth segment return          3.95                2.35           13.2              4.8
                                    (2.96)              (1.75)         (9.24)           (3.06)
Value/growth segment flow            15.4                14.7          -10.6              0.5
                                   (11.83)             (10.82)        (-6.72)           (0.32)
Sector segment return                  2                  0.8           7.75            -6.95
                                    (1.59)              (0.63)         (6.13)          (-5.48)
Sector segment flow                  4.65                3.15           7.75            -1.25
                                    (3.77)              (2.46)         (5.46)          (-0.89)
Conjugate return                    -2.85                -5.5          12.95           -12.25
                                   (-2.34)             (-4.41)         (9.92)          (-9.56)
Conjugate flow                     -14.15              -14.55          -3.95             10.7
                                  (-11.54)            (-11.34)        (-2.75)           (7.37)
Global conjugate return             -14.8              -16.95         -15.15            -7.35
                                   (-12.6)            (-13.87)       (-12.32)          (-6.24)
Global conjugate flow               -4.85               -5.75           3.55             -6.3
                                   (-4.29)             (-4.53)         (2.47)          (-4.71)
Stock BM                             20.5                20.4
                                   (13.74)             (13.43)
Stock ME                             -5.7               -6.15
                                   (-5.93)             (-6.34)
Stock ROE                             1.4                 1.6
                                    (1.18)              (1.34)
R squared                           0.006                               0.012
