                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      HOW WELL CAN THE NEW OPEN ECONOMY
                   MACROECONOMICS EXPLAIN THE EXCHANGE RATE
                            AND CURRENT ACCOUNT?

                                             Paul R. Bergin

                                         Working Paper 10356
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w10356


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      March 2004




I thank partic ipants in the 2003 AEA meetings and the CEPR International Capital Markets conference in
Rome 2003 for helpful comments. This material is based upon work supported by the National Science
Foundation under Grant No. 0109006. Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommendations
expressed in this material are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Science Foundation. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2004 by Paul R. Bergin. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
How Well Can the New Open Economy Macroeconomics Explain the Exchange Rate and
Current Account?
Paul R. Bergin
NBER Working Paper No. 10356
March 2004, Revised March 2006
JEL No. F41

                                           ABSTRACT

This paper advances the new open economy macroeconomic (NOEM) literature in an empirical

direction, estimating and testing a two-country model. Fit to U.S and G-7 data, the model performs

moderately well for the exchange rate and current account. Results offer guidance for future

theoretical work. Parameter estimates lend support to some common assumptions in the theoretical

literature, such as local currency pricing and risk sharing. Estimates are found for key parameters

commonly calibrated in the theoretical literature, such as the elasticity of substitution between home

and foreign composite goods, and the response of a country risk premium to the net foreign asset

position. Results also indicate that deviations from interest rate parity are not closely related to

monetary policy shocks, as recently hypothesized. Further, results suggest that inserting explicit

interest rate parity shocks into a NOEM model may be more helpful in explaining movements in the

current account than the exchange rate.

Paul R. Bergin
Department of Economics
University of California at Davis
One Shields Avenue
Davis, CA 95616
and NBER
pbergin@ucdavis.edu
1 Introduction

    International macroeconomists increasingly have come to rely upon a class of models known

as New Open Economy Macroeconomics (NOEM), characterized by microeconomic foundations
in combination with nominal rigidities. While theoretical work in the NOEM literature has grown
rapidly, there has been comparatively little work done on empirical dimensions.1 This has not been
for a lack of interest, as it generally is agreed that if we are to trust these models for policy analysis,

we should have some degree of confidence that they accurately reßect basic features of the economy.
However, the macroeconomic models developed recently are sufficiently complex that estimating and
testing them econometrically calls for new tools. This paper advances the NOEM literature in an
empirical direction, estimating and testing a two country model by maximum likelihood methods.2

This estimation provides several results that could be useful in guiding future theoretical work.
    The empirical record for earlier classes of macroeconomic models is very mixed. This is especially

true with regard to the exchange rate and the current account, key variables for open economy
macroeconomics. The current account dynamics of many countries have proved quite difficult to
explain in terms of macroeconomic models using present value tests.3 And in a classic result, Meese
and Rogoff (1983) showed that a range of macroeconomic models were unable to beat a random walk
in forecasting the nominal exchange rate. Exchange rate movements have proved so problematic,
that some recent research has recommended abandoning the attempt of explaining them in terms of
macroeconomic models. (See Flood and Rose, 1999.)
    As a result, it is becoming a familiar practice in NOEM studies to introduce exchange rate

1
    In open economy work, see Bergin (2003), and Ghironi, Iscan and Rebucci (2003); in closed economy work, see Ireland
(1997 and 2001), Kim (2000), Lubik and Schorfheide (2002), and Smets and Wouters (2002).
2
    The current exercise goes beyond the initial empirical work in Bergin (2003) in important ways. In general terms, the
model here is better suited to current questions raised in the theoretical literature, which are discussed in detail later in the
paper. First, the model develops a means to allow multiple types of price stickiness to coexist, and so it can estimate the
share of each type. Second, it uses a more general form of household preferences, to see if the estimated parameters support
common assumptions in the theoretical literature regarding these preferences. Third, it does not assume that interest rate
parity holds. The exercise also is improved on technical grounds, by ensuring stationarity of the wealth distribution and by
allowing monetary policy authorities to respond to economic conditions. A final distinction is that instead of a small open
economy, a two-country environment is modeled here, which is better suited to analyzing issues of the U.S. economy.
3
    For example, see Sheffrin and Woo (1990), Ghosh (1995), and Bergin and Sheffrin (2000).

                                                               1
movements in a manner other than macroeconomic fundamentals. This often is done by adding an
extra term to the uncovered interest rate parity condition (UIP) in the macro model.4 Such a term

is motivated by well-documented empirical evidence of strong deviations from UIP,5 and it can be
interpreted in a number of different ways: Obstfeld and Rogoff (2002) derive such a term as a currency

risk premium which is associated with monetary policy actions; Mark and Wu (1998) and Jeanne and
Rose (2002) derive it as a reßection of noise traders and a distribution of exchange rate expectations.

    In response to the controversy regarding macro models as explanations for the exchange rate and
current account, this paper will pay special attention to these two variables. In particular, a maximum
likelihood approach is adapted for estimating and evaluating a two country NOEM model. The U.S.
is used as one of these countries, and an aggregate of the remaining G7 is used as the other country.
The model is fit to five data series: the exchange rate, current account, output growth, inßation, and
interest rate deviations between the two countries. Data is quarterly from 1973:1 to 2000:4.
    The model shares many features common in NOEM models, including monopolistically
competitive firms, sluggish price setting, capital accumulation subject to adjustment costs, and

monetary policy in the form of interest rate setting rules. The procedure will estimate various deep
parameters of interest in the theoretical literature. There will be five shocks to the system, including
technology, monetary policy, consumption tastes, and the share of home bias in preferences; the fifth
shock will be to the interest rate parity condition. The estimation procedure will also estimate the
degree of correlation between the four structural shocks and the deviations from UIP.
    Results indicate that the model as equipped above is able to explain the exchange rate and current
account to some degree, in that it can beat a random walk in one-step ahead in-sample predictions.
It is not able to beat a standard vector-autoregression in terms of predictions for the exchange rate
and current account, although the overall fit of the model is superior to the VAR when the latter is

appropriately penalized for its larger set of free parameters.
    Parameter estimates are able to help address some current controversies in the theoretical NOEM

4
    For examples, see McCallum and Nelson (1999 and 2000), Kollmann (2001 and 2002), and Jeanne and Rose (2002).
5
    For a summary, see Lewis 1995.

                                                         2
literature. One such controversy deals with the nature of price stickiness. While Betts and Devereux
(2000) have argued that stickiness in the local currency of the buyer improves the model’s ability to

explain certain stylized facts regarding the exchange rate, Obstfeld and Rogoff (2000) have argued the
opposite case. The model here permits both types of price stickiness to coexist, where the share is a

parameter that can be estimated. Estimates indicate that a very high degree of local currency pricing
is needed to successfully explain exchange rate movements in this data set. A second controversy

regards the nature of household preferences, in particular, whether there is a unitary elasticity of
substitution between home and foreign goods. This highly convenient assumption has become
common practice in the theoretical literature, although it stands in contrast to empirical studies based
on micro-level evidence. The estimates of this elasticity in the present paper offer empirical evidence
from macro-level data which supports this common practice in the theoretical literature. Further, it has
become common practice in NOEM models to impose stationarity on the net foreign asset position

by specifying a country premium on interest rates, where this premium has a positive relationship to
net foreign debt. The estimation exercise here offers an estimate for the parameter characterizing this

positive relationship, which could prove useful as a basis for calibrations in future theoretical work.
   Estimates also offer some new insights into the nature of deviations from uncovered interest rate
parity (UIP). Results indicate that UIP deviations are not very closely related to monetary policy
actions, contrary to an hypothesis in some theoretical NOEM work. However, these deviations are
very highly correlated with shocks to marginal utility (taste shocks). Surprisingly, it appears that UIP
shocks are even more important for explaining movements in the current account than the exchange
rate. This may indicate that current account movements are determined in large part by financial

shocks, which affect capital account ßows, and thereby force current account adjustments through the
balance of payments identity. This idea is quite different from the usual NOEM theory of the current
account, as simply reßecting optimal saving and investment decisions, and it suggests a useful avenue
for future research.




                                                    3
2 The Model

2.1      General Features

Consider a two-country world, where the countries will be denoted home and foreign, and the

population of home is fraction n of the world total. Each country has a representative household
and a representative firm, and each country has a distinct continuum of intermediate goods that it
produces. Foreign variables will be indicated by an ’∗ ’, and where necessary also by an F subscript.
All variables will be written in per capita terms. Steady state levels will be indicated by overbars.

2.2      Market Structure

Final goods in this economy (Yt ) are produced by aggregating over a continuum of intermediate home
goods indexed by i ∈ [0, 1] along with aggregating over a continuum of imported foreign goods

indexed by j ∈ [0, 1]. The aggregation technology for producing final goods is:
                                  · 1 µ−1                  µ−1
                                                               ¸ µ
                                                        1       µ−1
                                     µ    µ                 µ
                          Yt = θt YHt + (1 − θt ) YF t  µ           , where                             (1)
                                    µZ      1                      ¶1+ν
                                                            1
                          YHt =                 yHt (i)    1+ν   di                                     (2)
                                        0
                                    µZ      1                         ¶1+ν
                                                            1
                          YF t =                yF t (j)   1+ν   dj          .                          (3)
                                        0

Here YHt represents an aggregate of the home goods sold in the small open economy, and YF t is
an aggregate of the imported foreign goods, where lower case counterparts with indexes represent

outputs of the individual firms. Note that the share parameter, θt , is subject to stochastic shocks.
      Final goods producers behave competitively, maximizing profit each period:

                                 π1t = max Pt Yt − PHt YHt − PF t YF t ,                                (4)

where Pt is the overall price index of the final good, PHt is the price index of home goods, and PF t is

the price index of foreign goods, all denominated in the home currency. It is assumed that fraction η
of firms (indexed i = 0, ...η) exhibit local currency pricing, that is, they set the price of goods in the

currency of the buyer. It is assumed that the remaining fraction 1 − η of firms (indexed i = η, ...1)


                                                             4
exhibit producer currency pricing, that is, they set the price of goods in their own the currency.
      The price indexes may be defined:
                                   h                          i 1
                                        1−µ
                                            + (1 − θt ) PF1−µ
                                                               1−µ
                          Pt = θt PHt                      t       , where                                     (5)
                                   µZ η                  Z 1             ¶−ν
                                                − ν1                − ν1
                         PHt =           pHt (i) di +        pHt (i) di                                        (6)
                                         0                                η
                                    µZ       η                      Z         1                     ¶−ν
                                                          1                                 1
                         PF t =                  pF t (j)− ν dj +                 spF t (j)− ν dj         ,    (7)
                                         0                                η

and where lower case counterparts again represent the prices set by individual firms. The nominal
exchange rate (st ) is the home currency price of one unit of the world currency. And the price index

of home exports may be expressed:
                             µZ η                  Z                  1                         ¶−ν
                                            1                             1 ∗         1
                        ∗
                      PHt =       p∗Ht (j)− ν dj +                           pHt (j)− ν dj            .        (8)
                                     0                            η       st
      Given the aggregation functions above, demand will be allocated between home and foreign goods
according to:

                                     YHt = θt Yt (Pt /PHt )µ                                                   (9)

                                     YF t = (1 − θt ) Yt (Pt /PF t )µ ,                                       (10)

with demands for individual goods:

                       yHt (i) = YHt (pHt (i) /PHt )−(1+ν)/ν                                                  (11)

                       yF t (j) = YF t (pF t (j) /PF t )−(1+ν)/ν for j = 0, ..., η                            (12)

                       yF t (j) = YF t (st pF t (j) /PF t )−(1+ν)/ν for j = η, ..., 1.                        (13)

Analogous conditions apply to the foreign country.

2.3      Firm Behavior

The firms rent capital (Kt ) at the real rental rate rt , and hire labor (Lt ) at the nominal wage rate Wt . It
is assumed that it is costly to reset prices because of quadratic menu costs. The problem for the local




                                                              5
currency pricing (i = 0, ...η) firms may be summarized:
                                          ∞
                                          X
                                  max E0 ρt,t+n πHt (i)                                                         (14)
                                               t=0
                                                                       µ       ¶
                                                                           1−n
           where πHt (i) = pHt (i) yHt (i) + st p∗Ht (i)                          ∗
                                                                                 yHt (i) − Pt rt Kt−1 (i)
                                                                            n
                                                                        ∗
                                     −Wt Lt (i) − Pt ACHt (i) − st Pt ACHt (i)                                  (15)

                                    ψ P (pHt (i) − pHt−1 (i))2
                    s.t. ACHt (i) =                              yHt (i)                                        (16)
                                     2       Pt pHt−1 (i)
                                        ¡ ∗          ∗
                                                               ¢2 µ      ¶
                           ∗        ψ P  pHt (i) − p Ht−1  (i)      1−n     ∗
                         ACHt (i) =                                        yHt (i)                              (17)
                                     2       Pt p∗Ht−1 (i)            n
                                 z(i)t = At Kt−1 (i)α Lt (i)1−α                                                 (18)
                                                   µ       ¶
                                                     1−n      ∗
                                 z(i)t = yHt (i) +           yHt (i) ,                                          (19)
                                                       n
                                                     ∗ (i) above. Here A represents technology
and subject to the demand functions for yHt (i) and yHt                 t

common to all production firms in the country, and it is subject to shocks. Lastly, ρt,t+n is the

pricing kernel used to value random date t + n payoffs. Since firms are assumed to be owned by the
representative household, it is assumed that firms value future payoffs according to the household’s
intertemporal marginal rate of substitution in consumption, so ρt,t+n =β n UC,t+n
                                                                            0       0 , where U 0
                                                                                  /UC,t        C,t+n

is the household’s marginal utility of consumption in period t + n. The problem for the producer
currency pricing firms (i = η...1) is identical, except that p∗Ht (i) is in units of home currency and
equation (15) is replaced by:
                                                               µ       ¶
                                                                   1−n
               π Ht (i) = pHt (i) yHt (i)       + p∗Ht (i)                ∗
                                                                         yHt (i) − Pt rt−1 Kt−1 (i)
                                                                    n
                                                                 ∗
                                 −Wt Lt (i) − Pt ACHt (i) − Pt ACHt (i) .

   This problem implies an optimal trade-off between capital and labor inputs that depend on the
relative cost of each:
                                                               α
                                        Pt rt Kt−1 (i) =            Wt Lt (i) .                                 (20)
                                                            1−α
The optimal price setting rule for domestic sales of all home firms (i = 0, ..., 1) is:
        ³                                                                        ´³         ´³        ´ 1+2ν
   1+ν                 Pt rt               ψ P (pHt (i)−pHt−1 (i))2      pHt (i)     YHt       pHt (i) −( ν )
    ν                                   +                             −
                                       ´ 2                                PHt´                  PHt
                                  (1−α)
            h αAt (Lt (i)/K
          PHt           ³ t−1 (i))                 iPHt pHt−1³(i)                   yHt (i)                     (21)
     ψP       ρt,t+i+1 p2Ht+1 (i)        yHt+1 (i)               pHt (i)
   + 2 Et ρ                p2 (i) − 1     yHt (i)    − ψP pHt−1 (i) − 1 + 1 = 0.
                 t,t+i      Ht



                                                           6
The optimal price setting rule for exports for local currency pricing firms (i = 0, ..., η) is:
         µ                                                               2
                                                                                         ¶³         ´ ³ ∗ ´−( 1+2ν )
                                                 ψP (pHt (i)−pHt−1 (i))
                                                       ∗         ∗
    1+ν                   Pt rt                                                 p∗Ht (i)       ∗
                                                                                             YHt       pHt (i)  ν
     ν         ∗
           st PHt αAt (Lt (i)/Kt−1 (i))(1−α)
                                              + 2        PHt∗
                                                              p∗Ht−1 (i)   − P∗              ∗
                                                                                            yHt (i)      ∗
                                                                                                        PHt
             h          ³ ∗2              ´        ∗
                                                            i          ³ ∗         Ht
                                                                                         ´
               ρ           p      (i)        st+1 yHt+1 (i)
    + ψ2P Et ρt,t+i+1 Ht+1   p∗2 (i)  − 1     st y∗ (i)       −  ψ P p∗
                                                                         pHt (i)
                                                                              (i)  −   1   + 1 = 0,
                  t,t+i      Ht                    Ht                   Ht−1
                                                                                                                       (22)
and the optimal price for exports by producer currency pricing firms (i = η, ..., 1) is:
         µ                                                              2
                                                                                     ¶³         ´ ³ ∗ ´−( 1+2ν )
                                                 ψP (pHt (i)−pHt−1 (i))
                                                         ∗    ∗
     1+ν                Pt rt−1                                             p∗Ht (i)       ∗
                                                                                         YHt       pHt (i)  ν
      ν        ∗
           st PHt αAt (Lt (i)/Kt−1 (i))(1−α)
                                              + 2 st P ∗ p∗ (i) − st P ∗                 ∗
                                                                                        yHt (i)        ∗
                                                                                                   st PHt
             h          ³ ∗2              ´ ∗          i      ³ ∗
                                                           Ht Ht−1
                                                                               ´Ht

       ψ       ρ           p      (i)        yHt+1 (i)           pHt (i)
    + 2P Et ρt,t+i+1 Ht+1    p∗2 (i)  − 1     y∗ (i)     − ψ P p∗     (i) − 1     + 1 = 0.
                  t,t+i      Ht               Ht                 Ht−1
                                                                                                                       (23)

2.4      Household behavior

The household derives utility from consumption (Ct ), and supplying labor (Lt ) lowers utility. For
simplicity, real money balances (Mt /Pt ) are also introduced in the utility function, where Pt is the
overall price level. The household discounts future utility at the rate of time preference β. Preferences

are additively separable in these three arguments, and preferences for consumption are subject to
preference shocks (τ t ).

      Households derive income by selling their labor at the nominal wage rate (Wt ), renting capital to
firms at the real rental rate (rt ), receiving real profits from the two types of firms (π1t and π2t ), and

from government transfers (Tt ). In addition to money, households can hold two types of noncontingent
bonds, one denominated in home currency (Bt ) paying return it , and the other denominated in foreign

currency(−Bt∗ ) paying return i∗t . Investment (It ) in new capital (Kt ) involves a quadratic adjustment
cost and a constant rate of depreciation (δ).

      The optimization problem faced by the household may be expressed:
                                      X∞
                                                   Mt
                              max E0 β t U(Ct ,       , Lt )                                                           (24)
                                      t=0
                                                   Pt
                                              ¡              ¢
                              Bt − Bt−1 st Bt∗ − Bt−1   ∗
               s.t. CAt =                 −                                                                            (25)
                                  Pt               Pt
                              Wt                 1
             where CAt ≡         Lt + rt Kt−1 + ∫ πHt (i)di + Tt + it−1 Bt−1 − st i∗t−1 Bt−1
                                                                                         ∗
                                                                                                                       (26)
                              Pt                 0




                                                           7
                                                          µ     ¶
                                                       Mt Mt−1
                              −Ct − It − ACIt −           −                                        (27)
                                                       Pt    Pt
                                                          µ ¶1−σ2
                                τt                     1    Mt        σ3        1+σ 3
            U(Ct , Lt ) =            (Ct )1−σ1    +               −        (Lt ) σ3                (28)
                              1 − σ1                1 − σ2 Pt       1 + σ3
                    It = Kt − (1 − δ t ) Kt−1                                                      (29)
                                                  2
                              ψ I (Kt − Kt−1 )
                 ACIt =                                                                            (30)
                              2       Kt−1
             where σ i > 0 for i = 1...3, ψI ≥ 0.

   The household problem implies the following optimality conditions. First, households will smooth
consumption across time periods according to:
                                                        ·           µ      ¶¸
                                                                       Pt
                            τ t Ct−σ1                           −σ1
                                        = β (1 + it ) Et τ t+1 Ct+1           .                    (31)
                                                                      Pt+1
Households prefer expected marginal utilities to be constant across time periods, unless a rate of
return on saving exceeding their time preference induces them to lower consumption today relative to
the future. Second, household money demand will be:
                                  µ ¶−σ2
                                    Mt                    it
                                            = τ t Ct−σ1        .
                                     Pt                 1 + it
Third, optimal portfolio choices imply the interest rate parity (UIP) condition:
                       · 0                         ¸       · 0                   ¸
                         UCt+1 st+1 Pt           ∗            UCt+1 Pt
                    Et      0             (1 + it ) = Et         0       (1 + i)t .                (32)
                          UCt    st Pt+1                       UCt  Pt+1
   Since the model equations will be used only as linear approximations, the UIP condition would

appear in the following simplified form:
                                         ³          ´
                                  (1 − β) eit − ei∗t = Et (e
                                                           st+1 − set ) .                          (33)

where tildes here indicate percent deviations from steady state. This approximation omits the

nonlinear terms involving marginal utilities and prices, which represent risk premium terms and
Jensen’s inequality. It is well known that this form of the UIP condition is strongly rejected by the

data (Lewis 1995), so we will generalize this expression by adding to the right hand side of (33) above
a ”risk premium term” as follows:
                                                      µ                 ¶
                                                          Bt − st Bt∗
                                    RPt = −ΨB                               + ξt.                  (34)
                                                             Pt Yt


                                                          8
One component of this term is a mean-zero disturbance, ξ t , aimed at capturing time-varying deviations
from UIP. Such a term is a common device in macro models (see McCallum and Nelson (1999 and

2000), Kollmann (2001 and 2002), and Jeanne and Rose (2002).) There are a number of ways to
interpret this term. McCallum and Nelson (1999 and 2000) interpret it as a representation of the

time-varying risk premium omitted by linearization. Obstfeld and Rogoff (2002) show theoretically
how this risk premium could vary over time with changes in the properties of monetary policy actions.

Mark and Wu (1998) and Jeanne and Rose (2002) derive it as a reßection of noise traders and a
distribution of exchange rate expectations. A second component of the RPt term will be a function of

the debt of a country. This can be motivated as a risk premium as well, where lenders demand a higher
rate of return on a country with a large debt to compensate for perceived default risk. The primary
motivation for including this term here is as a device to remove an element of nonstationarity in the
model, as has been demonstrated in Schmitt-Grohe and Uribe (2003). Given the incomplete asset
markets, shocks can lead to permanent wealth reallocations that would induce nonstationarity and
prevent computation of the second moments used in estimation. Introducing the risk premium term as
a function of debts forces wealth allocations in the long run to return to their initial distribution.6
    As a fourth optimality condition, households supply labor to the point that the marginal disutility
of labor equals its marginal product:7
                                                   1
                                                          Wt 1−σ1 −σ1
                                                Ltσ3 =      τ    Ct .                                                    (35)
                                                          Pt t
Finally, capital accumulation is set to equate the costs and expected benefits:
 µ                       ¶         "Ã                 !µ                      µ 2            #
                                        τ 1−σ 1
                                                C −σ1
                                                                                K    − K 2 ¶¶
        ψI (Kt − Kt−1 )                   t+1    t+1                      Ψ I    t+1    t
   1+                      = βEt                         rt+1 + (1 − δ) +                      . (36)
              Kt−1                      τ 1−σ
                                          t
                                              1
                                                Ct
                                                  −σ1                      2       K 2
                                                                                     t
The cost, on the left side, is the gross return if the funds instead had been used to purchase bonds;

and the benefits on the right include the return from rental of the capital plus the resale value after
depreciation, and the fact that a larger capital stock lowers the expected adjustment cost of further

6
    A similar UIP condition is implied by the foreign agent optimization, and these two conditions will be identical when
linearized. As a result, a bond allocation rule could be created to solve for B and B ∗ separately. Instead, we here solve for
B − B ∗ , thereby eliminating the need for the bond allocation rule.
7
    Wage rigidities are not included in this model because past empirical work in Bergin (2003) showed that they tend to be
extraneous in a model of this type when fit to these data series.

                                                              9
accumulation in the subsequent period.
   Write the resource constraint (define final goods demand):
                                                 Z 1               Z      1
                                                                                ∗
                 Yt = Ct + It + Gt + ACIt +          ACHt (i) di +            ACHt (i) di.        (37)
                                                   0                  0

The goods market clearing condition is:
                                                    ∗
                                     nYHt + (1 − n)YHt = nZt .                                    (38)

Define the trade balance in per capita terms (X):
                                      µ       ¶     ∗
                                         1 − n st PHt      PF t
                                Xt =                  Y∗ −      YF t .                            (39)
                                           n      Pt Ht    Pt
   To keep the number of state variables to a minimum, we abstract from government issue of debt
here. Given that the model has no features to break Ricardian equivalence, this simplification has no
impact on the results. The simple government budget constraint is:
                                                1
                                     Tt − G =      (Mt − Mt−1 ) .                                 (40)
                                                Pt
   Combine the budget constraints of the household, firm, and government:
                                  µ       ¶
                               ∗    1−n       ∗
                PHt YHt + st PHt            YHt + it−1 Bt−1 + st i∗t−1 Bt−1
                                                                        ∗
                                       n
                                                 ∗
                                                                          ¡          ¢
            = Pt (Ct + It + Gt + ACHt + ACHt        ) + (Bt − Bt−1 ) − st Bt∗ − Bt−1
                                                                                 ∗
                                                                                       .

Use the resource constraint above to write this using Yt , and then rewrite this in terms of home and

imported goods:
                         µ  ¶
                       1−n        ∗    ∗
          PHt YHt +           st PHt YHt   − (PHt YHt + PF t YF t ) + it−1 Bt−1 − st i∗t−1 Bt−1
                                                                                            ∗
                        n
                           ¡             ¢
        = (Bt − Bt−1 ) − st Bt∗ − Bt−1
                                     ∗
                                           .

Use the definition of the trade balance to write the balance of payments condition:
                                                                       ¡           ¢
                  Pt Xt + it−1 Bt−1 − st i∗t−1 Bt−1
                                                ∗
                                                    = (Bt − Bt−1 ) − st Bt∗ − Bt−1
                                                                               ∗
                                                                                     .            (41)

   The monetary policy will be specified in terms of an interest rate targeting rule:
                                        µ      ¶       µ ¶           ³s ´
                                     −1    Pt             Yt             t
                     it = i + (βa1 )             + a2          + a3        + φt ,                 (42)
                                          Pt−1            Y             s




                                                   10
where φt is a monetary policy shock.8
      The shocks may be specified:
                                                             ¡      ¢
                              ¡φt                ¢     = ρφ ¡φt−1 + εφt           ¢
                              ¡ log A t − log A¢       = ρA¡ log At−1 − log A    ¢ + εAt
                                log θt − log θ         = ρθ log θ t−1 − log θ + εθt                                   (43)
                              log τ t                  = ρτ ¡(log τ¢t−1 ) + ετ t
                              ξt                       = ρξ ξ t−1 + εξt t
                                         [εφt , εAt , εθt , ετ t , εξt ]0 ˜N (0, Σ1 ) .

      The equilibrium conditions all will be used in a form linearized around a deterministic steady state.
Further, the variables will be written as country differences, home minus the foreign counterpart. This
allows the dimensions of the data set and parameter space to be reduced, which is necessary to make
the sizeable empirical exercise tractable.9 The appendix lists all equilibrium conditions of the model

transformed in this way.


3 Empirical Methods

3.1      Data

Data for the U.S. will be used for the home country, and an aggregate of the remaining G7 will be
used for the foreign country. The five series used will be the exchange rate and the current account,
which are the primary variables of interest here, as well as the interest rate, output, and the price level.
The interest rate was included to help identify monetary policy shocks, and output was included to
help identify the technology shocks specified in the model. The price level is important for identifying
the role of price stickiness in the model, which is an issue of interest in the literature. In addition,
these three variables have been a common choice in early tests of how well macroeconomic models

8
     More complex policy rules proved problematic for convergence of the estimation algorithm.
9
     Note that this transformation will require the assumption that many of the deep behavioral parameters are the same for
both countries in the model. But this simplification is common in the empirical macroeconomic literature (see Meese and
Rogoff (1983)). Given that the foreign country here will represent an aggregate of the G-7 countries less the U.S., as is
common practice, this means that we already are assuming that the parameters of six of the seven countries in the data set
are the same. Note that this assumption does not need to be applied to the parameter representing monetary policy responses
to the bilateral exchange rate; in this case the transformation implies that the parameter estimated instead is just the sum
of home and foreign parameters. As a result, the model does allow for asymmetric responses by the two countries to the
bilateral exchange rate.

                                                              11
can explain exchange rates, as in Meese and Rogoff (1983).
      All data are seasonally adjusted quarterly series at annual rates for the period 1973:1 to 2000:4,

obtained from International Financial Statistics. The exchange rate for each country is measured
as the bilateral rate with the U.S. dollar. The current account is measured as GNP less expenditure

on consumption, investment, and government purchases. Output is measured as national GDP, the
domestic price level as the CPI, and the interest rate as a treasury bill rate or something similar.10

Foreign aggregate variables are computed as a geometric weighted average, where time-varying
weights are based on each country’s share of total real GDP. Series other than the current account are

logged. Because the steady state value of the current account in the theoretical model is necessarily
zero, this variable cannot be expressed in the model in a form that represents deviations from steady
state in log form. Instead the current account is scaled by taking it as a ratio to the mean level of
output.
      As a preliminary step, the data series are tested for unit roots. Table 1 shows the results. The
seven series appear to be nonstationary in levels but stationary in first differences. This motivates the
decision to fit the model to data in first differences. This is a common practice in the structural VAR
studies to which we wish to compare our empirical results.11 The data will also be demeaned and
transformed into country differences, home minus the foreign counterpart. The last transformation of

course does not apply to the exchange rate or current account, but it means that the last three variables
in the data set will be movements in interest rate differentials, differences in output growth rates, and
differences in inßation rates.



3.2      Econometric Methods

         The econometric methodology fits the linear approximation to the structural model, adapting a
maximum likelihood algorithm developed in Leeper and Sims (1994) and extended in Kim (2000).

10
      The treasury bill rate was used for the U.S., U.K., Canada, and France; the money market rate was used for Italy; and the
 call money rate was used for Germany and Japan.
11
      See Ahmed (1993).

                                                              12
   The linearized model equations, as derived in the section above and transformed and listed in the
appendix, can be expressed in autoregressive form as

                                           yt = Ayt−1 + εt                                          (44)

                                             εt ˜N (0, Σ)
where y is the18-element column vector of variables listed in the appendix. A is a 18x18 matrix,

where each cell is a non-linear function of the structural parameters; ε is a column vector, containing
the five structural disturbances and where the remaining elements are zeros; and Σ is the covariance

matrix of these disturbances.
   The model system may be rewritten in terms of first differences as follows:

                                       yt∗ = Ayt−1
                                               ∗
                                                   + εt − εt−1                                      (45)



                                       where yt∗ = yt − yt−1 .                                      (46)
This stochastic model implies a log likelihood function:

                                   L (Π) = −.5 ln |Ω| − .5x0 Ω−1 x                                  (47)

where x is the vector of the five variables on which we have data, over all periods stacked into a
single vector, and Ω is the theoretical variance-covariance matrix of the variables in x. The appendix
discusses the details of how Ω is computed as a function of the matrices A and Σ. But note that
each cell in A is a nonlinear function of the structural parameters from the theoretical model. An

algorithm is used to search for values of these structural parameters and for the elements of the
symmetric positive-definite covariance matrix Σ, which will maximize the likelihood function. Note
that taking first differences should not introduce the classic problem of ”overdifferencing” here. The
fact that differencing may introduce a moving average term is taken into consideration in equation
(45) and hence the computation of Ω and the likelihood function, so a misspecified model is not being
estimated.
   A few parameters will not be estimated here, but instead are pinned down ahead of time. This is


                                                  13
because the data set omits the relevant series for these parameters, like capital and labor, or because
the data set in first differences is not very relevant for parameters pertaining to steady states. As a

result, these parameters are pinned down at values common in the Real Business Cycle literature. In
particular, the capital share in production (α) is set at 0.40, the depreciation rate (δ) is set at 0.10, the

labor supply elasticity ( σ13 ) is calibrated at unity, the steady state share of home intermediate goods in
the home final goods aggregate (θ) is set at 0.80, and the discount factor (β) is set at 0.96.

     Some regions of the parameter space do not imply a well defined equilibrium within the
model. These regions can be precluded by imposing boundaries on the parameters by functional
transformations. For example the variances of shocks and the intertemporal elasticity are restricted to
be positive. The monetary policy reaction to inßation is bounded below to rule out indeterminacy.
Autoregressive coefficients on shock processes are also restricted to be greater than zero and less than
unity. Finally, the covariances between shocks must be restricted so that the implied correlations lie
between -1 and 1.


4 Results

     Table 2 shows the basic results from estimating the model. Regarding fit, the table reports the
likelihood value as 1797.6, compared to 1823.8 for a standard unidentified vector autoregression
(VAR) of the five variables in the data set. A likelihood ratio test cannot be used to compare the two,
since the structural model is not nested in the VAR.12 However, a comparison can be made in terms
of the Schwarz criterion, which penalizes the VAR for the fact it has 40 free parameters compared to

the 24 of the structural model. By this comparison, the structural model performs better. The fit of the
model can also be evaluated in terms of how well it can forecast the variables one period ahead. The
table reports root mean squared errors, indicating that the structural model has larger forecast error for
all five variables. It is interesting to note that the model comes closest for the exchange rate and the

current account.

12
    Given the unobserved variables in the structural model, it cannot be written as a first-order VAR in just the five observed
variables. See Bergin (2003) for details.

                                                              14
     Perhaps a more fair comparison, given the VAR’s extra parameters is a random walk model. One
may recall the classic result of Meese and Rogoff (1983) that no macro model was able to beat a

random walk in forecasting the exchange rate out of sample. Table 2 shows that the structural model
here does beat a random walk in in-sample predictions for the exchange rate, as well as for the current

account and the interest rate. Note that the predictions generated by this methodology are in sample,
and hence are not directly comparable to those of Meese-Rogoff.13

     The model also does quite well in terms of fitting unconditional moments, which is the typical
measure of fit used in real business cycle exercises. This is a bit unfair here, given that the maximum

likelihood estimation is trying to fit a set of hundreds of moments, not just a handful of arbitrary
moments that researchers have in the past chosen to focus upon. Nevertheless, for the data as
transformed here (in logged differences and demeaned), the variance of the exchange rate is 0.00290
in the data and 0.00293 in the model, the variance of the current account is 1.44x10−5 in the data and

1.51x10−5 in the model, and the covariance between the exchange rate and the current account is
6.52x10−6 in the data and 6.19x10−6 in the model.

     The parameter estimates generally are reasonable and statistically significant. The elasticity of
intertemporal substitution ( σ11 ) is near unity. The interest elasticity of money demand implies an
income elasticity of money demand ( σσ12 ) which is a bit high, around 4. The investment adjustment

cost (ΨI ) is high but not implausible, implying that if investment rises 1% above steady state, about
1.1% of this investment goes toward paying the adjustment cost. The adjustment cost on prices (ΨP )

is quite reasonable, indicating that after a money supply shock the half-life of price-level adjustments
is about five quarters.
     Some of the parameters estimated here deal directly with points of controversy in the theoretical
New Open Economy Macro literature. One such controversy regards the functional form of consumer

preferences. A common practice in the literature has been to assume Cobb-Douglas preferences
between home and foreign goods, implying a unitary elasticity of substitution. This form has
13
    Conducting out of sample tests here is problematic. To avoid the Lucas Critique, the model is specified in terms of
”deep” parameters, which as a matter of principle should not be changed period by period. Further, estimation is sufficiently
time-consuming that re-estimation for every period may not be practical.

                                                             15
convenient risk-sharing properties in many NOEM models, which facilitate analytical solution. This
assumption stands in contrast to studies based on micro-level evidence, which have tended to suggest

higher elasticities around 5 (See Harrigan, 1993.) However, there has been a recent defense of a unit
elasticity for macro-level data. One might imagine that there is less substitutability between home

goods as an aggregate and foreign goods as an aggregate, which is the concept relevant for our macro
modeling, than between home and foreign versions of an individual variety of good. (See Pesenti,

2002.) The estimate of the elasticity of substitution in the present model supports this hypothesis.
Table 2 reports a level of µ quite close to unity; while it is significantly different from zero statistically,
it is not significantly different from unity. This lends empirical support to the common practice which
the theoretical literature has found so convenient.
     Another controversy regards the choice of currency in which prices are sticky. Betts and Devereux
(2000) argue that assuming prices are sticky in the currency of the buyer (local currency pricing)

improves a model’s ability to explain exchange rate behavior. On the other hand, Obstfeld and Rogoff
(2000) argue in favor of prices sticky in the currency of the seller (producer currency pricing). As

explained above, this model is set up to allow both types of price-setters to coexist, and the share of
local currency pricing firms , η, is a parameter that can be estimated empirically. Table 2 shows that
the estimate of this share presses up against the upper bound of unity.14 This indicates strong support

for the use of local currency pricing in NOEM models, in as much as this provides a useful way of
explaining the macroeconomic times series examined here.
     Table 2 also provides an estimate for ψ B , which characterizes the sensitivity of a country interest
rate premium to changes in net foreign assets. The estimated value of 0.00384 implies that when a

G7 country runs a net foreign debt that is 20% of GDP (a relevant value for the U.S.), its domestic
interest rate would rise by 7.68 basis points. This is very close to the calibrated value used in Nason

and Rogers (2003) based on empirical work for Canada, but somewhat lower than the value estimated

14
    The standard error appears very small here, because the estimation algorithm estimates a functional transformation of
this parameter, with a range over (-∞, ∞) rather than the range of (0,1) of the original parameter. A large section of the
range over which the algorithm searches is mapped into a narrow range of the reported parameter near its upper bound of
unity. The delta method thus reports small standard errors in terms of the original parameter value.

                                                            16
from panel and cross-sectional regressions in Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2002)15 . It is hoped that this
estimate might prove useful as a basis for calibrations in future theoretical work.

     Finally, the table also lists parameters in the monetary policy reaction function. Since the estimate
of a1 is close to its boundary of unity, the monetary response to inßation is close to its lower bound of

( βa1 1 ), imposed to ensure a unique equilibrium. This suggests that the model might fit the data better
if we permitted it to explore regions of the parameter space that involved indeterminacy, as has been

suggested by Lubik and Schorfheide (2002). The response to output (a2 ) is near zero, indicating
little evidence of active output stabilization. The statistically significant estimate of a3 indicates some

systematic response to stabilize exchange rates by some countries.16
     Table 2 is informative also about the nature of structural shocks. Of particular interest are the
correlations at the bottom of the table. Obstfeld and Rogoff (2002) have posited a NOEM model in
which monetary policy accounts for deviations from interest rate parity. But the estimated model
here indicates that the deviations from interest rate parity we observe in the data have fairly little
to do with any monetary policy innovation or with technology shocks. However, there is a high

degree of negative correlation with the taste shocks defined in this model (correlation coefficient of
-0.86). This result is interesting, as the taste shock (τ ) directly affects marginal utility, which is an
important element in the risk premium term dropped from the UIP condition due to linearization,

as discussed above. Additional interpretation of this relationship between taste shocks and interests
rate parity deviations will follow below. Estimates of shock variances do not lend themselves to
direct interpretation and are not shown in the table, but these will be interpreted in the form of
variance decompositions to follow shortly. The shock autocorrelations indicate a fairly high degree of

persistence in all the shocks. Fortunately, none presses up against the boundary of unity, required to
maintain stationarity of the theoretical system.
     Impulse responses offer a greater sense of what these parameters imply for the dynamics of the
economy. Figure 1 shows the impulse responses of the five data variables to a one-standard deviation
15
    Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2001) estimate a value of 0.0107 from cross-sectional regressions and a value of 0.0254 from
 panels. Nason and Rogers (2003) use a value of 0.0035.
16
    Recall that in the transformed model a3 is the sum of home and foreign responses to the bilateral exchange rate.

                                                            17
shock to the monetary policy rule. As the interest rate rises, this induces an immediate fall in output
and a gradual fall in the price level.17 The monetary contraction induces a significant exchange rate

appreciation, in which the exchange rate overshoots. It also involves a small degree of worsening in
the current account.
     Figure 2 illustrates an interest rate parity shock in the context of this model. Such a shock permits
the home interest rate to rise relative to the foreign rate, even though the value of the domestic
currency is appreciating over time, as is often observed empirically. The shock may be understood
as a type of portfolio shift away from home assets, such that an excess return is required to make

households willing to hold home bonds in equilibrium. While this shock is often used as a shorthand
way of introducing exchange rate ßuctuations in a NOEM model, it is interesting to note that this

shock implies movements in a variety of variables, not just the exchange rate. In particular, the interest
rate moves substantially here, and there is also a sizeable response in the current account.
     Given the apparent relationship between the interest parity shock and the taste shock, figure 3 is
included to show the impulse response to the latter. It implies a case where the current account moves
in very much the same way as in figure 2 for an interest parity shock, but the exchange rate moves in
the opposite direction. If these two shocks indeed are highly negatively correlated, the combination of
the two would imply a large change in the exchange rate, while any effect on the current account is
substantially canceled out. This observation will be useful in analysis below.
     A natural question is how important are the interest parity shocks to these results? In particular,
is the model able to explain the exchange rate simply because it can invoke the UIP shock to drive
the exchange rate as needed to match the data? To address this question one can consider variance

decompositions, which show what fraction of the forecast error variance for each variable is explained
by each of the shocks at various time horizons. This analysis is complicated somewhat by the fact

that UIP deviations are allowed to be correlated here with the four structural shocks. Recall that this
choice was made because UIP deviations do not strictly arise from the structural model, and because

17
     The hump-shaped response of the interest rate comes from the fact that the exchange rate begins to depreciate after the
initial period of overshooting, and the policy rule responds to this by increasing the interest rate a bit further.

                                                             18
we wished to gather information that might help us interpret these UIP deviations and offer guidance
to future modelers. As a result, to disentangle the various contributions of these shocks, one must

take steps to orthogonalize them. It might seem that a natural approach would be to re-estimate
the model, requiring the shocks to be orthogonal. However, this estimation produced a likelihood

value of only 1755.737. This version of the model may be regarded as nested in the benchmark case
shown in Table 2, with the addition of four restrictions requiring the correlations between shocks to

be zero. As a nested comparison, a likelihood ratio test can be used, where twice the difference of the
likelihood values follows a chi-squared distribution with 4 degrees of freedom. The p-value of such
a comparison is zero, indicating we should reject the restrictions. Because the model that assumes
orthogonal shocks is strongly rejected by the data, I will continue to utilize the model that permits
them to be correlated.
     As a result, we must take a stand on how to disentangle the joint contribution of the UIP and other

shocks. Table 3 shows variance decompositions which orthogonalize the UIP shock by attributing
any joint contribution shared between the UIP and another shock to that other shock.18 The table

shows that the independent part of UIP shocks explains only about 1% of exchange rate movements
in this model. This suggests that the UIP shock is not being used here to drive the exchange rate
and artificially boost the model fit. Instead a bit more than half of the exchange rate movements
appear to be driven by monetary policy shocks. This result is comparable to that found in past studies.
Eichenbaum and Evans (1995) found variance decompositions between 18% and 43% using standard
VAR techniques. Rogers (1999) found between 19% and 60%. Faust and Rogers (2000) found
estimates ranging from the single digits to around 50% using a structural VAR that considered a wide

range of identification assumptions. Ahmed et al (1993) found almost no role for monetary shocks in
a structural VAR using long-run identification restrictions. In our estimation, taste shocks also have
some importance, explaining about 25% of exchange rate movements.
18
    Mechanically this is accomplished by a Cholesky decomposition, where the UIP shock is ordered last. Note that the
ordering of the other four shocks is inconsequential, since these structural shocks are orthogonal to each other already. Note
also that this orthogonalization differs from the standard VAR practice, as we are ordering shocks not variables. There is no
need to use the ordering to achieve identification of shocks, since the structure of the model has already provided sufficient
restrictions for identification.

                                                             19
     In contrast for the current account, Table 3 shows that a surprisingly large role is played by the UIP
shock. Nearly two-thirds of current account movements are attributable to these shocks, which raises

an interesting possibility. These UIP shocks represent portfolio shifts in the asset market between
countries, which naturally affect a country’s capital account. These shocks to the capital account then

should affect the current account through the balance of payments identity. The model seems to be
suggesting that attempts in the New Open Economy literature to explain current account movements

in terms of optimal intertemporal saving decisions may be misplaced. Rather, the current account
could be driven substantially by financial shocks affecting the capital account side of the balance of
payments, which then forces adjustment in saving and investment on the current account side. This
conjecture should be pursued in the future in the NOEM literature.
     For completeness, Table 4 shows variance decompositions with the opposite method of
orthogonalization, where comovements in the UIP shock with other shocks is awarded instead to the

UIP shock. By this accounting, the role of UIP shocks in driving exchange rates goes up somewhat,
but it still explains less than a quarter of exchange rate movements at its maximum. Monetary policy

shocks still are the main explanation and account for about half of the forecast error variance. Given
that it is the coincidence of UIP deviations with other shocks that affects the variance decomposition,
one may conclude that UIP shocks have their greatest usefulness in explaining exchange rate
movements not as an independent factor, but as a way of modifying the effect of other shocks. For
example, recall from above that taste and UIP shocks are highly negatively correlated. Recall also
from the discussion of impulse responses that the combination of a UIP and a negative taste shock
implies a large movement in the exchange rate with a net effect on the current account that is near

zero. The estimated model thus suggests a channel for explaining the ”relative price puzzle” and the
”exchange rate disconnect puzzle” noted in several papers (see Flood and Rose (1999), Duarte and
Stockman (2001), and Devereux and Engel (2002)). That is, the structural model has found one way
to account for the fact that volatility of the exchange rate tends to be high relative to quantity variables
like the current account, where large movements in the former have little impact on the latter.19 Future
19
     This conclusion is supported by results in Table 4 regarding variance decompositions of the current account. The

                                                            20
theoretical work may wish to pursue this suggestion, by looking for sources of interest rate parity
deviations that involve shifts in marginal utilities.


5 Conclusions

   This paper has advanced the New Open Economy Macroeconomic literature in an empirical
direction, fitting a two-country model by maximum-likelihood to data from the U.S. and an aggregate

of the remaining G7. The model fits reasonably well, in that it is able to beat a random walk model
for in-sample predictions of the exchange rate and current account, variables of key interest to
open economy macroeconomists. The estimated model facilitates empirical answers to a number
of interesting questions raised recently in the theoretical literature. For example, it gives empirical
support to the assumption of local currency pricing by firms, as well as to the common simplifying
assumption of a unitary elasticity of substitution between home and foreign goods. It also provides an
estimate for how a country interest rate premium responds to changes in net foreign debt positions, an
estimate which might prove useful as a basis for calibrations of future theoretical models. In addition,
the exercise indicates that deviations from interest rate parity do not seem to be closely related to
monetary policy, as has been hypothesized in recent theory, but that these deviations do seem to be

related to shifts in marginal utilities of consumption. Further, the model indicates that such interest
rate parity shocks are not especially helpful as independent explanations for exchange rate movements

observed in the data. But on the other hand, these shocks are helpful in explaining movements
in the current account. It is hoped that this study may prove helpful for discriminating between

alternative theoretical models currently being proposed, and for suggesting productive avenues for
future theoretical research.




respective roles of the taste and IRP shocks switch from those in Table 3. This clearly comes from the fact that there is a
high negative correlation between the two shocks as described above. Whenever the effects of the two shocks are considered
jointly there is no net effect on the current account, but the portion of either shock taken alone has a strong effect on the
current account. This underscores the fact that the two shocks are closely related to each other.

                                                            21
6 Acknowledgements

   I thank participants in the 2003 AEA meetings and the CEPR International Capital Markets

conference in Rome 2003 for helpful comments. I thank Ivan Tchakarov for excellent research
assistance. This material is based upon work supported by the National Science Foundation under
Grant No. 0109006. Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this
material are those of the author and do not necessarily reßect the views of the National Science
Foundation




                                                22
7 Appendix

7.1      List of Equilibrium Conditions

These equations are used in liearized form, expressed as differences between the home country

variables and foreign country counterparts. The system may be written in the following 18 variables:
ct − c∗t , lt − lt∗ , yt − yt∗ , pt − p∗t , wt − wt∗ , pF t − p∗Ht , pHt − p∗F t , yHt − yF∗ t , yF t − yHt
                                                                                                         ∗ , z       ∗
                                                                                                               Ht − zHt,

it − i∗t , kt − kt∗ , rt − rt∗ , Bt − Bt∗ , Mt − Mt∗ , st , cat, xt . Numbered below are the 18 linearized
conditions that determine these sequences.Country size is n.

      Linearized home consumption Euler:

                    σ 1 ct − τ t = σ1 Et (ct+1 ) − Et (τ t+1 ) + Et [Pt+1 ] − Pt − (1 − β)it

together with the foreign counterpart:
                                        ¡     ¢    ¡      ¢    £ ∗ ¤
                  σ1 c∗t − τ ∗t = σ 1 Et c∗t+1 − Et τ ∗t+1 + Et Pt+1 − Pt∗ − (1 − β)i∗t

to form:
                                                  ¡           ¢     ¡              ¢
           σ1 (ct − c∗t ) − (τ t − τ ∗t ) = σ1 Et ct+1 − c∗t+1 − Et τ t+1 − τ ∗t+1
                                                 £          ∗
                                                              ¤
                                            +Et Pt+1 − Pt+1     − (Pt − Pt∗ ) − (1 − β) (it − i∗t ) .              (48)

      Money demand:
                                                                       β2
                                   σ1 ct + σ2 pt − σ2 mt − τ t −          it = 0
                                                                      1−β
      combined with foreign:
                                 σ1 (ct − c∗t ) + σ2 (pt − p∗t ) − σ2 (mt − m∗t )
                                                    β2                                                             (49)
                                 − (τ t − τ ∗t ) − 1−β (it − i∗t ) = 0.
      Labor supply:
                1
                   (lt − lt∗ ) = (wt − wt∗ ) − σ 1 (ct − c∗t ) − (pt − p∗t ) + (1 − σ1 ) (τ t − τ ∗t ) .           (50)
                σ3
      Production function:
                                                    ¡            ¢
                       (zt − zt∗ ) = (at − a∗t ) + α kt−1 − kt−1
                                                             ∗
                                                                   + (1 − α) (lt − lt∗ ) .                         (51)




                                                          23
   The linearized price setting rule for domestic sales by local currency pricing (lcp) firms is:
                  [v] (yHt (lcp) − yHt ) + mct − [1 + ν] pHt + [ν − (1 + β)vψ P ]pHt (lcp)
                  +[vψP ]pHt−1 (lcp) + [βvψP ]Et pHt+1 (lcp) = 0
where

                              mct = pt + rt − at + (1 − α)kt−1 − (1 − α)lt
The linearized price setting rule for domestic sales is the same for producer currency pricing (pcp)

firms:
              [v] (yHt (pcp) − yHt ) + mct − [1 + ν] pHt + [ν − (1 + β)vψ P ]pHt (pcp)
              +[vψ P ]pHt−1 (pcp) + [βvψP ]Et pHt+1 (pcp) = 0.
   Given that all local currency pricing firms set the same price as each other, and all producer
currency pricing firms as each other, we may write the linearized form of the home domestic goods

price index as:
                                   pHt = ηpHt (lcp) + (1 − η)pHt (pcp).
Substituting in the price-setting equations above, we find the overall price level of home goods sold at

home:
                   mct − [1 + (1 + β)vψP ]pHt + [vψ P ]pHt−1 + [βvψ P ]Et pHt+1 = 0.

The foreign counterpart is

                    mc∗t − [1 + (1 + β)vψ P ]p∗F t + [vψ P ]p∗F t−1 + [βvψP ]Et p∗F t+1 = 0

where
                            mc∗t = p∗t + rt−1
                                          ∗
                                              − a∗t + (1 − α)kt−1
                                                              ∗
                                                                  − (1 − α)lt∗ .
   Similarly, the linearized price setting rule when home local currency pricing firms ( i = 0, ..., η)

export is:
                        ∗ (lcp) − y ∗ ) + mc − [1 + ν] p∗ + [ν − (1 + β)vψ ]p∗ (lcp)
                  [ν] (yHt          Ht       t             Ht             P Ht
                  +[vψ P ]p∗Ht−1 (lcp) + [βvψP ]Et p∗Ht+1 (lcp) − st = 0.
And for producer currency pricing firms, this is:
                    ∗ (pcp) − y ∗ ) + mc − [1 + ν] p∗ + [ν − (1 + β)vψ ]p∗ (pcp)
              [v] (yHt          Ht       t             Ht                   P Ht
              +[vψ P ]p∗Ht−1 (pcp) + [βvψP ]Et p∗Ht+1 (pcp) − [1 + ν] st = 0.
Since the linearized form of the home export price index implies:

                            p∗Ht = ηp∗Ht (lcp) + (1 − η)p∗Ht (pcp) − (1 − η)st ,

                                                      24
we can substitute in the pricing equations to write an equation for this export price index as:
   mct − [1 + (1 + β)vψ P ]p∗Ht + [vψP ]p∗Ht−1 + [βvψP ]Et p∗Ht+1 − [(1 − η) (1 + β) νψ P + 1] st
   +(1 − η)νψP st−1 + (1 − η)βνψ P Et [st+1 ] = 0.
The counterpart for foreign country exports to the home country is:
        mc∗t − [1 + (1 + β)vψP ]pF t + [vψP ]pF t−1 + [βvψP ]Et pf t+1 + [(1 − η)(1 + ν) + 1] st
        −(1 − η)νψ P st−1 − (1 − η)βνψP Et [st+1 ] = 0.
   Then combine these four pricing equations to get:
                                                ¡               ¢           ¡               ¢
(mct −mc∗t )−[1+(1+β)vψP ] (pHt − p∗F t )+[vψP ] pHt−1 − p∗F t−1 +[βvψ P ]Et pHt+1 − p∗F t+1 = 0

                                                                                                       (52)
and
             −(mct − mc∗t ) − [1 + (1 +¡ β)vψP¢](pF t − p∗Ht ) + [vψP ](pF t−1 − p∗Ht−1 )
             +[βvψ P ](Et (pF t+1 ) − Et p∗Ht+1 ) − 2 [(1 − η) (1 + β) νψ P + 1] st                    (53)
             +2(1 − η)νψ P st−1 + 2(1 − η)βνψ P Et [st+1 ] = 0.
   Ratio of price indexes:

                               pt = θpHt + (1 − θ)pF t + θ log (1 − θt )

                               p∗t = (1 − θ)p∗Ht + θp∗F t + θ log (1 − θt )

   so
                                        ¡     ¢
                           (pt − p∗t ) = 1 − θ (pF t − p∗Ht ) + θ (pHt − p∗F t ) .                     (54)
   Demands are

                                yHt = yt + µpt − µpHt + θt
                                                             µ        ¶
                                                                   θ
                                yF t = yt + µpt − µpF t −               θt
                                                                1−θ
                                yF∗ t = yt∗ + µp∗t − µp∗F t + θ∗t
                                                              µ       ¶
                                 ∗        ∗      ∗      ∗           θ
                                yHt = yt + µpt − µpHt −                  θ∗t
                                                                  1−θ
   so

           (yHt − yF∗ t ) = (yt − yt∗ ) + µ(pt − p∗t ) − µ(pHt − p∗F t ) + (θt − θ∗t )                 (55)
                                                                           µ        ¶
                    ∗               ∗              ∗              ∗            θ
           (yF t − yHt ) = (yt − yt ) + µ(pt − pt ) − µ(pF t − pHt ) −                 (θt − θ∗t ) .   (56)
                                                                             1−θ




                                                      25
     Capital accumulation:
                 (1 + β)ψI kt − βψ I Et kt+1 − ψI kt−1 − (1 − β(1 − δ))rt+1 + βδδ t
                      −σ 1 ct + σ1 Et ct+1 + (1 − σ1 ) τ ct − (1 − σ1 ) Et [τ ct+1 ] = 0.
combined with foreign:
                                            ¡              ¢     ¡            ¢
            (1 + β)ψI (kt − kt∗ ) − βψI Et kt+1 − kt+1 ∗                   ∗
                                                             − ψI kt−1 − kt−1
            −(1 − β(1                 ∗              ∗
                    ¡ − δ)) ∗(rt ¢− rt ) − σ1 (ct − ct ) ∗               ¡               ¢                                    (57)
            +σ1 Et ct+1 − ct+1 + (1 − σ1 ) (τ ct − τ ct ) − (1 − σ1 ) Et τ ct+1 − τ ∗ct+1 = 0
     Capital stock transition function:
                                                                      ¡            ¢
                                 δ (it − i∗t ) = (kt − kt∗ ) − (1 − δ) kt−1 − kt−1
                                                                               ∗
                                                                                     .                                        (58)

     Capital-labor tradeoff:
                                                   ¡            ¢
                        (pt − p∗t ) + (rt − rt∗ ) + kt−1 − kt−1
                                                            ∗
                                                                  = (wt − wt∗ ) + (lt − lt∗ )                                 (59)

     Define final goods demand:20
                                             C              I             G
                            (yt − yt∗ ) =      (ct − c∗t ) + (it − i∗t ) + (τ dt − τ ∗dt ) .                                  (60)
                                             Y              Y             Y
     Goods market clearing conditions are
                                                              ∗
                                               θyHt + (1 − θ)yHt = zt

                                               (1 − θ)yF t + θyF∗ t = zt∗ ,

so combining:
                                 θ(yHt − yF∗ t ) − (1 − θ)(yF t − yHt
                                                                   ∗
                                                                      ) = (zt − zt∗ ).                                        (61)
     Define trade balance: (taking X as a share of GDP, Z)
                             ·      ¸
                                 1
                                      xt = st − (pF t − p∗Ht ) − (yF t − yHt
                                                                          ∗
                                                                             ).                                               (62)
                               1−θ
     Compute the current account as the inverse of the capital account (as share of GDP):
                                                              ¡             ¢
                                          cat = (bt − sb∗t ) − bt−1 − sb∗t−1 .                                                (63)

     Rewrite the balance of payments condition (deviations as shares of GDP):




20
    Given parameter values, β, δ, α, σ 1 , σ 3, G, I can define the steady state value of A so that the steady state value of I is
any desired fraction of Y , and then the steady state value of C is just Y -I-G. I use YI = YG = 0.20.

                                                                26
                                         1¡               ¢
                                 xt +       bt−1 − sb∗t−1 − (bt − sb∗t ) = 0.                         (64)
                                         β
      Linearize the interest rate parity condition, as discussed above:
                                         1
                           it − i∗t =       (Et st+1 − st ) − ΨB (bt − sb∗t ) + ξt .                  (65)
                                        1−β




7.2      Econometric Methods

The contemporaneous covariances matrix, Ry∗ (0), can be written as follows :
                                     X∞
                      £ ∗ ∗0 ¤           £                    ¤ £             ¤0
          Ry∗ (0) ≡ E yt yt = Σ +         BDi (D − I) B −1 Σ BDi (D − I) B −1                         (66)
                                              i=0
where D is the diagonal matrix of eigenvalues and B the matrix of eigen vectors of A1. Ry∗ (0) can
then be computed:
                                            Ry∗ (0) = Σ + B [K] B 0                                   (67)
where the typical element (i,j) of K is
                                        (1−di )(1−dj )Mij
                             Kij =          1−di dj               f or di 6= 1 or dj 6= 1
                                                                                                      (68)
                                               0                 for di = 1 and dj = 1
and where
                                                                       0
                                               M = B −1 ΣB −1 .                                       (69)
      Once Ry ∗ (0) is computed, the covariances across one lag Ry∗ (1) may be found:
                                               £        ¤
                                   Ry ∗ (1) = E yt∗ yt∗0 = A Ry∗ (0) − Σ                              (70)

and over lags greater than one:
                                         £ ∗0 ¤
                             Ry ∗ (k) = E yt∗ yt−k = Ak−1 Ry∗ (1) f or k > 1.                         (71)

The full covariance matrix, Ω, then can be constructed by assembling the blocks for various lags.
In particular, the only parts of each covariance block used are those relating to the particular data

series to be fit, where xt is the relevant portion of y ∗ (in percent deviations from the previous period).


                                                            27
Further, to reduce numerical problems associated with rounding error, lags of only up to 15 periods
are currently used, with covariances assumed to be zero over lags greater than 15 periods.




                                                 28
7.3     References

Ahmed, S., Ickes, B., Wang, P., Yoo, B.S., 1993. International business cycles. American Economic
Review 83, 335-359.

Bergin, P., 2003. Putting the new open economy macroeconomics to a test. Journal of International
Economics 60, 3-34.

Bergin, P., Sheffrin, S., 2000. Interest rates, exchange rates, and present value models of the current
account. The Economic Journal 110, 535-558.

Betts, C., Devereux, M.B., 2000. Exchange rate dynamics in a model of pricing-to-market. Journal of
International Economics 50, 215-244.

Devereux, M.B., C. Engel, 2002. Exchange rate pass-through, exchange rate volatility, and exchange
rate disconnect. Journal of Monetary Economics 49, 913-940.

Duarte, M., Stockman, A., 2001. Rational speculation and exchange rates. NBER Working Paper
8362.

Eichenbaum, M., Evans, C.L., 1995. Some empirical evidence on the effects of shocks to monetary
policy on exchange rates. Quarterly Journal of Economics 110, 975-1009.

Faust, J., Rogers, J.H., 2003. Monetary policy’s role in exchange rate behavior. Journal of Monetary
Economics 50, 1403-1424.

Flood, R., Rose, A., 1999. Understanding exchange rate volatility without the contrivance of
macroeconomics. Economic Journal 109, 660-672.

Ghironi, F., Iscan, T., Rebucci, A., 2003. Productivity shocks and consumption smoothing in the
international economy. Mimeo, Boston College.

Ghosh, A.R., 1995. International capital mobility among the major industrialised countries: too little
or too much? Economic Journal 105, 107-128.

Harrigan, J., 1993. OECD imports and trade barriers in 1983. Journal of International Economics 35,
91-111.

Ireland, P., 1997. A small, structural, quarterly model for monetary policy evaluation. Carnegie-
Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy 47, 83-108.

Ireland, P., 2001. Sticky-price models of the business cycle: specification and stability. Journal of

                                                   29
Monetary Economics 47, 3-18.

Jeanne, O., Rose, A., 2002. Noise trading and exchange rate regimes. Quarterly Journal of Economics
117, 537-569.

Kim, J., 2000. Constructing and estimating a realistic optimizing model of monetary policy. Journal
of Monetary Economics 45, 329-359.

Kollmann, R., 2001. Macroeconomic effects of nominal exchange rates regimes: New insights into
the role of price dynamics. University of Bonn mimeo.

Kollmann, R., 2002. Monetary policy rules in the open economy: effects on welfare and business
cycles. Journal of Monetary Economics 49, 989-1015.

Lane, P.R., Milesi-Ferretti, G.M., 2002. Long-term capital movements. NBER Macroeconomics
Annual, 73-116.

Leeper, E., Sims, C., 1994. Toward a modern macroeconomic model usable for policy analysis. NBER
Macroeconomic Annual, 81-118.

Lewis, K., 1995. Puzzles in International Financial Markets. In: Grossman, G., Rogoff, K. (Eds.),
Handbook of International Economics, Vol. III. Elsevier, Amsterdam, pp. 1913-1971.

Lubik, T., Schorfheide, F., 2002. Testing for indeterminacy: An application to U.S. monetary policy.
American Economic Review forthcoming.

Mark, N., Wu, Y., 1998. Rethinking deviations from uncovered interest parity: The role of covariance
risk and noise. Economic Journal 108, 1686-1706.

McCallum, B., Nelson, E., 1999. Nominal income targeting in an open-economy optimizing model.
Journal of Monetary Economics 43, 553-578.

McCallum, B., Nelson, E., 2000. Monetary policy for an open economy: An alternative framework
with optimizing agents and sticky prices. Oxford Review of Economic Policy 16, 74-91.

Meese, R.A., Rogoff, K., 1983. Empirical exchange rate models of the seventies: do they fit out of
sample? Journal of International Economics 14, 3-24.

Nason, J.M., Rogers, J.H., 2003. The present-value model of the current account has been rejected:
roundup the usual suspects, Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta Working Paper 2003-7a.

Obstfeld, M., Rogoff, K., 2000. New directions for stochastic open economy models. Journal of


                                                 30
International Economics 50, 117-153.

Obstfeld, M., Rogoff, K., 2002. Risk and exchange rates. In: Helpman, E., Sadka, E. (Eds.),
Contemporary Economic Policy: Essays in Honor of Assaf Razin. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge.

Pesenti, P., 2002. International Monetary Policy Cooperation and Financial Market Integration,
discussant comments at European Central Bank International Research Forum on Monetary Policy,
Frankfurt, July.

Rogers, J., 1999. Monetary shocks and real exchange rates. Journal of International Economics 49,
269-288.

Schmitt-Grohe, S., Uribe, M., 2003. Closing small open economy models. Journal of International
Economics 61, 163-185.

Sheffrin, S., Woo, W. T., 1990. Present value tests of an intertemporal model of the current account.
Journal of International Economics 29, 237-253.

Smets, F., Wouters, R., 2002. Monetary policy in an estimated stochastic dynamic general equilibrium
model of the euro area. ECB mimeo.




                                                  31
                             Table 1: Unit Root Tests

                                           U.S.                   foreign aggregate
Phillips-Perron test:

   Exchange rate
     Levels                              -1.8230                          --
     Differences                        -9.4457**

   Current account
     Levels                              -0.8041                          --
     Differences                        -9.5258**

   Interest rate
      Levels                             -2.2940                       -2.4337
      Differences                       -7.4911**                      -5.2423**

   Output
     Levels                              -1.8986                       -1.4111
     Differences                        -4.1464**                      -9.3866**

   Price level
      Levels                             -1.7126                       -3.9689*
      Differences                       -4.3715**                      -9.4550**


** indicates unit root rejected at 1% significance level; * indic ates rejected at 5% level.
Tests run with 3 lags, intercept and trend. All variables in logs except current account.
Range is 1973Q2 to 2000Q4. Critical values: 1% --4.0444; 5% --3.4512; 10% --3.1507.
              Table 2: Estimation Results
                        Measures of Fit:
log likelihood value:
 model                                          1797.55
 standard VAR                                   1823.78

Schwarz criterion
 model                                          1741.14
 standard VAR                                   1642.81

RMSE: structural model / standard VAR
 exchange rate                                   1.013
 current account                                 1.019
 interest rate                                   1.104
 output                                          1.092
 price level                                     1.171
RMSE: structural model / random walk
 exchange rate                                   0.984
 current account                                 0.986
 interest rate                                   0.997
 output                                          1.045
 price level                                     1.037

                     Parameter Estimates:
                    behavioral parameters:
consumption                σ1                     1.072
  elasticity term                                (0.006)
money demand                σ2                    0.253
  elasticity term                                (0.003)
Investment                  ψI                   21.523
  adjustment cost                                (0.512)
Price adjustment            ψP                   31.099
  cost                                           (2.414)
bond cost                   ψB                   0.00384
                                                (0.00010)
share of local cur-         η                     0.999
  rency pricing                                  (0.000)
elasticity of subst.        µ                     1.130
 home-foreign goods                              (0.062)

             monetary policy rule parameters:
response to inflation       a1                   0.9891
                                                (0.0002)
response to output          a2                   0.0001
                                                (0.0000)
response to the             a3                   0.1128
   exchange rate                                (0.0138)
                    shock autocorrelations
  technology                                       0.9671
                                                  (0.0003)
  monetary                                         0.9309
                                                  (0.0089)
  tastes                                           0.9773
                                                  (0.0014)
  home bias                                        0.8908
                                                  (0.0046)
  UIP deviation                                    0.9750
                                                  (0.0034)
                 correlations with UIP shock
  technology                                       0.123
                                                  (0.035)
  monetary                                         0.152
                                                  (0.029)
  tastes                                          -0.845
                                                  (0.011)
  home bias                                       -0.427
                                                  (0.016)
Values in parentheses indicate standard errors.
                       Table 3: Variance Decompositions
Remove correlated components of interest parity shock
          Period                           Shocks
                  technology monetary       tastes home bias   interest
                              policy                            parity
exchange       1     0.11       0.54      0.26       0.07       0.01
rate           2     0.10       0.57      0.26       0.06       0.01
               3     0.09       0.59      0.25       0.06       0.01
               4     0.08       0.61      0.25       0.06       0.01
               5     0.07       0.62      0.25       0.05       0.01
              10     0.05       0.66      0.24       0.04       0.01
              20     0.04       0.66      0.25       0.04       0.01

current        1     0.24       0.00      0.07       0.05       0.64
account        2     0.28       0.00      0.06       0.03       0.64
               3     0.30       0.00      0.05       0.02       0.62
               4     0.32       0.01      0.04       0.03       0.60
               5     0.33       0.01      0.04       0.04       0.58
              10     0.35       0.03      0.02       0.14       0.47
              20     0.32       0.05      0.01       0.27       0.36

interest       1     0.48       0.16      0.31       0.01       0.04
rate           2     0.39       0.19      0.36       0.02       0.04
               3     0.32       0.21      0.39       0.03       0.05
               4     0.27       0.22      0.42       0.04       0.05
               5     0.22       0.23      0.45       0.05       0.05
              10     0.11       0.24      0.51       0.09       0.05
              20     0.06       0.22      0.55       0.11       0.05

output         1     0.16       0.16      0.37       0.31       0.01
               2     0.22       0.12      0.41       0.24       0.01
               3     0.28       0.10      0.44       0.18       0.00
               4     0.32       0.08      0.46       0.14       0.00
               5     0.35       0.06      0.47       0.11       0.00
              10     0.44       0.03      0.49       0.05       0.00
              20     0.47       0.02      0.49       0.02       0.00

price level    1     0.50       0.29      0.13       0.07       0.00
               2     0.50       0.30      0.13       0.07       0.00
               3     0.51       0.30      0.13       0.07       0.00
               4     0.51       0.30      0.13       0.06       0.00
               5     0.51       0.30      0.13       0.06       0.00
              10     0.53       0.31      0.13       0.04       0.00
              20     0.56       0.29      0.13       0.02       0.00
                        Table 4: Variance Decompositions
Remove correlated components of other shocks with interest parity shock
          Period                          Shocks
                  technology monetary      tastes home bias interest
                              policy                               parity
exchange       1      0.08       0.48       0.19        0.00       0.25
rate           2      0.07       0.49       0.20        0.00       0.24
               3      0.06       0.51       0.20        0.00       0.23
               4      0.05       0.52       0.21        0.00       0.22
               5      0.04       0.53       0.21        0.00       0.21
              10      0.03       0.56       0.22        0.00       0.19
              20      0.02       0.56       0.23        0.00       0.18

current        1      0.25       0.17       0.54        0.04       0.00
account        2      0.28       0.15       0.55        0.02       0.00
               3      0.30       0.13       0.54        0.02       0.01
               4      0.31       0.11       0.53        0.02       0.03
               5      0.32       0.10       0.52        0.02       0.04
              10      0.31       0.05       0.45        0.08       0.10
              20      0.27       0.03       0.37        0.17       0.15

interest       1      0.58       0.06       0.03        0.04       0.29
rate           2      0.50       0.07       0.03        0.03       0.37
               3      0.42       0.08       0.03        0.03       0.44
               4      0.36       0.08       0.03        0.02       0.50
               5      0.31       0.09       0.03        0.02       0.55
              10      0.17       0.09       0.03        0.01       0.69
              20      0.10       0.09       0.02        0.01       0.78

output         1      0.14       0.09       0.21        0.51       0.06
               2      0.19       0.07       0.19        0.44       0.11
               3      0.23       0.06       0.17        0.38       0.16
               4      0.27       0.05       0.16        0.33       0.20
               5      0.29       0.04       0.14        0.29       0.24
              10      0.35       0.02       0.10        0.19       0.34
              20      0.38       0.01       0.09        0.13       0.40

price level    1      0.41       0.20       0.03        0.00       0.36
               2      0.41       0.20       0.03        0.00       0.36
               3      0.41       0.21       0.03        0.00       0.35
               4      0.42       0.21       0.03        0.00       0.35
               5      0.42       0.21       0.03        0.00       0.34
              10      0.44       0.22       0.02        0.00       0.31
              20      0.47       0.23       0.02        0.01       0.27
                                                            Fig 1: Impulse responses for monetary shock
                                                      6




  percent deviations from steady state*
                                                          interest rate
                                                      4

                                                      2

                                                      0    current account
                                                                 output
                                                     -2
                                                                 price

                                                     -4
                                                           exchange rate

                                                     -6
                                                             5     10       15     20 25 30             35     40     45     50
                                                                                     periods


                                                            Fig 2: Impulse responses for interest parity shock
                                                     10
             percent deviations from steady state*




                                                      8
                                                            interest rate

                                                      6

                                                      4

                                                      2    exchange rate
                                                                                                         price

                                                      0                                           current account
                                                                                                         output
                                                     -2
                                                             5      10      15      20 25 30           35     40     45     50
                                                                                      periods


                                                           Fig 3: Impulse responses for taste shock
                                                     3
percent deviations from steady state*




                                                     2
                                                                                price
                                                     1

                                                     0                    current account

                                                     -1                    exchange rate

                                                     -2                    interest rate

                                                     -3

                                                     -4                          output
                                                     -5
                                                            5      10      15      20 25 30           35     40     45     50
                                                                                     periods
                                                      *except current account, which is shown as devia tio n fro m ste ady state
                                                      as a share of steady state outp ut
