NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

BUSINESS CYCLE ACCOUNTING
V.V. Chari
Patrick J. Kehoe
Ellen McGrattan
Working Paper 10351
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10351

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2004

We thank the co-editor and three referees for useful comments. We also thank Kathy Rolfe for excellent
editorial assistance and the National Science Foundation for financial support. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis,
the Federal Reserve System, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2004 by V.V. Chari, Patrick J. Kehoe, and Ellen McGrattan. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Business Cycle Accounting
V.V. Chari, Patrick J. Kehoe, and Ellen McGrattan
NBER Working Paper No. 10351
March 2004, Revised December 2006
JEL No. E1,E12
ABSTRACT
We propose a simple method to help researchers develop quantitative models of economic fluctuations.
The method rests on the insight that many models are equivalent to a prototype growth model with
time-varying wedges which resemble productivity, labor and investment taxes, and government consumption.
Wedges corresponding to these variables -- effciency, labor, investment, and government consumption
wedges -- are measured and then fed back into the model in order to assess the fraction of various
fluctuations they account for. Applying this method to U.S. data for the Great Depression and the 1982
recession reveals that the effciency and labor wedges together account for essentially all of the fluctuations;
the investment wedge plays a decidedly tertiary role, and the government consumption wedge, none.
Analyses of the entire postwar period and alternative model specifications support these results. Models
with frictions manifested primarily as investment wedges are thus not promising for the study of business
cycles.
V.V. Chari
Department of Economics
University of Minnesota
Minneapolis, MN 55455
and NBER
chari@res.mpls.frb.fed.us
Patrick J. Kehoe
Research Department
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis
90 Hennepin Avenue
Minneapolis, MN 55480-0291
and NBER
pkehoe@res.mpls.frb.fed.us

Ellen McGrattan
Research Department
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis
90 Hennepin Avenue
Minneapolis, MN 55480
and NBER
erm@mcgrattan.mpls.frb.fed.us

In building detailed, quantitative models of economic fluctuations, researchers face hard choices about
where to introduce frictions into their models in order to allow the models to generate business cycle
fluctuations similar to those in the data. Here we propose a simple method to guide these choices, and
we demonstrate how to use it.
Our method has two components: an equivalence result and an accounting procedure. The equivalence result is that a large class of models, including models with various types of frictions, are equivalent
to a prototype model with various types of time-varying wedges that distort the equilibrium decisions of
agents operating in otherwise competitive markets. At face value, these wedges look like time-varying
productivity, labor income taxes, investment taxes, and government consumption. We thus label the
wedges eﬃciency wedges, labor wedges, investment wedges, and government consumption wedges.
The accounting procedure also has two components. It begins by measuring the wedges, using data
together with the equilibrium conditions of a prototype model. The measured wedge values are then fed
back into the prototype model, one at a time and in combinations, in order to assess how much of the
observed movements of output, labor, and investment can be attributed to each wedge, separately and
in combinations. By construction, all four wedges account for all of these observed movements. This
accounting procedure leads us to label our method business cycle accounting.
To demonstrate how the accounting procedure works, we apply it to two actual U.S. business cycle
episodes: the most extreme in U.S. history, the Great Depression (1929—39), and a downturn less severe
and more like those seen since World War II, the 1982 recession. For the Great Depression period, we find
that, in combination, the eﬃciency and labor wedges produce declines in output, labor, and investment
from 1929 to 1933 only slightly more severe than in the data. These two wedges also account fairly
well for the behavior of those variables in the recovery. Over the entire Depression period, however,
the investment wedge actually drives output the wrong way, leading to an increase in output during
much of the 1930s. Thus, the investment wedge cannot account for either the long, deep downturn or
the subsequent slow recovery. Our analysis of the more typical 1982 U.S. recession produces essentially
the same results for the eﬃciency and labor wedges in combination. Here the investment wedge plays
essentially no role. In both episodes, the government consumption wedge plays virtually no role.
We extend our analysis to the entire postwar period by developing some summary statistics for
1959—2004. The statistics we focus on are the output fluctuations induced by each wedge alone and the
correlations between those fluctuations and those actually in the data. Our findings from these statistics
suggest that over the entire postwar period the investment wedge plays a somewhat larger role in business
cycle fluctuations than in the 1982 recession, but its role is substantially smaller than that of either the

1

labor or eﬃciency wedges.
We begin our demonstration of our proposed method by establishing equivalence results that link
the four wedges to detailed models. We start with detailed model economies in which technologies and
preferences are similar to those in a benchmark prototype economy and show that frictions in the detailed
economies manifest themselves as wedges in the prototype economy. We show that an economy in which
the technology is constant but input-financing frictions vary over time is equivalent to a growth model
with eﬃciency wedges. We show that an economy with sticky wages and monetary shocks, like that of
Bordo, Erceg, and Evans (2000), is equivalent to a growth model with labor wedges. In the appendix, we
show that an economy with the type of credit market frictions considered by those of Bernanke, Gertler,
and Gilchrist (1999) is equivalent to a growth model with investment wedges. Also in the appendix, we
show that an open economy model with fluctuating borrowing and lending is equivalent to a prototype
(closed-economy) model with government consumption wedges. In the working paper version of this paper
(Chari, Kehoe, and McGrattan (2004)), we also show that an economy with the type of credit market
frictions considered by Carlstrom and Fuerst (1997) is equivalent to a growth model with investment
wedges and that an economy with unions and antitrust policy shocks, like that of Cole and Ohanian
(2004), is equivalent to a growth model with labor wedges.
Similar equivalence results can be established when technology and preferences in detailed economies
are very diﬀerent from those in the prototype economy. In such situations, the prototype economy can
have wedges even if the detailed economies have no frictions. We show how wedges in the benchmark
prototype economy can be decomposed into a part due to frictions and a part due to diﬀerences in
technology and preferences by constructing alternative prototype economies which have technologies and
preferences similar to those in the detailed economy.
Our quantitative findings suggest that financial frictions which manifest themselves primarily as
investment wedges do not play a primary role in the Great Depression or postwar recessions. Such
financial frictions play a prominent role in the models of Bernanke and Gertler (1989), Carlstrom and
Fuerst (1997), Kiyotaki and Moore (1997), and Bernanke, Gertler, and Gilchrist (1999). More promising,
our findings suggest, are models in which the underlying frictions manifest themselves as eﬃciency and
labor wedges. One such model is the input-financing friction model described here in which financial
frictions manifest themselves primarily as eﬃciency wedges. This model is consistent with the views of
Bernanke (1983) on the importance of financial frictions. Also promising are sticky wage models with
monetary shocks, such as that of Bordo, Erceg, and Evans (2000), and models with monopoly power,
such as that of Cole and Ohanian (2004) in which the underlying frictions manifest themselves primarily

2

as labor wedges. In general, this application of our method suggests that successful future work will likely
include mechanisms in which eﬃciency and labor wedges have a primary role and the investment wedge
has, at best, a tertiary role. We view this finding as our key substantive contribution.
In our quantitative work, we also analyze some detailed economies with quite diﬀerent technology
and preferences than those in our benchmark prototype economy. These include variable instead of fixed
capital utilization, diﬀerent labor supply elasticities, and costs of adjusting investment. For these alternative detailed economies, we decompose the benchmark prototype wedges into their two sources, frictions
and specification diﬀerences, by constructing alternative prototype economies that are equivalent to the
detailed economies and so can measure the part of the wedges due to frictions. We find that with regard
to the investment wedge’s role in the business cycle, frictions driving that wedge are unchanged by different labor supply elasticities and worsened by variable capital utilization–with the latter specification,
for example, the investment wedge boosts output even more during the Great Depression than it did in
the benchmark economy. With investment adjustment costs, the frictions driving investment wedges do
at least depress output during the downturns, but only modestly. Altogether, these analyses reinforce
our conclusion that the investment wedge plays a decidedly tertiary role in business cycle fluctuations.
Our business cycle accounting method is intended to shed light on promising classes of mechanisms
through which primitive shocks lead to economic fluctuations. It is not intended to identify the primitive
sources of shocks. Many economists think, for example, that monetary shocks drove the U.S. Great
Depression, but these economists disagree about the details of the driving mechanism. Our analysis
suggests that models in which financial frictions show up primarily as investment wedges are not promising
while models in which financial frictions show up as eﬃciency or labor wedges may well be. Thus, we
conclude that researchers interested in developing models in which monetary shocks lead to the Great
Depression should focus on detailed models in which financial frictions manifest themselves as eﬃciency
and labor wedges.
Other economists, including Cole and Ohanian (1999 and 2004) and Prescott (1999), emphasize
nonmonetary factors behind the Great Depression, downplaying the importance of money and banking
shocks. For such economists, our analysis guides them to promising models, like that of Cole and Ohanian
(2004), in which fluctuations in the power of unions and cartels lead to labor wedges, and other models
in which poor government policies lead to eﬃciency wedges.
In terms of method, the equivalence result provides the logical foundation for the way our accounting procedure uses the measured wedges. At a mechanical level, the wedges represent deviations
in the prototype model’s first-order conditions and in its relationship between inputs and outputs. One

3

interpretation of these deviations, of course, is that they are simply errors, so that their size indicates the
goodness-of-fit of the model. Under that interpretation, however, feeding the measured wedges back into
the model makes no sense. Our equivalence result leads to a more economically useful interpretation of
the deviations by linking them directly to classes of models; that link provides the rationale for feeding
the measured wedges back into the model.
Also in terms of method, the accounting procedure goes beyond simply plotting the wedges. Such
plots, by themselves, are not useful in evaluating the quantitative importance of competing mechanisms
of business cycles because they tell us little about the equilibrium responses to the wedges. Feeding
the measured wedges back into the prototype model and measuring the model’s resulting equilibrium
responses is what allows us to discriminate between competing mechanisms.
Finally, in terms of method, our decomposition of business cycle fluctuations is quite diﬀerent from
traditional decompositions. Those decompositions attempt to isolate the eﬀects of (so-called) primitive
shocks on equilibrium outcomes by making identifying assumptions, typically zero-one restrictions on
variables and shocks. The problem with the traditional approach is that finding identifying assumptions
that apply to a broad class of detailed models is hard. Hence, this approach is not useful in pointing
researchers toward classes of promising models. Our approach, in contrast, can be applied to a broad
class of detailed models. Our equivalence results, which provide a mapping from wedges to frictions
in particular detailed models, play the role of the identifying assumptions in the traditional approach.
This mapping is detailed-model specific and is the key to interpreting the properties of the wedges we
document. For any detailed model of interest, researchers can use the mapping that is relevant for their
model to learn whether it is promising. In this sense our approach, while being purposefully less ambitious
than the traditional approach, is much more flexible than that approach.
Our accounting procedure is intended to be a useful first step in guiding the construction of detailed
models with various frictions, to help researchers decide which frictions are quantitatively important to
business cycle fluctuations. The procedure is not a way to test particular detailed models. If a detailed
model is at hand, then it makes sense to confront that model directly with the data. Nevertheless, our
procedure is useful in analyzing models with many frictions. For example, some researchers, such as
Bernanke, Gertler, and Gilchrist (1999) and Christiano, Gust, and Roldos (2004), have argued that the
data are well accounted for by models which include a host of frictions (such as credit market frictions,
sticky wages, and sticky prices). Our analysis suggests that the features of these models which primarily
lead to investment wedges can be dropped while only modestly aﬀecting the models’ ability to account
for the data.

4

Our work here is related to a vast business cycle literature that we discuss in detail after we describe
and apply our new method.

1. Demonstrating the Equivalence Result
Here we show how various detailed models with underlying distortions are equivalent to a prototype
growth model with one or more wedges.

1.1. The Benchmark Prototype Economy
The benchmark prototype economy that we use later in our accounting procedure is a stochastic
growth model. In each period t, the economy experiences one of finitely many events st , which index the
shocks. We denote by st = (s0 , ..., st ) the history of events up through and including period t and often
refer to st as the state. The probability, as of period 0, of any particular history st is πt (st ). The initial
realization s0 is given. The economy has four exogenous stochastic variables, all of which are functions of
the underlying random variable st : the eﬃciency wedge At (st ), the labor wedge 1−τ lt (st ), the investment
wedge 1/[1 + τ xt (st )], and the government consumption wedge gt (st ).
In the model, consumers maximize expected utility over per capita consumption ct and per capita
labor lt ,
∞ X
X

β t πt (st )U (ct (st ), lt (st ))Nt ,

t=0 st

subject to the budget constraint
ct + [1 + τ xt (st )]xt (st ) = [1 − τ lt (st )]wt (st )lt (st ) + rt (st )kt (st−1 ) + Tt (st )
and the capital accumulation law
(1)

(1 + γ n )kt+1 (st ) = (1 − δ)kt (st−1 ) + xt (st ),

where kt (st−1 ) denotes the per capita capital stock, xt (st ) per capita investment, wt (st ) the wage rate,
rt (st ) the rental rate on capital, β the discount factor, δ the depreciation rate of capital, Nt the population
with growth rate equal to 1 + γ n , and Tt (st ) per capita lump-sum transfers.
The production function is A(st )F (kt (st−1 ), (1 + γ)t lt (st )), where 1 + γ is the rate of laboraugmenting technical progress, which is assumed to be a constant. Firms maximize profits given by
At (st )F (kt (st−1 ), (1 + γ)t lt (st ))−rt (st )kt (st−1 ) − wt (st )lt (st ).
5

The equilibrium of this benchmark prototype economy is summarized by the resource constraint,
(2)

ct (st ) + xt (st ) + gt (st ) = yt (st ),

where yt (st ) denotes per capita output, together with
(3)

yt (st ) = At (st )F (kt (st−1 ), (1 + γ)t lt (st )),

(4)

−

(5)

Uct (st )[1 + τ xt (st )]

Ult (st )
= [1 − τ lt (st )]At (st )(1 + γ)t Flt , and
Uct (st )

=β

X

st+1

πt (st+1 |st )Uct+1 (st+1 ){At+1 (st+1 )Fkt+1 (st+1 ) + (1 − δ)[1 + τ xt+1 (st+1 )]},

where, here and throughout, notations like Uct , Ult , Flt , and Fkt denote the derivatives of the utility function and the production function with respect to their arguments and πt (st+1 |st ) denotes the conditional
probability πt (st+1 )/πt (st ). We assume that gt (st ) fluctuates around a trend of (1 + γ)t .

Notice that in this benchmark prototype economy, the eﬃciency wedge resembles a blueprint technology parameter, and the labor wedge and the investment wedge resemble tax rates on labor income and
investment. Other more elaborate models could be considered, models with other kinds of frictions that
look like taxes on consumption or on capital income. Consumption taxes induce a wedge between the
consumption-leisure marginal rate of substitution and the marginal product of labor in the same way as
do labor income taxes. Such taxes, if time-varying, also distort the intertemporal margins in (5). Capital
income taxes induce a wedge between the intertemporal marginal rate of substitution and the marginal
product of capital which is only slightly diﬀerent from the distortion induced by a tax on investment. We
experimented with intertemporal distortions that resemble capital income taxes rather than investment
taxes and found that our substantive conclusions are unaﬀected. (For details, see Chari, Kehoe, and
McGrattan (2006), hereafter referred to as the technical appendix.)
We emphasize that each of the wedges represents the overall distortion to the relevant equilibrium
condition of the model. For example, distortions both to labor supply aﬀecting consumers and to labor
demand aﬀecting firms distort the static first-order condition (4). Our labor wedge represents the sum
of these distortions. Thus, our method identifies the overall wedge induced by both distortions and
does not identify each separately. Likewise, liquidity constraints on consumers distort the consumer’s
intertemporal Euler equation, while investment financing frictions on firms distort the firm’s intertemporal
Euler equation. Our method combines the Euler equations for the consumer and the firm and therefore
identifies only the overall wedge in the combined Euler equation given by (5). We focus on the overall
6

wedges because what matters in determining business cycle fluctuations is the overall wedges, not each
distortion separately.

1.2. The Mapping–From Frictions to Wedges
Now we illustrate the mapping between detailed economies and prototype economies for two types
of wedges. We show that input-financing frictions in a detailed economy map into eﬃciency wedges in our
prototype economy. Sticky wages in a monetary economy map into our prototype (real) economy with
labor wedges. In an appendix, we show as well that investment-financing frictions map into investment
wedges and that fluctuations in net exports in an open economy map into government consumption wedges
in our prototype (closed) economy. In general, our approach is to show that the frictions associated with
specific economic environments manifest themselves as distortions in first-order conditions and resource
constraints in a growth model. We refer to these distortions as wedges.
We choose simple models in order to illustrate how the detailed models map into the prototypes.
Since many models map into the same configuration of wedges, identifying one particular configuration
does not uniquely identify a model; rather, it identifies a whole class of models consistent with that
configuration. In this sense, our method does not uniquely determine the model most promising to
analyze business cycle fluctuations. It does, however, guide researchers to focus on the key margins that
need to be distorted in order to capture the nature of the fluctuations.
a. Eﬃciency Wedges
In many economies, underlying frictions either within or across firms cause factor inputs to be used
ineﬃciently. These frictions in an underlying economy often show up as aggregate productivity shocks in
a prototype economy similar to our benchmark economy. Schmitz (2005) presents an interesting example
of within-firm frictions resulting from work rules that lower measured productivity at the firm level.
Lagos (2006) studies how labor market policies lead to misallocations of labor across firms and, thus, to
lower aggregate productivity. And Chu (2001) and Restuccia and Rogerson (2003) show how government
policies at the levels of plants and establishments lead to lower aggregate productivity.
Here we develop a detailed economy with input-financing frictions and use it to make two points.
This economy illustrates the general idea that frictions which lead to ineﬃcient factor utilization map
into eﬃciency wedges in a prototype economy. Beyond that, however, the economy also demonstrates
that financial frictions can show up as eﬃciency wedges rather than as investment wedges. In our detailed
economy, financing frictions lead some firms to pay higher interest rates for working capital than do other
firms. Thus, these frictions lead to an ineﬃcient allocation of inputs across firms.
7

¤ A Detailed Economy With Input-Financing Frictions
Consider a simple detailed economy with financing frictions which distort the allocation of intermediate inputs across two types of firms. Both types of firms must borrow to pay for an intermediate
input in advance of production. One type of firm is more financially constrained, in the sense that it pays
a higher interest rate on borrowing than does the other type. We think of these frictions as capturing the
idea that some firms, such as small firms, often have diﬃculty borrowing. One motivation for the higher
interest rate faced by the financially constrained firms is that moral hazard problems are more severe for
small firms.
Specifically, consider the following economy. Aggregate gross output qt is a combination of the
gross output qit from the economy’s two sectors, indexed i = 1, 2, where 1 indicates the sector of firms
that are more financially constrained and 2 the sector of firms that are less financially constrained. The
sectors’ gross output is combined according to
(6)

φ 1−φ
qt = q1t
q2t ,

where 0 < φ < 1. The representative producer of the gross output qt chooses q1t and q2t to solve this
problem:
max qt − p1t q1t − p2t q2t
subject to (6), where pit is the price of the output of sector i.
The resource constraint for gross output in this economy is
(7)

ct + kt+1 + m1t + m2t = qt + (1 − δ)kt ,

where ct is consumption, kt is the capital stock, and m1t and m2t are intermediate goods used in sectors
1 and 2, respectively. Final output, given by yt = qt − m1t − m2t , is gross output less the intermediate
goods used.
The gross output of each sector i, qit , is made from intermediate goods mit and a composite valueadded good zit according to
(8)

qit = mθit zit1−θ ,

where 0 < θ < 1. The composite value-added good is produced from capital kt and labor lt according to
(9)

z1t + z2t = zt = F (kt , lt ).
The producer of gross output of sector i chooses the composite good zit and the intermediate good

mit to solve this problem:
max pit qit − vt zit − Rit mit
8

subject to (8). Here vt is the price of the composite good and Rit is the gross within-period interest rate
paid on borrowing by firms in sector i. If firms in sector 1 are more financially constrained than those
in sector 2, then R1t > R2t . Let Rit = Rt (1 + τ it ), where Rt is the rate consumers earn within period
t and τ it measures the within-period spread, induced by financing constraints, between the rate paid to
consumers who save and the rate paid by firms in sector i. Since consumers do not discount utility within
the period, Rt = 1.
In this economy, the representative producer of the composite good zt chooses kt and lt to solve
this problem:
max vt zt − wt lt − rt kt
subject to (9), where wt is the wage rate and rt is the rental rate on capital.
Consumers solve this problem:
(10)

max

∞
X

β t U(ct , lt )

t=0

subject to
ct + kt+1 = rt kt + wt lt + (1 − δ)kt + Tt ,
where lt = l1t +l2t is the economy’s total labor supply and Tt = Rt

P

i τ it mit

lump-sum transfers. Here we

assume that the financing frictions act like distorting taxes, and the proceeds are rebated to consumers.
If, instead, we assumed that these frictions represent, say, lost gross output, then we would adjust the
economy’s resource constraint (7) appropriately.
¤ The Associated Prototype Economy With Eﬃciency Wedges
Now consider a version of the benchmark prototype economy that will have the same aggregate
allocations as the input-financing frictions economy just detailed. This prototype economy is identical to
our benchmark prototype except that the new prototype economy has an investment wedge that resembles
a tax on capital income rather than a tax on investment. Here the government consumption wedge is set
equal to zero.
Now the consumer’s budget constraint is
(11)

ct + kt+1 = (1 − τ kt )rt kt + (1 − τ lt )wt lt + (1 − δ)kt + Tt ,

and the eﬃciency wedge is
(12)

θ

φ 1−θ
At = κ(a1−φ
[1 − θ(a1t + a2t )],
1t a2t )

9

1

where a1t = φ/(1 + τ 1t ), a2t = (1 − φ)/(1 + τ 2t ), κ = [φφ (1 − φ)1−φ θθ ] 1−θ , and τ 1t and τ 2t are the interest
rate spreads in the detailed economy.
Comparing the first-order conditions in the detailed economy with input-financing frictions to those
of the associated prototype economy with eﬃciency wedges leads immediately to this proposition:
Proposition 1: Consider the prototype economy with resource constraint (2) and consumer budget
constraint (11) with exogenous processes for the eﬃciency wedge At given in (12), the labor wedge given
by
(13)

¶¸
∙
µ
1
1
1−φ
φ
,
=
+
1−θ
1 − τ lt
1−θ
1 + τ ∗1t 1 + τ ∗2t

and the investment wedge given by τ kt = τ lt , where τ ∗1t and τ ∗2t are the interest rate spreads from the
detailed economy with input-financing frictions. Then the equilibrium allocations for aggregate variables
in the detailed economy are equilibrium allocations in this prototype economy.
Consider the following special case of Proposition 1 in which only the eﬃciency wedge fluctuates.
Specifically, suppose that in the detailed economy the interest rate spreads τ 1t and τ 2t fluctuate over
time, but in such a way that the weighted average of these spreads,
(14)

a1t + a2t =

φ
1−φ
+
,
1 + τ 1t 1 + τ 2t

φ
is constant while a1−φ
1t a2t fluctuates. Then from (13) we see that the labor and investment wedges are

constant, and from (12) we see that the eﬃciency wedge fluctuates. In this case, on average, financing
frictions are unchanged, but relative distortions fluctuate. An outside observer who attempted to fit
the data generated by the detailed economy with input-financing frictions to the prototype economy
would identify the fluctuations in relative distortions with fluctuations in technology and would see no
fluctuations in either the labor wedge 1 − τ lt or the investment wedge τ kt . In particular, periods in which
the relative distortions increase would be misinterpreted as periods of technological regress.
b. Labor Wedges
Now we show that a monetary economy with sticky wages is equivalent to a (real) prototype
economy with labor wedges. In the detailed economy, the shocks are to monetary policy, while in the
prototype economy, the shocks are to the labor wedge.

10

¤ A Detailed Economy With Sticky Wages
Consider a monetary economy populated by a large number of identical, infinitely lived consumers.
The economy consists of a competitive final goods producer and a continuum of monopolistically competitive unions that set their nominal wages in advance of the realization of shocks to the economy. Each
union represents all consumers who supply a specific type of labor.
In each period t, the commodities in this economy are a consumption-capital good, money, and
a continuum of diﬀerentiated types of labor, indexed by j ∈ [0, 1]. The technology for producing final

goods from capital and a labor aggregate at history, or state, st has constant returns to scale and is given
by y(st ) = F (k(st−1 ), l(st )), where y(st ) is output of the final good, k(st−1 ) is capital, and
(15)

t

l(s ) =

∙Z

t v

l(j, s ) dj

¸1
v

is an aggregate of the diﬀerentiated types of labor l(j, st ).
The final goods producer in this economy behaves competitively. This producer has some initial
capital stock k(s−1 ) and accumulates capital according to k(st ) = (1 − δ)k(st−1 ) + x(st ), where x(st ) is
investment. The present discounted value of profits for this producer is
(16)

∞ X
X
t=0 st

£
¤
Q(st ) P (st )y(st ) − P (st )x(st ) − W (st−1 )l(st ) ,

where Q(st ) is the price of a dollar at st in an abstract unit of account, P (st ) is the dollar price of final
goods at st , and W (st−1 ) is the aggregate nominal wage at st which depends on only st−1 because of
wage stickiness.
The producer’s problem can be stated in two parts. First, the producer chooses sequences for
capital k(st−1 ), investment x(st ), and aggregate labor l(st ) in order to maximize (16) given the production
function and the capital accumulation law. The first-order conditions can be summarized by
(17)

P (st )Fl (st ) = W (st−1 ) and

(18)

Q(st )P (st ) =

X

st+1

Q(st+1 )P (st+1 )[Fk (st+1 ) + 1 − δ].

Second, for any given amount of aggregate labor l(st ), the producer’s demand for each type of diﬀerentiated labor is given by the solution to
(19)

min

{l(j,st )},j∈[0,1]

Z

W (j, st−1 )l(j, st ) dj

11

subject to (15); here W (j, st−1 ) is the nominal wage for diﬀerentiated labor of type j. Nominal wages are
set by unions before the realization of the event in period t; thus, wages depend on, at most, st−1 . The
demand for labor of type j by the final goods producer is
(20)

∙

W (st−1 )
l (j, s ) =
W (j, st−1 )
d

t

where W (st−1 ) ≡

hR

1
¸ 1−v

l(st ),

v

W (j, st−1 ) v−1 dj

is, thus, W (st−1 )l(st ).

i v−1
v

is the aggregate nominal wage. The minimized value in (19)

In this economy, consumers can be thought of as being organized into a continuum of unions indexed
by j. Each union consists of all the consumers in the economy with labor of type j. Each union realizes
that it faces a downward-sloping demand for its type of labor, given by (20). In each period, the new
wages are set before the realization of the economy’s current shocks.
The preferences of a representative consumer in the jth union is
(21)

∞ X
X

β t πt (st ) [U (c(j, st ), l(j, st )) + V (M(j, st )/P (st ))],

t=0 st

where c(j, st ), l(j, st ), M(j, st ) are the consumption, labor supply, and money holdings of this consumer,
and P (st ) is the economy’s overall price level. Note that the utility function is separable in real balances.
This economy has complete markets for state-contingent nominal claims. The asset structure is represented by a set of complete, contingent, one-period nominal bonds. Let B(j, st+1 ) denote the consumers’
holdings of such a bond purchased in period t at history st , with payoﬀs contingent on some particular
event st+1 in t + 1, where st+1 = (st , st+1 ). One unit of this bond pays one dollar in period t + 1 if the
particular event st+1 occurs and 0 otherwise. Let Q(st+1 |st ) denote the dollar price of this bond in period

t at history st , where Q(st+1 |st ) = Q(st+1 )/Q(st ).

The problem of the jth union is to maximize (21) subject to the budget constraint
P (st )c(j, st ) + M(j, st ) +

X

st+1
t−1

≤ W (j, s

Q(st+1 |st )B(j, st+1 )

)l(j, st ) + M(j, st−1 ) + B(j, st ) + P (st )T (st ) + D(st ),

the constraint l(j, st ) = ld (j, st ), and the borrowing constraint B(st+1 ) ≥ −P (st )b, where ld (j, st ) is given

by (20). Here T (st ) is transfers and the positive constant b constrains the amount of real borrowing by

the union. Also, D(st ) = P (st )y(st ) − P (st )x(st ) − W (st−1 )l(st ) are the dividends paid by the firms. The

initial conditions M(j, s−1 ) and B(j, s0 ) are given and assumed to be the same for all j. Notice that in
this problem, the union chooses the wage and agrees to supply whatever labor is demanded at that wage.

12

The first-order conditions for this problem can be summarized by
t+1 )
X
Vm (j, st ) Uc (j, st )
t+1 t Uc (j, s
π(s
|s
)
(22)
−
+
β
= 0,
P (st )
P (st )
P (st+1 )
s
t+1

(23)
(24)

Q(st |st−1 ) = βπt (st |st−1 )
t−1

W (j, s

)=−

P

st

Uc (j, st ) P (st−1 )
, and
Uc (j, st−1 ) P (st )

Q(st )P (st )Ul (j, st )/Uc (j, st )ld (j, st )
P
.
v st Q(st )ld (j, st )

Here πt (st+1 |st ) = πt (st+1 )/πt (st ) is the conditional probability of st+1 given st . Notice that in a steady
state, (24) reduces to W/P = (1/v)(−Ul /Uc ), so that real wages are set as a markup over the marginal
rate of substitution between labor and consumption. Given the symmetry among the unions, all of them
choose the same consumption, labor, money balances, bond holdings, and wages, which are denoted
simply by c(st ), l(st ), M(st ), B(st+1 ), and W (st ).
Consider next the specification of the money supply process and the market-clearing conditions for
this sticky-wage economy. The nominal money supply process is given by M (st ) = μ(st )M(st−1 ), where
μ(st ) is a stochastic process. New money balances are distributed to consumers in a lump-sum fashion by
having nominal transfers satisfy P (st )T (st ) = M(st )−M(st−1 ). The resource constraint for this economy
is c(st ) + k(st ) = y(st ) + (1 − δ)k(st−1 ). Bond market—clearing requires that B(st+1 ) = 0.
¤ The Associated Prototype Economy With Labor Wedges
Consider now a real prototype economy with labor wedges and the production function for final
goods given above in the detailed economy with sticky wages. The representative firm maximizes (16)
subject to the capital accumulation law given above. The first-order conditions can be summarized by
(17) and (18). The representative consumer maximizes
∞ X
X

β t πt (st ) U (c(st ), l(st ))

t=0 st

subject to the budget constraint
X
c(st ) +
q(st+1 |st )b(st+1 ) ≤ [1 − τ l (st )]w(st )l(st ) + b(st ) + v(st ) + d(st )
st+1

with

w(st )

replacing W (st−1 )/P (st ) and q(st+1 /st ) replacing Q(st+1 )P (st+1 )/Q(st )P (st ) and a bound

on real bond holdings, where the lowercase letters q, b, w, v, and d denote the real values of bond prices,
debt, wages, lump-sum transfers, and dividends. Here the first-order condition for bonds is identical to
that in (23) once symmetry has been imposed with q(st /st−1 ) replacing Q(st /st−1 )P (st )/P (st−1 ). The
first-order condition for labor is given by
−

Ul (st )
= [1 − τ l (st )]w(st ).
Uc (st )
13

Consider an equilibrium of the sticky wage economy for some given stochastic process M ∗ (st ) on
money supply. Denote all of the allocations and prices in this equilibrium with asterisks. Then this
proposition can be easily established:
Proposition 2: Consider the prototype economy just described with labor wedges given by
(25)

1 − τ l (st ) = −

Ul∗ (st ) 1
,
Uc∗ (st ) Fl∗ (st )

where Ul∗ (st ), Uc∗ (st ), and Fl∗ (st ) are evaluated at the equilibrium of the sticky wage economy and where
real transfers are equal to the real value of transfers in the sticky wage economy adjusted for the interest
cost of holding money. Then the equilibrium allocations and prices in the sticky wage economy are the
same as those in the prototype economy.
The proof of this proposition is immediate from comparing the first-order conditions, the budget
constraints, and the resource constraints for the prototype economy with labor wedges to those of the
detailed economy with sticky wages. The key idea is that distortions in the sticky-wage economy between
the marginal product of labor implicit in (24) and the marginal rate of substitution between leisure and
consumption are perfectly captured by the labor wedges (25) in the prototype economy.

2. The Accounting Procedure
Having established our equivalence result, we now describe our accounting procedure at a conceptual
level and discuss a Markovian implementation of it.
Our procedure is to conduct experiments that isolate the marginal eﬀect of each wedge as well as
the marginal eﬀects of combinations of these wedges on aggregate variables. In the experiment in which
we isolate the marginal eﬀect of the eﬃciency wedge, for example, we hold the other wedges fixed at some
constant values in all periods. In conducting this experiment, we ensure that the probability distribution
of the eﬃciency wedge coincides with that in the prototype economy. In eﬀect, we ensure that agents’
expectations of how the eﬃciency wedge will evolve are the same as in the prototype economy. For
each experiment, we compare the properties of the resulting equilibria to those of the prototype economy.
These comparisons, together with our equivalence results, allow us to identify promising classes of detailed
economies.

14

2.1 The Accounting Procedure at a Conceptual Level
Suppose for now that the stochastic process πt (st ) and the realizations of the state st in some
particular episode are known. Recall that the prototype economy has one underlying (vector-valued)
random variable, the state st , which has a probability of πt (st ). All of the other stochastic variables,
including the four wedges–the eﬃciency wedge At (st ), the labor wedge 1 − τ lt (st ), the investment wedge

1/[1 + τ xt (st )], and the government consumption wedge gt (st )–are simply functions of this random
variable. Hence, when the state st is known, so are the wedges.

To evaluate the eﬀects of just the eﬃciency wedge, for example, we consider an economy, referred
to as an eﬃciency wedge alone economy, with the same underlying state st and probability πt (st ) and the
same function At (st ) for the eﬃciency wedge as in the prototype economy, but in which the other three
wedges are set to constants, in that τ lt (st ) = τ̄ l , τ xt (st ) = τ̄ x , and gt (st ) = ḡ. Note that this construction
ensures that the probability distribution of the eﬃciency wedge in this economy is identical to that in
the prototype economy.
For the eﬃciency wedge alone economy, we then compute the equilibrium outcomes associated with
the realizations of the state st in a particular episode and compare these outcomes to those of the economy
with all four wedges. We find this comparison to be of particular interest because in our applications,
the realizations st are such that the economy with all four wedges exactly reproduces the data on output,
labor, investment, and consumption.
In a similar manner, we define the labor wedge alone economy, the investment wedge alone economy,
and the government consumption wedge alone economy, as well as economies with a combination of wedges
such as the eﬃciency and labor wedge economy.

2.2 A Markovian Implementation
So far we have described our procedure assuming that we know the stochastic process πt (st ) and
that we can observe the state st . In practice, of course, we need to either specify the stochastic process a
priori or use data to estimate it, and we need to uncover the state st from the data. Here we describe a
set of assumptions that makes these eﬀorts easy. Then we describe in detail the three steps involved in
implementing our procedure.
We assume that the state st follows a Markov process of the form π(st |st−1 ) and that the wedges in
period t can be used to uniquely uncover the event st , in the sense that the mapping from the event st to the
wedges (log At , τ lt , τ xt , log gt ) is one-to-one and onto. Given this assumption, without loss of generality,
let the underlying event st = (sAt , slt , sxt , sgt ), and let log At (st ) = sAt , τ lt (st ) = slt , τ xt (st ) = sxt , and
15

log gt (st ) = sgt . Note that we have eﬀectively assumed that agents use only past wedges to forecast future
wedges and that the wedges in period t are suﬃcient statistics for the event in period t.
The first step in our procedure is to use data on yt , lt , xt , and gt from an actual economy to estimate
the parameters of the Markov process π(st |st−1 ). We can do so using a variety of methods, including the
maximum likelihood procedure described below.
The second step in our procedure is to uncover the event st by measuring the realized wedges. We
measure the government consumption wedge directly from the data as the sum of government spending
and net exports. To obtain the values of the other three wedges, we use the data and the model’s decision
rules. With ytd , ltd , xdt , gtd , and k0d denoting the data and y(st , kt ), l(st , kt ), and x(st , kt ) denoting the
decision rules of the model, the realized wedge series sdt solves
(26)

ytd = y(sdt , kt ), ltd = l(sdt , kt ), and xdt = x(sdt , kt ),

with kt+1 = (1 − δ)kt + xdt , k0 = k0d , and gt = gtd . Note that we construct a series for the capital stock
using the capital accumulation law (1), data on investment xt , and an initial choice of capital stock k0 .
In eﬀect, we solve for the three unknown elements of the vector st using the three equations (3)—(5) and
thereby uncover the state. We use the associated values for the wedges in our experiments.
Note that the four wedges account for all of the movement in output, labor, investment, and
government consumption, in that if we feed the four wedges into the three decision rules in (26) and use
log gt (sdt ) = sgt along with the law of motion for capital, we simply recover the original data.
Note also that, in measuring the realized wedges, the estimated stochastic process plays a role in
measuring only the investment wedge. To see that the stochastic process does not play a role in measuring
the eﬃciency and labor wedges, note that these wedges can equivalently be directly calculated from (3)
and (4) without computing the equilibrium of the model. In contrast, calculating the investment wedge
requires computing the equilibrium of the model because the right side of (5) has expectations over future
values of consumption, the capital stock, the wedges, and so on. The equilibrium of the model depends
on these expectations and, therefore, on the stochastic process driving the wedges.
The third step in our procedure is to conduct experiments to isolate the marginal eﬀects of the
wedges. To do that, we allow a subset of the wedges to fluctuate as they do in the data while the
others are set to constants. To evaluate the eﬀects of the eﬃciency wedge, we compute the decision rules
for the eﬃciency wedge alone economy, denoted y e (st , kt ), le (st , kt ), and xe (st , kt ), in which log At (st ) =
sAt , τ lt (st ) = τ̄ l , τ xt (st ) = τ̄ x , and gt (st ) = ḡ. Starting from k0d , we then use sdt , the decision rules, and
the capital accumulation law to compute the realized sequence of output, labor, and investment, yte , lte ,
and xet , which we call the eﬃciency wedge components of output, labor, and investment. We compare
16

these components to output, labor, and investment in the data. Other components are computed and
compared similarly.
Notice that in this experiment we computed the decision rules for an economy in which only one
wedge fluctuates and the others are set to be constants in all events. The fluctuations in the one wedge
are driven by fluctuations in a 4 dimensional state st .
Notice also that our experiments are designed to separate out the direct eﬀect and the forecasting
eﬀect of fluctuations in wedges. As a wedge fluctuates, it directly aﬀects either budget constraints or
resource constraints. This fluctuation also aﬀects the forecasts of that wedge as well as of other wedges in
the future. Our experiments are designed so that when we hold a particular wedge constant, we eliminate
the direct eﬀect of that wedge, but we retain its forecasting eﬀect on the other wedges. By doing so, we
ensure that expectations of the fluctuating wedges are identical to those in the prototype economy.
Here we focus on one simple way to specify the expectations of agents: assume they simply use past
values of the wedges to forecast future values. An extension of our Markovian procedure is to use past
endogenous variables, such as output, investment, consumption, and perhaps even asset prices such as
stock market values, in addition to past wedges to forecast future wedges. Another approach is to simply
specify these expectations directly, as we did in our earlier work (Chari, Kehoe, and McGrattan (2002))
and then conduct a variety of experiments to determine how the results change as the specification is
changed.
3. Applying the Accounting Application
Now we demonstrate how to apply our accounting procedure to two U.S. business cycle episodes:
the Great Depression and the postwar recession of 1982. We then extend our analysis to the entire
postwar period. (In the technical appendix, we describe in detail our data sources, parameter choices,
computational methods, and estimation procedures.)

3.1. Details of the Application
To apply our accounting procedure, we use functional forms and parameter values familiar from
the business cycle literature. We assume that the production function has the form F (k, l) = kα l1−α and
the utility function the form U(c, l) = log c + ψ log(1 − l). We choose the capital share α = .35 and the
time allocation parameter ψ = 2.24. We choose the depreciation rate δ, the discount factor β, and growth
rates γ and γ n so that, on an annualized basis, depreciation is 4.64%, the rate of time preference 3%, the
population growth rate 1.5%, and the growth of technology 1.6%.
17

To estimate the stochastic process for the state, we first specify a vector autoregressive AR(1)
process for the event st = (sAt , slt , sxt , sgt ) of the form
st+1 = P0 + P st + εt+1 ,

(27)

where the shock εt is i.i.d. over time and is distributed normally with mean zero and covariance matrix V.
To ensure that our estimate of V is positive semidefinite, we estimate the lower triangular matrix Q, where
V = QQ0 . The matrix Q has no structural interpretation. (In section 5, we elaborate on the contrast
between our decomposition and more traditional decompositions which impose structural interpretations
on Q.)
We then use a standard maximum likelihood procedure to estimate the parameters P0 , P , and
V of the vector AR(1) process for the wedges. In doing so, we use the log-linear decision rules of the
prototype economy and data on output, labor, investment, and the sum of government consumption and
net exports.
For our Great Depression experiments, we proceed as follows. We discretize the process (27) and
simulate the economy using nonlinear decision rules from a finite-element method. We use nonlinear
decision rules in these experiments because the shocks are so large that, for a given stochastic process,
the linear decision rules are a poor approximation to the nonlinear decision rules. Of course, we would
rather have used the nonlinear decision rules in estimating the parameters of the vector AR(1) process. We
do not do so because this exercise is computationally demanding. Instead we experiment by varying the
parameters of the vector AR(1) process and find that our results are very similar across these experiments.
For our postwar experiments, we use the log-linear decision rules and the continuous state process
(27).
In order to implement our accounting procedure, we must first adjust the data to make them
consistent with the theory. In particular, we adjust the U.S. data on output and its components to
remove sales taxes and to add the service flow for consumer durables. For the pre—World War II period,
we remove military compensation as well. We estimate separate sets of parameters for the stochastic
process for wedges (27) for each of our two historical episodes. The other parameters are the same in
the two episodes. (See our technical appendix for our rationale for this decision.) The stochastic process
parameters for the Great Depression analysis are estimated using annual data for 1901—40; those for
analysis after World War II, using quarterly data for 1959:1—2004:3. In the Great Depression analysis, we
impose the additional restriction that the covariance between the shocks to the government consumption
wedge and those to the other wedges is zero. This restriction avoids having the large movements in
government consumption associated with World War I dominate the estimation of the stochastic process.
18

Table I displays the resulting estimated values for the parameters of the coeﬃcient matrices, P and
Q, and the associated confidence bands for our two historical data periods. The stochastic process (27)
with these values will be used by agents in our economy to form their expectations about future wedges.

3.2. Findings
Now we describe the results of applying our procedure to two historical U.S. business cycle episodes.
In the Great Depression, the eﬃciency and labor wedges play a central role for all variables considered.
In the 1982 recession, the eﬃciency wedge plays a central role for output and investment while the labor
wedge plays a central role for labor. The government consumption wedge plays no role in either period.
Most strikingly, neither does the investment wedge.
In reporting our findings, we remove a trend of 1.6% from output, investment, and the government
consumption wedge. Both output and labor are normalized to equal 100 in the base periods: 1929 for
the Great Depression and 1979:1 for the 1982 recession. In both of these historical episodes, investment
(detrended) is divided by the base period level of output. Since the government consumption component
accounts for virtually none of the fluctuations in output, labor, and investment, we discuss the government
consumption wedge and its components only in our technical appendix. Here we focus primarily on the
fluctuations due to the eﬃciency, labor, and investment wedges.
a. The Great Depression
Our findings for the period 1929—39, which includes the Great Depression, are displayed in Figures
1—4. In sum, we find that the eﬃciency and labor wedges account for essentially all of the movements
of output, labor, and investment in the Depression period and that the investment wedge actually drives
output the wrong way.
In Figure 1, we display actual U.S. output along with the three measured wedges for that period:
the eﬃciency wedge A, the labor wedge (1 − τ l ), and the investment wedge 1/(1 + τ x ). We see that the
underlying distortions revealed by the three wedges have diﬀerent patterns. The distortions that manifest
themselves as eﬃciency and labor wedges become substantially worse between 1929 and 1933. By 1939,
the eﬃciency wedge has returned to the 1929 trend level, but the labor wedge has not. Over the period,
the investment wedge fluctuates, but investment decisions are generally less distorted, in the sense that
τ x is smaller between 1932 and 1939 than it is in 1929. Note that this investment wedge pattern does
not square with models of business cycles in which financial frictions increase in downturns and decrease
in recoveries.

19

In Figure 2, we plot the 1929—39 data for U.S. output, labor, and investment along with the model’s
predictions for those variables when the model includes just one wedge. In terms of the data, note that
labor declines 27% from 1929 to 1933 and stays relatively low for the rest of the decade. Investment also
declines sharply from 1929 to 1933 but partially recovers by the end of the decade. Interestingly, in an
algebraic sense, about half of output’s 36% fall from 1929 to 1933 is due to the decline in investment.
In terms of the model, we start by assessing the separate contributions of the three wedges.
Consider first the contribution of the eﬃciency wedge. In Figure 2, we see that with this wedge
alone, the model predicts that output declines less than it actually does in the data and that it recovers
more rapidly. For example, by 1933, predicted output falls about 30% while U.S. output falls about 36%.
Thus, the eﬃciency wedge accounts for over 80% of the decline of output in the data. By 1939, predicted
output is only about 6% below trend rather than the observed 22%. As can also be seen in Figure 2,
the reason for this predicted rapid recovery is that the eﬃciency wedge accounts for only a small part
of the observed movements in labor in the data. By 1933 the fall in predicted investment is similar but
somewhat greater than that in the data. It recovers faster, however.
Consider next the contributions of the labor wedge. In Figure 2, we see that with this wedge alone,
the model predicts output due to the labor wedge to fall by 1933 a little less than half as much as output
falls in the data: 16% vs. 36%. By 1939, however, the labor wedge model’s predicted output completely
captures the slow recovery: it predicts output falling 21%, approximately as much as output does that
year in the data. This model captures the slow output recovery because predicted labor due to the labor
wedge also captures the sluggishness in labor after 1933 remarkably well. The associated prediction for
investment is a decline, but not the actual sharp decline from 1929 to 1933.
Summarizing Figure 2, we can say that the eﬃciency wedge accounts for over three-quarters of
output’s downturn during the Great Depression but misses its slow recovery, while the labor wedge
accounts for about one-half of this downturn and essentially all of the slow recovery.
Now consider the investment wedge. In Figure 3, we again plot the data for output, labor, and
investment, but this time along with the contributions to those variables that the model predicts are
due to the investment wedge alone. This figure demonstrates that the investment wedge’s contributions
completely miss the observed movements in all three variables. The investment wedge actually leads
output to rise by about 9% by 1933.
Together, then, Figures 2 and 3 suggest that the eﬃciency and labor wedges account for essentially
all of the movements of output, labor, and investment in the Depression period and that the investment
wedge accounts for almost none. This suggestion is confirmed by Figure 4. There we plot the combined

20

contribution from the eﬃciency, labor, and (insignificant) government consumption wedges (labeled Model
With No Investment Wedge). As can be seen from the figure, essentially all of the fluctuations in
output, labor, and investment can be accounted for by movements in the eﬃciency and labor wedges.
For comparison, we also plot the combined contribution due to the labor, investment, and government
consumption wedges (labeled Model With No Eﬃciency Wedge). This combination does not do well. In
fact, comparing Figures 2 and 4, we see that the model with this combination is further from the data
than the model with the labor wedge component alone.
One issue of possible concern with our findings about the role of the investment wedge is that
measuring it is subtler than measuring the other wedges. Recall that the measurement of this wedge
depends on the details of the stochastic process governing the wedges, whereas the size of the other
wedges can be inferred from static equilibrium conditions. To address this concern, we conduct an
additional experiment intended to give the model with no eﬃciency wedge the best chance of accounting
for the data.
In this experiment, we choose the investment wedge to be as large as it needs to be for investment in
the model to be as close as possible to investment in the data, and we set the other wedges to be constants.
Predictions of this model, which we call the Model With Maximum Investment Wedge, turn out to poorly
match the behavior of consumption in the data. For example, from 1929 to 1933, consumption in the
model rises more than 8% relative to trend while consumption in the data declines about 28%. (For
details, see the technical appendix.) We label this poor performance the consumption anomaly of the
investment wedge model.
Altogether, these findings lead us to conclude that distortions which manifest themselves primarily
as investment wedges played essentially no useful role in the U.S. Great Depression.
b. The 1982 Recession
Now we apply our accounting procedure to a more typical U.S. business cycle: the recession of
1982. Here we get basically the same results as with the earlier period: the eﬃciency and labor wedges
play primary roles in the business cycle fluctuations, and the investment wedge plays essentially none.
We start here as we did in the Great Depression analysis, by displaying actual U.S. output over
the entire business cycle period–here, 1979—85–along with the three measured wedges for that period.
In Figure 5, we see that output falls nearly 10% relative to trend between 1979 and 1982 and by 1985 is
back up to about 1% below trend. We also see that the eﬃciency wedge falls between 1979 and 1982 and
by 1985 is still a little more than 3% below trend. The labor wedge also worsens from 1979 to 1982, but
it improves substantially by 1985. The investment wedge, meanwhile, fluctuates until 1983 and improves
21

thereafter.
An analysis of the eﬀects of the wedges separately for the 1979—85 period is in Figures 6 and 7. In
Figure 6, we see that the model with the eﬃciency wedge alone produces a decline in output from 1979
to 1982 of 6%, which is about 60% of the actual decline in that period. Here output recovers a bit more
slowly than in the data, but seems to otherwise generally parallel the data’s movements. The model with
the labor wedge alone produces a decline in output from 1979 to 1982 of only about 3%. In Figure 7, we
see that the model with just the investment wedge produces essentially no fluctuations in output.
Now we examine how well a combination of wedges reproduces the data for the 1982 recession
period just as we did for the Depression period. In Figure 8, we plot the movements in output, labor,
and investment during 1979—85 due to two combinations of wedges. One is the combined eﬀects of the
eﬃciency, labor, and (insignificant) government consumption components (labeled Model With No Investment Wedge). In terms of output, this combination mimics the decline in output until 1982 extremely well
and produces a slightly shallower recovery than in the data. The other is the combination of the labor,
investment, and government components (labeled Model With No Eﬃciency Wedge), which produces a
modest decline in output relative to the data. In Figures 6, 7, and 8, we see clearly that in the model
with no eﬃciency wedge the labor wedge accounts for essentially all of the decline and the investment
wedge, essentially none.

3.3. Extending the Analysis to the Entire Postwar Period
So far we have analyzed the wedges and their contributions for specific episodes. The findings
for both episodes suggest that frictions in detailed models which manifest themselves as investment
wedges in the benchmark prototype economy play, at best, a tertiary role in accounting for business
cycle fluctuations. Do our findings apply beyond those particular episodes? We attempt to extend our
analysis to the entire postwar period by developing some summary statistics for the period from 1959:1
through 2004:3 using HP-filtered data. We first consider the standard deviations of the wedges relative
to output as well as correlations of the wedges with each other and with output at various leads and lags.
We then consider the standard deviations and the cross correlations of output due to each wedge. These
statistics summarize salient features of the wedges and their role in output fluctuations for the entire
postwar sample. We think of the wedge statistics as analogs of our plots of the wedges and the output
statistics as analogs of our plots of output due to just one wedge.1 The results suggest that our earlier
findings do hold up, at least in a relative sense: the investment wedge seems to play a larger role over the
entire postwar period than in the 1982 recession, but its eﬀects are still quite modest compared to those
22

of the other wedges.
In Tables II and III, we display standard deviations and cross correlations calculated using HPfiltered data for the postwar period. Panel A of Table II shows that the eﬃciency, labor, and investment
wedges are positively correlated with output both contemporaneously and for several leads and lags.
In contrast, the government consumption wedge is somewhat negatively correlated with output, both
contemporaneously and for several leads and lags. (Note that the government consumption wedge is the
sum of government consumption and net exports and that net exports are negatively correlated with
output.) Panel B of Table II shows that the cross correlations of the eﬃciency, labor, and investment
wedges are generally positive.
Table III summarizes various statistics of the movements of output over this period due to each
wedge. Consider panel A, and focus first on the output fluctuations due to the eﬃciency wedge. Table
III shows that output movements due to this wedge have a standard deviation which is 73% of that of
output in the data. These movements are highly positively correlated with output in the data, both
contemporaneously and for several leads and lags. These statistics are consistent with our episodic
analysis of the 1982 recession, which showed that the eﬃciency wedge can account for about 60% of the
actual decline in output during that period and comoves highly with it.
Consider next the role of the other wedges in the entire postwar period. Return to Table III.
In panel A, again, we see that output due to the labor wedge alone fluctuates almost 60% as much as
does output in the data and is positively correlated with it. Output due to the investment wedge alone
fluctuates less than a third as much as output in the data and is somewhat positively correlated with it.
Finally, output due to the government consumption wedge alone fluctuates about 40% as much as output
in the data and is somewhat negatively correlated with it. In panel B of Table III, we see that output
movements due to the eﬃciency and labor wedges as well as the eﬃciency and investment wedges are
positively correlated and that the cross correlations of output movements due to the other wedges are
mostly essentially zero or negative.
All of our analyses using business cycle accounting thus seem to lead to the same conclusion: to
study business cycles, the most promising detailed models to explore are those in which frictions manifest
themselves primarily as eﬃciency or labor wedges, not as investment wedges.

4. Interpreting Wedges With
Alternative Technology or Preference Specifications
In detailed economies with technology and preferences similar to those in our benchmark proto23

type economy, the equivalence propositions proved thus far provide a mapping between frictions in those
detailed economies and wedges in the prototype economy. Here we construct a similar mapping when
technology or preferences diﬀer in the two types of economies. We then ask if this alternative mapping
changes our substantive conclusion that financial frictions which manifest themselves primarily as investment wedges are unlikely to play a primary role in accounting for business cycles. We find that it does
not.
When detailed economies have technology or preferences diﬀerent from the benchmark economy’s,
wedges in the benchmark economy can be viewed as arising from two sources: frictions in the detailed
economy and diﬀerences in the specification of technology or preferences. While researchers could simply
use results from our benchmark prototype economy to draw inferences about promising classes of models,
drawing such inferences is easier with an alternative approach. Basically, we decompose the wedges
into their two sources. To do that, construct an alternative prototype economy with technology and
preferences that do coincide with those in the detailed economy, and repeat the business cycle accounting
procedure with those two economies. The part of the wedges in the benchmark prototype economy due
to frictions, then, will be the wedges in the alternative prototype economy, while the remainder will be
due to specification diﬀerences.
Here we use this approach to explore alternative prototype economies with technology and preference specifications chosen because of their popularity in the literature. These alternative specifications
include variable instead of fixed capital utilization, diﬀerent labor supply elasticities, and varying levels
of costs to adjusting investment.
Two of these changes oﬀer no help to investment wedges. Adding variable capital utilization to
the analysis shifts the relative contributions of the eﬃciency and labor wedges to output’s fluctuations–
decreasing the eﬃciency wedge’s contribution and increasing the labor wedge’s–but this alternative
specification leaves the investment wedge’s contribution definitely in third place. Adding diﬀerent labor
elasticities to the analysis oﬀers no help either.
The third specification change seems to give investment wedges a slightly larger role, but still
not a primary one. With investment adjustment costs added to the analysis, the investment wedge
in the benchmark prototype economy depends on both the investment wedge and the marginal cost of
investment in the alternative prototype economy. We find that even if the investment wedge is constant
in the benchmark economy, it will worsen during recessions and improve during booms in the alternative
economy. With our measured wedges, this finding suggests that with large enough adjustment costs,
investment wedges in detailed economies could play a significant role in business cycle fluctuations.

24

To study this possibility, we investigate the eﬀects of two parameter values for adjustment costs:
one at the level used by Bernanke, Gertler, and Gilchrist (1999), the BGG level, and one we consider
extreme, at four times that level. For the Great Depression period, we find that for both adjustment cost
levels, investment wedges play only a minor role. For the 1982 recession period, we find that these wedges
play a very small role with BGG level costs and a somewhat larger but still modest role with the much
higher costs. These findings suggest that researchers who think adjustment costs are extremely high may
want to include in their models financial frictions that manifest themselves as investment wedges. Such
models are not likely to do well, however, unless they also include other frictions that play the primary
role in business cycle fluctuations.

4.1. Details of Alternative Specifications
a. Variable Capital Utilization
We begin with an extreme view about the amount of variability in capital utilization.
Our specification of the technology which allows for variable capital utilization follows the work
of Kydland and Prescott (1988) and Hornstein and Prescott (1993). We assume that the production
function is now
(28)

y = A(kh)α (nh)1−α ,

where n is the number of workers employed and h is the length (or hours) of the workweek. The labor
input is, then, l = nh.
In the data, we measure only the labor input l and the capital stock k. We do not directly measure
h or n. The benchmark specification for the production function can be interpreted as assuming that all
of the observed variation in measured labor input l is in the number of workers and that the workweek h
is constant. Under this interpretation, our benchmark specification with fixed capital utilization correctly
measures the eﬃciency wedge (up to the constant h).
Now we investigate the opposite extreme: assume that the number of workers n is constant and
that all the variation in labor is from the workweek h. Under this variable capital utilization specification,
the services of capital kh are proportional to the product of the stock k and the labor input l, so that
variations in the labor input induce variations in the flow of capital services. Thus, the capital utilization
rate is proportional to the labor input l, and the eﬃciency wedge is proportional to y/kα .
Consider an alternative prototype economy, denoted economy 2, identical to a deterministic version
of our benchmark prototype economy, denoted economy 1, except that the production function is now
25

given by y = Akα l. Let the sequence of wedges and the equilibrium outcomes in the two economies be
(Ait , τ lit , τ xit ) and (yit , cit , lit , xit ) for i = 1, 2. We then have this proposition:
Proposition 3: If the sequence of wedges for an alternative prototype economy 2 are related to the
−α
, 1 − τ l2t = (1 − α)(1 − τ l1t ), and τ x2t = τ x1t , then
wedges in the prototype economy 1 by A2t = A1t l1t

the equilibrium outcomes for the two economies coincide.
Proof: We prove this proposition by showing that the equilibrium conditions of economy 2 are
α l1−α , using the definition of A ,
satisfied at the equilibrium outcomes of economy 1. Since y1t = A1t k1t
2t
1t
α l . The first-order condition for labor in economy 1 is
we have that y1t = A2t k1t
1t

−

(1 − α)y1t
Ult (c1t , l1t )
= (1 − τ l1t )
.
Uct (c1t , l1t )
l1t

Using the definition of τ l2t , we have that
−

y1t
Ult (c1t , l1t )
= (1 − τ l2t ) .
Uct (c1t , l1t )
l1t

The rest of the equations governing the equilibrium are unaﬀected.

Q.E.D.

Note that even if the eﬃciency wedge in the alternative prototype economy does not fluctuate, the
associated eﬃciency wedge in the prototype economy will. Proposition 3 also implies that if τ x1t is a
constant, so that the contribution of the investment wedge to fluctuations in economy 1 is zero, then τ x2t
is also a constant; hence, the contribution of the investment wedge to fluctuations in economy 2 is also
zero. Extending this proposition to a stochastic environment is immediate.
Now suppose that we are interested in detailed economies with variable capital utilization. We use
the alternative prototype economy to ask whether this change aﬀects our substantive conclusions. In
answering this question, we reestimate the parameters of the stochastic process for the underlying state.
(For details, see the technical appendix.)
Variable capital utilization can induce significant changes in the measured eﬃciency wedge. To see
these changes, in Figure 9, we plot the measured eﬃciency wedges for these two specifications of capital
utilization during the Great Depression period (with it fixed in the benchmark economy and variable
now). Clearly, when capital utilization is variable rather than fixed, the eﬃciency wedge falls less and
recovers more by 1939. (For the other wedges, see the technical appendix).
In Figure 10, we plot the data and the predicted output due to the eﬃciency and labor wedges
for the 1930s when the model includes variable capital utilization. Comparing Figures 10 and 2, we see
that with the remeasured eﬃciency wedge, the labor wedge plays a much larger role in accounting for the
output downturn and slow recovery and the eﬃciency wedge plays a much smaller role.
26

In Figure 11, we plot the three data series again, this time with the predictions of the variable
capital utilization model with just the investment wedge. Comparing this to Figure 3, we see that with
variable capital utilization, the investment wedge drives output the wrong way to an even greater extent
than in the benchmark economy.
In Figure 12, we compare the contributions of the sum of the eﬃciency and labor wedges for the
two specifications of capital utilization (fixed and variable) during the Great Depression period. The
figure shows that these contributions are quite similar. While remeasuring the eﬃciency wedge changes
the relative contributions of the two wedges, it clearly has little eﬀect on their combined contribution.
Overall, then, taking account of variable capital utilization strengthens our finding that in the
Great Depression period, the eﬃciency and labor wedges play a primary role and investment wedges do
not.
b. Diﬀerent Labor Supply Elasticities
Now we consider the eﬀects on our results of changing the elasticity of labor supply. We assume
in our benchmark model that preferences are logarithmic in both consumption and leisure. Consider
now an alternative prototype economy with a diﬀerent elasticity of labor supply. We show that a result
analogous to that in Proposition 3 holds: allowing for diﬀerent labor supply elasticities changes the size of
the measured labor wedge but not that of the measured investment wedge. Therefore, if the contribution
of the investment wedge is zero in the benchmark prototype economy, it is also zero in an economy with
a diﬀerent labor supply elasticity.
To see that, consider an alternative prototype economy which is identical to a deterministic version
of our benchmark model except that now the utility function is given by U(c) + V2 (1 − l). Denote the
utility function in our benchmark prototype economy (economy 1) by U(c)+V1 (1−l). Clearly, by varying
the function V2 , we can generate a wide range of alternative labor supply elasticities.
Let the sequence of wedges and the equilibrium outcomes in the two economies be (Ait , τ lit , τ xit )
and (yit , cit , lit , xit ) for i = 1, 2. We then have this proposition:
Proposition 4: If the sequence of wedges for the alternative prototype economy, economy 2, is
given by
1 − τ l2t = (1 − τ l1t )

V20 (1 − l1t )
,
V10 (1 − l1t )

and if A2t = A1t and τ x2t = τ x1t , then the equilibrium outcomes for the two economies coincide.
Proof: We prove this proposition by showing that the equilibrium conditions of economy 2 are
27

satisfied at the equilibrium outcomes of economy 1. The first-order condition for labor input in economy
1 is
−

V10 (1 − l1t )
(1 − α)y1t
= (1 − τ l1t )
.
0
U (c1t )
l1t

Using the definition of τ l2t , we have that
−

V20 (1 − l1t )
(1 − α)y1t
,
= (1 − τ l2t )
U 0 (c1t )
l1t

so that the first-order condition for labor in economy 2 is satisfied. The rest of the equations governing the
equilibrium are unaﬀected.

Q.E.D.

Note that here even if the labor wedge does not fluctuate in our benchmark prototype economy, it
typically will in the alternative prototype economy. Note also that the investment wedges are the same
in both economies. Thus, if the investment wedge is constant in one economy, it is constant in the other;
and the contribution of the investment wedge to fluctuations is zero in both economies. Extending this
proposition to a stochastic environment is immediate.
c. Investment Adjustment Costs
Now we consider a third alternative prototype economy, this one with investment adjustment
costs. These costs can be interpreted as standing in for one of two features of detailed economies.
One is that the detailed economies have adjustment costs in converting output into installed capital.
Another interpretation is that the detailed model does not have adjustment costs, but that financial
frictions manifest themselves as adjustment costs in the alternative prototype economy (as in Bernanke
and Gertler (1989) and Carlstrom and Fuerst (1997)).
In this alternative prototype economy, the only diﬀerence from the benchmark prototype economy
is that the capital accumulation law is no longer (1), but rather is
µ ¶
xt
(1 + γ n )kt+1 = (1 − δ)kt + xt − φ
kt ,
(29)
kt
where φ represents the per unit cost of adjusting the capital stock. In the macroeconomic literature, a
commonly used functional form for the adjustment costs φ is
(30)

φ

³x´
k

=

´2
a ³x
−b ,
2 k

where b = δ + γ + γ n is the steady-state value of the investment-capital ratio.
To set up the analog of Propositions 3 and 4, let the wedges in the benchmark prototype economy,
economy 1, and the alternative prototype economy, economy 2, be (Ait , τ lit , τ xit ) and (yit , cit , lit , xit ) for
28

i = 1, 2. For simplicity, let τ x2t and g2t be identically zero. The proof of the following proposition is
immediate.
Proposition 5: If the sequence of wedges for the alternative prototype economy, economy 2, is
given by A2t = A1t , τ l2t = τ l1t , τ x1t implicitly defined by
(31)

A2t+1 Fkt+1 + (1 − δ + φt − x2t+1 φ0t+1 /k2t+1 )(1 − φ0t+1 )−1
A1t+1 Fkt+1 + (1 − δ)(1 + τ x1t+1 )
=
,
1 + τ x1t
(1 − φ0t )−1

and g1t = φt k2t , then the equilibrium outcomes for the two economies coincide.
In understanding the investment wedge τ x1t , note that if adjustment costs are given by (30), then
the term φt − xt+1 φ0t+1 /kt+1 in (31) equals a[(x/k)2 − b2 ]/2, which is an order of magnitude smaller than

φ0t = a[x/k − b]. Setting this term to zero gives the approximation
(32)

1 + τ x1t =

1
.
1 − φ0t

>From (32) and the convexity of φ, we see that τ x1 is increasing in x/k and is zero when x/k is at its
steady-state value. Hence, in recessions, when x/k is relatively low, τ x1 is negative; and in booms, when
x/k is relatively high, τ x1 is positive. In this sense, even when the alternative prototype economy has
no investment wedges, τ x1 will be countercyclical in the benchmark prototype economy, so investment
distortions will be smaller in recessions.
Note, more generally, that when investment wedges in the alternative prototype economy are
nonzero, the analog of (32) is
(33)

1 + τ x1t =

1 + τ x2t
.
1 − φ0t

We can also use the equivalence map in (33) in the reverse direction. Imagine that the data are
generated from a detailed economy with no adjustment costs and no frictions. The benchmark prototype
economy will have τ x1t = 0. Suppose a researcher considers an alternative prototype economy with
adjustment costs. This researcher will find that 1 + τ x2t = 1 − φ0t , so that the investment wedge will be
procyclical even though the detailed economy has no frictions.
More generally, a researcher who incorrectly specifies too high a level of adjustment costs in the
alternative prototype economy will infer that investment wedges play a much larger role than they actually
do. To get some intuition for this result, consider two alternative prototype economies A and B, both
of which have investment wedges and adjustment costs. The analog of our approximation (33) is (1 +
τ xAt )/(1 − φ0At ) = (1 + τ xBt )/(1 − φ0Bt ), where φit denotes adjustment costs in economy i = A, B.
Straightforward algebra establishes that specifying too high a level of adjustment costs makes investment
wedges seem worse in recessions than they actually are.
29

Now we consider a prototype economy with adjustment costs and ask whether our substantive
conclusion that the investment wedge plays at most a tertiary role in either the Great Depression or
postwar business cycles is aﬀected. We follow Bernanke, Gertler, and Gilchrist (1999) in how we choose
the value for the parameter a. Bernanke, Gertler, and Gilchrist (BGG) choose this parameter so that the
elasticity, η, of the price of capital with respect to the investment-capital ratio is .25. In this setup, the
price of capital q = 1/(1 − φ0 ), so that, evaluated at the steady state, η = a(δ + γ + γ n ). Given our other
parameters, a = 3.22. In Figures 13 and 14, this parameterization is labeled as the model with BGG
Costs. Bernanke, Gertler, and Gilchrist also argue that a reasonable range for the elasticity η is between
0 and .5, that values much outside this range imply implausibly high adjustment costs. We consider an
extreme case in which η = 1, so that a = 12.88, roughly four times the BGG level. In the figures, this
parameterization is labeled as the model with Extreme Costs. For each setting of the parameter a, we
reestimate the stochastic process for the state. (For the parameter values of the stochastic process, see
the technical appendix.)
Comparing the investment wedges in Figure 1 and panel A of Figure 13, we see that introducing
investment adjustment costs leads the investment wedge to worsen rather than improve in the early
part of the Great Depression. In panel A of Figure 14 we see that this worsening produces a decline in
output from 1929 to 1933. With the BGG adjustment costs, however, the decline is tiny (2% from 1929
to 1933). Even with the extreme adjustment costs, the decline is only 6.5% and, hence, accounts for
only about one-sixth of the overall decline in output.2 Moreover, with these extreme adjustment costs,
the consumption anomaly associated with investment wedges is acute. For example, from 1929 to 1932,
relative to trend, consumption in the data falls about 18%, while in the model it actually rises by more
than 5%.
We are skeptical that detailed models with extreme adjustment costs are worth exploring. With
extreme costs, given the observed levels of investment and the capital stock in the data, (30) implies
that the resources lost due to adjustment costs as a fraction of output are nearly 7% in 1933. We share
Bernanke, Gertler, and Gilchrist’s (1999) concerns that costs of this magnitude are implausibly large.
From 1929 to 1933, investment falls sharply, but the adjustment costs implied by (30) rise sharply. Why
would firms incur adjustment costs simply by investing at positive rates below their steady-state value?
The idea that managers incurred huge adjustment costs simply because they were watching their machines
depreciate seems farfetched. Furthermore, the idea that from 1929 to 1933 investment fell sharply but
adjustment costs rose sharply is inconsistent with interpreting these costs as arising from monitoring
costs in an economy with financial frictions. Indeed, in such an economy, as investment activity falls, so

30

do monitoring costs.
We do similar experiments for the 1982 recession period, with similar results. In panel B of
Figure 13, we see that with BGG costs the investment wedge fluctuates little through the end of 1982
and improves thereafter. With extreme costs the investment wedges worsens until 1983 and improves
thereafter. Panel B of Figure 14 shows that in the model with costs at the BGG level, the investment
wedge plays essentially no role in output fluctuations. With costs at four times the BGG level, the panel
shows that the investment wedge plays a bit larger but still modest role. Recall that, relative to trend,
output in the data falls almost 10% from its peak to its trough. With extreme adjustment costs, output
due to the investment wedge falls about 2.2%, so that the investment wedge appears to account for
roughly one-fifth of the fall in output.
In our judgment, the investment wedge actually accounts for much less than one-fifth of the 1982
recession fall in output because we think extreme adjustment costs are implausible. Even aside from the
Great Depression issues, we find models with extreme adjustment costs diﬃcult to reconcile with data
on plant level investment decisions. An extensive literature has documented that investment at the plant
level has large spikes. Doms and Dunne (1994), for example, examine plant level data for 33,000 plants
over 17 years. They show that much of the growth in the capital stock of a plant is concentrated in a
short period of time. In the year of highest investment, the capital stock grows 45%, while in the years
immediately before and after that, it grows less than 10%. Such behavior is clearly inconsistent with
extreme adjustment costs.
Furthermore, the use of adjustment costs in macroeconomic analysis is controversial. Kydland and
Prescott (1982), for example, have argued that models with adjustment costs like those in equation (30)
are inconsistent with the data. Such models imply a static relationship between the investment-capital
ratio and the relative price of investment goods to output (of the form q = 1/[1 − φ0 (x/k)]). This means
that the elasticity of the investment-capital ratio with respect to the relative price is the same in the
short run and the long run. Kydland and Prescott argue that this is not consistent with the data, where
short-run elasticities are much smaller than long-run elasticities.
Finally, the finding that investment wedges play a modest role when adjustment costs are extreme is
easy to reconcile with the view that financial frictions which manifest themselves primarily as investment
wedges play a small role over the business cycle. This reconciliation uses the insight discussed above that
a modeler who incorrectly specifies too high a level of adjustment costs will incorrectly find too large a
role for investment wedges.

31

5. Contrasting Our Decomposition With Traditional Decompositions
Our decomposition of business cycle fluctuations is intended to isolate the partial eﬀects of each
of the wedges on equilibrium outcomes, and in this sense, it is diﬀerent from traditional decompositions.
Those decompositions attempt to isolate the eﬀects of (so-called) primitive shocks on equilibrium outcomes; ours does not. Isolating the eﬀects of primitive shocks requires specifying a detailed model. Since
our procedure precedes the specification of a detailed model, it obviously cannot be used to isolate the
eﬀects of primitive shocks. In order to clarify the distinction between our decomposition and a traditional
one, here we describe a traditional decomposition and explain why we prefer ours.
The traditional decomposition attempts to isolate the eﬀects of primitive shocks by “naming the innovations.” Recall that in our stochastic process for the four wedges, (27), the innovations εt+1 are allowed
to be contemporaneously correlated with the covariance matrix V. Under the traditional decomposition,
the primitive shocks, say, ηt+1 , are assumed to be mean zero, to be contemporaneously uncorrelated with
Eη t+1 η0t+1 = I, and to lead to the same stochastic process for the wedges. Identifying these primitive
shocks requires specifying a matrix R so that Rη t+1 = εt+1 and RR0 = V. Names are then made up for
these shocks, including money shocks, demand shocks, technology shocks, and so on.
In the traditional method, then, given any sequence of realized wedges st and the specification of
the matrix R, the associated realized values of ηt = (η1t , η 2t , η 3t , η4t )0 are computed. The movements
in, say, output, are then decomposed into the movements due to each one of these primitive shocks as
follows. Let st (η1 ) = (log At (η1 ), τ lt (η 1 ), τ xt (η1 ), log gt (η 1 )) denote the realized values of the four wedges
when the primitive shock sequence ηt = (η1t , 0, 0, 0) is fed into
st+1 = P0 + P st + Rηt+1 .
(Note that when the covariance matrix V is not diagonal, movements in a primitive shock η1t will lead
to movements in more than one wedge.) The predicted value of, say, output due to η 1 is then computed
from the decision rules of the model according to yt (η1 ) = y(kt (η1 ), st (η1 )), where kt (η 1 ) is computed
recursively using the decision rule for investment, the initial capital stock, and the capital accumulation
law. The values st (η2 ), yt (η2 ), and the rest are computed in a similar way.
Notice that in this traditional decomposition method, the realized value of each wedge is simply
the sum of the parts due to η1 , η2 , and so on, in that
X
X
X
X
log At =
log At (ηi ), τ lt =
τ lt (ηi ), τ xt =
τ xt (ηi ), log gt =
log gt (ηi ).
i

i

i

i

In this sense, the traditional decomposition attempts to decompose each of the four wedges into four
component parts, each of which is due to a primitive shock.
32

Our decomposition is purposefully less ambitious. It includes only the eﬀect of the movements of
each total wedge, not any of its subparts. The advantage of our decomposition is that it is invariant to R,
so that we do not need to make identifying assumptions implicit in the specification of the matrix R, nor do
we need to make up names for the shocks. The invariance makes our method valuable. The problem with
the traditional approach is that finding identifying assumptions that apply to a broad class of detailed
models is very diﬃcult. Hence, this approach is not useful in pointing researchers toward classes of
promising models. In a sense, the traditional approach puts the cart before the horse: the decomposition
requires specifying the matrix R, but doing that requires a detailed model. Our decomposition is useful
precisely because it does not need to make up identifying assumptions to specify the matrix R. Our
equivalence results have identifying assumptions built into them, so that results from the benchmark
prototype economy can be used to uncover promising classes of detailed models.

6. Reviewing the Related Literature
Our work here is related to the existing literature in terms of methodology and the interpretation
of the wedges.

6.1. Methodology
Our basic method is to use restrictions from economic theory to back out wedges from the data,
formulate stochastic processes for these wedges, and then put the wedges back into a quantitative general
equilibrium model for an accounting exercise. This basic idea is at the heart of an enormous amount
of work in the real business cycle theory literature. Prescott (1986), for example, asks what fraction of
the variance of output can plausibly be attributed to productivity shocks, which we have referred to as
the eﬃciency wedge. Subsequent studies have expanded this general equilibrium accounting exercise to
include a wide variety of other shocks. (See, for example, the studies in Cooley’s 1995 volume.)
An important diﬀerence between our method and others is that we back out the labor wedge and
the investment wedge from the combined consumer and firm first-order conditions, while most of the
recent business cycle literature uses direct measures of labor and investment shocks. Perhaps the most
closely related precursor of our method is McGrattan’s (1991); she uses the equilibrium of her model to
infer the implicit wedges. Ingram, Kocherlakota, and Savin (1997) advocate a similar approach.

33

6.2. Wedge Interpretations
The idea that taxes of various kinds distort the relation between various marginal conditions is
the cornerstone of public finance. Taxes are not the only well-known distortions; monopoly power by
unions or firms is also commonly thought to produce a labor wedge. And the idea that a labor wedge is
produced by sticky wages or sticky prices is the cornerstone of the new Keynesian approach to business
cycles; see, for example, the survey by Rotemberg and Woodford (1999). One contribution of our work
here is to show the precise mapping between the wedges and general equilibrium models with frictions.
Many studies have plotted one or more of the four wedges. The eﬃciency wedge has been extensively
studied. (See, for example, Kehoe and Prescott (2002).) The labor wedge has also been studied. For
example, Parkin (1988), Hall (1997), and Galí, Gertler, and López-Salido (forthcoming) all graph and
interpret the labor wedge for the postwar data. Parkin discusses how monetary shocks might drive this
wedge, and Hall discusses how search frictions might drive it. Galí, Gertler, and López-Salido discuss
a variety of interpretations of the labor wedge, as do Rotemberg and Woodford (1991, 1999). Mulligan
(2002a, b) plots the labor wedge for the United States for much of the 20th century, including the Great
Depression period. He interprets movements in this wedge as arising from changes in labor market
institutions and regulation, including features we discuss here. Cole and Ohanian (2002) plot the labor
wedge for the Great Depression and oﬀer interpretations similar to ours. The investment wedge has been
investigated by McGrattan (1991), Braun (1994), Carlstrom and Fuerst (1997), and Cooper and Ejarque
(2000).

7. Conclusions and Extensions
This study is aimed at applied theorists who are interested in building detailed, quantitative models
of economic fluctuations. Once such theorists have chosen the primitive sources of shocks to economic
activity, they need to choose the mechanisms through which the shocks lead to business cycle fluctuations.
We have shown that these mechanisms can be summarized by their eﬀects on four wedges in the standard
growth model. Our business cycle accounting method can be used to judge which mechanisms are
promising and which are not, thus helping theorists narrow their options. We view our method as an
alternative to the use of structural vector autoregressions (VARs), which has also been advocated as a
way to identify promising mechanisms. (Elsewhere, in Chari, Kehoe, and McGrattan (2005), we argue
that structural VARs have deficiencies that limit their usefulness.)
Here we have demonstrated how our method works by applying it to two historical episodes, the
Great Depression and the 1982 U.S. recession. We have found that eﬃciency and labor wedges, in
34

combination, account for essentially all of the decline and recovery in these business cycles; investment
wedges play, at best, a tertiary role. These results hold in summary statistics of the entire postwar period
and in alternative specifications of the growth model. We have also found that when we maximize the
contribution of the investment wedge, the models display a consumption anomaly: they tend to produce
much smaller declines in consumption during downturns than occur in the data. These findings together
imply that existing models of financial frictions in which the distortions primarily manifest themselves
as investment wedges can account, at best, for only a small fraction of the fluctuations in the Great
Depression or more typical U.S. downturns. This finding is our primary substantive contribution.
We have seen that if adjustment costs are extreme, investment wedges can play a larger but still
modest role over the business cycle. A combination of microeconomic and macroeconomic observations
argue against extreme adjustment costs, and we view them as a theoretical curiosity of no applied interest.
A useful extension of our work here would be to decompose our wedges into a portion that comes
from explicit taxes imposed by governments and a portion that comes from frictions in detailed models.
This decomposition would be particularly useful when explicit taxes vary significantly over the business
cycle.
Researchers have argued–quite beyond the prominent model of Bernanke and Gertler (1989)–
that frictions in financial markets are important for business cycle fluctuations. (See Bernanke (1983)
and the motivation in Bernanke and Gertler (1989).) We stress that our findings do not contradict this
idea. Indeed, we have shown that a detailed economy with input-financing frictions is equivalent to a
prototype economy with eﬃciency wedges. In this sense, while existing models of financial frictions are
not promising, new models in which financial frictions show up as eﬃciency and labor wedges are.
Our results suggest that future theoretical work should focus on developing models which lead to
fluctuations in eﬃciency and labor wedges. Many existing models produce fluctuations in labor wedges.
The challenging task is to develop detailed models in which primitive shocks lead to fluctuations in
eﬃciency wedges as well.
University of Minnesota and Research Department, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, 90 Hennepin
Avenue, Minneapolis, MN 55401, U.S.A.; chari@res.mpls.frb.fed.us
and
Research Department, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, 90 Hennepin Avenue, Minneapolis,
MN 55401, U.S.A., and University of Minnesota; pkehoe@res.mpls.frb.fed.us
and
35

Research Department, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, 90 Hennepin Avenue, Minneapolis,
MN 55401, U.S.A., and University of Minnesota; erm@mcgrattan.mpls.frb.fed.us

36

APPENDIX: The Mapping for Two Other Wedges
Here we demonstrate the mapping from two other detailed economies with frictions to two prototype
economies with wedges. In the preceding text, we have described the mapping for eﬃciency and labor
wedges. In this appendix, we describe it for investment and government consumption wedges.
A. Investment Wedges Due to Financial Frictions
We start with the mapping of financial frictions to investment wedges.
In Chari, Kehoe, and McGrattan (2004), we show the equivalence between the Carlstrom and
Fuerst (1997) model and a prototype economy. Here we focus on the financial frictions in the Bernanke,
Gertler, and Gilchrist (1999) model and abstract from the monetary features of that model. Bernanke,
Gertler, and Gilchrist begin by deriving the optimal financial contracts between risk-neutral entrepreneurs
and financial intermediaries in an environment with no aggregate uncertainty. These contracts resemble
debt contracts (with default). Bernanke, Gertler, and Gilchrist try to extend their derivation of optimal
contracts to an economy with aggregate uncertainty. The contracts they consider are not optimal given
the environment, because these contracts do not allow risk sharing between risk-averse consumers and
risk-neutral entrepreneurs. Here we solve for optimal debt-like contracts that arbitrarily rule out such
risk sharing, but even so, our first-order conditions diﬀer from those of Bernanke, Gertler, and Gilchrist.
(One reason for this diﬀerence is that our break-even constraint for the financial intermediary and our
law of motion for entrepreneurial net worth diﬀer from theirs. See equations (35) and (37) below.)
a. A Detailed Economy With Financial Frictions
The Bernanke-Gertler-Gilchrist model has a continuum of risk-neutral entrepreneurs of mass Le , a
continuum of consumers of mass 1, and a representative firm. Output y(st ) is produced according to
£
¤1−α
(34)
,
y(st ) = A(st )kα lΩ L1−Ω
e
where A(st ), k, and l are the technology shock, the capital stock, and the labor supplied by consumers. The
stochastic process for the technology shock is given by log A(st+1 ) = (1−ρA ) log A+ρA log A(st )+εA (st+1 ).
Each entrepreneur supplies one unit of labor inelastically.
representative firm’s maximization problem
£
¤The
1−α
− w(st )l − we (st )Le − r(st )k, where w(st ),
is to choose l, Le , k to maximize profits A(st )kα lΩ L1−Ω
e
we (st ), and r(st ) denote the wage rate for consumers, the wage rate for entrepreneurs, and the rental rate
on capital.
New capital goods can be produced only by entrepreneurs. Each entrepreneur owns a technology
that transforms output and old capital at the end of any period into capital goods at the beginning of
the following period. In each period t, each entrepreneur receives an idiosyncratic shock ω drawn from
a distribution F (ω) with expected value 1. This shock is i.i.d. across entrepreneurs and time. The
realization of ω is private information to the entrepreneur. An entrepreneur who buys k(st−1 ) units of
goods in period t − 1 produces ωk(st−1 ) units of capital at the beginning of period t. These capital goods
are sold at price Rk (st ) = r(st ) + (1 − δ), where δ is the rate of depreciation of the capital goods.
Entrepreneurs finance the production of new capital goods partly with their own net worth, n(st−1 ),
and partly with loans from financial intermediaries. These intermediaries oﬀer contracts with the following
cutoﬀ form: in all idiosyncratic states at t in which ω ≥ ω̄(st ), the entrepreneur pays ω̄(st )Rk (st )k(st−1 )
and keeps [ω−ω̄(st )]Rk (st )k(st−1 ). In all other states, the entrepreneur receives nothing while the financial
intermediary receives ωRk (st )k(st−1 ) net of monitoring costs μωRk (st )k(st−1 ). We assume that financial
intermediaries make zero profits in equilibrium.

37

Given an entrepreneur’s net worth n(st−1 ), the contracting problem for a representative entrepreneur is to choose the cutoﬀ ω̄(st ) for each state and the amount of goods invested k(st−1 ) to maximize
the expected utility of the entrepreneurs,
X
π(st |st−1 ){[(1 − Γ(ω̄(st ))]Rk (st )k(st−1 ) dF (ω)},

subject to a break-even constraint for the intermediary,
X
(35)
(st |st−1 )[Γ(ω̄(st )) − μG(ω̄(st ))]Rk (st )k(st−1 ) = k(st−1 ) − n(st−1 ),

R ω̄
R∞
R ω̄
where Γ(ω̄) = 0 ωf(ω) dω + ω̄ ω̄ f(ω) dω and G(ω̄) = 0 ωf(ω) dω. Here q(st |st−1 ) denotes the price
of consumption goods in state st in units of consumption goods in state st−1 .
This formulation implies an aggregation result: The capital demand of the entrepreneurs is linear
in their net worth, so that total demand for goods from them depends only on their total net worth. The
solution to the contracting problem is characterized by the first-order conditions with respect to k(st−1 )
and ω̄(st ), which can summarized by
P t t−1
P
q(s |s )[Γ(ω̄(st )) − μG(ω̄(st ))]Rk (st ) − 1
π(st |st−1 )[1 − Γ(ω̄(st ))]Rk (st )
P
P
(36)
=
π(st |st−1 )Γ0 (ω̄(st ))Rk (st )
q(st |st−1 )[Γ0 (ω̄(st )) − μG0 (ω̄(st ))]Rk (st )

and the break-even constraint (35).
In each period, a fraction γ of existing entrepreneurs dies and is replaced by a fraction γ of newborn
entrepreneurs. At the beginning of each period, entrepreneurs learn whether they will die this period.
We assume that γ is suﬃciently small and the technology for producing investment goods is suﬃciently
productive so that entrepreneurs consume their net worth only when they are about to die. All entrepreneurs who are going to die consume their entire net worth and do not supply labor in the current period.
(The newborn replacements do instead.) Those entrepreneurs who do not die save their wage income
plus their income from producing capital goods. The aggregate income of the entrepreneurs is, then,
Z
¤
£
ω − ω̄(st ) Rk (st )k(st−1 ) dF (ω) + we (st )Le ,
where k(st−1 ) is the aggregate capital stock. The law of motion for aggregate net worth is given by
Z
£
¤
t
(37)
ω − ω̄(st ) Rk (st )k(st−1 ) dF (ω) + we (st )Le .
n(s ) = γ
Total consumption by entrepreneurs in any period is
Z
£
¤
t
ce (s ) = (1 − γ)
(38)
ω − ω̄(st ) Rk (st )k(st−1 ) dF (ω).
Consumers maximize utility given by

(39)

∞ X
X

β t πt (st ) U (c(st ), l(st )),

t=0 st

where c(st ) denotes consumption in state st subject to
X
c(st ) +
(40)
q(st+1 |st )b(st+1 ) ≤ w(st )l(st ) + b(st ) + T (st ),
st+1

for t = 0, 1, . . . , and borrowing constraints, b(st+1 ) ≥ b̄, for some large negative number b̄. Here T (st )
is lump-sum transfers. The initial condition b(s0 ) is given. Each of the bonds b(st+1 ) is a claim to one
38

unit of consumption in state st+1 and costs q(st+1 |st ) dollars in state st . The first-order conditions for
the consumer can be written as
(41)
(42)

−

Ul (st )
Uc (st )

= w(st ) and

q(st+1 |st ) = βπ(st+1 |st )

Uc (st+1 )
.
Uc (st )

The market-clearing condition for final goods is then
c(st ) + ce (st ) + μG(ω̄(st ))Rk (st )k(st−1 ) + k(st ) − (1 − δ)k(st−1 ) = y(st ).
b. The Associated Prototype Economy With Investment Wedges
Now consider a prototype economy which is the same as our benchmark prototype economy, except
for the following changes. We assume that the production function is as in (34), with Le interpreted as
a fixed input rented from the government, and we assume that consumers are taxed on capital income
but not on investment or labor income. With capital income taxes, the consumers’ budget constraint is
given by
c(st ) + k(st ) − (1 − δ)k(st−1 ) = w(st )l(st ) + [1 − τ k (st )]r(st )k(st−1 ) + δτ k (st )k(st−1 ) + T (st ),
where τ k (st ) is the tax rate on capital income. Here τ k (st ) plays the role of an investment wedge. The
resource constraint for the prototype economy is as in the benchmark prototype economy. Let government
consumption in the prototype economy be given by
(43)

g(st ) = c∗e (st ) + μG(ω̄ ∗ (st ))Rk∗ (st )k∗ (st−1 ),

where asterisks denote the allocations in the detailed economy with investment frictions.
We now show how the tax on capital income in our prototype economy can be constructed from
the detailed economy. First, the break-even constraint in the detailed economy can be rewritten as
½
¾
X
n∗ (st−1 )
Uc∗ (st−1 )
∗ t t−1
∗ t
∗ t
∗ t
= 1,
q (s |s ) [Γ(ω̄ (s )) − μG(ω̄ (s ))]Rk (s ) + ∗ t−1
k (s ) βπ(st |st−1 )Uc∗ (st )

where q ∗ (st |st−1 ) = βπ(st |st−1 )Uc∗ (st )/Uc∗ (st−1 ). The intertemporal Euler equation in the prototype economy is
X
q(st |st−1 ){[(1 − τ k (st )]A(st )Fk (st ) + (1 − δ)} = 1,
where q(st |st−1 ) = βπ(st |st−1 )Uc (st )/Uc (st−1 ). Let the tax rate on capital income τ k (st ) be such that
(44)

[1 − τ k (st )][A(st )Fk∗ (st ) − δ] + 1
= [Γ(ω̄∗ (st )) − μG(ω̄ ∗ (st ))]Rk∗ (st ) +

Uc∗ (st−1 )
n∗ (st−1 )
.
∗
t−1
k (s ) βπ(st |st−1 )Uc∗ (st )

Comparing first-order conditions for the two economies, we then have this proposition:
Proposition 6: Consider the prototype economy just described, with government consumption
given by (43) and capital income taxes by (44). The aggregate equilibrium allocations for this prototype
economy coincide with those of the detailed economy with financial frictions.

39

B. Government Consumption Wedges Due to International Borrowing and Lending
Now we develop a detailed economy with international borrowing and lending and show that net
exports in that economy are equivalent to a government consumption wedge in an associated prototype
economy.
a. A Detailed Economy With International Borrowing and Lending
Consider a model of a world economy with N countries and a single homogenous good in each
period. We use the same notation for uncertainty as before.
The representative consumer in country i has preferences
X
(45)
β t πt (st )U (ci (st ), li (st )),
where ci (st ) and li (st ) denote consumption and labor. The consumer’s budget constraint is
X
(46)
q(st+1 /st )bi (st+1 ),
ci (st ) + bi (st ) + ki (st ) ≤ F (ki (st−1 ), li (st )) + (1 − δ)ki (st−1 ) +
st+1

where bi (st+1 ) denotes the amount of state-contingent borrowing by the consumer in country i in period
t, q(st+1 /st ) denotes the corresponding state-contingent price, and ki (st ) denotes the capital stock.
An equilibrium for this detailed economy is a set of allocations (ci (st ), ki (st ), li (st ),
t+1
bi (s )) and prices q(st /st−1 ) such that these allocations both solve the consumer’s problem in each
country i and satisfy the world resource constraint:
(47)

N
N
X
X
t
t
[ci (s ) + ki (s )] ≤
[F (ki (st−1 ), li (st )) + (1 − δ)ki (st−1 )].
i=1

i=1

Note that in this economy, the net exports of country i are given by
F (ki (st−1 ), li (st )) − [ki (st ) − (1 − δ)ki (st−1 )] − ci (st ).
b. The Associated Prototype Economy With Government Consumption Wedges
Now consider a prototype economy of a single closed economy i with an exogenous stochastic
variable, government consumption gi (st ), which we call the government consumption wedge. In this
economy, consumers maximize (45) subject to their budget constraint
£
¤
(48)
ci (st ) + ki (st ) = wi (st )li (st ) + ri (st ) + 1 − δ ki (st−1 ) + Ti (st ),

where wi (st ), ri (st ), and Ti (st ) are the wage rate, the capital rental rate, and lump-sum transfers. In each
state st , firms choose k and l to maximize F (k, l) − ri (st )k − wi (st )l. The government’s budget constraint
is
(49)

gi (st ) + Ti (st ) = 0.

The resource constraint for this economy is
(50)

ci (st ) + gi (st ) + ki (st ) = F (ki (st−1 ), li (st )) + (1 − δ)ki (st−1 ).

An equilibrium of the prototype economy is, then, a set of allocations (ci (st ), ki (st ), li (st ), gi (st ),
Ti (st )) and prices (wi (st ), ri (st )) such that these allocations are optimal for consumers and firms and
the resource constraint is satisfied.

40

The following proposition shows that the government consumption wedge in this prototype economy
consists of net exports in the original economy.
Proposition 7: Consider the equilibrium allocations (c∗i (st ), ki∗ (st ), li∗ (st ), b∗i (st+1 )) for country i
in the detailed economy. Let the government consumption wedge be
£
¤
(51)
gi (st ) = F (ki∗ (st−1 ), li∗ (st )) − ki∗ (st ) − (1 − δ)ki∗ (st−1 ) − c∗i (st ),

∗ (st ), and let T (st ) be defined
let the wage and capital rental rates be wi (st ) = Fli∗ (st ) and ri (st ) = Fki
i
∗
t
∗
t
∗
t
∗
t
t
by (49). Then the allocations (ci (s ), ki (s ), li (s ), gi (s ), Ti (s )) and the prices (wi (st ), ri (st )) are an
equilibrium for the prototype economy.

The proof follows by noting that the first-order conditions are the same in the two economies and
that, given the government consumption wedge (51), the consumer’s budget constraint (46) in the detailed
economy is equivalent to the resource constraint (50) in the prototype economy.
Note that for simplicity we have abstracted from government consumption in the detailed economy.
If that economy had government consumption as well, then the government consumption wedge in the
prototype economy would be the sum of net exports and government consumption in the detailed economy.

41

REFERENCES
Bernanke, B. (1983): “Nonmonetary Eﬀects of the Financial Crisis in the Propagation of the
Great Depression,” American Economic Review, 73, 257—276.
Bernanke, B., and M. Gertler (1989): “Agency Costs, Net Worth, and Business Fluctuations,”
American Economic Review, 79, 14—31.
Bernanke, B., M. Gertler, and S. Gilchrist (1999): “The Financial Accelerator in a Quantitative Business Cycle Framework,” in Handbook of Macroeconomics, Volume 1C, ed. by J. Taylor and
M. Woodford. Amsterdam: North-Holland.
Bordo, M., C. Erceg, and C. Evans (2000): “Money, Sticky Wages, and the Great Depression,”
American Economic Review, 90, 1447—1463.
Braun, R. (1994): “How Large Is the Optimal Inflation Tax?” Journal of Monetary Economics,
34, 201—214.
Carlstrom, C., and T. Fuerst (1997): “Agency Costs, Net Worth, and Business Fluctuations:
A Computable General Equilibrium Analysis,” American Economic Review, 87, 893—910.
Chari, V., P. Kehoe, and E. McGrattan (2002): “Accounting for the Great Depression,”
American Economic Review, 92, 22—27.
(2004): “Business Cycle Accounting,” Working Paper 10351, National Bureau of Economic Research.
(2005): “A Critique of Structural VARs Using Business Cycle Theory,” Research
Department Staﬀ Report 364, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis.
(2006): “Appendices: Business Cycle Accounting,” Research Department Staﬀ Report
362, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis.
Christiano, L., C. Gust, and J. Roldos (2004): “Monetary Policy in a Financial Crisis,”
Journal of Economic Theory, 119, 64—103.
Chu, T. (2001): “Exit Barriers and Economic Stagnation: The Macro-impact of Government
Subsidies to Industries,” Manuscript, East-West Center.
Cole, H., and L. Ohanian (1999): “The Great Depression in the United States from a Neoclassical Perspective,” Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly Review, 23(Winter), 2—24.
(2002): “The U.S. and U.K. Great Depressions through the Lens of Neoclassical
Growth Theory,” American Economic Review, 92, 28—32.
(2004): “New Deal Policies and the Persistence of the Great Depression: A General
Equilibrium Analysis,” Journal of Political Economy, 112, 779—816.
42

Cooley, T., ed. (1995): Frontiers of Business Cycle Research. Princeton: Princeton University
Press.
Cooper, R., and J. Ejarque (2000): “Financial Intermediation and Aggregate Fluctuations: A
Quantitative Analysis,” Macroeconomic Dynamics, 4(4), 423—447.
Doms, M., and T. Dunne (1994): “Capital Adjustment Patterns in Manufacturing Plants” CES
94-11, U.S. Bureau of the Census.
Gali, J., M. Gertler, and D. Lopez-Salido (forthcoming): “Markups, Gaps, and the Welfare
Costs of Business Fluctuations,” Review of Economics and Statistics.
Hall, R. (1997): “Macroeconomic Fluctuations and the Allocation of Time,” Journal of Labor
Economics, 15(Part 2), S223—S250.
Hornstein, A., and E. Prescott (1993): “The Firm and the Plant in General Equilibrium
Theory,” in General Equilibrium, Growth, and Trade, Vol. 2: The Legacy of Lionel McKenzie, ed. by R.
Becker et al. San Diego: Academic Press.
Ingram, B., N. Kocherlakota, and N. Savin (1997): “Using Theory for Measurement: An
Analysis of the Cyclical Behavior of Home Production,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 40, 435—456.
Kehoe, T., and E. Prescott (2002): “Great Depressions of the 20th Century,” Review of
Economic Dynamics, 5, 1—18.
Kiyotaki, N., and J. Moore (1997): “Credit Cycles,” Journal of Political Economy, 105, 211—
248.
Kydland, F., and E. Prescott (1982): "Time to Build and Aggregate Fluctuations,” Econometrica, 50, 1345—1370.
(1988): “The Workweek of Capital and Its Cyclical Implications,” Journal of Monetary
Economics, 21, 343—360.
Lagos, R. (2006): “A Model of TFP,” Review of Economic Studies, 73, 983—1007.
McGrattan, E. (1991): “The Macroeconomic Eﬀects of Distortionary Taxation,” Institute for
Empirical Macroeconomics Discussion Paper 37, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis.
Mulligan, C. (2002a): “A Century of Labor-Leisure Distortions,” Working Paper 8774, National
Bureau of Economic Research.
(2002b): “A Dual Method of Empirically Evaluating Dynamic Competitive Equilibrium Models with Market Distortions, Applied to the Great Depression and World War II,” Working
Paper 8775, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Parkin, M. (1988): “A Method for Determining Whether Parameters in Aggregative Models Are

43

Structural,” Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, 29, 215—252.
Prescott, E. (1986): “Theory Ahead of Business Cycle Measurement,” Federal Reserve Bank of
Minneapolis Quarterly Review, 10(Fall), 9—22.
(1999): “Some Observations on the Great Depression,” Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly Review, 23(Winter), 25—31.
Restuccia, D., and R. Rogerson (2003): “Policy Distortions and Aggregate Productivity with
Heterogeneous Plants,” Manuscript, Arizona State University.
Rotemberg, J., and M. Woodford (1991): “Markups and the Business Cycle,” in NBER
Macroeconomics Annual 1991, ed. by O. Blanchard and S. Fischer. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
(1999): “The Cyclical Behavior of Prices and Costs,” in Handbook of Macroeconomics,
ed. by J. Taylor and M. Woodford. Amsterdam: North-Holland.
Schmitz, J. (2005): “What Determines Labor Productivity? Lessons From the Dramatic Recovery
of the U.S. and Canadian Iron-Ore Industries Following Their Early 1980s Crisis,” Journal of Political
Economy, 113, 582—625.

44

Notes
1 In Chari,

Kehoe, and McGrattan (2004), we apply a spectral method to determine the contributions

of the wedges based on the population properties of the stochastic process generated by the model. We
do this for both periods and find that the investment wedge plays only a modest role in both.
2 In

general, in our Great Depression experiments, linear methods perform poorly compared to our

nonlinear method. With extreme adjustment costs, for example, linear methods produce large errors, on
the order of 100%.

45

TABLE I
Parameters of Vector AR(1) Stochastic Process in Two Historical Episodesa
Estimated Using Maximum Likelihood with U.S. Datab

A. Annual Data, 1901−40
Coefficient matrix P on lagged states


.732
(.470,.856)
−.150



 (−.339,.0504)
 −.0114

 (−.384,.260)
0

.0521
(−.0364,.142)
1.04
(.908,1.10)
−.0197
(−.262,.126)

−.317
(−.716,.130)
.390
(−.0751,.782)
.0731
(−.363,.296)

0

0

0



Coefficient matrix Q where V = QQ0
.0575
0
0
0
(.0440,.0666)

  −.00561

  (−.0216,.00952)
  .000299

0
  (−.0308,.0230)
.750
0
(.424,.814)
0

(.0378,.0643)
−.000253
(−.0167,.0121)

0

0

.0369
(.0194,.0489)

0

0

0

.221
(.145,.276)

.0555









Means of states = [.541 (.503, .591), −.190 (−.271, −.0867), .286 (.216, .364), −2.79 (−2.95, −2.55)]
B. Quarterly Data, 1959 : 1−2004 : 3
Coefficient matrix Q where V = QQ0

Coefficient matrix P on lagged states


.980
(.944,.984)
−.0330



 (−.0396,−.0061)

−.0702

 (−.1087,−.0672)
.00481
(−.0278,.0116)

−.0138
(−.0192,.00222)
.956
(.920,.959)
−.0460
(−.0612,−.0304)
−.00811
(−.0158,.0157)

−.0117
(−.0129,−.00605)
−.0451
(−.0512,−.0286)
.896
(.879,.907)
.0488
(.0371,.0643)

.0192
(.0125,.0259)
.0569
(.0473,.0677)
.104
(.0817,.112)
.971
(.954,.974)



.0116
(.0105,.0126)
.00141



  (.000462,.00232)

−.0105

  (−.0141,−.00779)
−.000575
(−.00219,.00132)

0

0

0

.00644
(.00567,.00695)
.00103
(−.00278,.00266)
.00611
(.00383,.00760)

0

0

.0158
(.0133,.0190)
.0142
(.0121,.0154)

0
.00458
(.00386,.00554)









Means of states = [−.0239 (−.0301, −.0137), .328, (.322, .336), .483 (.473, .495), −1.53 (−1.55, −1.52)]
a

To ensure stationarity, we add a penalty term to the likelihood function proportional to max(|λ max | − .995, 0)2 , where λmax is the maximal
eigenvalue of P . Numbers in parentheses are 90% confidence intervals for a bootstrapped distribution with 500 replications. To ensure that
the variance-covariance matrix V is positive semi-definite, we estimate Q rather than V = QQ 0 .

b

Sources of basic data: See Chari, Kehoe, and McGrattan (2006).

TABLE II
Properties of the Wedges, 1959:1–2004:3a
A. Summary Statistics

Wedges

Standard Deviation
Relative
to Output

Efficiency
Labor
Investment
Government Consumption

Cross Correlation of Wedge with Output at Lag k =
−2

−1

0

1

2

.63
.92

.65
.52

.76
.65

.85
.71

.60
.73

.35
.68

1.18
1.51

.44
−.42

.48
−.42

.47
−.33

.30
−.24

.09
−.11

B. Cross Correlations
Cross Correlation of X with Y at Lag k =
Wedges (X,Y)
Efficiency, Labor

−2

−1

0

1

2

.57

.48

.30

.28

.16

Efficiency, Investment
Efficiency, Government Consumption

.31
−.27

.46
−.33

.61
−.34

.47
−.35

.35
−.31

Labor, Investment
Labor, Government Consumption

−.07
−.02

.11
−.22

.18
−.38

.37
−.47

.46
−.50

Investment, Government Consumption

−.60

−.73

−.88

−.70

−.51

a

Series are first logged and detrended using the HP filter.

TABLE III
Properties of the Output Components, 1959:1–2004:3a
A. Summary Statistics

Output Components

Standard Deviation
Relative
to Output

Cross Correlation of Component with Output at Lag k =
−2

−1

0

1

2

Efficiency
Labor

.73
.59

.65
.44

.75
.59

.83
.68

.57
.74

.31
.74

Investment
Government Consumption

.31
.40

.33
−.45

.37
−.45

.40
−.39

.25
−.25

.07
−.08

B. Cross Correlations
Cross Correlation of X with Y at Lag k =
Output Components (X,Y)
Efficiency, Labor

−2

−1

0

1

2

.54

.41

.18

.15

.04

Efficiency, Investment
Efficiency, Government Consumption

.30
−.34

.44
−.45

.60
−.56

.40
−.48

.28
−.39

Labor, Investment
Labor, Government Consumption

−.17
.14

−.03
−.03

−.03
−.13

.20
−.31

.29
−.40

Investment, Government Consumption

−.49

−.63

−.87

−.66

−.48

a

Series are first logged and detrended using the HP filter.

Figures 1−4
Examining the U.S. Great Depression
Annually, 1929−39; Normalized to Equal 100 in 1929

Figure 1
U.S. Output and Three Measured Wedges
120

110

Investment Wedge

100

Efficiency Wedge

90

80

70

Output

Labor Wedge

60
1929 1930 1931 1932 1933 1934 1935 1936 1937 1938 1939

Figure 2
Data and Predictions of Models With Just One Wedge
110

100

150

Output

Model With Efficiency Wedge
Model With Labor Wedge
Data

140

90

130

80

120

70

110

60

100
Labor

50

90

40

80

30

70
Investment

20

60

10

50

0
40
1929 1930 1931 1932 1933 1934 1935 1936 1937 1938 1939

Figure 3
Data and Predictions of a Model With Just the Investment Wedge
110

150
Output

100

140
Model With Investment Wedge
Data

90

130

80

120

70

110

60

100
Labor

50

90

40

80

30

Investment

70

20

60

10

50

0
40
1929 1930 1931 1932 1933 1934 1935 1936 1937 1938 1939

Figure 4
Data and Predictions of Models With All But One Wedge
110

100

150

Output

Model With No Efficiency Wedge
Model With No Investment Wedge
Data

140

90

130

80

120

70

110

60

100

50

Labor

40

90

80

30

70
Investment

20

60

10

50

0
40
1929 1930 1931 1932 1933 1934 1935 1936 1937 1938 1939

Figures 5−8
Examining the 1982 U.S. Recession
Quarterly, 1979:1−1985:4; Normalized to Equal 100 in 1979:1

Figure 5
U.S. Output and Three Measured Wedges
110

Investment Wedge

105
Labor Wedge

100

95
Efficiency Wedge
Output

90

1979

1980

1981

1982

1983

1984

1985

Figure 6
Data and Predictions of Models with Just One Wedge
110

150
Output

100

140

90

130

Model With Efficiency Wedge
Model With Labor Wedge
Data

80

120

70

110

60

100
Labor

50

90

40

80

30

70
Investment

20

10

60

1979

1980

1981

1982

1983

1984

1985

50

Figure 7
Data and Predictions of a Model With Just the Investment Wedge
110

150
Output

100

140

90

130

Model With Investment Wedge
Data

80

120

70

110

60

100
Labor

50

90

40

80

30

70
Investment

20

10

60

1979

1980

1981

1982

1983

1984

1985

50

Figure 8
Data and Predictions of Models With All But One Wedge
110

150
Output

100

140

90

130

Model With No Efficiency Wedge
Model With No Investment Wedge
Data

80

120

70

110

60

100
Labor

50

90

40

80

30

70
Investment

20

10

60

1979

1980

1981

1982

1983

1984

1985

50

Figures 9−12
Varying the Capital Utilization Specification
During the Great Depression Period, 1929−39

Figure 9
Measured Efficiency Wedges for Two Capital Utilization Specifications
110

Variable

100

Fixed

90

80

1929 1930 1931 1932 1933 1934 1935 1936 1937 1938 1939

Figure 10
Data and Predictions of Models With
Variable Capital Utilization and Just One Wedge

110

100

Output

150

Model With Efficiency Wedge
Model With Labor Wedge
Data

140

90

130

80

120

70

110

60

100
Labor

50

90

40

80

30

Investment

70

20

60

10

50

0
40
1929 1930 1931 1932 1933 1934 1935 1936 1937 1938 1939

130

Figure 11
Data and Predictions of a Model With
Variable Capital Utilization and Just the Investment Wedge

170

120

160

110

150

100

Output

140
Model With Investment Wedge
Data

90

130

80

120

70

110

60

100
Labor

50

90

40

80

30

70
Investment

20

60

10

50

0
40
1929 1930 1931 1932 1933 1934 1935 1936 1937 1938 1939

110

100

Figure 12
Predictions of Models with Fixed and Variable
Capital Utilization and With All But the Investment Wedge

Output

Variable
Fixed

150

140

90

130

80

120

70

110

60

100
Labor

50

90

40

80

30

70
Investment

20

60

10

50

0
40
1929 1930 1931 1932 1933 1934 1935 1936 1937 1938 1939

Figure 13
Measured Investment Wedges for Two Adjustment Cost Specifications
(Normalized to Equal 100 in 1929 or 1979:1)
A. U.S. Great Depression, Annually, 1929−39

110

BGG Costs
100

90

80

Extreme Costs

70

60
1929

1930

1931

1932

1933

1934

1935

1936

1937

1938

B. 1982 U.S. Recession, Quarterly, 1979:1−1985:4

120

BGG Costs

110

100

90

80

Extreme Costs

70

1979

1980

1981

1982

1983

1984

1985

1939

Figure 14. U.S. Output and Predictions of Model
With Alternative Adjustment Costs and Just the Investment Wedge
(Normalized to Equal 100 in 1929 or 1979:1)
A. U.S. Great Depression, Annually, 1929−39

110

BGG Costs
100

Extreme Costs

90

80

70

U.S. output
60
1929

1930

1931

1932

1933

1934

1935

1936

1937

1938

B. 1982 U.S. Recession, Quarterly, 1979:1−1985:4

104

BGG Costs

102
100
98

Extreme Costs
96
94
92

U.S. output
90
88

1979

1980

1981

1982

1983

1984

1985

1939

