NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

FIBONACCI AND THE FINANCIAL REVOLUTION
William N. Goetzmann
Working Paper 10352
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10352
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2004

I thank my colleague Geert Rouwenhorst for many helpful conversations on this and related topics. I think
the International Center for Finance at the Yale School of Management for financial support. All errors are
the responsibility of the author. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2004 by William N. Goetzmann. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Fibonacci and the Financial Revolution
William N. Goetzmann
NBER Working Paper No. 10352
March 2004
JEL No. B10, B31, N23, N83
ABSTRACT
This paper examines the contribution of Leonardo of Pisa [Fibonacci] to the history of financial
mathematics. Evidence in Leonardo's Liber Abaci (1202) suggests that he was the first to develop
present value analysis for comparing the economic value of alternative contractual cash flows. He
also developed a general method for expressing investment returns, and solved a wide range of
complex interest rate problems. The paper argues that his advances in the mathematics of finance
were stimulated by the commercial revolution in the Mediterranean during his lifetime, and in turn,
his discoveries significantly influenced the evolution of capitalist enterprise and public finance in
Europe in the centuries that followed. Fibonacci's discount rates were more culturally influential
than his famous series.
William N. Goetzmann
School of Management
Yale University
Box 208200
New Haven, CT 06520-8200
and NBER
william.goetzmann@yale.edu

I. Introduction
Present value analysis is a method for comparing the relative economic value of
differing payment streams, taking into account the time-value of money. Mathematically
reducing all cash flow streams to a single point in time allows the investor to decide
which is unambiguously the best. According to a recent survey of corporate financial
officers by Graham and Harvey (2001), the present value criterion is now used by
virtually all large companies in the capital budgeting decision.1

The modern present

value formula was developed by economist Irving Fisher in 1930, however its origins
extend much deeper in the tradition of Western thought.2 Geoffrey Poitras’ excellent
survey of the early history of Financial Economics traces related interest-rate problems
back to 15th Century Europe.3 The roots of the present value criterion may lay deeper
still, however. In this paper, I argue that an important early formulation of the present
value criterion appeared in the work of one of the most famous mathematicians of the
Middle Ages, Leonardo of Pisa [1170-1240], commonly called Fibonacci.
Leonardo was arguably the first scholar in world history to develop a detailed and
flexible mathematical approach to financial calculation. He was not only a brilliant
analyst of the business problems of his day, but also a very early financial engineer
whose work played a major role in Europe’s distinctive capital market development in
the late Middle Ages and the Renaissance.

This paper examines the range of

Fibonacci’s contributions to Finance in historical and economic context, and specifically
focuses on his particular development of present value analysis.
1

While many of

Graham, John R., and Campbell Harvey, 2001, “The Theory and Practice of Corporate Finance: Evidence
from the Field,” Journal of Financial Economics 60(2-3), pp. 187-243.
2
Fisher, Irving, 1930, The Theory of Interest, The MacMillan Company, New York.
3
Poitras, Geoffrey, 2000, The Early History of Financial Economics, 1478-1776, Edward Elgar,
Northampton.

1

Fibonacci’s mathematical tools -- including his use of interest rates -- were a direct
extension of

Indian and Arabic mathematics,

he appears to have invented a new

mathematical approach to financial decision-making. This innovation, in turn, allowed
European mathematicians to value increasingly complex financial instruments in the
centuries that followed. As such, his intellectual contributions shed some light on the
role of mathematics in the broader trajectory of economic development in the Middle
Ages and indeed on the distinctive divergence of European society in the world economy.
Fibonacci wrote Liber Abaci in the year 1202 in the city of Pisa. It is best known
for the Fibonacci series – a sequence of numbers describing
growth.

geometric population

What is less well-known about Fibonacci’s book is that the famous series is

only a single example in a book almost entirely devoted to the mathematics of trade,
valuation and commercial arbitrage. Liber Abaci develops a wide range of practical
mathematical tools for calculating present value, compounding interest, evaluating
geometric series,’ dividing profits from business ventures, and pricing goods and monies
involving a complex variety weights, measures and currencies. The table of contents
gives a sense of the structure and topics covered in the book.4

Table of Contents for Liber Abaci
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.

Here Begins the First Chapter
On the Multiplication of Whole Numbers
On the Addition of Whole Numbers
On the Subtraction of Lesser Numbers from Greater Numbers
On the Division of Integral Numbers
On the Multiplication of Integral Numbers with Fractions

4

From Sigler, L.E., 2002, Fibonacci’s Liber Abaci: A Translation into Modern English of Leonardo
Pisano’s Book of Calculation, Springer-Verlag, New York. Spellings of the title of the book differ. I use
the spelling from Sigler, but Liber Abbaci is also common.

2

7. On the Addition and Subtraction and Division of Numbers with Fractions and
the Reduction of Several Parts to a Single Part
8. On Finding the Value of Merchandise by the Principal Method
9. On the Bartering of Merchandise and Similar Things
10. On Companies and Their Members
11. On the Alloying of Monies
12. Here Begins Chapter 12
13. On the Method Elchataym and How With It Nearly All Problems in
Mathematics are Solved
14. On the Finding of Square and Cubic Roots and on the Multiplication,
Division, and Subtraction of Them and On the Treatment of Binomials and
Apotomes and Their Roots
15. On Pertinent Geometric Rules and On Problems of Algebra and Amuchabala
Liber Abaci

begins with an exposition of the fundamentals of arithmetic,

followed by chapters on valuation, relative value, companies and metallurgy. Chapter 12
contains a wide variety of problems, including interest rate and present value examples.
Chapter 13 presents a method of solution through linear interpolation, and Chapters 14
and 15 present more abstract mathematical results. Proceeding as it does from the
simple to the complex, the book is organized as a manual for instruction, and it is likely
that Leonardo used it himself for teaching commercial arithmetic.
However, it is not only the content and use of the book that makes it important,
but the historical and economic context.

Liber Abaci was written at a time of nearly

unprecedented commercial interaction between East and West. Italian merchants traded
actively with the Arab world – bringing exotic goods to an increasingly prosperous
Europe.

This period of economic vitality stimulated the development of practical

mathematics – in effect, creating a market for mathematical knowledge. This knowledge,
in turn became a major factor in the economic trajectory of Europe over the next several
centuries.

The 500 year period following Leonardo saw the development in Europe of

virtually all the tools of financial capitalism that we know today: share ownership of

3

limited-liability corporations, long-term government and corporate loans, liquid and
active international financial markets, life insurance, life-annuities, mutual funds,
derivative securities and deposit banking. Many of these developments have their roots in
the contracts first mathematically analyzed by Fibonacci.

What began with his

application of mathematics to current commercial problems may have led to important
later economic innovations and the development of Western capitalism as we know it
today.

East and West
Leonardo’s contribution is also interesting in a global context.

Historians have

long puzzled over the extraordinary economic divergence between Western Europe and
China over the period from 1200 to 1700 AD.5

These innovations are all the more

puzzling in the context of China’s comparatively advanced scientific, technological,
political and cultural advantages at the time.6 For example, Marco Polo’s account of
China in the late 13th Century highlighted the extraordinary advancement of Chinese
civilization in Western eyes. Polo and his fellow travelers encountered a vast nation
politically unified under Mongol rule. The wonders of Yuan China included magnificent
cities, a widely literate population and highly advanced art, science and technology.

5

See, for example, Kenneth Pomeranz, 2000, The Great Divergence: China, Europe, and the Making of
the Modern World Economy, Princeton University Press, Princeton.
6

See the on-going publication of Needham, Joseph, 1954-, Science and Civilisation in China,
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge -- a work that definitively documents the level of scientific
advancement of China, and indeed gave rise to the so called ‘Needham Puzzle” -- see for example, Lin ,
Justin, 1995, “The Needham Puzzle: Why the Industrial Revolution Did Not Originate in China, “
Economic Development and Cultural Change, 43(2 ) pp. 269-292.

4

More relevant to our study, however, China also had a sophisticated system of
government finance that included both a paper and a metallic currency, a system of
national government monopolies on commodities, closely regulated commercial markets,
as well as a centuries-long legal tradition of property rights.

By contrast, Europe of

Polo’s day was a fragmented patchwork of cities, states and communes, only partially
unified by the holy Roman empire and the Crusades. The Mediterranean world was
politically fragmented in the Middle Ages but economically connected by a network of
commerce. Thus, almost by definition, virtually all trade in Europe in the 13th century
was international.
The Mongol rulers of Macro Polo’s era in the Khan’s capital near modern-day
Beijing could sip tea picked thousands of miles away in China’s southern province of
Yunan and shipped through China – perhaps even via the great man-made inland canal
system linking the Yangtse and Yellow River valleys.

They could

read

books

published in the distant Southeastern Chinese province of Fujian, paid for in national
currency accepted across the breadth of China. On the other hand,

a merchant in

Fibonacci’s Pisa who traded goods just within Northern Italy had to be able to calculate
currency conversions from the money of each city-state – mastering the comparative
values and differential silver content of Bolognese, Pisan, Venetian and Genoese lira, and
knowing their value relative to Byzantine besants, Imperial pounds, Barcelona lira and
Magalonese soldi. The very complexity of European commerce at the time necessitated
arithmetical tools for solving problems of conversion and exchange. Fibonacci’s book
thus met an important commercial need.

5

Perhaps more relevant to the issue of the great divergence between East and West
however is that Fibonacci’s mathematical technology in general, and the present value
criterion in particular, facilitated the development of financial contracts, instruments
and markets in Europe. Some of these financial contracts existed in Europe or were
created during Fibonacci’s lifetime, however the mathematical capacity to calculate the
present value of differing instruments led to a sustained period of financial innovation in
a relatively localized geographical area.

The financial divergence that began in 13th

Century Italy culminated most dramatically in the commercial encounter between China
and the great capitalist powers of the 19th Century, with the opening of the treaty ports of
Canton and Shanghai after the Opium Wars.

At that moment, a country with a long

tradition of family and clan-based finance met a culture of business armed with the
extraordinary capacity to borrow and raise equity capital from complete strangers. This
encounter offered both a challenge and an opportunity to Chinese entrepreneurs and
government officials and led to a rapid process of economic and political change that
continues into the modern era.

II. Fibonacci and the Commercial World of the 13th Century
Interest in the Medieval origins of the European commercial revolution has
stimulated some remarkable scholarship – from the extensive archival explorations into
the roots of capitalism by the late Robert Lopez and his students to the geography-based
quantitative traditions of the late Ferdinand Braudel and his followers. The contributions
of both narrative and quantitative history has created a rich picture of the sudden
emergence of trade and business in Medieval Europe after the year 1000.

6

Most

characterize it -- for better or worse -- as a commercial revolution and an economic
awakening from the Dark Ages. Although the scholarly contributions based on primary
archival sources are too numerous to cite here, synthetic works in this tradition include
Ferdinand Braudel’s classic three-volume work, Civilization and Capitalism, Joseph
Gies’ Merchants and Moneymen: The Commercial Revolution, 1000-1500, and Robert
S. Lopez’ The Commercial Revolution of the Middle Ages, 950-1350.

7

The dramatic

change during this period has recently stimulated economists to analyze the institutional
structures that supported the new long-distance trade.

Avner Greif, for example,

suggests that Italian cites had to develop new ways of dealing with foreign merchants –
including internally and externally recognized coalitions and business associations.8 In
other recent work, Peter Spufford describes the world of the merchant in 13th century
Medieval Europe in detail and points out that the very factors that impeded European
trade – from bad roads and a multiplicity of currencies, to varying legal standards and
lack of credit markets also created opportunities for entrepreneurs who could surmount
them.9 Wealthy urban centers throughout the continent stimulated a demand for exotic
goods and an enterprising merchant and banking sector emerged to meet this demand –
extending mercantile ties outside of Europe to the wider basin of the Mediterranean and
beyond, importing goods from the Middle East and occasionally even further afield.
Marco Polo and his brothers, for example, manned a Venetian trading station in the

7

See, for example, Braudel, Ferdinand, 1973-1984, Civilization and Capitalism 15th-18th Century 3 vols.
University of California Press, Berkeley. Gies, Joseph, 1972, Merchants and Moneymen: The Commercial
Revolution, 1000-1500, Ty Crowell, New York, and Lopez, Robert S. 1971, The Commercial Revolution
of the Middle Ages, 950-1350, Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs.
8
Greif, Avner, 1989, “Reputation and Coalitions in Medieval trade: Evidence on the Maghribi Traders,”
The Journal of Economic History, 49(4), December, pp. 857-882.
9
Spufford, Peter, 2002, Power and Profit: The Merchant in Medieval Europe, Thames and Hudson, New
York.

7

region of the Black Sea from which he either launched his long journey to China, or
perhaps simply collected travelers accounts of distant Cathay.
Fibonacci and his family were also an integral part of this

commercial

revolution.10 According to Leonardo’s brief autobiography in Liber Abaci, his father was
an administrative official in the Pisan colony of Bugia in North Africa. Leonardo was
summoned as a youth to the colony, and trained there according to his father’s request in
Arabic mathematical methods.

As a result of Fibonacci’s bi-cultural education, he

enthusiastically embraced “the Indian Method” of calculation, i.e. the use of Arabic
numerals. In fact, while the use of Arabic numerals had appeared sporadically in Western
Europe before Fibonacci’s time, Liber Abaci was one of the first works to methodically
describe the new number system to Europeans and to demonstrate its practical,
commercial use through detailed and copious examples.
The Pisan colony of Bugia in the Middle Ages was an important source for two
trade items: a fine grade of beeswax and high-quality leather. Originally a minor Roman
colony, the city was revived in the 11th Century by the Berbers. The Pisans took the
Algerian colony from their Genoese rivals in the mid-12th Century, and established a
trading port that not only exported North African goods, but also served as a conduit of
Eastern luxury items of all kinds into Europe.
Leonardo’s father served as a customs official and perhaps local representative
of the merchants in the Pisan colony in the late-1100’s and thus may have had

10

Gies, Joseph and Frances, 1969, Leonardo of Pisa and the New Mathematics of the Middle Ages,
Harper-Collins, New York , provide a brief, but very readable popular account of the life of Leonardo.

8

responsibility for recording the inflow and outflow of the goods through the port.11 At
least two problems in Liber Abaci concern the calculation and payment of customs duties.
Indeed, as an official representative of the Italian merchants in Bugia, Leonardo’s father
would presumably have understood the nature and value of the range of merchandise in
which they traded, and perhaps even the system of record and notation, accounts and
language used by Arab traders. Leiber (1968) notes regular business correspondence in
Arabic between Muslim and Pisan merchants from the years 1200 to 1202.12 Thus,
Leonardo not only had an education in Eastern mathematics, but deep family roots in
Mediterranean trade.
In his own account of his life, Leonardo explains that he traveled extensively
throughout the Mediterranean as a young man – presumably as a merchant himself. He
notes that he pursued mathematical knowledge from “whoever was learned in it, from
nearby Egypt, Syria, Greece, Sicily and Provence …to which locations of business I
traveled afterwards for much study.”

13

Leonardo returned from his travels sometime

around 1200, at about age 30 and published Liber Abaci in 1202. He revised it in a
second edition of 1228.

The oldest extant edition of the book is a handwritten

manuscript from 1291, now in the Biblioteca Riccardiana in Firenze.14 Copied more than

11

See Leiber, Alfred E., 1968, “Eastern Business Practices and Medieval European Commerce,” The
Economic History Review, New Series, 21(2) August, pp. 230-243. According to Lieber, European
merchants who traded with eastern Mediterranean ports may have exported regulatory practices as well as
goods. The modern French word “duanes,” for example, derives from the Arabic “dowanes” for customs.
12
Ibid.
13
Sigler, (2002) Op.cit. p.15. It of interest that Leonardo learned mathematics from teachers, as opposed
to books. Although he cites other works, his own account suggests that mathematical education during his
lifetime was, at least in large part, an oral tradition.
14
This is the edition translated into modern Italian by Baldassare Boncompagni, Scritti di Leonardo
Pisano, matematico del secolo decimoterzo, vol. 1 : Il Liber Abaci di Leonardo Pisano, pubblicato secondo
la lezione del codice Magliabechiano C. I, 2616, Badia Fiorentina, n° 73, Tipografia delle scienze
matematiche e fisiche, Rome, 1857. A useful description of the manuscript can be founding Van
Edgemond, Warren, 1980, Practical Mathematics in the Italian Renaissance: A Catalogue of Italian

9

sixty years after the original, according to Siegler (2002) it contains a variety of minor
mathematical errors – some noted by the later copyist, other not, suggesting a slow
accretion of mistakes through repeated hand-copying over the decades from 1228 to 1291
– implying among other things

a sustained interest in the book after its original

appearance.15 Indeed, the fact that Leonardo produced a second edition attests to the
interest in the book even during his lifetime.
Little else is known of Leonardo’s life in Pisa, except that he wrote a number of
other mathematical treatises, and corresponded with members of Emperor Fredrick II’s
court. The emperor himself is thought to have read Liber Abaci, and, on one of his visits
to Italy, granted the famous mathematician an audience.
Leonardo received a pension from the Republic of Pisa in 1241 for “ educating its
citizens and for his painstaking, dedicated service.”

Professor Heinz Lhneburg has

posted a Latin transcript of the document – it suggests that the city was equally grateful
for his teaching (doctrinum) and his accounting and valuation (abbacandis estimationibus
et rationibus).16 We can thus surmise from this that much of his life was devoted to
teaching mathematics and advising the Pisan government on issues of finance and
accounting.

Abbacus Manuscripts and Printed Books to 1600. Supplemento agli Annali dell’Instituto e Museo di Storia
della Scienza, Fascicolo 1, Firenze.
15
Sigler (2002), Op.cit. p. 10.
16
“…qui eis tam per doctrinam quam per sedula obsequia discreti et sapientis viri magistri Leonardi
Bigolli, in abbacandis estimationibus et rationibus civitatis …” http://www.mathematik.unikl.de/~luene/miszellen/Fibonacci.html Accessed by author 10/25/2003.

10

Sources and Predecessors
Leonardo gives considerable credit throughout Liber Abaci

to the work of

Muhammad ibn Mūsá Al Khwārizmī [c.780-850], the 9th century court astronomer of
Baghdad who wrote the famous treatise The Algebra, for whom that entire branch of
mathematics is named.17 A few earlier “Algorisms” – as translations and variations on
The Algebra are called --

appear in European context before the publication of Liber

Abaci. The earliest dates to the early or Mid-12th century.18 However these other
algorisms hone fairly closely to Khwārizmī’s work.
Liber Abaci, obviously owes an intellectual debt to Al Khwārizmī, not only in his
use of Indian numerals but also in the extensive use of algebraic methods. The two
works differ significantly in many ways, however. Liber Abaci is a much longer book,
containing many more problems and solutions and introducing a considerably broader
range of practical applications.

More importantly, the two authors treat fundamentally

different types of practical problems.

For example, most of Al Khwārizmī’s non-

geometric examples are problems of inheritance. They deal with the complexity of
dividing assets among family members and other claimants. A typical question is:
[A man] leaves two sons and ten dirhems of capital
and a demand of ten dirhems against one of the sons, and
bequeaths one-fifth of his property and one dirhem to a
stranger..”19

17

An English translation of The Algebra is Rosen, Frederic, 1831, the Algebra of Mohammed Ben Musa,
the Oriental Translation Fund and J. Murray, London.
18
For an account of the earliest European algebras, see Menninger, Karl, 1969, Number Word and Number
Symbols, MIT Press, Cambridge, pp. 410-412. Also useful is Karpinski, Louis C., 1921, “Two Twelfth
Century Algorisms” Isis, 3(3), Summer, pp. 396-413 and Benedict, Suzan Rose, 1914, A Comparative
Study of the Earliest Treatises Introducing Into Europe The Hindu Art of Reckoning, Thesis submitted to
the University of Michigan.
19
Rosen (1831) Op.cit. p. 87.

11

Thus, Al Khwārizmī’s focus is not fundamentally commercial, but directed
towards legal issues related to legacies and dowries – a class of problems that might in
fact have inspired him to write his book. As we will see in further discussion of Liber
Abaci below, Leonardo takes the solution methods from Al Khwārizmī’s Algebra and
adapts them to problems of dividing the capital from commercial ventures among
partners, rather than among family members. Thus, the works share methodological
approaches but differ in applications and scope.
An equally important precedent for Liber Abaci’s more commercial orientation is
the practical tradition of Hindu mathematics.

For at least seven centuries before

Fibonacci, Indian mathematicians were calculating interest rates and investment growth.
For example, one of India’s earliest mathematicians, Āryabhata [475 – 550] presents and
solves some interest rate problems in his famous book, Āryabhatīya -- a work otherwise
known for its contribution to astronomy.20 In the 7th Century, Bhāskara [c. 600-680]
wrote and extension and commentary on Āryabhatīya which contains several practical
applications of

the mathematics in the earlier work, including partnership share

divisions, and the relative pricing of commodies.21 Sridharacarya’s [c. 870-930] 10th
Century Trisastika, a work of 300 verse couplets, contains a few very practical interest
rate problems and a division of partnership problem.22
One particularly interesting example of an Indian mathematical precedent to
Leonardo’s work is a problem posed by the ninth-century Jain mathematician Mahavira
20

Clark, Walter E., 1930, The Āryabhatīya of Āryabhata, The University of Chicago Press, Chicago, pp.
38- 40. Clark discusses the possibility that some portions of the work were actually added substantially
later – perhaps as late as the 10th Century.
21
Sarma, Sreeramula Rajeswara, 2002, “Rule of Three and its Variations in India,” Dold-Samplonius et. a.
eds. From China to Paris: 2000 Years Transmission of Mathematical Ideas,” Franz Steiner Verlag,
Stuttgart pp. 133-156.
22
Ramanujacharia, R and Kaye, G.R., 1913, “The Trisatika of Sridharacarya,” Bibliotheca Mathematica,
series 3, 1913, pp. 203-217.

12

[c. 800-870]in his Ganita Sara Sangraha.

In the Indian work, three merchants find a

purse lying in the road. The first asserts that the discovery would make him twice as
wealthy as the other two combined. The second claims his wealth would triple if he kept
the purse, and the third claims his wealth would increase five fold. Precisely the same
problem appears in Chapter 12 of Liber Abaci, leaving little doubt that at least certain
classical problems in Leonardo’s book derive from Indian texts – whether transmitted by
word of mouth over centuries through the Arab world, or even directly through now-lost
Arabic translations of Hindu works. Closer to Leonardo’s era, and very close to the spirit
of the financial problems in the Pisan’s work, the Lilivati of Bhāskarācārya [1114-1185],
dates to about 1150 A.D. and, like the earlier works Trisastika and Āryabhatīya, contains
some loan problems and methods of finding principal and interest.23

Despite broad

parallels, however, none of the earlier Indian works develop a present-value criterion.
Even in Europe there may have been mathematicians who shared Fibonacci’s
interest in applied mathematics. Savasorda [d. 1136], a Jewish encyclopoedist in 12th
Century Barcelona composed a mathematical treatise on arithmetic and geometry, but
also solved problems involving price, quantity and money.24 Levey (1952) argues from
close textual similarities that Fibonacci must have seen Savasorda’s work and adapted his
methodology of proof, although the work is not cited by the Pisan. Perhaps a follower

23

The legal tradition in India pertaining to loans and interest rates is a long one. See Kane, M.P.V., 1946
History of Dharmaśastra , Government Oriental Series Class B Ro. 6, Bhandarkar Oriental Research
Institute, Poona, vol. 3 p. 419 and ff. This classic study of India’s ancient and medieval law describes legal
texts dating from the first four centuries A.D. and deals in detail with the classification and calculation of
interest on loans of various sorts, from unsecured debt to mortgages to investment in seafaring enterprises.
Thus the commercial context for the development of the mathematics of discounting in India preceded the
surviving mathematical texts on the subject.
24
Levey, Martin, 1952, “The Encyclopedia of Abraham Savasorda: A Departure in Mathematical
Methodology,” Isis, 43(3) September, pp. 257-264.

13

of Savasorda was one of the unnamed mathematics masters whom Fibonacci visited on
his travels.
Thus, although we will never know all of Fibonacci’s sources for mathematical
methods and problems, his acknowledged Arabic precedents, and the likely multiple
Indian precedents, provide at least a conceptual foundation for his work. Never-the-less,
the differences are as interesting as the similarities. No previous work of algebra or
applied mathematics comes close to the comprehensive analysis of business and financial
transactions of Liber Abaci, and none provides a comparable text for the actual teaching
of applied mathematics. While it is structured a bit like previous algorisms – with the
number system first, followed by the introduction of basic operations and then fractions,
a large part of the book is devoted to progressively more complex word problems. In
chapter after chapter, Fibonacci first introduces a very simple problem and its solution,
and then provides increasingly sophisticated examples that use the same method of
solution and require applications of tools mastered in previous chapters. Let us now turn
to some of Liber Abaci’s key contributions.

Fractions and The Rule of Three
After an initial discussion of arithmetic operations in the first four chapters,
chapters five and six of Liber Abaci introduce fractions and mixed numbers. Leonardo’s
fractions are a bit different from the modern form. They are “factored.” For example the
number 5.123 would be written

3 2 1
5 . That is, the denominator of the leftmost
10 10 10

fraction is the product of all denominator values that precede it.

This method was

particularly useful for calculations involving non-decimal monetary

14

and quantity

systems. For example, monetary units based upon the Roman system used denari, soldi,
and lira, with 12 denari to the soldo and 20 soldi to the lira. In this notation, the units of
each denomination can be preserved in the fraction -- a price of five lira, six soldi and
four denari can be represented as
more complex.

4 6
5.
12 20

Units of weight and measure can be even

According to Leonardo,

Pisan hundredweights … have in themselves one
hundred parts each of which is called a roll, and each roll
contains 12 ounces, and each of which weighs ½ 39
pennyweights; and each pennyweight contains 6 carobs and
a carob is 4 grains of corn.25
Chapters 8 is entitled “on Finding the Value of Merchandise by the Principal
Method,” and it begins the application of the new mathematics to commercial problems.
The first problem he addresses is how to determine an unknown price from a given
quantity of merchandise when the price per unit is known -- suppose a 100 rolls costs 40
lira, how much would five rolls cost?

He offers the solution through a diagram

40 100
and the solution as (40 * 5)/100.
?
5
This simple solution is generally called “The Rule of Three,” and is one of the
oldest algebraic tools in mathematics.

The Rule of Three appears in the Āryabhatīya,

and is extended and elaborated upon in Bhāskara’s commentaries, in which he applies it
to problems quite similar to those analyzed by Leonardo.26
Leonardo uses the Rule of Three with increasingly complex quantities and
currencies, applying it to examples drawn from trade around the Mediterranean. Goods

25
26

Sigler (2002), Op.cit. p. 128.
See Sarma (2002) Op. cit. for an early history of the Rule of Three.

15

include hundredweights of hides, hundredpounds of pepper, tons of Pisan cheese, rools
of saffron, nutmeg and cinnamon, meters of oil, sestario of corn, canes of cloth, oil from
Constantinople. Currencies include denari, massamutini, bezants, tareni. Leonardo
colorfully describes transactions in Sicily, the Barbary Coast, Syria, Alexandria,
Florence, Genoa, Messina and Barcelona. The prosaic nature of each of these problems
speaks of the practical import and the likely appeal of the book to merchants.

For

example, for a Pisan cloth merchant who trades perhaps in Syrian damask, and competes
with a Genoese merchant, it would have been useful to be able to translate across three
different units of length:
A Pisan cane is 10 palms or four arms however a Genoese
cane is said to be 9 palms. And furthermore the canes of
Provence and Sicily and Syria and Constantinople are the
same measure.27
Or for traders of raw cotton here is a useful problem:
One has near Sicily a certain ship laden with 11
hundreweights and 47 rolls of cotton, and one wishes to
convert them to packs; because 1/3 1 hundredweights of
cotton … is one pack, then four hundredweight of cotton
are 3 packs and for rolls of cotton are 3 rolls of a pack; you
write down in the problem the 11 hundredweights and 47
rolls , that is 1147 rolls below the 4 rolls of cotton and you
will multiply the 1147 by three and you divide by the 4;
the quotient will be ¼ 860 rolls of a pack.28
Following this basic technology, Fibonacci then extends the problems to those of
exchange between two goods – for example:
It is proposed that 7 rolls of pepper are worth 4
bezants and 9 pounds of saffron are worth 11 bezants, and

27
28

Sigler (2002) Op.cit. . p.168.
Ibid. p. 176.

16

it is sought how much saffron will be had for 23 rolls of
pepper. 29
 saffron bezants pepper 
Here, the diagram is expanded to three columns.  72 118 10
4
7  30
 9
11
23 
Showing how to multiply 23 * 4 * 9 and divide by the diagonal elements 7*11 to arrive at

[

]

the solution. This pattern can thus be applied to any longer sequence of intermediate
trades to establish no-arbitrage relationships among commodities in a market. This
solution is essentially the application of the “Rule of Five” that Bhāskara and later Indian
mathematicians developed for expressing price/quantity

relationships across several

goods. Sarma (2002) points out that the horizontal expression of The Rule of Five in
Western algorisms is orthogonal to the vertical orientation of the Indian application of the
rule.31 Thus, either an intermediate Arabic manuscript changed the algorithm, or the
solution method was transmitted West conceptually, without a written Indian model.
Although the mathematics of the Rules of Three and Five are trivial to us 800
years later, they were unquestionably a vital quantitative tool of the arbitrageur of the
13th Century. Italian merchants were buying saffron and pepper from their Arab counterparties, who were the primary intermediaries in the spice trade. Merchants who could not
calculate the relative value of saffron and pepper in the market – or perhaps could only do
so approximately, or with some difficulty -- were at an extreme disadvantage in trade
and negotiation. Just as today’s hedge funds use sophisticated, quantitative models to
rapidly calculate the relative price of two mortgage-backed securities, and then use these
calculations to establish a long or a short position if they detect a mispricing, so must 13th

29

Ibid. p. 184.
Ibid.
31
Sarma (2002) Op. cit.
30

17

Century Pisan merchants, bartering in a Damascus suk with spice traders, have used a
rapid series of arithmetic calculations to detect and exploit deviations from price parity
and barter their way towards profit. It is thus not surprising that the knowledge of the
Rule of Three extended in antiquity along trade routes.

Foreign Exchange and Coinage
Leonardo also applies the Rules of Three and Five to problems of currency
exchange. Here, the practical demand for a guide to monetary conversions must have
been considerable. Peter Spufford charts the evolution of an extraordinary patchwork of
currencies in Medieval Europe around Leonardo’s time [See Figure 1].32 Italy had the
highest concentration of different currencies with 28 different cites at one time or other
issuing coins in the Middle Ages -- 7 in Tuscany alone. Most, but not all, of them were
based on the Roman system of “d,s,l” denari, soldi, lire – familiar to English readers as
the pounds, shilling and pence system.

However their relative value and metallic

composition varied considerably through time and across space. The varieties of currency
created business for money changers, “Banche Del Giro,” where monetary systems
came into contact, and these money changers and their customers needed tools for
calculation. Before Fibonacci, the common method for exchange arithmetic was the
abacus, or versions based on moving markers in grooves or along scored lines on a table.
As such, the algorithmic solution to an exchange problem was separated from the written
expression of the problem – Arabic numerals allowed the solution to be calculated on
paper based upon the written statement of the problem. This almost certainly altered and

32

Spufford, Peter, 1986, Handbook of Medieval Exchange, Offices of the Royal Historical Society,
London.

18

improved the way money changers could model and analyze relative values of multiple
currencies rapidly.

It is one thing to be able to accurately calculate a sequence of

monetary exchanges one at a time – it is another thing to be able to set up a series of
equations of relative value, and to place algebraic bounds on how much any currency is
worth in terms of another.

Reading Liber Abaci one has the sense that Italian

merchants of the 13th century operated in a world of complete relativism. With no central
government, no dominant currency, and even competing faiths and heresies, value is
expressed quite abstractly only in a set of relative relations to other items. While many
of Leonardo’s examples use money as a unit of calculation, the currencies vary arbitrarily
from example to example – almost as if to stress the flexibility and broad applicability of
his algebraic approach.
Indeed, money of his day was not quite money in the way we currently think of it.
Transactions might be expressed in a certain currency, or unit of account, but the quantity
of physical coinage corresponding to that unit could vary through time, as governments
regularly debased and re-valued their currencies. One of the attractive things about a
pure gold coin, like the Florentine florin first minted in 1252, is that it could serve
simultaneously as a unit of account and of transaction, with a 1:1 numeric
correspondence. Most silver coinage of the time had at least some level of debasement
with copper that caused its value relative to bullion to fluctuate through time.

It is thus

not surprising that Leonardo’s monetary analysis goes beyond currency conversions into
problems of minting and alloying of money. An entire chapter is devoted to the methods
for minting coins of silver and copper.

19

Certain cities – including Pisa -- had imperial rights to coin money, and mints in
these cities operated by striking coins from bullion brought to them from the public and
the private sector. A merchant who wished to turn a quantity of metal (perhaps even old
coins) into currency would pay a seigniorage fee to the mint for the production of coin.
During much of Leonardo’s lifetime, the Pisan penny was pegged to the value of the
Lucchese penny and together they became the standard monetary unit in Tuscany, with
little evidence of debasement or changes in the metallic composition.

In contrast, also

during Leonardo’s lifetime, the currency of Northern Italy underwent a revolution -cites began to mint large silver coins called grossi. In the late 1220’s (around the time of
the second edition of Liber Abaci) Lucca introduced a coin with a high silver content
worth 12 denari.33 This followed the introduction of grossi by Genoa in 1172 and by
Venice in 1192. Leonardo does not specifically address the relative value of grossi and
denari on his chapter on minting of coin, instead abstracting away from particular
currencies to the general methods of calculation and evaluation of relative proportions of
silver and copper in coins. Presumably the methodology developed in Liber Abaci was
useful not only to the master of the Pisa mint, but perhaps to merchants who brought
metal to be coined, and paid the seignorage.

III. Finance and Interest Rate Problems
Most of the pure finance problems in Liber Abaci are in the twelfth chapter – as is
the famous “Fibonacci series” example. The finance in this chapter is of four general
types. The first type concerns how the profits from joint business ventures should be

33

Velde, François R, 2000, “Notes on Tuscan Coinage, 12th C. 14th Ce.” Federal Reserve Bank of
Chicago.

20

fairly split when contributions are unequal and are made at different points in time, and in
different currencies or goods and in cases in which business partners borrow from each
other. The second type concerns the calculation of the profits from a sequence of business
trips in which profit and expense or withdrawal of capital occurs at each stop. The third is
the calculation of future values from investments made with banking houses. The fourth
is present value analysis as we now think of it, including specifically the difference
between annual and quarterly compound interest.

Division of Profits
The mathematics of dividing profits from business joint ventures was obviously
relevant to Italian merchants of the 13th Century. The basic business unit used to finance
many of the trade ventures in Northern Italy in the Middle Ages was the commenda
contract between an investor and his

traveling partner – the former (commedator)

investing capital and the latter (tractator) investing labor. John H. Pryor’s (1977) study of
commeda from the 12th Century describes two basic types – a unilateral and a bi-lateral
contract – the former providing limited liability but smaller profit to the tractator and the
latter sharing the potential losses equally between the contracting parties.34

In the

standard, uni-lateral commenda, the commendator would transfer capital to the tractator
for the duration of the voyage (or term of the contract) and would take ¾ of the profit.
Much of what is known about commeda has been gleaned from studies of notarial
documents in Italian and French archives, and Pisan records are among the oldest. Pisa’s
Constitutum Usus (1156) is the earliest surviving municipal document specifying the

34

Pryor, John, H., 1977, “The Origins of the Commenda Contract,” Speculum, 52(1) January, pp. 5-37.

21

conditions of the commeda contract. 35

The unilateral commeda in Pisa was very much

like the contract described by Leonardo in a problem of division of profits, writing 44
years after the statues. The problem “On Companies,” is worth quoting at length:
Whenever … any profit of an association is divided among
its members we must show how the same must be done
according to the abovewritten method of negotiation …We
then propose this of a certain company which has in its
association 152 pounds, for which the profit is 56 pounds,
and is sought how much of the same profit each of its
members must be paid in pounds. First, indeed, according
to Pisan custom, we must put aside one fourth of the
abovewritten profit [apparently for the tractator] ; after this
is dealt with, there remain 42 pounds. Truly if you wish to
find this according to the popular method, you will find the
rule of 152, that is 18 190 ; you divide the profit, namely the 42
pounds; by 8; the quotient will be 5 pounds and 5 soldi
which are 105 soldi, which you divide by the 19; the
6
quotient
will
be
5
soldi
and
6
19
 profit
capital 


denari.  42
152  If you wish to find by the
 665
1 
 19 12 20
aforewritten rule how much will result … for profit from 13
pounds in the association, then you do this: multiply the 13
by the profit prortion in one pound, namely by 5 soldi and
6
6 denari.. there will be 3 pounds and 11 soldi and 192 10
19
 profit

denari.  42
 2 10 11 3
19 12 20

capital 

152  .
13 

36

Fibonacci’s problem provides a fascinating example of how commenda were used.
Although the tractator profits were divided according to Pisan custom, the commendator
shares could be divided among several investors, whose association is termed a societas.
Fibonacci thus develops a general approach to dividing the profits from a societas
35
36

Sigler (2002) Op.cit. p.10.
Sigler (2002) p. 172.

22

according to the proportion of contributed capital. His approach is the now familiar
definition of a rate of return on a unit of capital which is then scaled by the amount
invested. Robert Lopez argues that societas and the commenda contracts were the
original European forms of business association from which modern partnership and
corporations ultimately developed. Consequently, the commenda example, and related
problems addressed by Fibonacci in Liber Abaci, were significant early contributions to
“pre-corporate” financial economics.

Traveling Merchant Problems
The second type of financial problem is a set of “traveling merchant” examples,
akin to accounting calculations for profits obtained in a series of trips to trading cities.
The first example is:
A certain man proceeded to Lucca on business to make a
profit doubled his money, and he spent there 12 denari. He
then left and went through Florence; he there doubled his
money, and spent 12 denari. Then he returned to Pisa,
doubled his money and it is proposed that he had nothing
left. It is sought how much he had at the beginning.37
Leonardo proposes an ingenious solution method. Since capital doubles at each stop, the
discount factor for the third cash flow (in Pisa) is ½ ½ ½ . He multiplies the periodic
cash flow of 12 denari times a discount factor that is the sum of the individual discount
factors for each trip i.e.

1 1 1
+ + .
2 4 8

The solution is 10½ denari. The discount factor

effectively reduces the individual cash flows back to the point before the man reached
Lucca.
37

Notice that this approach can be generalized to allow for different cash flows at

Sigler (2002) Op.cit. p. 372.

23

different stages of the trip, a longer sequence of trips, different rates of return at each
stop, or a terminal cash flow. In the twenty examples that follow the Lucca-FlorencePisa problem, Leonardo presents and solves increasingly complex versions with various
unknown elements. For example, one version of the problem specifies the beginning
value and requires that the number of trips to be found – e.g. “A certain man had 13
bezants, and with it made trips, I know not how many, and in each trip he made double
and he spent 14 bezants. It is sought how many were his trips.”38

This and other

problems demonstrate the versatility of his discounting method. They also provide a
framework for the explicit introduction of the dimension of time, and the foundation for
what we now consider finance.

Interest Rate and Banking Problems

Immediately following the trip problems, Fibonacci poses and solves a series of
banking problems. Each of these follows the pattern established by the trips example –
the capital increases by some percentage at each stage, and some amount is deducted.
For example:
A man placed 100 pounds at a certain [banking] house for
4 denari per pound per month interest and he took back
each year a payment of 30 pounds. One must compute in
each year the 30 pounds reduction of capital and the profit
on the said 30 pounds. It is sought how many years,
months, days and hours he will hold money in the
house....39
Fibonacci explains that the solution is found by using the same techniques developed in
the trips section. Intervals of time replace the sequence of towns visited and thus a time38
39

Ibid. p. 383.
Ibid. p. 384.

24

series of returns and cash draw-downs can be evaluated. Once the method of trips has
been mastered, then it is straightforward to construct a multiperiod discount factor and
apply it to the periodic payment of 30 pounds – although in this problem the trick is to
determine the number of time periods used to construct the factor. Now we might use
logarithms to address the problem of the nth root for an unknown n, but Fibonacci lived
long before the invention of logarithms. Instead, he solves it by brute force over the
space of three pages, working forward from one period to two periods etc. until he finds
the answer of 6 years, 8 days and

13
5 hours. The level of sophistication represented by
29

this problem alone is unmatched in the history of financial analysis. Although the
mathematics of interest rates had a 3,000 year history before Fibonacci, his remarkable
exposition and development of multi-period discounting is a quantum leap above his
predecessors.
Eleven banking house problems follow this initial mathematical tour de force.
Each of them has some value of the problem that is unknown – either the future value, the
present value, the rate of interest, the duration of the loan, or the periodic dividend that is
withdrawn. Fibonacci provides model solutions to each unknown, basing all of them on
the previously introduced “trips” paradigm.
It is a bit surprising to find such an overt description of the charging of interest by
bankers in the 13th Century, given the ecclesiastical proscription against usury. John
Munro has argued convincingly that, while Church doctrine had long forbidden usury,
vigorous institutional attacks on the charging of interest began in earnest in the early 13th
century and were a major impetus for

the development of census and rentes and

perpetual bond contracts – all of which circumvented the ecclesiastical definition of

25

loans.40

Liber Abaci

was written just before the formation of the Franciscan and

Dominican orders (1206 and 1216 respectively) who were at the vanguard of the fight
against usury. The Church’s attack on the charging of interest was in fact an attack on
just the operations described and analyzed in Leonardo’s book.41

Present Value Analysis

The most sophisticated of Fibonacci’s interest rate problems is “On a Soldier
Receiving Three Hundred Bezants for his Fief.” In it, a soldier is granted an annuity by
the king of 300 bezants per year, paid in quarterly installments of 75 bezants. The king
alters the payment schedule to an annual year-end payment of 300. The soldier is able to
earn 2 bezants on one hundred per month (over each quarter) on his investment. How
much is his effective compensation after the terms of the annuity have changed? To
solve this, Fibonacci explains
First indeed you strive to reduce this problem to the method
of trips and it is reduced thus… because there are 4
payments, 4 trips are similarly carried, and because each
payment is 75 bezants, this is had for the expense of each

40

Munro, John H., 2003, 'The Medieval Origins of the Financial Revolution: Usury, Rentes, and
Negotiability', The International History Review, 25(3) September, pp. 505-62.
41
There is some evidence in Liber Abaci that Fibonacci’s financial analysis may have roots in the
ancient Near East. Consider this problem: “A certain man gave one denaro at interest so that in five years
he must receive double the denari, and in another five he must have double two of the denari and thus
forever from 5 to 5 years the capital and interest are doubled. It is sought how many denari from this one
denaro he must have in 100 years.” Compare this to the problem from the Old Babylonian tablet 8528 in
the Berlin museum published by Otto Neugebauer (1935). It asks: “If I lent one mina of silver at the rate of
12 shekels (a shekel is equal to 1/60 of a mina) per year, and I received in repayment, one talent (60 minas)
and 4 minas. How long did the money accumulate?” [Sigler, 2002, Op.cit. p. 437] The solution is found
by capitalizing interest only when the outstanding principal doubles. At 20%, the principal doubles every
five years. Thus, the answer is that it would take 30 years for the debt to grow to 64 minae. The doubling
over five year intervals seems a striking parallel, particularly given the fact that an annual compound rate
that yields that result is not a round number – it is something less than 15%.

26

trip. Next because 53 is made from 50, you put
times for the four payments thus

50
for
53

50 50 50 50 42
…
53 53 53 53

The product of these ratios is used to discount a payment by four periods (or trips).
Notice that Fibonacci’s novel fraction expression allows each term to be successively
discounted by one more period. The discounted annual value of the 300 bezants paid in
the last period is 259 and change. As before, Fibonacci explains how to construct a
multi-period discount factor from the product of the reciprocals of the periodic growth
rate of an investment, using the model developed from mercantile trips in which a
percentage profit is realized at each city.

In this problem, he explicitly quantifies the

difference in the value of two contracts due to the timing of the cash flows alone. As
such, this particular example marks the discovery of one of the most important tools in
the mathematics of Finance – an analysis explicitly ranking different cash flow streams
based upon their present value.

Institutional and Commercial Context

The soldier’s present value problem above testifies to the fact that the
mathematics of time-value discounting was apparently important 1202 when Liber Abaci
was written. However, over the next few centuries its significance to governmental and
commercial transactions grew tremendously.

With the growth of international trade --

and warfare – in the late Middle Ages, the need for long-distance monetary transfers
increased.

Chinese merchants had solved this problem centuries earlier with the use of

feichan “flying money” remittance certificates issued by government institutions in
42

Sigler (2002) Op.cit, p. 392.

27

provincial capitals. Arab merchants in Fibonacci’s time used an instrument much like a
modern personal check for paper remittance. Neither of these explicitly involved a
discount for the time-value of money. Early European money transfers -- bills of
exchange -- did. Any distant remittance involved a time interval due to travel, and
compensation for the use of the money over that period is natural, so bills of exchange
were typically discounted to compensate for forgone interest revenue – essentially as in
the example of “The Soldier Receiving Three Hundred Bezants for his Fief.” Thus, bills
of exchange were also interest rate instruments. Ashtor (1983) published the earliest
known bill of exchange which appears to date from 1220.43 Sivéry (1983) identifies an
Italian discount contract with an implicit interest rate of around 11% from the year
1252.44

Both the early 13th century date and the Levantine origin of Medieval bills of

exchange form an interesting parallel to the publication date and Eastern influences of
Liber Abaci. Were the mathematical tools for present value imported to Italy along with

bills of exchange and Arabic numerals? Or did the technological innovation of using
bills of exchange as debt securities (called “dry-exchange” by Medieval practitioners),
stimulate mathematical work on the time value of money? In all likelihood, it was a
fertile interplay between commerce and mathematical advancement, and Leonardo of
Pisa was at its geographical and intellectual center.
Another key innovation occurred in northern Italy around Fibonacci’s
lifetime – the creation of long-term government debt. Venice and Genoa both began to

43

Ashtor, Eliyahu, 1983, Levant Trade in the Later Middle Ages, Princeton: Princeton
University Press. Cited in Kohn, Meir, 1999, “Bills of Exchange and the Money Market to 1600,”
working paper Dartmouth College. http://www.dartmouth.edu/~mkohn/99-04.pdf. The latter is an up-todate and excellent survey of bills of exchange.
44
Sivéry, Gérard, 1983, “Mouvements de capitaux et taux d’interêt en occident au XIIIe siècle,” Annales
Economies Societés Civilizations. 38, p.367. Quoted in Spufford, Op.cit.

28

issue forced loans to her wealthy citizens in the late 12th Century. In 1171, for example,
Venice issued a mandatory 5% loan to all citizens of the Republic to finance the
construction of a fleet to fight Byzantium.45 Out of this and successive loans called
prestiti a regular market for government debt developed in Venice by the mid-13th

century. The consolidation of the Venetian debt by decree in 1262 institutionalized the
funding of municipal debt, and gave birth to the now widespread modern practice of
financing the government through a national debt.
The roots of this debt revolution can be found in the financial records of Pisa
itself. Pisa in Leonardo’s time regularly made long-term debt commitments to creditors,
promising the perpetual flow of revenues from specific sources to amortize a debt.
Favier (1971) reports just such a contract with a creditor of the commune in 1173.46
Historian David Herlihy points out that the public finances of the commune became
increasingly complex through the course of the 13th Century. Pisan governors – podesta - began to raise money through capitalization of taxation and monopoly rights.47

The

economic decision to alienate a stream of future cash flows in return for a current lumpsum payment is essentially a present value consideration. There is no doubt that the
mathematical techniques in Liber Abaci would have allowed the podesta to quantify these
decisions in a manner not feasible before Fibonacci’s work. In fact, the annuity settled
on Fibonacci late in his life for service to the state suggests that he may have had a hand
in advising on precisely these financial contracts.
45

Pezzolo, Luciano, 2003, “Bonds and Government Debt in Italian City States: 1250-1650,” in Goetzmann
and Rouwenhorst, eds. Origins of Value: Innovations in the History of Finance, forthcoming, Oxford
Press.
46
Favier, Jean, 1971, Finance and Fiscalité au Bas Moyen Âge , Société D’Édition D’Enseignement
Supérieur, Paris, p. 283.
47
Herlihy, David, 1958, Pisa in the Early Renaissance: a Study ofUurban Growth, Yale University Press,
New Haven. Chapter 6 describes these new contracts. Pezzolo (forthcoming) Op.cit. cites examples of
similar sales of income rights in Genoa in 1152 and Venice in 1164.

29

The technology of present value in Liber Abaci would also have served the
analysis of private commercial transactions.

Consider, for example, the extraordinary

futures contracts quoted in neighboring Pistoia from at least the beginning of the 13th
Century. From 1201 to 1210, contracts for delivery of perpetual delivery of a staio of
wheat sold for a median price of 2.80 lira – a period in which, according to Herlihy, the
“spot” price of a staio sold for ¼ of a lira.

Without a mathematical method for

discounting future deliveries, how did market participants determine the present value of
such contract?48 How were speculators able to arbitrage the relative prices of farmland
and futures contracts?

Indeed, did the capacity to discount future values exist in

Northern Italy before Fibonacci or did his mathematics make futures and complex fixed
income contracts possible?

Ultimately, It is difficult to disentangle the causal

relationship between the commercial problems of the day and the mathematical methods
for solving them. Almost certainly, as is true today, there was a dynamic relationship
between the analytical framework and the market. Mathematicians then, as now, must
have been motivated by problems in the world around them, and in turn, their solutions
engendered new advances in financial engineering.

Did Finance Influence the Mathematics of Infinite Series’ or Vice-Versa?

The famous Fibonacci series problem is posed late in Chapter 12 – not as part of a
series of related problems, but included after a problem on finding numbers equal to the
sum of their factors, and before an algebra problem about four men with money.

Is

there any connection between the famous series and the commercial problems in the
chapter? Certainly Chapter 12 is full of examples of compound growth from period to
48

Herlihy, David, 1967, Medieval and Renassiance Pistoia, Yale University Press, New Haven, p. 138-9.

30

period – in particular, proportional increases in capital. The arithmetic of constructing a
sequence of future values establishes a basis for considering a number of other, curious,
infinite series.’ One particularly interesting example of this sort in Chapter 12 is about
the problem of doubling grains of wheat on a chessboard and summing the result –
starting with only two grains, and doubling them through a chessboard of 64 squares
leads to a quantity that is so great that “The number of ships [required to carry it] is
effectively infinite and uncountable…”49 Fibonacci marvels at how a simple growth
algorithm applied to the well-known and finite pattern of a chessboard leads to imagining
a vast, nearly infinite magnitude.

This example suggests that Fibonacci’s study of

infinite series’ may actually have developed as an extension of his analyses of
compounding rates of return in finance problems.

After Liber Abaci

No matter how revolutionary, Leonardo’s book did not suddenly advance Pisa to
the economic forefront of competing Tuscan communes in the 13th Century. Although
Pisa grew significantly during this period, she gradually lost out to other cites in the
competition for the Levantine trade. Pisan merchants increasingly turned toward the
North African colonies and trade with France and Spain, leaving trade with
Constantinople and the Holy Land to her rivals Venice and Genoa. Larger political
forces trumped any commercial or technological advantage potentially enjoyed as a result
of Leonardo’s writing and teaching.
One enduring aspect of Fibonacci’s legacy is business education. Van Egmond
(1980) documents a dramatic increase in the number of commercial arithmetic books in
49

Sigler (2002), Op.cit. p. 437.

31

Italy during the centuries following the writing of Liber Abaci and Natalie Zemon Davis
(1960) does the same for France.50 Hundreds of hand-written and printed arithmetic
books have survived from the European Renaissance, and many of them draw directly or
indirectly from Leonardo’s Liber Abaci. Undoubtedly beginning with Leonardo’s own
efforts to educate the citizens of Pisa in the 13th Century, Italian businessmen learned
techniques of valuation and discounting according to his methods. When 15th century
Florentine bankers extended their lending operations throughout Europe, they already had
a centuries-long Italian tradition of financial mathematics upon which to draw.51 To see
how the mathematics of Finance developed after Fibonacci, let us consider two of the
most important examples of his legacy of arithmetic writing and education: one from
the 15th Century and another from the 16th Century.
The earliest extant printed commercial arithmetic is the Treviso Arithmetic of
1478, a volume of commercial problems written in the Venetian dialect, apparently used
widely as a text for Renaissance Italian “Reckoning” schools.

52

Liber Abaci and the

Treviso are clearly written in the same style – with an introduction to arithmetic

operations, followed by chapters devoted to such topics as partnerships and division of
profits, applications of ratios to trade and exchange, and metallurgy and coinage.
Lacking in the Treviso, however are interest-rate problems and methods of discount. –
perhaps reflecting the influence of usury laws in the preceding centuries curtailed their

50

Van Egmond, Warren, 1980, Practical Mathematics in the Italian Renaisance: A Catalogue of Italian
Abbacus Manuscripts and Printed Books to 1600, Monographia n. 4, Instituto di Storia Della Scienza
Firenzi. Also, Davis, Nathalie Zemon, 1960, "Sixteenth-Century French Arithmetics on the Business
Life." Journal of the History of Ideas (January-March ), 21(1), pp. 18-48.
51
For the evolution of arithmetic schools in the tradition of Fibonacci, see for example Poitras (2000)
Op.cit and Swetz, Frank J., 1987, Capitalism and Arithmetic; the New Math of the 15th Century, Open
Court, LaSalle.
52
Swetz, Frank J. (1987) Op.cit. p. 293.

32

explicit role in mathematical education.53 We know Italians were using discounting
technology widely at this time, but apparently it would not do to include such examples
in a published book.
By contrast, a book published a century later in Lyons draws heavily on the
financial technology

of Liber Abaci, and in fact demonstrates the fundamental role in

European finance played by present value analysis.

L’ Arithmetique written by Jean

Trenchant in 1558 follows the general structure of earlier and contemporary arithmetics.
However, unlike the the author of the Treviso, Trenchant also devotes a major section of
his book to interest rate and present value problems.

Trenchant poses one problem in

particular that clearly builds on Fibonacci’s work, but is an actual “case” rather than
simply an illustrative example.

In the year 1555, King Henry, to conduct the war, took
money from bankers at the rate of 4% per fair. That is
better terms for them than 16% per year. In this same year
before the fair of Toussaints, he received by the hands of
certain bankers the sum of 3,945,941 ecus and more, which
they called “Le Grand Party” on the condition that he will
pay interest at 5% per fair for 41 fairs after which he will
be finished. Which of these conditions is better for the
bankers?54
The question is posed whether Henry’s perpetuity at 4% per quarter is worth more or less
than his 5% per quarter annuity for 41 quarters. Here, three and a half centuries after
Leonardo, mathematicians are using methods developed in Liber Abaci to finance the
struggle for control of Europe.

Trenchant, in fact, may have been one of the

53

See Poitras, 2000, Op. cit. p.160 for a discussion of the Treviso’s limited coverage of interest rate
problems.
54
Trenchant, Jean, L’Arithmetique, 1558, second edition, 1637, Lyons, p. 307. Author’s translation.

33

mathematicians consulted in the structuring and valuation of these loans – he lived in
Lyons where the financing took place.
Trenchant’s solution is an elegant one.

Rather than calculating the present value

of the annuity and the perpetuity separately and comparing the two, he takes the
incremental cash flow generated by the annuity over the 41 quarters and calculates the
future value of that steam, under the assumption that each extra 1% payment per quarter
is loaned at interest until the end of the period. He observes that, if the future value of
this cumulated residual is less than the value of a perpetuity 41 quarters hence, then the
4% perpetuity is worth more than the annuity.
Earlier in his book he develops methods for calculating geometric progressions.
He uses these methods to calculate a sequence of 41 numbers representing the future
value of the 41 incremental cash flows due from the annuity, and then sums them and
scales the value to the initial investment, allowing a comparison in percentage terms to
any given initial investment in the perpetuity. He finds that the annuity is only worth
99.2% of the perpetuity, and thus concludes that the first deal is a better one for the
bankers than the second.
Trenchant’s analysis is noteworthy in that it demonstrates how important present
value analysis had become in Europe by the 16th Century. Over the centuries following
Leonardo, the present value method evolved from being the tool of an Italian commune
seeking to reduce its pension expenses, to a critical factor in the financing of the defense
of France. Unlike Leonardo who relied upon the analogy to trips, but who made a major
contribution to the mathematics of infinite series’, Trenchant’s exposition of present
value analysis was based directly upon solutions to geometric series. In fact, Trenchant

34

is interesting is his own right.

His development of present value analysis is more

complete than that of Fibonacci – considering as it does the difference between an
annuity and a perpetuity. Among other things, his book was the first to publish a table of
discount factors for present value calculation.

East and West Revisited

Returning to the broader theme of the contrast between Europe and the Far East
during the late Middle Ages and the Renaissance, it is curious that the interplay between
mathematics and financial contracts witnessed in Europe from 1200 to 1700 was not
matched in China, despite the advancement of both the Chinese financial system and
Chinese mathematics – and indeed despite the cultural ties that linked China, India and
the Middle East fostered by religious and commercial intercourse.

Although the

fragmentation of European monetary systems, the complexity of Mediterranean trade and
the proscription again usury may also have been stimulating factors in the joint
development of increasingly sophisticated financial tools and analytical methods, the
largest institutional factor differentiating Europe and China in this period is public
finance. James Tracy (1985) shows that, beginning around the turn of the 12th Century,
cities like Venice, Genoa, Sienna and Florence in the South, and Douai, Valias and Ghent
in Northern Europe all began to rely increasingly upon a variety of forms of debt
financing.55 In the North, cities sold long-term life-rent contracts to citizens, both
perpetual and fixed term, creating a rentier class in the Late Middle Ages. In the South,

55

Tracy, James, 1985, A Financial Revolution in the Hapsburg Netherlands, University of California Press,
Berkeley, pp. 11-14.

35

cities issued callable bonds, non-callable bonds -- even bonds callable by lottery.56 The
assignability of these contracts led to active public securities trading – most spectacularly
in 13th Century Venice near the Rialto bridge, where the first bond market was born. 57
Even in the Middle Ages, public finance and private commerce relied upon an
analytical system of valuation, and Fibonacci’s book is the earliest historical evidence of
such a system in Europe. While earlier evidence of such calculation may not have
survived, the internal textual evidence in Liber Abaci, in particular the endogenous
development of discounting methods from the analogy to trips, suggests that his
contribution to the financial mathematics of the time was original.
History proceeds by processes of broad cultural trends, salient political and
military events and population movements, as well as by discoveries and contributions
by individuals. In China, there is little question that wars during the Song era stimulated
a desperate need for innovations in governmental finance. Indeed, these pressures led to
the invention in China of paper money, and the “discovery” of inflation – but not,
interestingly enough, to state borrowing and deficit finance. Is this because China had
no previous tradition of census contracts, or was it because of the diverging technological
development of Finance and Financial Economics in the West, a development that
eventually culminated in the far-flung capitalist empires of the late 19th Century? Had
Fibonacci been born in China, would the world have become a different place?

56

Epstein, Steve A., 1996, Genoa and the Genoese: 958-1528, University of North Carolina Press, Chapel
Hill, p. 192.
57
See, Mueller, Reinhold, C., 1997, The Venetian Money Market, Banks, Panics and the Public Debt
1200-1500, Johns Hopkins University Press, Baltimore.

36

References

Ashtor, Eliyahu, 1983, Levant Trade in the Later Middle Ages, Princeton University
Press, Princeton.
Boncompagni, Baldassare, 1857, Scritti di Leonardo Pisano, Matematico del Secolo
Decimoterzo, vol. 1 : Il Liber Abaci di Leonardo Pisano, Pubblicato Secondo la Lezione
del Codice Magliabechiano C. I, 2616, Badia Fiorentina, n° 73, Tipografia delle Scienze
Matematiche e Fisiche, Rome.
Benedict, Suzan Rose, 1914, A Comparative Study of the Earliest Treatises Introducing
Into Europe The Hindu Art of Reckoning, Thesis submitted to the University of
Michigan.
Braudel, Ferdinand, 1973-1984, Civilization and Capitalism 15th-18th Century,
University of California Press, Berkeley.
Clark, Walter E., 1930, The Āryabhatīya of Āryabhata, The University of Chicago Press,
Chicago.
Davis, Nathalie Zemon, 1960 "Sixteenth-Century French Arithmetics on the Business
Life," Journal of the History of Ideas (January-March ), 21(1), pp. 18-48.
Epstein, Steve A.,1996, Genoa and the Genoese: 958-1528, University of North
Carolina Press, Chapel Hill.
Favier, Jean, 1971, Finance and Fiscalité au Bas Moyen Âge , Société D’Édition
D’Enseignement Supérieur, Paris.
Fisher, Irving, 1930, The Theory of Interest, The MacMillan Company, New York.
Gies, Joseph, 1972, Merchants and Moneymen: The Commercial Revolution, 1000-1500,
Ty Crowell, New York.
Gies, Joseph and Frances, 1969, Leonardo of Pisa and the New Mathematics of the
Middle Ages, Harper-Collins, New York.
Graham, John R., and Campbell Harvey, 2001, “The Theory and Practice of Corporate
Finance: Evidence from the Field,” Journal of Financial Economics 60(2-3), pp. 187243.
Greif, Avner, 1989, “Reputation and Coalitions in Medieval trade: Evidence on the
Maghribi Traders,” The Journal of Economic history, 49(4), December, pp. 857-882.
Herlihy, David, 1958, Pisa in the Early Renaissance: a Study of Urban Growth, Yale
University Press, New Haven.

37

Herlihy, David, 1967, Medieval and Renassiance Pistoia, Yale University Press, New
Haven.
Menninger, Karl, 1969, Number Word and Number Symbols, MIT Press, Cambridge.
Kane M.P.V., 1946, History of Dharmaśastra , Government Oriental Series Class B Ro.
6, Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute, Poona, v. 3.
Kohn, Meir, 1999, “Bills of Exchange and the Money Market to 1600,” working paper
Dartmouth College. http://www.dartmouth.edu/~mkohn/99-04.pdf.
Karpinski, Louis C., 1921, “Two Twelfth Century Algorisms” Isis, 3(3), Summer, pp.
396-413.
Leiber, Alfred E. 1968, “Eastern Business Practices and Medieval European Commerce,”
The Economic History Review, New Series, 21(2), August, pp. 230-243.
Levey, Martin, 1952, “The Encyclopedia of Abraham Savasorda: A Departure in
Mathematical Methodology,” Isis, 43(3), September, pp. 257-264.
Lin, Justin, 1995, “The Needham Puzzle: Why the Industrial Revolution Did Not
Originate in China, “ Economic Development and Cultural Change, 43(2), pp. 269-292.
Lopez, Robert S. 1971, The Commercial Revolution of the Middle Ages, 950-1350,
Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs.
Munro, John H., 2003, 'The Medieval Origins of the Financial Revolution: Usury,
Rentes, and Negotiability', The International History Review, 25(3), September, pp. 50562.
Mueller, Reinhold, C., 1997, The Venetian Money Market, Banks, Panics and the Public
Debt 1200-1500, Johns Hopkins University Press, Baltimore.
Needham, Joseph, 1954-, Science and Civilisation in China, Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge.
Neugebauer, Otto, 1935, Mathematische Keilschrift-Texse, Springer-Verlag, Berlin.
Pezzolo, Luciano, 2003, “Bonds and Government Debt in Italian City States: 12501650,” in Goetzmann and Rouwenhorst, eds. Origins of Value: Innovations in the
History of Finance, forthcoming, Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Poitras, Geoffrey, 2000, The Early History of Financial Economics, 1478-1776, Edward
Elgar, Northampton.
Pryor, John, H., 1977, “The Origins of the Commenda Contract,” Speculum, 52(1)
January, pp. 5-37.
38

Pomeranz, Kenneth, 2000, The Great Divergence: China, Europe, and the Making of the
Modern World Economy, Princeton University Press, Princeton.
Ramanujacharia, R and Kaye, G.R., 1913, “The Trisatika of Sridharacarya,” Bibliotheca
Mathematica, series 3, 1913, pp. 203-217.
Rosen, Fredrick, 1831, the Algebra of Mohammed Ben Musa, the Oriental Translation
Fund and J. Murray, London.
Sarma, Sreeramula Rajeswara, 2002, “Rule of Three and its Variations in India,” DoldSamplonius et. a. eds. From China to Paris: 2000 Years Transmission of Mathematical
Ideas,” Franz Steiner Verlag, Stuttgart.
Sigler, L.E., 2002, Fibonacci’s Liber Abaci: A Translation into Modern English of
Leonardo Pisano’s Book of Calculation, Springer-Verlag, New York.
Sivéry, Gérard, 1983, “Mouvements de Capitaux et Taux d’Interêt en Occident au XIIIe
Siècle,” Annales Economies Societés Civilizations, 38.
Spufford, Peter, 1986, Handbook of Medieval Exchange, Offices of the Royal Historical
Society, London.
Spufford, Peter, 2002, Power and Profit: The Merchant in Medieval Europe, Thames
and Hudson, New York.
Sreeramula Rajeswara Sarma, 2002, “Rule of Three and its Variations in India,” DoldSamplonius et. a. eds. From China to Paris: 2000 Years Transmission of Mathematical
Ideas,” Franz Steiner Verlag, Stuttgart.
Swetz, Frank J., 1987, Capitalism and Arithmetic: The New Math of the 15th Century,
Open Court Publishing Company, New York.
Tracy, James, 1985, A Financial Revolution in the Hapsburg Netherlands, University of
California Press, Berkeley.
Trenchant, Jean, 1558, L’Arithmetique, second edition, 1637, Lyons.
Van Edgemond, Warren, 1980, Practical Mathematics in the Italian Renaissance: A
Catalogue of Italian Abbacus Manuscripts and Printed Books to 1600. Supplemento agli
Annali dell’Instituto e Museo di Storia della Scienza, Fascicolo 1, Firenze.
Velde, François R., 2000, “Notes on Tuscan Coinage, 12th C. 14th Ce.” Federal Reserve
Bank of Chicago.

39

Figure 1

40

41

42

