                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     TAX POLICY AND EDUCATION POLICY:
                        COLLISION OR COORDINATION?
          A CASE STUDY OF THE 529 AND COVERDELL SAVING INCENTIVES

                                           Susan M. Dynarski

                                         Working Paper 10357
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w10357


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      March 2004




I gratefully acknowledge support from NBER-National Institute on Aging Grants P30-AG12810 and K12-
AG000983. Naomi Calvo, Joe Ciesla, Betsy Kent and Juan Saavedra provided excellent research assistance.
I thank Julie-Anne Cronin, Martin Feldstein, Andrew Samwick, James Stedman and participants in the NBER
Taxation and Saving Conference and Tax Policy and the Economy Conference for helpful comments. This
paper is forthcoming in Tax Policy and the Economy, Volume 18. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2004 by Susan M. Dynarski. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Tax Policy and Education Policy: Collision or Coordination? A Case Study of the 529 and
Coverdell Saving Incentives
Susan M. Dynarski
NBER Working Paper No. 10357
March 2004
JEL No. I22, H21, H24

                                            ABSTRACT

529 saving plans and Coverdell Educational Savings Accounts are marketed as attractive vehicles

for college savings. The main finding of this paper is that college savings plans can actually harm

some families. The joint treatment by the income tax code and financial aid system of college

savings creates tax rates that exceed 100 percent for those families on the margin of receiving

additional financial aid. Since even families with incomes above $100,000 receive need-based aid,

the impact of these very high taxes is quite broad. I find that an aid-marginal family with funds in

a Coverdell is worse off than if it did not save at all. Simulations show that $1,000 of pretax income

placed in a Coverdell for a newborn and left to accumulate until college will face income and aid

taxes that consume all of the principal, all of the earnings and an additional several hundred dollars.

This perverse outcome is the product of poor coordination between the income tax code and the

financial aid system.

Susan M. Dynarski
Kennedy School of Government
Harvard University
79 JFK Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
susan_dynarski@harvard.edu
1. Introduction

        In the past few years, a new breed of tax-advantaged savings vehicle has emerged. The federal

Coverdell Education Savings Account (ESA) allows annual, after-tax deposits of up to $2,000 a year,

with asset earnings untaxed so long as withdrawals are used for educational expenses. At the state level,

nearly every state offers a tax-advantaged 529 savings plan. These accounts allow participants to make

annual, after-tax deposits of up to $11,000 a year per child, comparable to the annual ceilings on the

401(k).1 The tax treatment is like that of the ESA: earnings are untaxed by the federal government, and by

almost every state, when the funds are used for postsecondary education. In about half the states, deposits

are exempt from state taxation, further increasing the income tax advantages of the 529.

        Politicians and financial advisors aggressively market 529 saving plans and the ESA as attractive

vehicles for college savings. For many families, the favorable tax treatment of these savings vehicles does

make them more attractive than other methods of saving for college. However, as I show in this paper,

some families are worse off saving in an ESA than they would be in an alternative savings vehicle, such

as an IRA or even a non-tax-advantaged account. For families on the margin of getting more financial aid,

holding funds in an education savings account will result in substantial decreases in aid eligibility. In the

case of the ESA, more than a dollar in aid is lost for each dollar held in the account, more than undoing its

tax incentive for saving and in fact leaving a family worse off than if it had not saved at all.

        One might dismiss the results of the paper as irrelevant by observing that the poor get aid but do

not save, and the rich save but do not get aid. This common wisdom is wrong. As I show in the next

section, a substantial proportion of families with incomes above $70,000, and even $100,000, receive

need-based aid, in the form of both grants and loans. Upper-income students at expensive, four-year

private colleges often qualify for need-based grant aid from their schools, while even those at less-

1
  Each parent can deposit $11,000 per child in a given year without triggering a gift tax. A two-parent
family with three children could therefore move $66,000 per year into a tax-advantaged 529 account.
Grandparents can also make deposits up to these limits, further expanding the amount of assets that can be
shielded from taxation. A five-year averaging option allows a participant to contribute $55,000 in a single
year without triggering a gift tax.



                                                                                                                1
expensive four-year public colleges often qualify for subsidized, need-based federal loans. These families

are therefore subject to the aid policies I describe in the paper. Of course, such families also save, and so

have assets that are affected by the intersection of tax policy and aid policy described in this paper.

          That there is a tension between policies intended to increase saving and distribute aid according

to need is unsurprising. The intent of the 529 and ESA is to increase saving by increasing after-tax

returns. The intent of the need-based aid system is to give less aid to those with higher assets. These two

sets of policies inevitably work at cross-purposes, because the aid system taxes away part of the increase

in assets and asset returns that the savings incentives create.2 This tension between targeting funds to

those who are most needy and discouraging desirable behaviors is an inherent characteristic of all means-

tested programs. For example, the old welfare system had an earned income test: welfare benefits were

reduced proportionally for each dollar earned. This acted as a tax on labor supply and theoretically

discouraged work effort by welfare recipients. Similarly, the need-based aid system taxes increases in

income and assets, thereby potentially discouraging saving.

          Unless assets and asset income are completely disregarded in the distribution of need-based aid,

the aid determination process inevitably reduces asset returns and perhaps saving rates. The conclusion of

this paper is that the tension between targeting aid and discouraging saving can be managed well or

poorly. For example, I find that that the aid system assesses different assets at very different rates, with

the drop in aid associated with a dollar in assets ranging from 50 cents to nearly two dollars. This

variation in asset treatment has a cost, because it distorts decisions about the composition of savings.

There is no concomitant benefit, however, because these wildly varying policies do not improve the

targeting of aid toward needy students. If anything, such arbitrary policy variation undermines the goals

of need-based aid, in that families with identical financial positions receive very different levels of aid,

depending on whether they are savvy enough to steer their savings toward the right vehicles.




2
    The aid tax was first discussed by Edlin (1993) and Feldstein (1995).



                                                                                                                2
        It now appears that the Department of Education is moving to improve the treatment of the ESA

documented in this paper. In early November, 2003, the department posted revisions to the online version

of the Student Financial Aid Handbook, its reference manual of aid rules. These revisions indicate

that, in the future, the ESA will be given the treatment currently applied to the 529 savings plans. This

treatment will eliminate the so-called aid tax of over 100 percent that is currently applied to the ESA.

        It is not clear when this new policy will become effective. Given how the department collects

asset data from applicants, a necessary step in implementing the new policy is revision of the Free

Application for Federal Student Aid (FAFSA). The FAFSA does not collect separate data on each type of

asset; if it did, the department could change the formula that calculates aid eligibility without altering the

FAFSA. Rather, the 2003-2004 FAFSA, which has not been revised, instructs families to add ESA

balances to other miscellaneous student assets, while 529 balances are added to other parental assets.

Parental and student assets are then run separately through the aid formula, with one dollar in student

assets leading to a reduction in aid of more than one dollar over the course of a college career. Note that

all student assets are subject to this treatment; changing the treatment of the ESA will still leave other

student assets subject to the very high taxes that are the subject of this paper. The discussion in Section 6

speaks to this point.

        The paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, I show that families quite high in the income

distribution are affected by aid policy. In Section 3, I provide background on the tax-advantaged college

savings plans. In Section 4, I calculate returns on various savings vehicles net of income taxes. In Section

5, I explain the aid determination process and calculate returns that accounts for both income taxes and

the reductions in aid caused by holding savings in various vehicles. Section 6 discusses the results and

Section 7 concludes.



2. Who Is Affected by Aid Policy?

        What kind of family is affected by the aid system and its treatment of assets? Given the

historically high level of tuition prices, relatively well-off families qualify for need-based aid, and so are


                                                                                                                 3
affected by the aid rules. This is particularly true if the student attends a private college, or if a family has

multiple students in college at the same time.3 As this section will show, families all along the income

distribution are affected by the need-based aid system and its treatment of assets and asset returns.

        For two kinds of families, however, the aid system’s treatment of assets is irrelevant. The first

type of family is extremely needy (as defined by the need-based aid system) and receives the maximum

aid allowed. 4 For this family, a marginal decrease in assets does not increase its aid, nor does a marginal

increase in their assets decrease its aid. Since there is no link between assets and aid for this family, its net

asset returns are unaffected by the aid system. The second type of family is at the other end of the

spectrum: this family is very well off (again, as defined by the need-based aid system) and receives no

aid. Again, marginal changes in assets will not affect this family’s aid eligibility. For any family that is

not at one of these two extremes of need, asset returns are affected by the rules discussed in this paper.

2.1 Who Gets Aid?

        Families all along the income distribution get financial aid. Table 1 shows the probability that a

student with a given family income will receive need-based aid, and the average amount of aid received

among aid recipients. These data are for non-foreign, full-time, dependent undergraduates attending a

single college in academic year 1999-2000 and are taken from the 2000 National Postsecondary Aid

Survey (NPSAS). I show results separately for four categories of need-based aid: 1) all types, including

grants, loans and work-study 2) federal Pell Grants only 3) need-based grants provided by colleges and 4)

subsidized federal loans.




3
  A family that has multiple children in college at a given point in time is eligible for more need-based aid
than if those children attended college in sequence.
4
 Total aid is capped by a student’s actual schooling costs, which includes tuition and fees plus an
allowance for items such as food, rent, and other living expenses.



                                                                                                                4
        Low-income families are most likely to receive aid, and get the largest aid packages.5 Among

students with family incomes below $40,000, 85 percent receive need-based aid, with their total aid

packages averaging $6,859. However, middle- and even upper-income families are quite likely to receive

substantial amounts of aid. Of students from families with incomes of $40,000 to $70,000, 62 percent

receive need-based aid in the form of grants, loans or work-study, with the aid of recipients averaging

$5,937. Moving up the income distribution, we see that 37 percent of students from families with incomes

of $70,000 to $100,000 receive need-based aid averaging $5,371. Even in the highest income group, 22

percent of students receive some form of need-based aid, averaging $4,975.

        The composition of this need-based aid varies considerably across the income groups. Pell Grant

distribution is highly progressive. While 68 percent of students from families with income below $40,000

receive a Pell Grant, only nine percent of students from families with incomes of $40,000 to $70,000

receive a Pell, and no students in higher income categories. While the Pell is heavily concentrated among

low-income students, the story is quite different for other forms of need-based aid. Colleges and

universities, especially the more-expensive private schools, distribute their own need-based scholarships.

The more expensive the school, the more likely that a student of a given income level will qualify for

need-based aid from that school. Among students with family income below $40,000, 26 percent receive

need-based grants from their schools, with the grant of recipients averaging $4,074. In the next-higher

income category, the share receiving a need-based grant drops barely, to 24 percent, while the average

grant received rises to $5,060. This reflects the tendency of these higher-income families to send their

children to expensive schools. Even among families with incomes above $100,000, 12 percent receive

need-based grants from their schools averaging $4,617 per grant.6


5
 Note that the average amount of need-based aid does not drop very rapidly with income. This is because
higher-income students are more likely to attend expensive private institutions, and need is a function of
both ability to pay and actual schooling costs.
6
  Most schools follow the federal formulas described in this paper in distributing their own need-based
grant. Eighty-seven percent of four-year public schools and 57 percent of four-year private schools use
the federal formula in distributing their own need-based grants (see National Association of Student
Financial Aid Administrators and the College Board, 2002).


                                                                                                             5
        Many middle-and upper-income students also qualify for need-based, subsidized federal loans.

While loans are obviously less valuable than grants, the need-based Perkins and Stafford loans have very

attractive terms, with all interest paid while the child is in school and a low rate of interest paid thereafter.

The subsidy value of a need-based Stafford loan is currently about thirty cents on the dollar.7 In the

$40,000 to $70,000 income range, 49 percent of students receive one of these federal loans, with annual

borrowing averaging $3,419, not very different from the borrowing patterns in the lowest income group

(52 percent borrowing, with loans averaging $3,835). Even in the highest income category the figures are

12 percent and $3,518, respectively.



2.2 Who is on the Margin of Getting More Aid?

        Many of these families who receive need-based aid are on the margin of getting more aid – that

is, an increase (decrease) in their financial resources decreases (increases) the amount of aid for which

they are eligible. So too are those families who currently get no aid at all but would if their financial

resources, as defined by the aid system, were to decrease. We can get a sense of how many students are

on the aid margin by examining the population of current students, and in particular those who apply for

financial aid. Note that who applies for aid is almost certainly influenced by individuals’ expectations

about whether they will qualify for aid and how much they might receive. For example, an upper-income

family with substantial funds in an ESA might not apply for aid under the current policy regime, but

would if the aid system treated ESAs differently. By using data from those students who apply for aid to

estimate the share of all students who are on the margin of aid I underestimate the share of the student




7
  See Dynarski (2002). The bulk of the subsidy arises from the government paying the interest on the loan
while the student is in school. The subsidy value on the Stafford is at a historical low, since market
interest rates are quite low. As market interest rates rise, so too does the subsidy value. The subsidy value
rises especially rapidly when market rates exceed the statutory rate cap of 8.25 percent, as above this rate
the government assumes all interest rate risk.



                                                                                                                6
population that would be affected by a change in the aid formula, since I do not account for such

endogenous changes in the extensive aid margin.8

        Describing who is on the aid margin requires some understanding of how the need-based aid

system defines need. As I will describe in greater detail later in the paper, need is determined by

comparing a student’s projected schooling costs with the amount that the aid formula determines that her

family can afford to pay toward college. This latter amount is referred to as the expected family

contribution (EFC). Need is defined as schooling costs minus the EFC.

        Two types of students are on the aid margin: 1) those receiving no aid who would receive aid if

their financial situation changed marginally (these students have non-positive need) and 2) those

receiving some aid who would get more or less aid if their financial situation changed marginally (these

students have positive need). I treat these two cases in turn.

        A student with non-positive need is not eligible for need-based aid, because the aid formula

calculates that he and his family can handle the full cost of college. Those with very negative need

(EFC>>schooling cost) are far from the aid margin, because the aid formula indicates that they can

contribute an amount well above schooling costs; such families are not on the aid margin. But for those

whose need is relatively small and negative, marginal decreases in their financial resources push them

over the margin into aid eligibility.

        At the bottom of Table 1, I show the share of students in each income category whose need lies

between 0 and -$5,000. For these students, changing the formula so that their expected family

contribution drops by $5,000 or less pushes them over the margin into receiving aid. To get a sense of the

magnitude of this change in EFC, note that a high school senior whose family has $15,000 of college

savings in a Coverdell ESA or UTMA (Uniform Transfer to Minors Act) account has a freshman-year




8
 Note that, in the calculations that follow, when a student does not have EFC information, as is the case
for anyone who has not applied for aid, I have assumed that she is not on the margin of getting aid.



                                                                                                            7
EFC about $5,000 higher than a senior whose family has no college savings.9 The lowest-income

families (less than $40,000) are always eligible for some form of need-based aid, so none of them are on

this aid margin. However, six percent of students from families in the $40,000 to $70,000 income range,

and 14 percent of those in the $70,000 to $100,000 income range, would be pushed into aid eligibility by

a decrease in their EFC of $5,000 or less. In the highest income group, eight percent are on this aid

margin.10

          Another type of family is getting some need-based aid but would get more if their EFC dropped.

These families have positive need, but they are not so needy that changes in their financial situation

cannot increase or decrease their aid package. I define these families as those whose EFCs are sufficiently

far from zero (at least $5,000) that they will see substantial changes in need if their financial resources (as

defined by the aid system) alter. For such families, dollar decreases in need translate into dollar increases

in aid. For example, their need can increase by at least $5,000 without bumping up against the ceiling of

the student’s total schooling costs.11 Again, few low-income students are on this aid margin – just four

percent. However, about forty percent of students in the $40,000 to $100,000 income group have room for

their need to grow by at least $5,000. Nineteen percent of students in the top income group fall on this aid

margin.

          As the bottom row of Table 1 shows, a substantial share of families fall on one of these two aid

margins. Roughly half of students from families with income between $40,000 and $100,000 are on the

margin of getting more aid, as are a quarter of those from families with income above $100,000. The




9
  As I will show later in the paper, the aid eligibility of subsequent years of college is also negatively
affected by this ESA account, so the ultimate impact of ESA and UTMA holdings on aid is substantially
larger than that described in this sentence.
10
  Note that the share of students on this margin is likely to be underestimated using data on aid
applicants, as discussed above.
11
  This assumes that all need is met by some combination of loans, grants, and work-study provided by
government and schools.



                                                                                                                8
interaction of aid policy and tax policy described in this paper therefore affects a large number of

families.



3. Income Tax Incentives for College Saving

3.1 Legislative History

        In 1997, the Education IRA was established. The Education IRA was structured much like the

then-new Roth IRA. In both types of vehicles, after-tax dollars grow tax-free. Earnings are never taxed if

Education IRA withdrawals are used for postsecondary expenses or if Roth funds are withdrawn after age

59 ½. Annual contributions to the Education IRA were capped at $500 per child until 2001, when the

contribution limit was raised to $2,000. The same year, eligible educational expenses were expanded to

include primary and secondary education, and the name of the Education IRA was changed to Coverdell

Education Savings Account (ESA).

        While the ESA is a product of federal legislation, the 529 savings plans are innovations of the

states. The 529 savings plans have their roots in prepaid tuition plans, the first of which was introduced

by Michigan in 1986. Those who purchased shares in Michigan’s plan were guaranteed that their

investment would cover the cost of a certain number of semesters at Michigan schools. Essentially,

Michigan created a savings plan whose rate of return was linked to tuition costs at the state’s public

postsecondary schools, thereby allowing parents to insure against the risk of rising tuition prices.12

Michigan exempted investment returns in its prepaid plan from state taxes, and the state argued to the

Internal Revenue Service (IRS) that returns should also be exempted from federal taxes. The IRS

disagreed, but Michigan went forward with the plan and sued the IRS for a refund of taxes paid, winning

its case in 1994. While the Michigan case was wending through the courts, several other states introduced

their own prepaid tuition plans.



12
  A key drawback of the prepaid plans is that the tuition guarantee is only for in-state schools. Funds can
be used at out-of-state schools, but the implied rate of return on funds used in this way is quite low.



                                                                                                             9
        In 1997, Congress codified in Internal Revenue Code (IRC) section 529 the federal tax treatment

of the tuition plans, which was to tax earnings in these accounts only at withdrawal. IRC section 529 also

contains language that recognized a variant on the prepaid plans that had been introduced by a handful of

states: the tax-advantaged college savings plan. Like the Education IRA, these new savings plans allowed

after-tax investments to grow free of federal and state taxes; however, withdrawals used for

postsecondary costs were exempt only from state taxation.

        With the passage of tax reform in 2001, the federal tax on withdrawals from 529 savings plans

was eliminated.13 Every state except Washington now has a 529 savings plan, as does the District of

Columbia. The growth of the 529 savings plans has far outstripped that of the prepaid plans, likely

because of their greater fungibility and potentially higher returns.14 In this paper, I focus on the 529

savings plans.



3.2 Eligibility for and Tax Advantages of the 529 and ESA

        The tax treatments of the ESA and 529 are quite similar: after-tax dollars put into savings and

earnings are not taxed as they accrue, nor are they taxed at withdrawal if the withdrawal is used for

educational expenses.15 However, there are some key differences between the two savings vehicles.

        First, there is an income limit on participation in the ESA. Joint-filer households with incomes

above $220,000 and single-filer households with incomes above $110,000 cannot contribute to an ESA;




13
  This federal tax treatment of the 529 savings plans sunsets in 2010. The present analysis assumes that
the provision will be extended indefinitely.
14
  The bull market of the 1990s made the tuition plans appear stodgy to investors accustomed to double-
digit returns. Also, the plans substantially constrain the college choices of beneficiaries, who can use the
funds at out-of-state schools only at unattractive terms.
15
  As discussed below, some states exempt contributions to the 529 from state taxable income, thereby
increasing the tax advantages.



                                                                                                           10
eligibility begins to phase out at $190,000 and $95,000, respectively. There is no income limit on

contributions to a 529 savings plan.16

          A second distinguishing characteristic of the 529 is that its contribution limits are much higher

than the limit on the ESA. Each account owner (a parent or grandparent, for example) can put $11,000 in

after-tax income per beneficiary, per year, into a 529.17 A two-parent family with three children can put

$66,000 a year into 529 savings plans for their children, but just $6,000 into ESAs. Each state has a

lifetime limit on the account balance that can be reached in an account held in a given beneficiary’s name.

When the account reaches this limit, no additional contributions can be made. The limit averages

$241,000, and it ranges from $182,000 in Louisiana to $305,000 in South Dakota.18

          Third, while families can invest their ESAs as they wish, they are constrained in their ability to

allocate assets in a 529. Each state determines the investment options open to investors in its plan and, by

federal law, assets can be reallocated by the investor only once a year. Until recently, most 529 savings

plans provided only a single investment option, an age-based portfolio that grew less aggressive as the

child neared college age. Most plans now offer several investment options.

          Finally, the 529s are creatures of state government, with each state sponsoring its own plan. There

is therefore heterogeneity across the states in 529 characteristics, including portfolio choice, tax treatment,

and net returns. Each state contracts with a mutual fund company to run its plan; chooses the mutual

funds that will be available to investors; decides upon the treatment of deposits and earnings for the

purposes of state taxation; and negotiates fees that will be paid by the investor to the state and fund

company. Individuals are free to participate in any state’s plan. Many of the states encourage their

residents to invest in the local plan by allowing them to deduct contributions to its 529 savings plan from


16
  In some states, the exclusion of contributions from state taxable income phases out as income rises. The
exclusion of earnings from taxable income is not linked to income in any state.
17
  $55,000 per account owner, per year, can be deposited in a single year for a beneficiary if no deposits
are made for the next four years.
18
     See Cerulli Associates, 2003.



                                                                                                               11
state taxable income. Some states also tax withdrawals from other states’ 529 plans, further encouraging

investors to choose their home state’s plan.

        There is considerable cross-state variation in fees charged on the 529 accounts. 529 fees also

appear to be somewhat higher, on average, than fees on ESAs or retail mutual funds. For the purposes of

this paper, I ignore this source of variation in net returns across states and savings vehicles. By assuming

that pretax returns on the various savings vehicles are identical, we can focus on variation in returns

driven by the income tax code and the aid system. In ongoing work, I explicitly focus on sources of cross-

state heterogeneity in 529 returns and its impact on savings decisions.



4. Calculation of After-Tax Returns on the ESA, 529 and Alternative Savings Vehicles

        In this section, I calculate returns, net of the income tax, on the 529 and ESA, in absolute terms

and relative to other vehicles. I first show variation in net returns across vehicles for a single household

type, with household income of $100,000 and two dependent children. Since the benefits of tax-

advantaged accounts vary with marginal tax rates, I then calculate returns for a range of household

incomes.



4.1 Assumptions

        For the purposes of assigning tax rates, I consider a household that consists of a married couple,

filing jointly, with two dependent children. All earned income is assumed to come from one earner.19 The

children are assumed to have no income other than that produced by any college savings held in their

name. The marginal federal and state tax rates on earned income, capital gains and interest for this

household, as well as for the other income groups I will be analyzing, are shown in Table 2. The state tax




19
  Some assumption about the distribution of earned income within the household must be made in order
to assign FICA rates. For each earner, the FICA rate is 7.65 percent up to $87,000 and 1.45 percent
thereafter.



                                                                                                               12
rates in Table 2 are the average of the states’ 2002 marginal tax rates for each income group, as calculated

by the National Bureau of Economic Research’s TAXSIM program.20

        Table 2 shows, and the paper’s calculations use, federal tax rates effective as of the Jobs and

Growth Tax Relief Reconciliation Act (JGTRRA) of 2003. Some of these rates are scheduled to revert to

pre-2003 rates in a few years. Since it is difficult to forecast which, if any, of these provisions will be

allowed to sunset, in this paper I calculate the effect of making the current provisions permanent.

        For each savings vehicle, I calculate the return to $1,000 of pretax income placed in an account at

the time of a child’s birth. A family saving for college will likely start with a portfolio heavily weighted

toward stocks, moving toward a more conservative mix as college nears. Every state’s 529 savings plan

offers an age-based portfolio that follows this pattern. I use a portfolio mix typical of state 529s in

calculating returns; this portfolio is shown in Table 3. I assume an identical portfolio mix for the other

savings vehicles, so that any the variation in returns across the vehicles will be induced by variation in

their treatment by the income tax and aid systems.

        Stocks are assumed to earn a nominal rate of return of nine percent and bonds a rate of four

percent. To simplify the analysis, I assume that all stock returns take the form of long-term capital gains.

Capital gains are realized when the funds are withdrawn from the account in order to pay for college;

these withdrawals begin at the end of the account’s eighteenth year.21 After any relevant taxes on asset

earnings are paid, earnings are reinvested.

        In about half the states, deposits to the 529 are excluded from state taxable income. I calculate

returns for 529s both with and without this upfront deduction. I also calculate returns for a non-tax-

advantaged mutual fund account in the name of the parent, a Uniform Transfer to Minors Act (UTMA)

account in the name of the student, and a Traditional IRA. Table 4 summarizes the income tax treatment

20
  The average is taken over the states that have an income tax. I use effective marginal state tax rates
calculated by TAXSIM, rather than the bracket rates. The effective marginal rates account for the
interaction of state and federal taxes as well as the phase-out of various credits and deductions.
21
  The family withdraws 1/nth of the remaining balance each year, with n representing the number of
years remaining until college completion. For the calculations in the paper, I assume four years of college.



                                                                                                              13
of these savings vehicles. For all vehicles, I assume that all capital gains realizations are put off until the

account is drawn down, and that no dividends are earned. Therefore, the only relevant taxes on the inside

buildup are those on bond interest.22 Note that the IRAs can be used for higher education expenses

without the 10 percent penalty usually assessed on withdrawals before retirement age. However, the

earnings portion of such early withdrawals from a Roth is subject to taxation as ordinary income. As a

result, the Roth is not an advantageous vehicle for college savings if its use requires early withdrawal.



4.2 Calculation of Returns Net of Income Taxes - Example

        I first calculate the nominal returns for a family with household income of $100,000, using the

assumptions laid out above. The return for a non-tax-advantaged mutual fund account, held in the name of

the parent, forms the benchmark used to gauge the financial benefits of the tax-advantaged vehicles.

        After paying Social Security and Medicare taxes (FICA), as well as federal and state income

taxes, on $1,000 of pretax income, this household has $673 to deposit. The family uses the portfolio

allocation shown in Table 3, putting 90 percent of the funds into stocks and the balance into bonds.

Interest on the bonds is taxed as ordinary income; the interest net of taxes is reinvested in the account.

After eighteen years, the account will have grown to $1,135, with 55 percent of the account’s value

consisting of unrealized capital gains. At the end of year eighteen, one-quarter of the account balance is

withdrawn to pay for college. Capital gains taxes are paid on the portion of this withdrawal that

represents unrealized capital gains. After four years of withdrawals, the account is empty. Taking into

account income and payroll taxes, as well as taxes on interest and capital gains, a family following the

investment path just described nets $1,113 on its $1,000 in pretax saving, as shown in the first bar in

Figure 1 and in Table 5.

        The tax-advantaged vehicles, including the 529 and ESA, increase returns by reducing or

eliminating the taxes assessed before the initial deposit, during the inside buildup, and/or at withdrawal.

22
  I assume that current tax law will persist despite the scheduled sunset of the exclusion of 529 earnings
from federal taxable income.



                                                                                                              14
The return for each of these vehicles is shown in Figure 1. The second column of Table 5 shows the

returns on assets held in these vehicles relative to returns for a non-advantaged account in the name of the

parent. Below, I briefly discuss the tax advantages conferred by each of these vehicles.

        The UTMA account shifts assets into the child’s name and, thereby, the child’s lower tax

bracket.23 The initial pretax savings are taxed at the parent’s rate, and so $673 is deposited into the

UTMA account, as was true for the parental account discussed above. For a family with taxable income

of $100,000, these tax advantages translate into a substantially higher return on the UTMA account than

on a parental account. This family yields $1,453 in an UTMA account, nearly one-third more than in a

parental account.

        A 529 savings account confers even greater tax advantages than the UTMA, because the taxes on

the inside buildup and withdrawals are not just reduced, they are eliminated. In a state that does not allow

families to deduct 529 deposits from taxable income, $1,000 of pretax income translates into the same

$673 deposit that was placed in the parental account and UTMA account. Because no taxes are levied on

the inside buildup, by the time the child enters college the family has a slightly higher balance in a 529

than it would in a parental account or UTMA account ($2,314 as compared to $2,135 and $2,277,

respectively). The relative advantage of the 529 grows as the family begins to draw down the funds and is

exempted from any taxes on the resulting capital gains realizations. Accounting for these taxes, the family

nets a $1,634 return on its $1,000 in pretax savings, 47 percent more than in a parental account and 12

percent more than with an UTMA. The ESA confers the same tax advantages as the 529 without an

upfront deduction and therefore yields the same return.24




23
   In an UTMA, annual asset earnings up to $750 are untaxed. For a child younger than 14, the next $750
is taxed at the child’s rate and the remaining earnings are taxed at the parents’ rate. For children 14 and
over, all earnings over $750 are taxed at the child’s rate. Note that the tax advantages of the UTMA drop
as asset holdings (and earnings) grow, since an ever-smaller share of earnings are taxed at a zero rate.
24
  A key difference, however, is that much larger amounts can be deposited in a 529 than can be deposited
in an ESA.



                                                                                                             15
        The return on these two college savings vehicles is also identical to that on the Traditional IRA.

The Traditional IRA is the mirror image of the college savings accounts, because there are no upfront

taxes on the $1,000 deposit and no taxes on the inside buildup, but withdrawals are taxed as ordinary

income. Note that there is no penalty for early withdrawal (before age 59½) from the Traditional IRA if

the funds are used for higher education expenses. The Traditional IRA therefore yields the same return as

the ESA and 529, producing a return 47 percent greater than a non-advantaged parental account.

        The option with the highest return is a 529 in a state that allows deposits to be deducted from

state taxable income. For a given $1,000 in pretax income, more can be deposited into this account than is

true for a non-deductible 529 or ESA. With the typical state tax rate on earned income of 5.95 percent, the

initial deposit is $718 rather than the $673. Going forward, the tax treatment is the same as for a standard

529 or ESA. The 529 with an upfront deduction yields a return of $1,811, or 63 percent more than a non-

advantaged account in the parent’s name.

        As these calculations make clear, the education savings accounts provide new and substantial tax

advantages. The 529 with the upfront reduction offers a higher return than any existing investment option.

Further, the 529 and ESA, while yielding the same after-tax return as the Traditional IRA, substantially

expand the assets that can be shielded from taxation. Finally, since the 529 has no eligibility

requirements, it provides the first opportunity for tax-advantaged saving for those families ineligible for

the IRA or ESA due to their incomes or their access to a pension program at work.



4.3 Calculation of Returns Net of Income Taxes - All Income Groups

        In this section, I examine the advantages of the education savings accounts for a range of

household incomes, ranging from the lowest federal tax bracket (household income of $35,000) to the

highest (household income of over $335,000). The groups and their associated state and federal tax rates

on earned income, capital gains, and interest are shown in Table 2.

        I first show how returns vary by income in our benchmark, a non-advantaged account held in the

name of the parent. In Figure 2, and Table 5, we see that the lowest-income household has the highest


                                                                                                           16
absolute returns. This is due to this group’s relatively low tax rates on two types of income. First, this

group’s lower marginal tax rates on earned income produce a larger deposit for a given $1,000 of pre-tax

income: they start with $773 in principal, compared to $572 for the highest-income family. This

difference in the upfront taxation of income accounts for most of the variation across income groups in

net returns. Second, the lowest-income household faces the lowest marginal tax rates on capital gains and

interest. As a result of these two aspects of the tax code, the highest-income household earns an after-tax

return of $728 on its pretax savings of $1,000, while the lowest-income household earns 2.4 times as

much, or $1,735.

        By eliminating some forms of taxation, the tax-advantaged vehicles flatten this income gradient

in after-tax returns. Figures 3 and 4 shows the after-tax return on the ESA and 529 for each income group.

Figure 4 shows the returns in dollar terms, while Figure 3 scales the returns relative to the return in the

non-advantaged account for that income group. Note that since their returns for the investment scenario

laid out earlier are identical, I have collapsed the ESA, 529 without an upfront deduction and the

Traditional IRA into one category. It should be recalled, however, that the contribution limits are far

higher on the 529 than the ESA or IRA, making the 529 particularly advantageous to those who save

above the ESA or IRA limits, or to those participating in a retirement plan at work and above the

associated IRA income limits. Also, note that the top two income groups do not qualify for the ESA but

do qualify for the 529.

        The largest increases in returns accrue to the highest income group, both in dollar terms (Figure

4) and relative terms (Figure 3). For those in the top federal tax bracket, the 529 with an upfront

deduction delivers a net return almost twice as high as that on a non-advantaged account. The 529 without

an upfront deduction and the ESA net an after-tax return 70 percent higher than funds held in a non-

advantaged account. For those in the lowest bracket, the proportional increases are much lower: the return

on a 529 with an upfront deduction is 26 percent. The corresponding figure is 17 percent for the ESA and

529 with no upfront deduction. Note that the UTMA is of almost no benefit for this lowest-income

household, since the child and parent are in the same low tax bracket.


                                                                                                              17
          These calculations make clear that both the relative and absolute advantages of the education

savings accounts rise steeply with income. At the bottom of the income distribution, where marginal tax

rates are the lowest, the new accounts offer after-tax returns 17 to 26 percent higher than the return on a

non-advantaged account. For an initial pretax investment of $1,000, this translates into an additional

return of $291 to $453. At the top of the income distribution, the new accounts offer after-tax returns 70

to 91 percent higher than that on a non-advantaged account. For an initial pretax investment of $1,000,

this translates into an additional return of $511 to $663.



5. The Treatment of Assets by the Financial Aid System

          This section turns to the financial aid system I first discuss in general terms the aspects of aid

determination that affect net returns to savings. Next, I calculate the impact of the aid system’s treatment

of assets on returns to various savings vehicles.



5.1 Overview of the Financial Aid Determination Process

          The federal government distributes need-based aid according to a formula called the Federal

Methodology, which I describe in this section.25 Most schools use the same formula when distributing

their own need-based aid. Eighty-seven percent of four-year public schools, and 57 percent of four-year

private schools, use the Federal Methodology to distribute need-based institutional grants.26 The aid

determination process I describe here is that used for dependent students in academic year 2002-2003.27




25
  The aid determination process is described in detail by the Department of Education in annual releases
of The Student Financial Aid Handbook. The 2002-2003 version used in this paper was downloaded from
http://ifap.ed.gov/IFAPWebApp/currentSFAHandbooksPag.jsp on October 17, 2003.
26
     See National Association of Student Financial Aid Administrators and the College Board (2002).
27
  In the past, students gamed their dependency status, since for an independent student family income is
not counted in the need determination process, Today, almost all college-age students are considered
dependents, as rule changes have made it much more difficult for young people to declare themselves
independent.



                                                                                                               18
          Families applying for aid fill out the Free Application for Federal Student Aid (FAFSA), which

collects detailed information on family income, assets and expenses. A new FAFSA, with current data,

must be filled out previous to every academic year for which a student wants aid. Financial data from the

FAFSA is put through an algorithm that calculates the expected contribution of the family and of the

student toward schooling costs. If the sum of the expected contributions from the family and student is

less than anticipated schooling costs, the student is eligible for aid. In the calculation of the expected

contribution savings are taxed, because both assets and asset income are considered resources for paying

for college.

          The resources of the family and the student are calculated separately, and assessed at differing

rates in the determination of aid. I start with the family’s expected contribution. In the calculation of the

family’s contribution, an algorithm sums parental income from all sources. Asset income, in the form of

dividends, interest, and capital gains, is included.28 In particular, the earnings portion of withdrawal from

some asset accounts is counted as income by the aid formula. After summing income, the aid algorithm

subtracts allowable expenses, including taxes, an allowance based on family size, tuition paid for primary

and secondary school, and unusually high medical costs.

          To this net income figure is added twelve percent of certain family assets.29 From the perspective

of the aid system, assets fall into three categories. A first class of assets, notably home equity, pensions,

and other retirement vehicles, is completely sheltered from consideration by the aid formula. These assets

are not considered available for college expenses. A second class of assets, including 529 savings

accounts and ESAs, is considered fully available for college expenses. The first dollar of these assets is

assessed in the determination of aid. A final class consists of any assets that do not fall into these first two

categories. These assets are partially sheltered from consideration by an asset protection allowance. Each

family is allowed a certain level of savings, based on the age of the oldest parent; the assumption is that

28
     I discuss below the types of assets for which this source of income is counted and not counted.
29
  If a family is not required to file a 1040 and has an adjusted gross income (AGI) below $50,000 then no
assets are added at this point.



                                                                                                                19
older parents need a higher level of savings for their approaching retirement. Below this allowance, assets

in this class are assumed to be unavailable for schooling costs. The highest allowance is $70,000; for a

family in which the oldest parent is 50, the allowance is $44,000. Above the allowance, twelve percent of

assets is added to the net income figure.

        The resulting weighted sum of income, expenses and assets is the family’s adjusted available

income (AAI). A progressive schedule, with rates ranging from 22 percent to 47 percent, is applied to

AAI to determine the expected family contribution (EFC).30 The schedule is quite steep: an AAI of

$11,000 is marginally assessed at 22 percent, while the schedule tops out at an AAI of $24,000, which is

marginally assessed at 47 percent. In the calculations below, I assume that families are at the top of this

schedule.

        The expected contribution of the student is calculated analogously to the process just described,

with fewer protections for income and assets. All student income above $1,750 is assumed to be available

for college and is assessed at a rate of 50 percent. There is no asset protection allowance for students. For

each year of college, students are expected to contribute 35 percent of their assets.



5.2 The Treatment of Assets and Asset Income in the Aid Determination Process

        Assets returns are affected twice in the process just described, since both asset balances and asset

income are considered available for college expenses. I will first describe the treatment of an asset

balance. Consider an entering freshman whose parents have $45,000 in financial assets that are not held in

retirement accounts or college savings plans. These assets fall into the third category described above, and

so are partially sheltered by the asset protection allowance. Assuming the older parent is 50, $44,000 is

protected from consideration by the aid formula and $1,000 is subject to assessment. Twelve percent of

the $1,000 is added to adjusted available income, which is then assessed at 47 percent, and so 5.64 (=0.12



30
  Families that are not required to file a 1040 and whose incomes are below $13,000 are automatically
assigned an EFC of zero.



                                                                                                              20
x 0.47) percent of the $1,000 is considered available for the first year of college. Freshman-year aid is

reduced by $56.40 as a result of this aspect of the aid formula.

        If the child goes on for another year of college, and applies again for aid, sophomore year aid is

again reduced by 5.64 percent of the remaining asset balance. As a result, the total impact of this $1,000

asset on aid received throughout college is a function of the annual assessment on the asset balance ( ta ,

5.64 percent in this case) and the number of years spent in college. If a family draws down an equal share

of the initial asset balance for each year of college (and, for simplicity, we assume no asset earnings once

the child enters college) we can summarize the reduction in aid received over the college career as a result

of owning a dollar in assets as of the senior year of high school as follows:

                                                           T
                                                                t
                                                       τ a = ∑ ta
                                                           t =1 T


Here, t indexes each year of college for which aid is requested, T is the total number years of college for

which aid is requested; a indexes different types of assets. Say the high school senior we are considering

ends up spending four years in college, drawing down equal increments of the asset per year for expenses.

For this family, each dollar of assets held as of the senior year leads to a reduction in aid over the four

years of college of 14.1 cents:

                                             4
                                                   t       5
                                      τ a = ∑ ta = 0.0564 = 0.141
                                            t =1   4       2

or 14.1 percent. Note that this is not the full impact of the asset on aid, as we have not allowed the asset to

grow while the child is in college, which produces income that goes into the aid formula, nor have we

considered that some portion of the withdrawals may consist of earnings, which again produces income

that goes into the aid formula. I will consider both of these issues below and in the main calculations of

the paper.

        I have just described the aid system’s treatment of a parental asset. Some savings are considered

assets of the child in the calculation of aid eligibility, which changes the annual assessment rate from 5.64

to 35 percent. The second column of Table 6 shows the annual assessment on asset balances for the


                                                                                                              21
savings vehicles we have been considering throughout the paper. Balances in a 529 savings plan are

treated as an asset of the parent in the determination of the aid tax on asset balances. Balances in

retirement vehicles are ignored by the aid formula. An ESA is considered by the aid system to be owned

by the potential student, as is an UTMA or any other asset in the child’s name.31 For such assets, the

relevant annual assessment on asset balances is 35 percent, rather than 5.64 percent. Further, the first

dollar of such assets is assessed at this rate, as there is no asset protection allowance for the student. Over

four years of college, the assessment on these assets balances amounts to 87.5 percent:

                                                   4
                                                         t   5
                                           τ a = ∑ ta = 0.35 = 0.875
                                                  t =1   4   2

As the table and these calculations make clear, the aid tax on asset balances varies widely across savings

vehicles.

        I next describe the aid system’s treatment of asset earnings. Like all other sources of income,

asset income is considered a financial resource that a family can apply toward college costs, and so

increases in asset income lead to decreases in aid. Asset income is considered only if it is realized during

a year whose income is considered in the determination of aid. Asset income is assessed with a one-year

lag, since it is based on income reported on the previous year’s 1040. Freshman-year aid, for example, is

based on the FAFSA filed when the student was a high school senior. This FAFSA contains tax return

31
   Department of Education documents for the 2003-2004 school year clearly state that the ESA is to be
treated as an asset of the child, which is assessed at the 35 percent rate: “The Education IRA is counted as
an asset of the beneficiary” and “Education IRAs have been appropriately renamed education savings
accounts; they are considered an investment asset for the student beneficiary (pp. AVG-20 and AVG-19,
respectively, in The Student Financial Aid Handbook 2003-2004. This document can be accessed at
http://ifap.ed.gov/sfahandbooks/attachments/0304AVGMaster.pdf) This same information is contained in
the dozens of financial advising documents, news articles, and financial aid resources for parents, schools
and aid professionals that I have consulted. It is also contained in the instructions for completing the
online FAFSA.

As of November, 2003, it appears that the Department of Education is moving to improve the treatment of
the ESA documented in this chapter. The department has now posted revisions to the online version of
The Student Financial Aid Handbook, its reference manual of aid rules. These revisions indicate that, in
the future, the ESA will be given the treatment currently applied to the 529 savings plans. This will
eliminate the aid tax of over 100 percent that is currently applied to the ESA. See further discussion of
implementation of this policy shift in the introduction to this paper.



                                                                                                             22
data on asset income for the calendar year that spans the spring of the junior year and fall of the senior

year of high school. Any earnings received during that period count as income in the determination of aid

for freshman year. These earnings might take the form of interest, dividends or capital gains realizations

stemming from the sale of stock or liquidation of a mutual fund.

          Note that in any account that has been building value for 18 years a substantial portion of the

balance consists of unrealized gains. As the account is drawn down for college, these earnings are realized

and assessed by the aid formula. In a non-advantaged account, given the investment scenario assumed

throughout the paper, unrealized gains represent about 55 percent of account value. When withdrawals are

made to pay for college 55 percent of each withdrawal is treated as income.

          Any income taxes paid in a given year offset the income taxed by the aid formula. For example,

interest earned in a non-advantaged account is taxed by the state and federal governments. Interest adds to

adjusted available income, and taxes paid on the interest subtract from it. The aid system therefore

assesses asset income net of any income taxes paid on that income.

          The last two columns of Table 6 show the assessment rate on asset earnings for the different

savings vehicles. I show separately the treatment of earnings accruals and of withdrawals.

          For the 529 and ESA, earnings are ignored by the aid system as they accrue; these earnings do not

appear on the FAFSA. The earnings portion of withdrawals from the 529 is also ignored by the aid

system. However, the earnings portion of withdrawals from the ESA are assessed at 50 percent.32 For the

Traditional IRA, earnings are ignored by the aid system as they accrue and the entirety of any withdrawal

is treated as income and is assessed at the parents’ rate of 47 percent. However, any income taxes paid on

these withdrawals reduce the amount of income that goes into the aid formula.33




32
     See p. AVG-17 of US Department of Education (2003).
33
  Personal communication with Anthony Jones, US Department of Education. Also see Chapter 6 of The
Student Financial Aid Handbook 2003-2004, which contains the worksheets that detail the treatment
various assets and income.



                                                                                                             23
5.3 Returns Net of Income Taxes and Aid Reductions

        Table 7 shows how reductions in aid affect after-tax returns for various savings vehicles. The first

column shows the return on a given savings vehicle for a household that is unaffected by aid policy; these

are the returns we have seen in earlier tables. As discussed earlier, asset returns are unaffected by aid

policy for two types of families. The first type is extremely needy (with very low financial resources

and/or very high schooling costs) and receiving the maximum aid allowed. 34 The second type of family is

not at all needy (with very high financial resources and/or very low schooling costs) and receiving zero

aid. For neither family does a marginal change in assets affect aid.

        The second column of Table 7 shows returns net of reductions in financial aid induced by asset

holdings. I assume, as I have throughout the paper, that the account funds are drawn down over the four

years of college. These results are not shown for the top two tax brackets, in which I assume household

income is sufficiently high (above $150,000) that the child is beyond the margin of eligibility of financial

aid at even the most expensive institutions. Columns (3) and (4) express the loss in aid as a percent of the

asset balance at the start of college and as a percent of the after-tax return, respectively.

        The impact on returns is enormous, especially for the UTMA and ESA, for which returns are

negative once losses in aid are considered,. Each of these assets is considered by the aid system to belong

to the child. As a result, the annual assessment on asset balances held in either of these vehicles is 35

percent, rather than the 5.64 percent applied to the other savings vehicles. When we consider only income

taxes, an aid-marginal family with taxable income of $50,000 that puts $1,000 pretax in an ESA nets a

return of $1,808. This return is 22 percent higher than if the funds were invested in a non-advantaged

account (see Table 4). But once we consider losses of need-based aid, the financial advantage of the ESA

disappears. The final return on the $1,000 pretax investment, net of income and aid taxes, is -$1,194. This

family loses all principal and all earnings, plus an additional $194, to income taxes and foregone aid. The

34
  As already noted, total aid is capped by a student’s actual schooling costs, which includes tuition and
fees plus an allowance for items such as food, rent and other living expenses.



                                                                                                            24
aid lost due to owning assets in the ESA, expressed as a percentage of the return net of income tax, ranges

from 160 percent for the family with $35,000 of income to 172 percent for the family with $100,000 of

income. A similar story holds for the UTMA, with the reduction in returns ranging from 178 to 194

percent.

           Since this is such an extraordinary result, I will lay out in detail the losses in aid associated with

holding funds in an ESA. Table 8 shows the calculation in detail, for the ESA, for a 529 without an

upfront deduction and for an UTMA. As an example, I examine a family with $100,000 in income.35 In

January of year 18, when the child is a high school senior, this family files a financial aid form. At this

time the ESA account, which has been gaining value since it was established at year 0 with an after-tax

contribution of $673, contains $2,314; this balance is shown in Column (1) of Table 8. Thirty-five percent

of this balance, or $810, is considered available for college costs; this is shown in Column (2). At the end

of the year, when the child is a freshman in college, the family draws down $609, one-quarter of the end-

of-year balance [Column (4)]. Seventy-one percent of this amount ($432) consists of earnings, which is

considered income of the child in the calculation of aid and assessed at 50 percent. Aid is therefore

reduced by $216 due to this withdrawal.

           The remaining rows repeat these calculations for the three subsequent years, until the account is

emptied. Asset balances are assessed four times, once for each FAFSA that is filed. Withdrawals are

assessed just three times; this is because income is recorded on the FAFSA with a one-year lag, and so the

final, senior-year withdrawal does not appear on a filed FAFSA. The total reduction in aid is $2,816,

while the balance at the start of year 18 was $2,314. The ratio of these two numbers is the 122 percent

shown in Table 7.

           The 529 savings plans are not as hard hit by the aid tax, as the aid system considers this asset to

belong to the parent rather than to the child. The aid tax on net-of-income-tax returns for the 529 is 57 to

63 percent, lower than that on a non-advantaged account in the name of the parent (63 percent to 81

35
  Family income does not affect the aid process depicted in Table 8, but it is necessary to choose an
income tax bracket to pin down the dollar amounts shown therein.



                                                                                                                 25
percent). Once we consider aid taxes, the 529, with or without an upfront deduction, nets higher returns

than the non-advantaged account, the UTMA or the ESA. In the case of the non-advantaged account, the

529 performs better because its inside buildup is not taxed by the aid system. In the case of the UTMA

and ESA, the 529 performs better because the tax on the asset balance is 5.64 percent rather than 35

percent.



6. Discussion

           The intent of the savings incentives is to increase saving by increasing net returns. The intent of

the financial aid system is to give less aid to those with higher income and assets. These two sets of

policies inevitably work at cross-purposes, as the financial aid system attempts to tax away any increase

in assets and income that the savings incentives create. Unless assets and asset income are completely

disregarded, asset returns for aid-marginal families are reduced by the aid determination process. Given

this constraint, we can make the aid tax as non-arbitrary as possible. Here, I discuss the results of the

paper’s analysis in the context of this goal.



6.1 Asset “Taxes” Greater Than 100 Percent

It is difficult to infer any reasonable policy goal that is consistent with the aid system’s current treatment

of the Coverdell, the UTMA, and all assets held in the name of the student. Families that put funds in

these vehicles lose all their assets to income taxes and aid reductions; that is, these vehicles face income

taxes and “aid taxes” that sum to well over 100 percent. The paper’s simulations show that a middle-

income family that puts $1,000 into a Coverdell loses all of the principal and earnings, plus an additional

$194, to income and aid taxes. A family that puts funds into the name of the student in an UTMA is even

worse off, losing principal and earnings plus an additional $391. Any asset held in the name of the child

faces similar treatment.

           Fully taxing away principal and earnings—a tax of 100 percent – is consistent with a very strict,

narrow formulation of need: at the time of college attendance, it puts a saving family in the same position


                                                                                                             26
vis-à-vis the aid system as a non-saving family.36 However, taxing away more than principal and earnings

is certainly not consistent with this strict formulation of need, as it places the saving family in a worse-off

position than the non-saving family, by thousands of dollars if they save at the rate recommended by

financial counselors.



6.2 Sharply Differing Tax Rates on Parents’ and Students’ Assets

The differing treatment of assets held by the parent and the student has a very large impact on aid

received and net returns, as is shown in Figure 5. This operates counter to the aid system’s goal of treating

equally families with equal resources, as two families with the same asset levels face vastly divergent tax

rates depending on whose name is on the account. A middle-income family (income of $50,000) that puts

funds in the child’s name in an UTMA account yields a small income tax advantage – a nine percent

increase in the lifetime return (not annualized return), as shown in Table 4. For a family that deposits

$1,000 of pretax income in an account and leaves it to accrue for 18 years, this translates into a savings of

$133. However, the associated loss in aid more than erases this small gain from gaming the income tax

system. Once we consider both the income tax and losses in aid, this family loses $1,881 by having the

funds in an UTMA account rather than in the parents’ name [netting a return of -$1,391 versus $490, see

Column 2 of Table 7]. Further, they end up with far less than they would have had they not saved at all,

having lost their principal, their earnings and an additional $391. Further, the first dollar of funds held in

the child’s name result in aid reductions, while assets held in the parent’s name are protected by an asset

allowance. As a result, the average aid tax rate on the parents’ assets is well below that on children’s

assets.




36
  The saving family has forgone consumption to save, and so it is worse off in a lifetime sense than if it
had not saved at all when principal and earnings are fully taxed away. Edlin (1993) discusses this and
other aspects of the equity of the aid tax.



                                                                                                             27
6.3 Sharply Differing Tax Rates on Different Savings Vehicles

As Table 7 makes clear, the impact of aid policy on asset returns varies wildly, depending on the savings

vehicle. A dollar in assets held by the family of a high school senior produces, over a four-year college

career, a reduction in need-based aid of 15 cents if the funds are held in a 529 savings plan, 26 to 39 cents

if the funds are held in an IRA, about forty cents if the funds are held in a typical mutual fund account in

the parent’s name, $1.22 if they are held in a Coverdell ESA, and $1.24 if they are held in an UTMA

account. We can express these aid reductions relative to after-tax returns on these various savings

vehicles. The reduction in aid caused by holding funds in a given vehicle ranges from 19 percent of after-

tax returns for the 529 to 200 percent for the UTMA.

        As discussed above, in the context of asset ownership by parents and children, such wildly-

varying treatment of assets does not advance the goals of the need-based aid system. It induces an

efficiency loss, in that it encourages shifting of assets toward those vehicles that are treated preferentially

by the aid system. And it induces a loss in equity, in that it imposes significant losses on those who do not

know how to game the system. This leads to a loss of horizontal equity, in that the aid system treats

unequally those who have the same asset levels but have made differing strategic choices about where to

put the funds.



6.4 Policy Alternatives

        Two key points emerge from this discussion. First, some assets are treated extremely punitively

by the aid system, resulting in those who save losing more than one dollar in aid for each dollar they hold

in assets. A second and distinct point is that the treatment of assets is highly inconsistent. I have already

explained the efficiency and equity losses induced by these aspects of the aid system. Here I lay out and

critique several policy options that address these two points.

        There are two main sources of the variable treatment of assets by the aid system: the differential

treatment of parents’ and children’s assets and the differential treatment of different asset types – e.g.,

retirement accounts, home equity, college savings plans, and non-advantaged accounts. The differential


                                                                                                              28
treatment of parents’ and children’s assets accounts for most of the variance in the treatment of assets; for

example, because the Coverdell is defined as an asset of the child, it faces an annual assessment rate on

asset balances of 35 percent, rather than the 5.64 percent imposed on the 529 savings plans, which are

defined as an asset of the parent. Were the Coverdell instead defined as an asset of the parent a dollar held

in a Coverdell would lead to a reduction in aid of fifteen cents, the same as the 529 savings plan, rather

than $1.22. The fact that the first dollar of children’s assets is assessed while many parental assets are

protected by an allowance that goes as high as $70,000 also contributes to the divergence in the treatment

of parents’ and children’s assets.37

          Pooling parents’ and children’s assets in aid determination will therefore go far in reducing the

variability in the treatment of assets. All children’s assets, and not just those of the student applicant,

would be included in this pool. Applying what is currently the treatment of parental assets to children’s

assets is the simplest solution, but this approach would obviously lead to a higher level of aid

expenditures, since children’s assets would be assessed at a much lower rate. A revenue-neutral

alternative would be a new assessment rate on the pooled assets that is the asset-weighted average of the

current assessment rates. Note that this pooling of assets would bring children’s assets under what is

currently the parents’ asset protection allowance.

          The second issue is how different types of assets are treated. Currently, the value of retirement

assets and home equity are completely excluded from aid determination.38 All other assets contribute to

the net worth considered available for college costs. An alternative is to pool all assets – regular

accounts, Coverdells, 529s, UTMAs, retirement assets, home equity – and tax them uniformly in the aid

determination process. Under such a system, the aid tax rate on assets would be the same across savings

vehicles. Unifying assets in this way would reduce the deadweight loss caused by families shifting assets

to avoid the aid tax. It would also eliminate several sources of horizontal inequity. For example,

37
  Since the paper’s calculations use marginal tax rates rather than average rates they ignore this aspect of
the divergence in the treatment of parent’s and children’s assets.
38
     After-tax withdrawals from retirement funds are treated as available income, however.



                                                                                                              29
homeowners in areas with high real estate values (the East and West coasts) have greater opportunity to

shield assets from the aid system than do renters or those in areas with lower real estate values (the

middle of the country). Similarly, those who work in jobs that provide access to a 401(k) have a greater

ability to shield assets than do other workers.

        If other aspects of the aid determination process were unchanged, the main effect of pooling all

types of assets would be to decrease aid, since it would add retirement assets and home equity to the net

worth considered available for paying for college. To maintain the current level of aid spending, the

assessment rate on all assets could be reduced below its current maximum of 5.64 percent. Alternatively,

the asset protection allowances could be increased so that the total net worth assessed by the aid system

remains unchanged.



7. Conclusion

This paper has examined the income tax code’s most recent experimentation with education policy, in the

form of the Coverdell Education Savings Account and the 529 savings plans. Tax incentives for college

saving were designed to increase savings by increasing after-tax returns. From the narrow perspective of

the income tax code, they have succeeded in increasing after-tax returns. But if we broaden our

perspective to include the interaction of the new tax incentives with existing educational policy – in the

form of the financial aid system – these policies fail. Families that save for college are potentially subject

to taxation not only by federal and state taxing authorities but also by the federal, state and college

financial aid systems. As I have shown, the aid tax on savings can extend well up the income distribution,

as fairly well-off families can qualify for aid at expensive private institutions.

        For families caught in the cross-fire between aid policy and tax policy, the impact on the bottom

line is not pretty. A family that heeds advice to save for college in one of the new college savings vehicles

can find itself far worse off than if it had simply placed funds in a non-advantaged account in the parents’

name. Further, those who put funds in a Coverdell can find themselves worse off than if they had not




                                                                                                             30
saved at all. These perverse outcomes indicate that greater attention to the interaction of aid and taxes is

required if the tax code is to succeed as an instrument for education policy.




                                                                                                               31
                                         References

Cerulli Associates (2003). “A Competitive Outlook for 529 Savings Plans.”

Dynarski, Susan (2002). “Loans, Liquidity and Schooling Decisions.” Kennedy School of
      Government Working Paper.

Edlin, Aaron (1993). “Is College Financial Aid Equitable?” Journal of Economic Perspectives.
       7:2, pp. 143-158.

Feldstein, Martin (1995). “Scholarship Rules and Private Savings.” American Economic Review
       85:3, 552-66.

National Association of Student Financial Aid Administrators and the College Board (2002).
       2001 Survey of Undergraduate Financial Aid Policies, Practices, and Procedures.

U.S. Department of Education (2002). Student Financial Aid Handbook 2002-2003.

U.S. Department of Education (2003). Student Financial Aid Handbook 2003-2004.




                                                                                               32
                                               Table 1
                                  Need-Based Aid Receipt, by Income
                     Dependent Full-Time Undergraduates, Academic Year 1999-2000




                                                               Household Income

                                                            $40,000-      $70,000-
                                                <$40,000                             $100,000+
                                                             70,000       100,000

                                 Received         85%         62%           37%        22%
Any Need-Based Aid
(grant, loan, work-study)
                                 Mean if > 0    $6,859       $5,937       $5,371      $4,975


                                 Received         68%          9%           0%          0%
Pell Grant
                                 Mean if > 0    $2,259       $1,056          -           -


                                 Received         26%         24%           18%        12%
School Need-Based Grant
                                 Mean if > 0    $4,074       $5,060       $4,793      $4,617


                                 Received         52%         49%           28%        12%
Subsidized Federal Loan,
Perkins or Subsidized Stafford
                                 Mean if > 0    $3,835       $3,491       $3,322      $3,518


Ineligible for Need-Based Aid, but
Will Qualify if Expected Family Contribution      0%           6%           14%         8%
Decreases by $5,000 or less


Eligible for Need-Based Aid, Room for Need to
                                                  4%          39%           39%        19%
Increase by $5,000 or more if EFC drops



Total Share on Aid Margin                         4%          45%           53%        27%




Note: Data are from NPSAS 2000.
                                                                     Table 2
                                                      Marginal Tax Rates Used in Calculations




  Household                   Earned Income                          Capital Gains                 Interest Income                    Dividends
   Income          Federal         State          FICA           Federal         State         Federal          State         Federal         State

$35,000             10%            5.08%          7.65%            5%            4.41%           10%           5.08%            5%            5.08%


$50,000             15%            5.65%          7.65%            5%            4.83%           15%           5.65%            5%            5.65%


$100,000            25%            6.29%          1.45%           15%            5.22%           25%           6.29%            15%           6.29%


$150,000            28%            6.43%          1.45%           15%            5.61%           28%           6.43%            15%           6.43%


$200,000            33%            6.38%          1.45%           15%            5.48%           33%           6.38%            15%           6.38%


$335,000+           35%            6.40%          1.45%           15%            5.56%           35%           6.40%            15%           6.40%




Notes: Federal rates are 2003 bracket rates. State rates are average of effective 2002 marginal rates calculated from NBER TAXSIM. State averages taken
across states that have an income tax.
                                                                       Table 3
                                                   Age-Based Portfolio Used in Return Calculations




                                                                                                                     Nominal
                       Year:           1-3       4-6      7-8      9        10     11-12      13     14-15   16-22   Rate of
                                                                                                                     Return


                    Stock Share        90%       85%     74%      68%      59%      58%      45%     42%     25%       9%

                    Bond Share         10%       15%     26%      32%      41%      42%      55%     58%     75%       4%




Note: Values reflect typical age-based 529 portfolio.
                                                                                       Table 4
                                                                   Tax Treatment of College Saving Alternatives




                                      Income Limit                  Taxes Paid on Income,
        Investment Option                                                                             Taxed Paid on Inside Build-up          Taxes Paid at Withdrawal
                                   married, filing jointly                pre-deposit


          Non-Advantaged                                                                                                                      Federal and state on
                                                                 Federal and state, plus FICA    Federal and state
          Account, Parent                                                                                                                     realized capital gains



                               $70,000
                                                                                                                                              Federal and state on entire
          Traditional IRA      No income limit if no work-       FICA
                                                                                                                                              withdrawal
                               related retirement plan.


                                                                 Federal and state, FICA.
          529                                                    No state taxes if 529 with
                                                                 deduction



          Coverdell            $220,000                          Federal and state, FICA


                                                                                                 Federal and state
                                                                                                 First $750 untaxed                           Federal and state on
          UTMA                                                   Federal and state, FICA         Child 14+: earnings >$750 at child's rate    realized capital gains,
                                                                                                 Child <14: next $750 at child's rate &       child's rate
                                                                                                 >$1500 at parent's rate




Note: Unless otherwise indicated, applicable tax rate is that on parent's income.
                                                    Table 5
                                After-Tax Return to College Savings Alternatives

                                                 Nominal Return              Return Relative to Parental Account
      Non-Advantaged Account, Parent
        $35K                                          $1,735                                1.00
        $50K                                          $1,485                                1.00
        $100K                                         $1,113                                1.00
        $150K                                          $987                                 1.00
        $200K                                          $803                                 1.00
        $335K+                                         $728                                 1.00
      UTMA
        $35K                                          $1,824                                1.05
        $50K                                          $1,618                                1.09
        $100K                                         $1,453                                1.31
        $150K                                         $1,338                                1.36
        $200K                                         $1,157                                1.44
        $335K+                                        $1,084                                1.49
      529 Plan (Deduction)
        $35K                                          $2,188                                1.26
        $50K                                          $1,976                                1.33
        $100K                                         $1,811                                1.63
        $150K                                         $1,683                                1.71
        $200K                                         $1,475                                1.84
        $335K+                                        $1,391                                1.91
      529 Plan (No Deduction)
        $35K                                          $2,026                                1.17
        $50K                                          $1,808                                1.22
        $100K                                         $1,634                                1.47
        $150K                                         $1,511                                1.53
        $200K                                         $1,317                                1.64
        $335K+                                        $1,238                                1.70
      ESA
        $35K                                          $2,026                                1.17
        $50K                                          $1,808                                1.22
        $100K                                         $1,634                                1.47
        $150K                                         $1,511                                1.53
        $200K                                         $1,317                                1.64
        $335K+                                        $1,238                                1.70
      Traditional IRA
        $35K                                          $2,026                                1.17
        $50K                                          $1,808                                1.22
        $100K                                         $1,634                                1.47
        $150K                                         $1,511                                1.53
        $200K                                         $1,317                                1.64
        $335K+                                        $1,238                                1.70




Notes: Assumes portfolio mix of Table 2, with stock returns of 9% and bond returns of 4%. One-time investment of $1,000
of pretax income with all earnings reinvested. Funds drawn down over the final four years of investment horizon.
                                                              Table 6
                                 Aid System's Treatment of Saving Alternatives in Aid Determination




                                    Annual Assessment on        Annual Assessment on
        Investment Option                                                                             Assessment of Withdrawals
                                       Asset Balance          Earnings Net of Income Tax



Non-Advantaged Account, Parent              5.64%                        47%                47% of realized earnings net of income tax



Traditional IRA                               0%                          0%                47% of withdrawal net of income tax



529                                         5.64%                         0%                None



Coverdell                                    35%                          0%                50% of realized earnings



UTMA                                         35%                         50%                50% of realized earnings net of income tax
                                                Table 7
              After-Tax Return to College Savings Alternatives, Net of Financial Aid Losses
                        (1)             (2)                 (3)                  (4)                (5)
                     After-Tax   After-Tax Return,   Return Net of Aid   Aid Loss As % of    Aid Loss As % of
                      Return      Net of Aid Loss     Loss Relative to   Asset Balance at    After-Tax Return
                                                     Non-Advantaged       Start of College
                                                      Account, Parent
Non-Advantaged Account, Parent
  $35K                  $1,735         $635                1.00                43%                63%
  $50K                  $1,485         $490                1.00                43%                67%
  $100K                 $1,113         $267                1.00                40%                76%
  $150K                  $987          $193                1.00                39%                80%
  $200K                  $803            -                                       -                 -
  $335K+                 $728            -                                       -                 -
UTMA
  $35K                  $1,824        -$1,422              -2.24              124%                178%
  $50K                  $1,618        -$1,391              -2.84              124%                186%
  $100K                 $1,453        -$1,366              -5.12              124%                194%
  $150K                 $1,338        -$1,349              -6.98              124%                201%
  $200K                 $1,157           -                                      -                   -
  $335K+                $1,084           -                                      -                   -
529 Plan (Deduction)
  $35K                  $2,188        $1,772               2.79                15%                19%
  $50K                  $1,976        $1,587               3.24                15%                20%
  $100K                 $1,811        $1,444               5.41                15%                20%
  $150K                 $1,683        $1,333               6.90                15%                21%
  $200K                 $1,475           -                                       -                 -
  $335K+                $1,391           -                                       -                 -
529 Plan (No Deduction)
  $35K                  $2,026        $1,631               2.57                15%                19%
  $50K                  $1,808        $1,441               2.94                15%                20%
  $100K                 $1,634        $1,290               4.84                15%                21%
  $150K                 $1,511        $1,183               6.13                15%                22%
  $200K                 $1,317           -                                       -                 -
  $335K+                $1,238           -                                       -                 -
ESA
  $35K                  $2,026        -$1,209              -1.90              122%                160%
  $50K                  $1,808        -$1,194              -2.44              122%                166%
  $100K                 $1,634        -$1,182              -4.43              122%                172%
  $150K                 $1,511        -$1,174              -6.08              122%                178%
  $200K                 $1,317           -                                      -                   -
  $335K+                $1,238           -                                      -                   -
Traditional IRA
  $35K                  $2,026         $987                1.55                33%                51%
  $50K                  $1,808         $844                1.72                31%                53%
  $100K                 $1,634         $730                2.74                27%                55%
  $150K                 $1,511         $649                3.36                26%                57%
  $200K                 $1,317           -                                       -                 -
  $335K+                $1,238           -                                       -                 -
                             Table 8: Detailed Aid Calculations
                       Loss in Aid for Family Holding Various Assets

                                        Coverdell ESA
                           Loss of Aid due to                                    Loss of Aid due to
                            Asset Balance,                                         Asset Income,       Total
             Balance,      35% of Start-of-    Balance,         Withdrawal,      50% of After-Tax     Loss of
           Start of Year     Year Balance     End of Year       End of Year      Realized Earnings     Aid

                (1)               (2)               (3)              (4)                (5)             (6)
Year 18    $      2,314    $              810   $     2,435     $          609   $             216
Year 19    $      1,826    $              639   $     1,922     $          641   $             227
Year 20    $      1,282    $              449   $     1,349     $          674   $             239
Year 21    $        674    $              236   $       710     $          710
TOTAL                      $            2,134                                    $             682    $ 2,816
                                                              As Share of Year 18 Starting Balance:     122%
                                 529, No Upfront Deduction
                         Loss of Aid due to                                      Loss of Aid due to
                           Asset Balance,                                         Asset Income,        Total
             Balance,    5.64% of Start-of-       Balance,      Withdrawal,            none           Loss of
           Start of Year    Year Balance        End of Year     End of Year                            Aid
                 (1)             (2)                (3)             (4)                (5)              (6)
Year 18    $       2,314 $             130      $     2,435    $        609 $                  -
Year 19    $       1,826 $             103      $     1,922    $        641 $                  -
Year 20    $       1,282 $              72      $     1,349    $        674 $                  -
Year 21    $         674 $              38      $       710    $        710
TOTAL                    $             343                                    $                -    $    343
                                                              As Share of Year 18 Starting Balance:      15%
                                            UTMA
                         Loss of Aid due to                                 Loss of Aid due to
                            Asset Balance,                                    Asset Income,      Total
             Balance,      35% of Start-of-       Balance,   Withdrawal, 50% of After-Tax Loss of
           Start of Year    Year Balance        End of Year End of Year Realized Earnings        Aid
                 (1)              (2)               (3)          (4)                (5)           (6)
Year 18    $       2,277 $              797     $     2,392 $        598 $                 226
Year 19    $       1,794 $              628     $     1,884 $        628 $                 238
Year 20    $       1,256 $              440     $     1,320 $        660 $                 241
Year 21    $         660 $              231     $       693 $        693
TOTAL                    $            2,096                                $               705 $ 2,801
                                                           As Share of Year 18 Starting Balance:   123%

Note: 68-71% of withdrawals consist of unrealized earnings. Family has household income of $100,000.
                                                                                             Figure 1:
                                                                          After-Tax Return to College Savings Options
                                                         nominal return to $1,000 of pretax savings, household taxable income of $100,000


                   $1,750




                   $1,500




                   $1,250




                   $1,000
after-tax return




                    $750




                    $500




                    $250




                      $0
                            Non-Advantaged Account,   UTMA                529 Plan (No Deduction)                   ESA                     Traditional IRA   529 Plan (Deduction)
                                    Parent
                                                                                            Household Income


       Notes: Assumes portfolio mix of Table 3, with stock returns of 9% and bond returns of 4%. One-time investment of $1,000 of pretax income with all
       eanrings reinvested. Funds drawn down over the final four years of investment horizon.
                                                                        Figure 2:
                                          After-Tax Return to Non-Advantaged Account Held in Name of Parent
                                                        nominal return to $1,000 of pretax savings


                   $2,000



                   $1,800



                   $1,600



                   $1,400



                   $1,200
after-tax return




                   $1,000



                    $800



                    $600



                    $400



                    $200



                      $0
                            $35K   $50K                        $100K                       $150K              $200K   $335K+
                                                                       Household Income
                                                                                     Figure 3:
                                                                    After-Tax Return to College Saving Options
                                                             Relative to Non-Advantaged Account Held in Name of Parent


                     2.00


                             UTMA
                     1.80
                             ESA, Traditional IRA or 529 (no deduction)
                             529 (deduction)
                     1.60



                     1.40



                     1.20
   Relative Return




                     1.00



                     0.80



                     0.60



                     0.40



                     0.20



                     0.00
                            $35K                 $50K                     $100K                      $150K               $200K      $335K+
                                                                                  Household Income


Notes: Assumes portfolio mix of Table 3, with stock returns of 9% and bond returns of 4%. One-time investment of $1,000 of pretax income with all
earnings reinvested. Funds drawn down over the final four years of investment horizon.
                                                                               Figure 4
                                                               After-Tax Return to College Saving Options


                      $2,500
                                                                                                Non-Advantaged Account
                                                                                                UTMA
                                                                                                ESA, Traditional IRA or 529 (no deduction)
                      $2,000                                                                    529 (deduction)




                      $1,500
   After-tax Return




                      $1,000




                       $500




                         $0
                               $35K          $50K                  $100K               $150K                    $200K                $335K+
                                                                       Household Income

Notes: Assumes portfolio mix of Table 3, with stock returns of 9% and bond returns of 4%. One-time investment of $1,000 of pretax income with all
earnings reinvested. Funds drawn down over the final four years of investment horizon.
                                                                                                   Figure 5
                                                                    Return to College Saving Options, Net of Aid Lost and Income Tax
                                                     Assumes those in bottom four brackets are on aid margin; in top two brackets, assumed aid tax is zero

                                    $2,000




                                    $1,500




                                    $1,000
Return, Net of Taxes and Lost Aid




                                      $500




                                        $0
                                              $35K       $50K                         $100K                         $150K                         $200K             $335K+




                                     -$500


                                                                                                                                          Non-Advantaged Account
                                                                                                                                          UTMA
                                    -$1,000
                                                                                                                                          Traditional IRA
                                                                                                                                          ESA
                                                                                                                                          529 Plan (No Deduction)
                                    -$1,500                                                   Household Income                            529 (deduction)
