NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

INTEREST RATES AND BACKWARD-BENDING INVESTMENT
Raj Chetty
Working Paper 10354
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10354
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2004

I thank Alan Auerbach, Gary Chamberlain, Ben Friedman, Boyan Jovanovic, Anil Kashyap, Robert Pindyck,
Michael Schwarz, Arnold Zellner, seminar participants, two anonymous referees, and especially George
Akerlof, Martin Feldstein, and Jerry Green for helpful discussions and suggestions. Funding from the
National Bureau of Economic Research and National Science Foundation is gratefully acknowledged. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
©2004 by Raj Chetty. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Interest Rates and Backward-Bending Investment
Raj Chetty
NBER Working Paper No. 10354
March 2004
JEL No. D83, D92, E22, E52, H3
ABSTRACT
This paper studies the effect of interest rates on investment in an environment where firms make
irreversible investments and learn over time. In this setting, changes in the interest rate affect both
the cost of capital and the cost of delaying investment. These two forces combine to generate an
aggregate investment demand curve that is always a backward-bending function of the interest rate.
At low rates, increasing the interest rate stimulates investment by raising the cost of delay. Existing
evidence supports the hypothesis that firms change the time at which they invest in response to
changes in interest rates. The model also generates a rich set of additional predictions that can be
tested empirically.

Raj Chetty
Department of Economics
UC- Berkeley
521 Evans Hall #3880
Berkeley, CA 94720
and NBER
chetty@econ.berkeley.edu

Macroeconomic policies to stimulate investment are frequently motivated by the
downward sloping relationship between investment demand and interest rates derived from
neoclassical models of investment. The intuition underlying this relationship is straightforward:
Lowering the cost of capital via monetary or tax policies stimulates investment by enlarging the
set of projects that are sufficiently profitable to warrant investment.1
This paper shows that this canonical result breaks down when firms making irreversible
investment decisions can learn over time, as in standard real options or "time to build" models.2
To see the intuition, consider a pharmaceutical company deciding how quickly to proceed with
investments in operations to produce new drugs. The firm is uncertain about which drugs will be
successful, and can acquire further information by delaying investment via R&D. The cost of
delaying investment is that the firm cannot retire its outstanding debt as quickly, raising its
interest expenses.3 Now consider how an increase in the interest rate will affect the firm's
behavior.

A higher interest rate reduces the set of drugs that surpass the hurdle rate for

investment, creating the standard cost of capital effect that acts to reduce the scale of investment.
But a higher interest rate also makes the firm more eager to retire its debt quickly by investing
immediately so that it has a chance to earn profits sooner. This second "timing effect" acts to
raise current investment. These two forces combine to generate a non-monotonic investment
demand curve.
To formalize this intuition, I first analyze a simple dynamic model where a continuum of
profit-maximizing firms make binary investment decisions and can observe a noisy signal about
the parameters that control payoffs by postponing investment. In this model, expected profits
grow at a rate 1  ! when firms delay investment because they acquire more information and
increase the probability of investing only in successful ventures. Profits earned in subsequent
1Haavelmo (1960) pioneered the neoclassical theory of investment and Jorgenson (1963) derived equations to
estimate the effect of the user cost of capital on investment.
2Models of the timing of investment were first analyzed by Marglin (1967, 1970) in the context of government
investment. Pindyck (1991) and Dixit and Pindyck (1994) provide extensive reviews of the real options literature.
3This example ignores the additional cost of delay due to loss of rents in a competitive industry. This important
issue is addressed below.

1

periods are discounted at the interest rate, <. Therefore, firms invest immediately only if the
expected profit from investment is positive and the expected growth in profits from delaying (1)
is less than the interest rate. The backward-bending shape of the aggregate investment demand
curveß MÐ<Ñ, arises directly from this firm-level optimality condition. If < is low, 1 is likely to
exceed <, compelling many firms to delay investment rather than investing in period 1. On the
other hand, when < is high, the expected return to immediate investment is negative for many
firms, making investment in period 1 suboptimal for them. Consequently, aggregate investment
is maximized at an intermediate <‡  !, and MÐ<Ñ is upward-sloping from ! to <‡ and downwardsloping above <‡ .4
The backward-bending property of the investment demand curve is robust to several
generalizations of the basic model. First, permitting choices about the scale of investment does
not affect the result.

The aggregate economy in the basic extensive-marginal model is

isomorphic to a single firm making scale choices, so the main intuition still goes through.
Second, I study the effects of competition in a model where prices and profit rates are
determined endogenously in equilibrium to equate supply and demand.

If firms can earn

sufficiently high quasi-rents (producer surplus) from investment in the short-run, the equilibrium
level of investment remains a backward-bending function of <. Intuitively, as long as the
marginal firm values the option to delay in equilibrium -- which will be true if entry by identical
competitors does not occur immediately -- the interest rate continues to affect both the cost of
delay and the cost of capital, thereby generating two opposing forces on investment demand in
equilibrium. Third, in a model where firms have additional margins of choice beyond scale,
other behavioral responses such as changes in the composition of investment reinforce the
backward-bending shape that arises from learning effects.

For instance, if construction is

cheaper when firms take a longer time to build (as in Alchian, 1959), they have an incentive to
4In

recent work independent of this study, Jovanovic and Rousseau (2001, 2004) and Capozza and Li (2001) point
out that interest rate changes can have non-monotonic effects on IPOs and real estate development decisions. Their
models differ from the present analysis in several respects, which are discussed along with their empirical results in
section 4.

2

switch to slower building technologies when interest rates are low, reducing aggregate
investment for reasons independent of learning.
The unconventional relationship between M and < derived here is of interest for two
reasons. First, the model in this paper is representative of the extensive literature on irreversible
investment under uncertainty, a concept that Caballero (1999) emphasizes is "at the center of
modern theories." From a normative perspective, it is useful to understand how interest rates
should affect investment in what is increasingly viewed as the leading theory of investment
behavior. Second, the non-monotonic relationship is interesting from an empirical perspective
because several econometric studies have searched for a negative relationship between
exogenous changes in the cost of capital and aggregate investment demand without success.5
This paper proposes a model that could explain the lack of a clear, monotonic relationship
between M and < at least in certain high-risk sectors of the economy.
A natural question in this regard is whether the timing effects that generate the nonmonotonic investment curve are empirically important.

Existing microeconomic studies,

reviewed in section 4, find that firms change the time at which they invest in response to changes
in interest rates in several industries, ranging from mining to real estate development. In
addition, studies show that many firms in high-risk sectors explicitly or implicitly use realoptions approaches to make investment decisions, and that the timing of investment appears to
be a real choice variable. Hence, it is clear that at least some firms follow decision rules that
generate a non-monotonic relationship between investment and the interest rate.
While this evidence suggests that timing effects are empirically relevant, it of course does
not directly indicate the importance of these issues for aggregate investment demand. Sharper
5Several

studies have found that interest rates have little or no effect on the level of aggregate investment; see e.g.,
the early studies of Eisner and Nadiri (1968) and Feldstein and Flemming (1971), or Chirinko (1993a,b) for a
review. A modern literature that exploits cross-sectional variation in the user cost finds a larger role for the cost of
capital in the long run in some sectors (see e.g., Cummins, Hassett, and Hubbard 1994, who exploit tax reforms as
natural experiments). Caballero (1999) and Hassett and Hubbard (2002) review this literature. In interpreting these
results, note that in the model proposed here, tax changes can affect investment differently than changes in < and
interest elasticities are more negative in the long run than the short run. These points are discussed in greater detail
in section 5.

3

tests of the relationship between interest rates are required. The learning structure of the model
yields many predictions that could be tested in future work. The most important is perhaps that
an increase in the interest rate is more likely to increase investment in sectors or times when the
potential to learn is greater, i.e. when signals about future payoffs are more informative and the
variance of payoffs is large. Examples that satisfy these conditions include startups or small
businesses, especially in high-tech fields. Intuitively, the effect of changes in < on the cost of
learning become amplified when the potential to learn is large.

The learning effect thus

dominates the cost of capital effect for a larger range of <, raising the investment-maximizing <‡ .
Several other empirical implications are derived as well. First, a permanent increase in <
is more likely to raise investment in the short-run than the long run, because the benefits to
additional learning diminish over time. Second, a change in < affects not only the size but also
the quality of investment non-monotonically. Raising < when <  <‡ expands the pool of current
investors and drives down average observed profits by bringing in less successful ventures;
raising < when <  <‡ raises the average observed profit rate. Finally, temporary changes in
interest rates create incentives to substitute investment intertemporally, in different directions
depending on whether the changes are anticipated or not. The model predicts when the yield
curve becomes steeper, current investment should rise relative to subsequent investment.
In interpreting these results, it is important to keep in mind that the interest rate is taken
as exogenous throughout this paper. The determinants of the supply of capital are therefore left
unspecified.6 This partial-equilibrium approach is appropriate in analyzing policy questions
such as the effects of exogenous changes in the user cost of capital via tax or monetary policies.
This question has been the primary focus of the empirical literature, which has at least attempted
to generate exogenous variation in < using instrumental-variable and other econometric
techniques (see Chirinko 1993b). The relationship between investment and interest rates derived
6The

supply of capital could itself be a non-monotone function of < for several reasons, including countervailing
price and wealth effects and asymmetric information (Stiglitz and Weiss 1981). In addition, if consumers
purchasing durables can learn more about their properties by delaying purchase, the same non-monotonicities that
arise from learning effects on the investment demand side could also affect the schedule of the supply of funds.

4

here should not be expected to hold when < is endogenously determined in general equilibrium,
as changes in < could occur because of autonomous shocks to investment demand (a simultaneity
problem).
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. The next section develops a stylized
model of investment by learning firms.

It solves for optimal investment behavior, and

aggregates the model to derive an investment demand curve. The main backward-bending
investment result is derived for this model in section 2. Section 3 generalizes the result to more
realistic environments. Section 4 describes existing empirical evidence that supports the main
timing intuition, and section 5 derives additional empirical implications of the model. The final
section offers concluding remarks. All proofs are given in the appendix.

1 A Stylized Model of Investment by Learning Firms
I analyze the effect of interest rates on investment in a standard discrete-time learning
model where firms are Bayesian updaters. Firms are assumed to be residual claimants in all
states of the world and make one irreversible investment decision with the objective of
maximizing profits. Two simplifying assumptions are made in the basic case: Firms only decide
whether to invest or not (the scale of investment at the firm level is not flexible), and competitive
forces are ignored by taking profit rates as exogenous. The basic model thus best describes a
firm that has already obtained a patent on an idea (e.g. a chemical compound) and is deciding
when to market its innovation (e.g. a new drug) by building a factory. I first analyze the
investment decision of a single firm of this type, and then aggregate over firms with
heterogeneous expectations to characterize total investment in the economy.

1.1 Structure and Assumptions

5

Suppose a firm is deciding whether to invest in a new plant that can be built at cost G .
The economy is stationary in the sense that nominal revenues from the project and the cost of
investment are constant over time. In a world of perfect information, the manager's decision rule
is simple: invest if the rate of return from the project is the higher than that of his best
alternative. But the manager is uncertain about how strong demand for the firm's product will
be. To model his uncertainty, assume that there are two possible distributions that govern the
characteristics of demand D for the product in each period. Labeling the two distributions 0 ÐDÑ
and 1ÐDÑ, index the true distribution by . − Ö!ß "×, where
. œ ! Ê D µ 0 ÐDÑ and . œ " Ê D µ 1ÐDÑ
The value of . determines the stream of revenues that the firm gets from investment. Let V.
denote the manager's expectation of total revenue from the project in state . and let . œ " denote
the good state, i.e. assume V"  V! . To make the problem nontrivial, assume that investment is
unprofitable in the bad state a<  !, i.e. V!  G . Note that the two-state assumption simplifies
the exposition but is not essential; the results hold with a continuous state space.
Investing in the plant allows the firm to start production in the next period, so revenue
starts accruing one period after the investment is made. The plant generates revenue via sales of
the product for a fixed number of periods, after which it is worthless. The decision to invest is
irreversible -- once the plant is built, it cannot be sold at any price.7 This assumption, which is
equivalent to assuming a large non-convex adjustment cost for the capital stock, underlies most
recent investment models (Caballero, 1999). It is motivated by evidence that investment is a
very lumpy process in practice. For instance, Doms and Dunne (1993) document that nearly
40% of the median firm's investment over a 17 year span takes place within the span of one year
in the U.S. More recently, Goolsbee and Gross (1997) find strong evidence of non-convex
adjustment costs in data on investment decisions of US airlines.

7Full

irreversibility is not essential. If there were a cost to investing and then liquidating the plant, the firm would
still be reluctant to plunge resources into a venture of uncertain value. But if the investment decision were fully
reversible and all money put in could be recovered, there would be no reason not to invest immediately.

6

To model learning, assume that the manager can gain further information about the
probability distribution governing demand by delaying his investment decision and observing a
signal D . These observations can be used to update prior beliefs about the project's payoff,
allowing the firm to make a more informed decision. Let -! œ T Ð. œ "Ñ denote the manager's
prior belief that the project will succeed. By postponing his decision to the next period, he
updates his estimate of the probability of success to -" œ T Ð. œ "lDÑ after observing a
realization of D .
The cost of this reduction in uncertainty is that a delayed investment yields revenues one
period later, which have lower present value. To simplify the analysis, I abstract from additional
costs of delay that the firm may incur, such as the cost of performing the research needed to
obtain the signal or the permanent loss of one period of profits. Section 3.2 shows that the key
results hold as long as the additional interest-invariant cost of delaying is small relative to the
potential benefits of delay.
Having outlined the basic features of the model, we can define the firm's action space and
profit functions formally. Let 3 denote the decision to invest immediately, 6 the decision to
delay, and < the real interest rate. Assume that the investment opportunity is available for X
periods; after X periods, the opportunity disappears, perhaps because the patent expires and all
rents are bid away.8 In the terminal period X , the firm therefore must decide either to invest
immediately or reject the project. The profit function, 1> Ð.Ñ, identifies the expected payoff (in
period 1 dollars), to investing in period > when the true state is .:
1> Ð . Ñ œ

V.
"
Ö
 G×
>"
Ð"  <Ñ
"<

Ð1Ñ

To simplify the discussion below, I restrict attention to the case in which the manager must
decide whether to invest or not within X œ # periods: here, delaying investment more than once

8Though

the phrasing below refers to finite X , the results apply to X œ _ as well.

7

is not possible. However, all the results for the basic model are proved in the appendix for
general X , including the limiting case of an infinite decision horizon.

1.2 Optimal Investment Rule

The optimal action in each period can be computed by solving the firm's dynamic
programming problem using backwards induction. To reduce notation, assume that the signal D
is a scalar, and that the likelihood ratio of the two densities,

1ÐDÑ
0 ÐDÑ ,

is monotonically and

continuously increasing in D . This monotonic likelihood ratio property holds for many
distributions, including all one parameter Natural Exponential Families. The motivation for
these assumptions will become clear shortly. Let Z Ð3Ñ denote the expected value of investing in
period 1 and Z Ð6Ñ the expected value of delay.

Lemma 1

In period 2, the firm invests iff D  D ‡ where D ‡ satisfies
1ÐD ‡ Ñ
"  -0 G  V! ÎÐ"  <Ñ
œ
‡
0 ÐD Ñ
-0 V" ÎÐ"  <Ñ  G

Ð2Ñ

In period 1, the firm invests iff
V"
V!
 GÑ  Ð"  -! ÑÐ
 GÑ
"<
"<
"
V"
V!
 Z Ð6Ñ œ
Ö-! " ÐD ‡ ÑÐ
 GÑ  Ð"  -! Ñ!ÐD ‡ ÑÐ
 GÑ×
"<
"<
"<

Z Ð3Ñ œ -! Ð

Ð3Ñ

where " ÐD ‡ Ñ ´ 'D ‡ 1ÐDÑ.D and !ÐD ‡ Ñ ´ 'D ‡ 0 ÐDÑ.DÞ
_

_

When making his period 2 decision, the manager needs to determine the relative likelihood that
the observed signal D came from the distributions corresponding to . œ !ß ". He refines his
estimate of T Ð. œ "Ñ using Bayes Rule, and compares the expected payoffs to investing and not

8

investing in period 2 given his updated belief. If the likelihood that the observed demand D came
from the good distribution 1 is high -- that is, if

1ÐDÑ
0 ÐDÑ

exceeds some threshold value -- he invests.

Hence, the firm's second period decision rule is formally identical to a likelihood ratio
hypothesis test. The test here has power " ÐD ‡ Ñ and type one error rate !ÐD ‡ Ñ, where D ‡ is chosen
via profit maximization in period 2. In the limiting case of noiseless signals, "ÐBÑ œ " and
!ÐBÑ œ ! aB. The probability that the manager will invest in period 2 when . œ " is " , while

g(z)

0.010

f(z)

0.005

Frequency

0.015

0.020

the probability that he will invest when . œ ! is !.

Invest

0.0

Reject

10

z*(λ0)

20

30

40

Demand (z) Observed in Period 1

FIGURE 1. PERIOD 2 INVESTMENT DECISION AFTER OBSERVING DEMAND SIGNAL

If

1ÐDÑ
0 ÐDÑ

is monotonic, this likelihood ratio test translates into a cutoff value for investment

in the second period (D ‡ ) determined by the manager's prior odds and the profit-loss ratio. The
cutoff D ‡ is computed as in (2) so that the expected profit from investing in period 2 conditional
on observing a signal of exactly D ‡ is zero. Intuitively, at the optimal threshold, the manager
should be indifferent between investing and not investing in period 2; if he were not, there would

9

either be a region of the state space where he is investing and earning negative expected profits
or one where he is not investing when he could have earned positive expected profits.
In period 1, the firm again chooses the action that maximizes its expected payoff, where
possible actions are now to invest or learn by delaying. The payoff to investing is the expected
profit in period 1, where the weight in the expectation is given by the prior belief, -! . The
payoff to learning, Z Ð6Ñ, is also a weighted average of profits in each state, but there are two
changes in the formula. First, the relevant payoff outcomes are 1# instead of 1" -- revenue is
discounted more steeply because it is earned one period later. Second, the weights in the profit
expression are multiplied by the factors " ÐD ‡ Ñ and !ÐD ‡ Ñ. The term corresponding to the good
state, 1# Ð"Ñ, decreases by the weight " ÐD ‡ Ñ  " because of the chance of rejecting the project
when it is profitable. The test's benefit is that !ÐD ‡ Ñ  ", placing less weight on the negative
term corresponding to the bad state. The sole benefit of delaying investment is to reduce the
probability of undertaking an unprofitable venture.
The period 1 investment rule is closely linked to the results of existing real options
models. To see this, let 1 denote the expected growth in profits by delaying, which is the
undiscounted expected profit in period 2 divided by the expected profit in period 1 (minus 1):
1œ

V!
V"
Ö-! " ÐD ‡ ÑÐ "<
 GÑ  Ð"  -! Ñ!ÐD ‡ ÑÐ "<
 GÑ×
V!
V"
-! Ð "<
 GÑ  Ð"  -! ÑÐ "<
 GÑ

"

Ð4Ñ

We can rewrite the period 1 optimality condition for investment given in (0) as
Z Ð3Ñ  ! and <  1

Ð5Ñ

As we will see shortly, this expression is the key condition that drives the backwardbending result. The intuition underlying this condition is that it is optimal to invest if (a) the
expected profit from investment is positive and (b) the growth rate of profits from delaying, 1, is
smaller than the interest rate, <. If the second condition is not satisfied, the firm will delay since
doing so yields a higher expected rate of return than the market interest rate.

10

Importantly, the intuition in (5), and therefore the subsequent results, apply much more
generally than in the simple stylized model considered here. The same condition characterizes
investment behavior in a large set of models in the optimal "tree-cutting" literature, pioneered in
the analysis of public investment by Marglin (1967, 1970), and developed further in the real
options literature reviewed by Dixit and Pindyck (1994).9 A basic insight of these models is that
the optimal time to cut a growing tree, once it has already been planted, is precisely when the
rate of return on the best alternative (<) begins to exceed the rate at which the tree grows (1).
The present model gives a learning interpretation to the "growth" of the tree, which generates
several additional predictions that can be used to test the model and refine understanding of
investment behavior more generally.
The two parts of equation (5) drive the two effects of interest rate changes in this model.
The second part shows that a reduction in < causes investors to cut trees later (postpone
investment), because it is more likely that 1  <. The first part shows that a reduction in < also
makes more individuals plant trees (increasing the scale of investment), because more projects
have positive expected value. These two effects are hard to see at the firm level because there
are discontinuous jumps in investment as < changes in this extensive-margin model. To analyze
how changes in < affect investment more intuitively, I now aggregate the model over
heterogeneous firms and derive a smooth aggregate investment demand curve.

1.3 Aggregation

Consider an economy populated by a continuum of firms with heterogeneous prior probabilities
of success (-! s). Assume that the density of -! , denoted by . (Ð-! Ñ, is continuous and places
non-zero weight on all -! − Ò!ß "Ó. Revenues from investment in each state and the learning
technology are identical across firms.

In addition, assume for now that each firm's profit

9See,

for example, Cukierman (1980), Bernanake (1983), McDonald and Siegel (1986), Pindyck (1988), Demers
(1991), Leahy (1993), and Bertola and Caballero (1994).

11

realization is independent of other firms' outcomes, so firms can ignore the behavior of other
firms when making investment decisions.
Under these assumptions, it follows that each firm follows Lemma 1 in determining its
investment rule. The period 1 investment decisions of each firm can be identified by computing
the action . that maximizes Z Ð.à -! Ñ for each -! .10 This allows us to characterize the decisions
of all firms in the economy by a single threshold value -!‡ that determines who invests in period
1 and who does not, as shown in Figure 2. The next lemma establishes this result formally.

Lemma 2

There is a unique -!‡ at which the value of investing equals that of postponing.
In period 1, firms with -!  -!* delay their investment decision.
-!* invest in period 1.

R1= 140
R0= 80
C=100
r =0.06
f = Ν(10,16)
g =Ν(15,16)

V(l)

-10

0

V

10

20

30

Firms with -!

Delay

Invest

-20

V(i)

0.0

0.2

0.4

λ0

0.6

λ0*

0.8

1.0

FIGURE 2. EXPECTED PAYOFFS AND INVESTMENT BEHAVIOR IN THE ECONOMY

Investment behavior in the economy follows a simple pattern: Confident firms (-! high)
do not want to forego profits by delaying and invest immediately. The remaining firms, who are
10Unless

otherwise noted, all subsequent figures use the parameter values given in this figure.

12

less certain about whether they have a profitable project, choose to wait and decide what to do in
the next period based on the information they observe. The threshold -!‡ thus determines the
scale of investment in the economy.
It follows from Lemma 2 that aggregate period 1 investment is
M œ ( G . ( Ð -! Ñ
"

(6)

-!*

Note that "period 1" investment is always equal to "current" investment; in other words,
the economy is always currently in period 1. The reason is that the only state variable in any
firm's dynamic programming problem, irrespective of when it started learning, is its current
belief, which we call -! .11 Firms that existed prior to the current period and already acquired
information about their projects simply have a different value of -! . Hence, we use the terms
"period 1 investment" and "current investment" interchangeably below.

2 Interest Rates and Investment Demand
In the model above, the level of current (period 1) aggregate investment is always a
backward-bending function of the interest rate. Irrespective of the underlying parameters, MÐ<Ñ
has an upward-sloping segment from < œ ! to < œ <‡  ! followed by a downward sloping
segment thereafter.

Proposition 1 Investment demand is a backward-bending function of the interest rate.
(i) MÐ< œ !Ñ œ ! and lim `` Ir Ð<Ñ œ  _
<Ä!

‡
(ii) <‡ ´ +<17+B< MÐ<Ñ  ! and < 
< Ê

`M  12
`<  !

11With

a finite decision horizon, the current period > is also a state variable, but with appropriate redefinition of X
the current belief remains a sufficient statistic to compute investment behavior.
12More precisely, `M œ ! for <  V"  ", the uninteresting case in which the interest rate is so high that investing is
`<
G
suboptimal even in the good state.

13

To see the intuition for this result, first note that if < œ !, no one invests in the first
period. Firms certain of success (-! œ ") are indifferent between postponing and investing
today, and all firms with lower priors must therefore strictly prefer delay (Lemma 2). Hence,
MÐ< œ !Ñ œ !. In this stylized model, there is no reason to forego the free information one gets
by waiting and learning if < œ !. Increasing < from < œ ! raises the cost of learning by delaying
and increases aggregate investment by making the most confident firms invest immediately. At
the other extreme, if < 

V"
G

 ", projects are unprofitable in both states for all firms, and hence

no one invests. Since few firms invest when < is low or high, it follows that MÐ<Ñ is nonmonotonic.
A natural concern with this result is that the prediction that investment falls to zero at low
interest rates is empirically implausible. However, when certain unrealistic assumptions of the
stylized model are relaxed, this prediction disappears, while the backward-bending shape of MÐ<Ñ
remains intact. Two differences between the stylized model and the real world are important in
this respect. First, some types of investment, such as replacement of depreciating machines,
involve virtually no learning. This component of investment has a conventional downwardsloping relationship with <. In a more general model that allows for both non-learning and
learning investment, total investment is positive at < œ !. Nonetheless, MÐ<Ñ remains upwardsloping at low < because lim `` Ir Ð<Ñ œ  _ for the learning component. Second, even within the
<Ä!

learning component, there are other non-interest costs to delay such as research expenditures and
loss of profits due to competition that are ignored in the model above. Incorporating these other
costs eliminates the prediction that MÐ< œ !Ñ œ !, because the most confident investors will not
want to incur these additional costs at any interest rate. In section 3.2, I show that MÐ<Ñ remains
backward-bending provided that these costs are not too large. I proceed here with the stylized
model that abstracts from non-learning investment and other waiting costs since the main
intuitions are most transparent in this setting.

14

Having discussed why MÐ<Ñ is non-monotonic, I now explain why it has a backwardbending shape more precisely. If a given manager has -! such that Z Ð3 ;-! Ñ  Z Ð6;-! Ñ for all
<

!, his behavior is unresponsive to changes in < and he does not affect the aggregate

investment demand curve.

Therefore, to understand how the shape of MÐ<Ñ emerges from

microeconomic decisions, restrict attention to firms that do invest for some value of <.13 To
analyze the firm's behavior, let us examine how the two payoff functions, Z Ð3 à -! Ñ and Z Ð6à -! Ñ
change with respect to <. Decomposing

`ÖZ Ð3ÑZ Ð6Ñ×
`<

into the NPV ( ` Z` rÐ3Ñ ) and learning ( 

` Z Ð6Ñ
`r )

effects gives:
`ÖZ Ð3Ñ  Z Ð6Ñ×
œ RT Z  P
`<

(7)

where
"
Ö-! V"  Ð"  -! ÑV! ×  !
(8)
Ð"  <Ñ#
#V"
G
#V!
G
P œ -! " ÐD ‡ ÑÖ

×  Ð"  -! Ñ!ÐD ‡ ÑÖ

×!
$
$
2
Ð"  <Ñ
Ð"  <Ñ
Ð"  <Ñ
Ð"  <Ñ2

RT Z œ

The NPV effect makes an increase in < reduce the value of immediate investment, as in static
investment models. The learning effect arises because the value of delaying is also affected by
changes in the interest rate. The two terms of P reflect the fact that an increase in < causes the
proceeds of investment at > œ # to be discounted more steeply and also reduces the value of the
investment at > œ # in period 2 dollars. Via the P effect, a higher < reduces Z Ð6Ñ, creating a
force that counteracts the conventional effect by making immediate investment more attractive.
These expressions show that the magnitude of PÐ<Ñ diminishes relative to the magnitude
of R T Z Ð<Ñ as < gets larger. Hence, for any given -! , there is exactly one value < at which
R T Z Ð<Ñ œ  PÐ<Ñ. This implies that for a given firm, Z Ð3 ;-! Ñ and Z Ð6;-! Ñ intersect for at
most two values of <, say <P Ð-! Ñ and <Y Ð-! Ñ. The individual investment demand curves thus all
have the same form: invest iff <P Ð-! Ñ Ÿ < Ÿ <Y Ð-! Ñ, as shown in Figure 3. The source of the
13Such

firms exist: For -! œ "ß Z Ð3à -! Ñ  Z Ð6à -! Ñ a<  ! Ê b-!w  " s.t. Z Ð3à -!w Ñ  Z Ð6à -!w Ñ for some <  ! by
continuity.

15

non-monotonicity with respect to < is that a small increase in < causes Z Ð6Ñ to fall more than
Z Ð3Ñ at <P Ð-! Ñ, increasing period 1 investment by firm -! , but an increase in < causes Z Ð6Ñ to
fall less than Z Ð3Ñ at <Y Ð-! Ñ, reducing the level of investment by the same firm.
B. Individual Expected Payoffs vs. r
0.4

0.4

A. Individual Expected Payoffs vs. r
λ0 = 0.8

0.3
V (i)

0.2

0.2

r

λ0 = 0. 73

V (l)
0.3

V (l)

V (i)

0.1

0.1

rU
r*

0

0

rL

0

5

10

V

15

20

0

25

5

20

25

dη=1

0.4

0.4

+

+

=

0.1

r*

0.2

0.3

0.3
0.2
0.1

rU

15
V

D. Aggregate Investment

C. Individual Investment Demands

r

10

0

0

rL

0 100
0 100
0 100
…+ λ0 = 0.80 +…+ λ0 = 0.73 +…+ λ0 < 0. 73

=

0

5

10

15

20

25

I(r)

FIGURE 3. EFFECT OF INTEREST RATE ON PERIOD 1 INVESTMENT DEMAND
Notes: Firms compare Z Ð6Ñ and Z Ð3Ñ for each value of < (A,B) and compute their investment
demands as functions of < (C). Summing these step functions horizontally yields MÐ<Ñ (D).

It can be shown that <P Ð-! Ñ is decreasing in -! and <Y Ð-! Ñ is increasing in -! -- more
confident firms have a larger range of interest rates for which they finding immediate investment
optimal. At the extremes, investors with -! œ " strictly prefer 3 for any < − Ð!ß VG"  "Ñ, whereas
investors with -! œ ! prefer not to invest a<  !.

There is exactly one -!w such that

<P Ð-!w Ñ œ <Y Ð-!w Ñ. For this firm, Z Ð3;-! Ñ and Z Ð6;-! Ñ are tangent at <‡ œ <P Ð-!w Ñ œ <Y Ð-!w Ñ. The
-!w firm invests only if < œ <‡ . MÐ<Ñ is maximized at <‡ because all firms who have -!  -!w also
invest at <‡ by Lemma 2.
Summing the individual non-monotonic step functions horizontally generates a smooth
aggregate investment demand curve. Aggregate investment demand is a backward-bending
16

function of < because the firm-level investment demand curves are non-monotonic step functions
that are strictly nested within each other as -! falls, as shown in Figure 3. The slope of MÐ<Ñ
approaches +_ as < tends to ! because the most confident investors have little to gain by
learning and immediately jump into the market when a small cost of delay is introduced.
Note that in contrast to investment demand, the value of the firm is a strictly downward
sloping function of the interest rate, because both Z Ð3Ñ and Z Ð6Ñ rise when < falls. Lower
interest rates essentially lead to more investment in information rather than physical capital such
as equipment and structures, ultimately yielding higher profit rates.

If the measure of

"investment" is broadened to include the value of information, the conventional prediction that
higher interest rates lower investment still holds. However, from a normative perspective, the
distinction between investment in information and physical capital could be important. If a
policy maker's goal is to stimulate job creation or aggregate demand, or if physical investment
leads to spillovers that raise growth, the amount of investment in equipment and structures itself
may matter.14 Therefore, while the results of this paper are in some sense empirical claims
related to the measurement of investment, they also have real implications for economic welfare.

3 Extensions
3.1 Scale choice

To incorporate scale choice at the firm level, assume that each firm can set investment in
periods 1 and 2, M" and M# , at any positive value. The restriction that investment must be positive
captures irreversibility. There are two states of the world, which differ in the mean price at
which the output good can be sold (:. ). Investments generate a profit stream for XT periods. An
14This

is particularly clear when changes in < lead to compositional effects, as in section 3.3. If firms switch to
slower construction methods because < is low, building permits fall. The fact that building permits are perceived as
an indicator of the economy's strength suggests that this change in behavior could have real economic
consequences.

17

investment of M" generates a profit of :. 0 (M" ) for XT periods in state ., starting in period 2 (one
period after investment). A further incremental investment of M# in period 2 changes the profit
stream to :. 0 (M"  M# ) in periods $ to XT  #. Irreversibility of investment is a meaningful
restriction only when XT  #, so assume that this condition holds below.
The scale problem has a solution only if 0 ÐMÑ is concave, i.e., the marginal return to
investment is diminishing. This concavity can arise from technological constraints or from a
downward-sloping demand curve where price falls as supply rises. The information revelation
structure of the model is the same as in section 2: A signal D is observed at the end of period 1
and beliefs are then updated. Let the ex-ante probability of state 1 be given by -! Þ We can now
generalize Proposition 1.

Proposition 2 M" Ð<Ñ is backward-bending when firms choose scale.

To understand this result intuitively, recall that the key step in the proof in the extensivemargin case was to show that investment is zero at both low < and high <. This continues to hold
here: Since there is no non-interest cost to delay in this simple model, there is no reason to invest
immediately if < œ !. In other words, profit-maximizing firms will rationally choose a scale of 0
investment in period 1, implying M" Ð< œ !Ñ œ !. Similarly, if < is sufficiently high, investment is
undesirable.

Hence, investment-demand must be a non-monotonic function of <.

More

generally, in an environment with other costs of waiting or non-learning investment, the scale of
investment is relatively low at both low < and high <, yielding a non-monotonic M" Ð<Ñ curve with
M" Ð< œ !Ñ  !.
To see why the main result does not change when scale choice is permitted, it is helpful
to consider the following alternative model of scale choice. Suppose a firm has many projects in
which it can invest, some of which have higher probabilities of success than others. The firm
must make a binary decision about each individual project but can choose the total number of
projects to take up. As the firm raises investment, it is forced to choose projects with lower
18

probabilities of success, making its profits a concave function of investment, as in the continuous
scale-choice model. Since each project decision is made independently, investment decisions are
determined exactly as in Lemma 2. Consequently, the total scale of investment by this firm,
M 0 Ð<Ñ, has the same form as equation (6), the expression for aggregate investment in the original
model where several small firms make investment decisions on different projects. Firms are
divisible, so total investment is identical if many small firms make decisions about one project
each or one big firm makes investment decisions on several projects.
Since M 0 Ð<Ñ has the same form as (6), it follows that it also has the same backwardbending shape. Put differently, the original aggregate model with extensive-margin choices at
the microeconomic level effectively contained a scale choice in the aggregate, so it already
contained the intensive-margin ("plant fewer trees") effect of increasing <. Modelling this effect
at the firm level instead of the aggregate level does not change the result.

3.2 Competition

In the stylized model, investors enjoy pure rents from their investments. While patent
and copyright protection limit competition in some cases, in practice most firms face some
degree of competition in the long run. Competition reduces the option value of delay, since rents
cannot persist indefinitely in equilibrium. Hence, it is important to investigate whether the
backward-bending result holds when the returns to investment are determined endogenously in
competitive equilibrium.
To model competition, let us return to the setting where firms with different product
concepts (e.g. different drugs to treat a specific disease) make binary investment decisions.
Firms must make a decision to invest within two periods, indexed by > œ "ß #Þ Each firm enters
period 1 with a prior probability of success of -! . There is a distribution of -! s to capture
heterogeneous expectations as in the basic model. Each firm receives an independent signal
about demand for its product at the end of period 1 which is used to update beliefs.
19

Investment in period > yields revenues in period >  ". Each firm that invests in period >
ends up with either a good product that sells for :> in period >  " or a bad product that is
worthless (sells for $0). Prices are determined by cumulative supply. Let M> denote aggregate
investment in period > and M>- denote cumulative investment up to and including period >. The
inverse-demand function for good products made in period > is given by an arbitrary downwardsloping function :ÐM>- Ñ.15 This implies that the price of the product falls over time (:1  :2 ).
To capture free entry in the long run, assume that profits are bid to zero after the first
period in which a particular product is sold. After this point, other firms can replicate the
technology, forcing the original firm to sell at cost. A firm that invests in period 1 thus has a
chance to earn positive profits in period 2 only; firms that invest in period 2 can earn positive
profits in period 3 only.

The one-period lag captures adjustment costs which prevent

competitors from bidding away infra-marginal quasi-rents (short run surplus) by selling an
identical product instantly.

Note that this model of competition parallels neoclassical

competitive production theory, where producer surplus is positive in the short run and falls to
zero in the long run. The pharmaceutical industry is a good example to keep in mind for
concreteness: First-movers can earn large profits in the short run (e.g. Aspirin until generics are
introduced), while subsequent firms with slightly different products can also earn temporary
rents (Tylenol, Advil, Motrin) until their profits are bid away by generics as well.
This setup allows us to write the expected profit from immediate investment (3) and
learning (6) for a firm with prior -! as:
Z Ð3,-! Ñ œ

-! :"
"<

Z Ð6,-! Ñ œ

:#
"
‡
"< Ö-! " ÐD ÑÐ "<

G
 GÑ  Ð"  -! Ñ!ÐD ‡ ÑÐ  GÑ×

I first establish the existence and uniqueness of equilibrium in this model. In equilibrium, all
firms with Z Ð3,-! Ñ  Z Ð6,-! Ñ at the market price vector Ð:" ß :# Ñ invest in period 1, and markets

15This

model is equivalent to one where prices depend on the supply of good products rather than total investment
because there is a monotonic link between M>- and the supply of good products, and :ÐM>- Ñ is an arbitrary function.

20

clear in each period. Investment behavior in the economy follows a pattern similar to that in the
base case.

Lemma 3

In period 1 equilibrium, there is a unique price vector Ð:" ß :# Ñ and threshold -!‡ at
which Z Ð3ß -!‡ Ñ œ Z Ð6ß -!‡ Ñ  !.
Firms with -!  -!* delay their investment decision.
Firms with -!

-!* invest in period 1.

The key point of Lemma 3 is that the marginal investor in period 1 equilibrium earns
strictly positive expected profits from immediate investment. Unlike in the neoclassical model
of competition, profits are not driven to zero at the margin in the period 1 equilibrium. To
understand this result, first consider period 2 decisions. Since there is no further option to delay,
a firm invests in period 2 if its expected return to investment at the market-clearing price exceeds
the cost of investment. Consequently, there is a threshold value - ‡" such that only firms with
updated probabilities of success - "  - ‡" invest in period 2. The marginal firm with belief - ‡"
earns zero profits in equilibrium. But the infra-marginal firms who have higher - " s earn positive
profits in expectation. These firms are able to earn short-run quasi-rents despite being in a
competitive market because they have a better technology (higher - " ) that cannot be instantly
replicated by other firms. For example, they might have access to more fertile land, a better
chemical compound, or better human capital that gives them a short-run advantage. However,
after one period passes, other firms are able to observe the technology of successful firms, and
free entry leads to zero profits.
Now turn to period 1 behavior. There is some probability that the marginal investor in
period 1 will be one of the infra-marginal investors in period 2. Hence the value of postponing
must be strictly positive for this indifferent firm. The reason that NPV is not driven to zero in
the period 1 equilibrium is again heterogeneity in success probabilities. Other firms are free to

21

enter the market and try to capture the positive rents, but they have lower probabilities of success
than the indifferent firm, and therefore opt to delay instead.
Since the option value of delaying is positive for the marginal period 1 investor in
equilibrium, changes in < continue to affect that firm's behavior via both an NPV and learning
effect, as in the basic model. The existence of these two opposing forces suggests that period 1
investment demand, M" Ð<Ñ, may be non-monotonic in competitive equilibrium.

This result

cannot be established as easily as in the baseline model because there is now a non-interest cost
to waiting, so M" Ð< œ !Ñ is no longer !.16 Even at a zero interest rate, the most confident (highest
-! ) firms will invest immediately to take advantage of the high initial price they can extract.
Nonetheless, one can obtain a simple condition under which the investment demand curve in this
model is upward-sloping at low <.

Proposition 3 Let -!‡ and -"‡ denote the success probabilities of the marginal (indifferent)
investors in periods 1 and 2, respectively. Then `M" Î`<Ð< œ !Ñ  ! if at < œ !,
-!‡ " Ð-!‡ Ñ  -"‡

(9)

This condition requires that the marginal investor in period 1 have a significantly higher success
probability than the marginal investor in period 2. Since the marginal investor in period 2 earns
zero profits in equilibrium, this condition guarantees that the marginal investor in period 1 can
gain substantial rents by delaying and investing in period 2, since he is likely to be an inframarginal investor in that period.
To understand why (9) is required intuitively, it is helpful to consider two extreme
examples. First, suppose signals are perfect, so that " Ð-!‡ Ñ œ ". In this case, the distribution of
-" is a degenerate two-point distribution, and if supply is sufficiently large, price is driven down
to :2 œ G in the second period. Since firms cannot earn any profits if they delay investment, the
option to delay is worthless. The model collapses into the conventional single-period model,
16However,

at very high <, it remains the case that investment is suboptimal for all firms, so aggregate investment
falls to zero as <p_. Hence, MÐ<Ñ must have a downward-sloping segment in the competitive model.

22

where < has only a conventional cost-of-capital (scale) effect and MÐ<Ñ is strictly downward
sloping.

Correspondingly, (9) does not hold in this case because -"‡ œ ".

This example

illustrates that the "timing effect" of < can emerge only if delaying is a "real option" that has
value in equilibrium. Condition (9) essentially guarantees that the option to delay has value.
Now consider a second example, where signals are imperfect. Suppose the demand curve
for the good product is
:> œ 0 ÐM>- Ñ  O
where O is a constant and `0 /`M>-  ! so that demand is downward-sloping. Suppose the cost
of investment is
G œ G!  "# O
In this example, O controls the variance of payoffs: High O yields higher profits in the good
state but a bigger loss in the bad state. The following result establishes that (9) holds when
payoff uncertainty is sufficiently high, implying that MÐ<Ñ is upward-sloping at low <:

Corollary to Proposition 3 For O sufficiently large, `MÎ`<Ð< œ !Ñ  !

The mechanics driving this result are straightforward. As O becomes large, the threshold for
investment in period 2 approaches -1‡ œ

"
#

because firms earn approximately the same amount in

the good state ( O# ) as they lose in the bad state. In period 1, increased uncertainty makes delay
more attractive for each firm, raising the threshold for investment -!‡ . Therefore, as the amount
of uncertainty grows larger, -!‡ and consequently " (-!‡ ) approach " while -1‡ approaches "# , so
that (9) is eventually satisfied. Intuitively, in a very risky environment, the incentive to delay
and acquire information is large, so only the most confident investors take advantage of high
equilibrium prices in period 1. However, once there is no further opportunity to learn, many
lower-capability firms are willing to take risky but positive NPV risks, creating large inframarginal rents in the second period for the marginal period 1 investor. These large rents become
less valuable when interest rates rise, compelling the marginal firm to start investing
23

immediately when < rises from < œ !, and raising aggregate investment in competitive
equilibrium.
The model of competition analyzed here is obviously quite stark, but the results can be
extended to richer settings where entry dynamics are endogenous and prices fall gradually as
competitors enter the market. The main conclusion to be drawn from this analysis is that MÐ<Ñ is
upward-sloping at small < in competitive equilibrium if firms can earn significant temporary
rents. More generally, as long as the non-interest costs of delay -- whether from competitive
forces, research costs, or other sources -- are small relative to the rents earned by the marginal
period 1 investor, MÐ<Ñ is non-monotonic. The shape of MÐ<Ñ thus depends on whether firms
actually earn temporary rents in practice and treat delaying as a valuable option. Anecdotal
evidence suggests that many successful firms do earn revenues far above costs at least in certain
industries with large fixed costs and substantial uncertainty, such as software, pharmaceuticals,
apparel, and media. More systematic evidence that firms value the option to delay at the margin
is given in section 4.

3.3 Investment Composition Decisions

We have assumed thus far that firms make a one-dimensional decision about the scale of
investment. However, in practice, firms make many choices about projects beyond scale. For
instance, they may choose technologies for construction, speed of delivery to market, etc. To see
how these "investment composition" decisions affect the shape of MÐ<Ñ, consider a model where
firms can choose between two construction methods, A and B. Method A requires the use of
expensive building materials and is fast (e.g. 1 year to build). Method B involves less real
investment but is slower (e.g. 2 years to build). At < œ !, time is costless, so the firm will use
only method B. When < is very high, time is precious, and the firm will use only method A. For
intermediate interest rates, the firm will use a combination of these two methods. Since method
A involves more real investment than method B, the composition effect, holding scale fixed,
24

makes MÐ<Ñ strictly upward sloping. As the scale effect dominates at high < -- for sufficiently
high <, it is best not to invest with any technology -- MÐ<Ñ is downward-sloping for high < when
scale is endogenous. However, composition effects lengthen the upward-sloping segment of
MÐ<Ñ and raise the investment-maximizing <‡ generated by the basic model with only learning
effects.
In the tree-cutting and planting analogy of section 2, composition choices are the kinds of
trees one plants (oak or apple).

Increases in the interest rate have three effects in this

environment: (1) Plant fewer trees; (2) Cut trees later; (3) Plant trees that mature later. Effects 2
and 3 act to make MÐ<Ñ upward-sloping at low interest rates. Generalizing the model to allow
composition choices thus reinforces the main result, and illustrates that learning is not the only
reason that firms may reduce current investment in response to an interest rate cut.

4 Evidence for Timing Effects
The upward-sloping portion of MÐ<Ñ emerges only if firms actually compare the value of
immediate investment with the discounted value of future investment when making decisions in
practice (and do not simply follow NPV rules). Hence, a natural place to start in assessing the
empirical relevance of this model of investment is to ask whether companies take into account
the option to delay investment. There is now considerable evidence supporting this hypothesis.
For example, Coy (1999) describes several examples where companies such as Airbus, HewlettPackard, Chevron, and Enron made investment decisions using an explicit real-options analysis.
Summers (1987) and Poterba and Summers (1995) surveyed Fortune 1,000 CEOs about their
business practices and found that hurdle rates for immediate investment are 2-3 times higher than
the user cost of capital. McDonald (2000) argues that the hurdle rate methods used by many
companies serve as good rules-of-thumb for real-options calculations. These studies suggest that
most firms do not simply maximize NPV, and at least implicitly value the option to wait and
acquire more information.
25

Several studies also give direct evidence that firms actively choose the time of
investment. Hellman and Puri (2000) find that the mean time-to-market for startup firms in
Silicon Valley is 2.6 years, but various factors such as sources of finance affect this time
significantly. In addition, microeconomic and macroeconomic studies have shown that firms
wait longer to invest in more uncertain environments, as the model of this paper and real options
theory predicts (e.g. Pindyck and Solimano 1993; Bulan, Mayer, and Somerville 2003).
The very fact that the value of delay is taken into account indicates that the option to
delay is not worthless at the margin in competitive equilibrium. In addition, interest rate changes
must affect the timing of investment at least for firms that explicitly compare the discounted
values of investment options. To complement this reasoning, I now describe a set of recent
studies which provide direct evidence on the timing effects of interest rate changes.
In recent work independent of this paper, Jovanovic and Rousseau (2001, 2004) construct
a model of initial public offerings (IPOs) which predicts that the time of IPO investment should
be positively related to < at low levels of the interest rate and negatively related to < at higher
levels of the interest rate.17 They use time-series variation over the 20th century in the interest
rate in the United States, and document a backward-bending relationship between < and time to
IPO, precisely as the model predicts.18
Moel and Tufano (2002) also examine the effect of time-series variation in < on
investment decisions. They study the timing of gold mine closures in North America between
1988 and 1997. Since closing a mine involves a large fixed cost, profit-maximizing firms with
the option to delay should take the discounted value of expected future cashflows into account
when making such decisions. When interest rates are high, the future matters less relative to the
17The intuition underlying the Jovanovic-Rousseau result is somewhat similar to that here, but the premises and
structure of the two models are quite different. Given their focus on the timing of IPOs in particular, their paper
does not model learning, heterogeneity across firms, and aggregation as in the model of investment here. The
papers also differ in the discussion of extensions and additional comparative statics.
18Jovanovic and Rousseau do not address the potential endogeneity of the interest rate explicitly. However, they
show that < has little effect on incumbent firms' investment in the time series. Since IPOs are a small fraction of
total investment, autonomous shocks to IPO investment are unlikely to affect <. Given that total investment is
uncorrelated with < in the time series, < can arguably be taken as exogenous to changes in IPO investment.

26

present, and the immediate costs of closing a mine are more likely to outweigh the potential
benefits. Hence, if firms take interest rates into account when timing decisions, mine closures
should be less frequent when interest rates are high. Moel and Tufano find that firms are indeed
more likely to keep mines open in periods when interest rates are high.
Capozza and Li (2001) test a model of real-estate development where interest-rate
changes have non-monotonic effects on construction for reasons related to those described
above.19 They provide cross-sectional evidence for timing effects using data on building permits
in the United States from 1981 to 1989. They first estimate the interest-elasticity of building
permits for each metropolitan area during this period. The interest-elasticities vary substantially
across metropolitan areas. The elasticities are most negative in areas in with minimal price
volatility and most positive in the most risky metropolitan areas. Hence, timing effects -- which
drive up the interest elasticity -- seem to be most important in risky environments. This finding
is consistent with the model's prediction that timing effects should be larger when firms face
uncertainty and the option to delay is very valuable (see section 5.1).
In another cross-sectional study, Hellman and Puri (2000) examine variation in the time
to market for startup firms in Silicon Valley in the 1990s. They show that firms backed by
venture capitalists, who charge a high effective rate of interest, rush their product to market
much more quickly than firms financed through other traditional means. Hellman and Puri
conduct several tests using data on ex-ante characteristics to rule out the hypothesis that this
difference in time-to-invest is a selection effect caused by differences in the types of firms that
seek VC funding vs. other sources of funding. They conclude that VC funding -- which comes
with a high interest rate -- has a causal effect on time to invest, again supporting the main timing
intuition of the present model.
19Capozza and Li study a continuous-time model with stochastic price that builds on Arnott and Lewis's (1979)
model of land development and other real options models. They show that the effect of changes in < on the speed of
investment is indeterminate in this setting. The most important difference between these papers and the present
study is that they do not show that MÐ<Ñ has a backward-bending shape. In addition, they do not model learning,
aggregate over heterogenous firms, or consider the extensions such as competition and other comparative statics
studied here.

27

5 Additional Empirical Implications
This section presents a set of testable comparative statics that could be used to test the
empirical relevance of the model for aggregate investment more systematically in future work.
These predictions are derived in the basic model of section 2 for simplicity.

5.1 Potential to Learn

I first show that an increase in < is most likely to increase investment in environments
with a high potential to learn. A formal definition of changes in the "potential to learn" is
necessary to operationalize the comparative statics analysis. Intuitively, a firm can learn more
rapidly if "signal noise" is lower, i.e. if it easier to distinguish whether D is drawn from 0 or 1.
Recall that any manager's second period decision is the outcome of a hypothesis test. We will
_
say that "signal noise" rises if the power of the test, "ÐBÑ = 'B 1ÐDÑ.D , falls while the type 1

error rate, !ÐBÑ œ 'B 0 ÐDÑ.D , rises for all cutoff values B below the point at which 0 and 1 are
_

indistinguishable. Formally, let =Ð0 ß 1Ñ denote the level of signal noise with densities 0 and 1 ,
and Bw the unique point at which

1ÐBw Ñ
0 ÐBw Ñ

œ ". Then

=Ð01 ß 11 Ñ  =Ð02 ß 12 Ñ if "# ÐBÑ  "" ÐBÑ and !" ÐBÑ  !# ÐBÑ aB  min(Bw" ß Bw#Ñ
where Bw4 is s.t.

1ÐBw4 Ñ
0 ÐBw4 Ñ

Ð10Ñ

œ ". Note that this definition is an incomplete ordering since it does not

rank all distributions in terms of signal noise. A leading example of an increase in signal noise
according to this definition is a rightward shift of 1ÐDÑ or a leftward shift of 0 ÐDÑ in Figure 1.
Before turning to the relationship between signal noise and
establish the connection between signal noise and the level of M itself.

Lemma 4 An increase in signal noise increases current investment

28

`M
`< ,

it is useful to first

=Ð01 ß 11 Ñ  =Ð02 ß 12 Ñ Ê MÐ01 ß 11 Ñ  MÐ02 ß 12 Ñ

When signal noise rises, a firm's ability to learn about the true value of . by waiting is
reduced. This reduces the value of delaying investment, making aggregate investment rise.
Cukierman (1980) gives an analogous result: Increases in the variance of earnings reduce current
investment by raising the value of delay.
How does an increase in signal noise affect the shape of MÐ<Ñ? To build intuition,
consider the extreme case of totally uninformative signals (0 œ 1). In this case, the model
collapses into the neoclassical model and the MÐ<Ñ curve is downward-sloping, i.e. <‡ œ !. This
observation suggests that the potential to learn should be positively associated with <‡ ; that is,
the upward-sloping segment of the investment-demand curve should be larger in industries or
times where there is more to be learned. The following proposition establishes that this is indeed
the case provided that the payoff in the bad state is sufficiently low, or, equivalently, the
variance of returns is sufficiently high relative to the expected return.

Proposition 4 bV!  ! s.t. if V!  V! , a reduction in signal noise raises <‡ :
=Ð0# ß 1# Ñ  =Ð0" ß 1" Ñ Ê <#‡  <"‡

To see the intuition for this result, observe that changes in signal noise affect only Z Ð6Ñ,
leaving Z Ð3Ñ unaffected for each firm. An increase in < is more likely to raise aggregate
investment if it tends to reduce Z Ð6Ñ more than Z Ð3Ñ, making immediate investment preferable,
for a given set of parameters. When signal uncertainty is lowered, Z Ð6Ñ changes in two ways.
First, firms have a higher probability of investing in the good state in period 2 (" rises). Second,
firms have a lower probability of investing in the bad state (! falls). The first effect makes
expected period 2 profits more sensitive to the interest rate, since there is a higher probability of
earning revenues in the good state. The second effect goes in the opposite direction, since there
is a lower probability of earning revenues in the bad state. If V! is small, the second effect is
29

small in magnitude relative to the first, so Z Ð6Ñ is more sensitive to < overall. For instance when
V! œ !, an increase in < has no effect at all on revenues in the bad state. Therefore, provided
that V! is small, an increase in < is more likely to reduce Z Ð6Ñ relative to Z Ð3Ñ for each firm and

0.4

0.4

thereby raise aggregate investment when signal uncertainty is lower.

0.3
0.0

0.0

0.1

0.1

I(r)

40

0

60

10

I(r)

15

20

25

µ0 = 10
µ1 = 25

0

2

4

6
I(r)

8

10

0.0

0.1

0.1

r
0.2

0.3

0.3

µ0 = 10
µ1 = 20

r
0.2

5

0.4

20

0.4

0

0.0

µ0 = 10
µ1 = 15

r
0.2

r
0.2

0.3

µ0 = 10
µ1 = 10

12

0

2

4

I(r)

6

8

10

FIGURE 4. SIGNAL NOISE AND THE SHAPE OF MÐ<Ñ
This figure shows MÐ<Ñ for four pairs of signal distributions 0 and 1Þ
The distributions are Normal with a mean of .! for 0 and ." for 1 and
a standard deviation of 16. As ."  .! rises, signal uncertainty falls.

The low V! condition on the result requires that the variance of earnings be high relative
to the mean profit rate, which is essentially a requirement that good information about the state
of the world is valuable. The variance of profits is typically quite high in practice: Investments
usually either have very large payoffs or are complete failures. Hence, the important empirical
implication is that interest rate increases are more likely to stimulate investment in industries or
times where the potential to learn is greater, as shown in Figure 4.

5.2 Short Run vs. Long Run

30

I now turn to the effects of changes in < on total investment over a longer horizon, taking
into account changes in investment behavior beyond the current period. In this case, it is
necessary to consider the more general X period formulation of the model instead of the two
period special case discussed above. In this more general model, the firm has the option to delay
investment in every period from 1 to X  ".20 As noted earlier, the preceding results apply
when X  # as well. In the X period model, total investment from period 1 to > is
M"ß> œ "M= œ ( G . (Ð-! Ñ  "(
>

=œ"

>

"

-!*

=œ# !

-!*

T" ÐM= l-! ÑG . (Ð-! Ñ

Ð11Ñ

where T" ÐM= l-! Ñ is the probability that a firm with prior -! ends up investing in period =. The
next proposition analyzes the relationship between M"ß> and <.

Proposition 5
(i) M",> Ð<Ñ is a backward-bending function of < a>  X :
‡
‡
<"ß>
´ +<17+B< M"ß> Ð<Ñ  ! and < 
 <"ß> Ê

`M"ß> 
`<  !

(ii) The upward sloping portion of the M",> Ð<Ñ curve becomes smaller at > rises:
<"‡,>  <"‡,t+1

The first part of the proposition is driven by the same two effects that make the response
of investment demand in period 1 to a change in < non-monotonic. For any >  X , a decrease in
< creates two opposing forces: first, the cost of capital falls, compelling more entrepreneurs to
invest at any given time; second, the cost of waiting falls, encouraging investors to wait until
they are more certain that they will make money. The waiting effect reduces total investment
between periods 1 and > by causing investors to postpone investment beyond >. As explained
above, the waiting effect dominates when the interest rate is very low and the cost of capital
effect dominates when the interest rate is higher, resulting in a backward bending curve. One
20See

Lemma 1 in the appendix for details of the X period model.

31

way of seeing why the backward-bending result emerges here as well is to observe that if < œ 0,
all the firms will postpone their decision until X and M",> Ð< œ 0Ñ œ 0; but if <  !, some firms
will find it optimal to invest.
The second part of the proposition arises from the fact that the learning effect has a
smaller impact on the interest elasticity of investment demand over longer horizons. The growth
in profits from delay diminishes over time because the marginal return to information falls as
more knowledge is accumulated.

When < is lowered, less confident investors may delay

investment for a few periods to acquire information. But some of these firms will eventually
decide to invest, since there is still a non-zero cost to delay and the potential benefits for further
information have fallen. A reduction in < thus leads to temporary delays via the learning effect,
making investment fall more in the short run relative to the long run. The conventional cost of
capital effect therefore starts to dominate at lower levels of < in the long run, and the investment‡
maximizing <"ß>
falls.21

The important implication of this result is that the long run elasticity of investment
demand is more negative than the short run elasticity of investment demand when firms learn
over time. If the near-zero existing estimates of the short-run interest elasticity of investment
demand are due to learning effects, interest rate reductions from policies that stimulate savings
could nonetheless increase investment over a longer horizon.22

5.3 Average Profit Rates

In the neoclassical model, a higher interest rate increases the average rate of return of
investments that are undertaken by driving out low-NPV ventures. This result also breaks down
when firms learn over time, providing another ancillary test of the learning model.

21Unlike learning effects, which die away in the long run as firms acquire perfect information, composition effects
may never subside. Hence, when composition effects are permitted, the long-run investment demand curve may
continue to exhibit a substantial upward-sloping segment.
22Interestingly, Caballero (1994) and Caballero, Engel, and Haltiwanger (1995) find that a higher cost of capital
reduces investment much more in the long run than the short run in the U.S.

32

To analyze the average rate of return, we must identify the level of ex-post profitable
(.=1) and ex-post unprofitable (.=0) investment by specifying how frequently a project that a
manager expects to succeed with probability -! actually does succeed. A natural benchmark is
rational expectations: T-! Ò. œ "Ó œ -! Þ

In this case, the average (net) profit rate among

investments that are undertaken in period 1 is given by:
3Ð<Ñ œ

'-"* -! ÐV"  GÑ  Ð"  -! ÑÐV!  GÑÑ. (Ð-! Ñ
!

' "* G. (Ð-! Ñ

Ð12Ñ

-!

Proposition 6 The average profit rate 3 is a backward-bending function of the interest rate:
‡
<
< Ê

`3 
`<  !

As established in Proposition 1, when <  <‡ , an increase in the interest rate draws the marginal
investor with prior -!‡ Ð<Ñ into the period 1 pool of investors. This firm has the lowest probability
of success among the set of firms who are investing. Consequently, it pulls down the average
rate of return in the overall pool. Conversely, when <  <‡ , an increase in < eliminates the
marginal investor with prior -!‡ Ð<Ñ, who has the lowest probability of success in the pool of
investors, increasing the average rate of return.
The average observed profit rate on current investment is thus a backward-bending
function of <. Building on earlier results, an increase in the interest rate is more likely to lower
the average observed rate of return when the potential to learn is greater and in the short run
relative to the long run.

5.4 Temporary Interest Rate Changes

The results above relate to permanent changes in the interest rate. Variation in the
"permanent" interest rate can only be obtained cross-sectionally, e.g. by comparing across

33

countries, or using low-frequency variation in the time series, as in Jovanovic and Rousseau
(2004). In this section, I discuss a few comparative statics for temporary changes in the interest
rate that may be easier to test. Proofs (available by request) are omitted since these results are
simple extensions of the preceding propositions.
First consider the effect of a temporary unanticipated temporary increase in the interest
rate. Let <"> denote the per-period interest rate between periods " and >  X . An unanticipated
increase in <"> (holding fixed < in all other periods) is more likely to reduce current investment
than a permanent increase in < because one can take advantage of lower future costs of capital by
delaying investment. If the potential to learn is sufficiently high, MÐ<"> ) is backward-bending,
with a smaller upward-sloping segment than MÐ<Ñ. When the potential to learn is low, MÐ<"> Ñ is
strictly downward-sloping. The longer the duration of an interest rate change, the less the
incentive to postpone investment following a temporary increase, and the larger the range of
parameters over which MÐ<"> Ñ is upward-sloping.
Now consider the effect of a temporary anticipated change in the interest rate that begins
in period =  " and lasts until period >  =. An anticipated increase in <=> is more likely to raise
current investment than a permanent change in < because one can take advantage of lower
current costs of capital by investing immediately. In fact, if the change is anticipated sufficiently
far in advance, current investment may be a strictly upward-sloping function of <=> . In contrast,
future investment falls when <=> rises because of the intertemporal substitution.
Together, these results indicate that the shape of the yield curve on bonds should have a
significant effect on current and future investment patterns. The yield curve embodies investors'
expectations of current and future interest rates. When the yield curve becomes steeper, current
investment should rise relative to subsequent investment. Hence, variations in the shape of the
yield curve -- especially when coupled with cross-industry variation in learning potential -- can
provide powerful tests of model beyond the basic backward-bending MÐ<Ñ result.
A final set of predictions relates to the effect of tax changes. In the neoclassical model,
taxes matter only through the user cost of capital. In the present model, both the user cost and
34

the discount rate matter, and tax policies may affect these two quantities differently. For
example, accelerated depreciation provisions change the user cost but need not change the
discount rate (there is no additional incentive to delay from accelerated depreciation itself).
Hence, they should unambiguously raise investment.23 In contrast, changes in the tax treatment
of capital income can affect equilibrium interest rates, thereby changing the discount rate and
user cost simultaneously.
responses.

Hence, these changes could generate non-monotonic investment

A more thorough examination of the relationship between tax policies and

investment behavior is left to future work.

6 Conclusion
One of the central questions for tax and monetary policy makers is, "How will a policy
change that increases interest rates affect real investment?"

This paper has explored this

question in an environment where firms making irreversible investments learn over time. In this
setting, real investment is a backward-bending function of the interest rate. At low interest rates,
an increase in < raises the cost of learning and increases investment by enlarging the set of
projects for which the interest rate exceeds the rate of return to delay.
Empirical studies of firm behavior have found that interest rate changes cause some firms
to change the timing of investments as the model predicts. However, additional tests of the
model's auxiliary predictions are needed to determine whether it can help explain why empirical
estimates of the short-run interest elasticity of aggregate investment demand are so low. Testing
whether temporary and permanent interest rates changes affect the timing of investment in
sectors with a high potential to learn may be a promising direction for future work.

23This

point is empirically relevant because the clearest evidence that the cost of capital affects investment behavior
comes from tax reforms (e.g. Cummins, Hassett, and Hubbard (1994)). Most of the reforms are changes in
depreciation allowances and investment tax credits, which arguably do not change the cost of delay.

35

References
Alchian, Armen, "Costs and Outputs," in The Allocation of Economic Resources, edited by
Moses Abramotvitz (1959).
Arnott, R. and F. Lewis, 1979, "The Transition of Land to Urban Use," Journal of Political
Economy 87, 161-169.
Bertola, G. and R.J. Caballero, 1994. "Irreversibility and Aggregate Investment." Review of
Economic Studies 61(2): 223-246.
Blanchard, O., 1986. "Investment, output, and the cost of capital: a comment",
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1986(1): 153-158.
Bulan, L., C. Mayer, and T. Somerville., 2004. “Irreversible Investment, Real Options, and
Competition: Evidence From Real Estate Development,” Columbia Univ. mimeo.
Caballero, R.J., 1994. "Small sample bias and adjustment costs", Review of Economics
and Statistics 76(1): 52-58.
Caballero, R.J., E. Engel and J. Haltiwanger, 1995. "Plant-level adjustment and
aggregate investment dynamics", Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1995(2): 1-54.
Caballero, R. J., 1999. "Aggregate investment" in Handbook of Macroeconomics, Vol. 1B, eds.
Taylor, J. P. and Woodford, M., 813–862, Elsevier.
Capozza, D. and Y. Li, 2001 "Residential Investment and Interest Rates: An Empirical Test of
Development as a Real Options,” Real Estate Economics 29:3.
Chetty, R., 2000. "Interest Rates, Learning, and Business Investment Under Uncertainty" UCBerkeley mimeo.
Chirinko, R., 1993a. "Business Fixed Investment Spending: A Critical Survey of Modelling
Strategies, Empirical Results, and Policy Implications." Journal of Economic Literature 31:
1875-1911.
Chirinko, R., 1993b. Econometric Models and Empirical Findings for Business Investment.
New York: Basil Blackwell.
Coy, P. "Exploiting Uncertainty," Business Week, June 7, 1999
Cukierman, A., 1980. "The Effects of Uncertainty on Investment Under Risk Neutrality with
Endogenous Information." Journal of Political Economy 88(3): 462-275.

36

Cummins, J., K. Hassett, and G. Hubbard, 1994, "A Reconsideration of Investment Behavior
Using Tax Reforms as Natural Experiments," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Vol. 2, 174.
Demers, M., 1991. "Investment under uncertainty, irreversibility and the arrival of information
over time." Review of Economic Studies 58, 333–350.
Dixit, A. and Pindyck, R. 1994. Investment Under Uncertainty. Princeton: Princeton Univ.
Press.
Doms, M., and T. Dunne, 1993. "An investigation into capital and labor adjustment at
the plant level." Center for Economic Studies, Census Bureau mimeograph.
Eisner, R. and Nadiri, R. I. 1968. "Investment behavior and neoclassical theory." Review
of Economics and Statistics 50:369-82.
Feldstein, M.S. and Flemming, J.S. 1971. "Tax policy, corporate saving, and investment
behaviour in Britain." Review of Economic Studies 38:415-434
Goolsbee, A. and D. Gross, 1997. "Estimating Adjustment Costs with Data on Heterogeneous
Capital Goods." NBER Working Paper 6342.
Haavelmo, T., 1960 A Study in the Theory of Investment, Chicago: Chicago University Press.
Hassett, K. and G. Hubbard, 2002, "Tax Policy and Business Investment," in Handbook of
Public Economics Vol. 3, edited by A. Auerbach and M. Feldstein. Elsevier.
Hellman, T. and M. Puri, “The interaction between product market and financing strategy: The
role of venture capital,” Review of Financial Studies, 2000, 13(4), 959-984.
Jorgenson, D. 1963. "Capital Theory and Investment Behavior." American Economic Review
53(2), 247-259.
Jovanovic, B. and P. Rousseau, 2001. "Why Wait? A Century of Life before IPO." American
Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 91, no. 2, May 2001, pp 336-341.
Jovanovic, B. and P. Rousseau, 2004. "Interest Rates and Initial Public Offerings." NBER
Working Paper 10298.
Pindyck R.S. and A. Solimano. Economic Instability and Aggregate Investment. NBER
Macroeconomics Annual. 8, 1993, 259-303.
Poterba, James M. and Lawrence H. Summers, "A CEO Survey of U.S. Companies' Time
Horizons and Hurdle Rates," Sloan Management Review, Fall 1995, Vol. 37 No. 1, pp. 43–53.

37

Marglin, S., 1967. Public investment criteria; benefit-cost analysis for planned economic
growth. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Marglin, S., 1970. "Investment and Interest: A Reformulation and Extension of Keynesian
Theory" The Economic Journal 80(320), 910-931.
McDonald, R., 2000. "Real Options and Rules of Thumb in Capital Budgeting" in M. J. Brennan
and L. Trigeorgis (eds.), Project Flexibility, Agency, and Competition. London: Oxford
University Press.
McDonald, R. and D. Siegel, 1986. "The Value of Waiting to Invest." Quarterly Journal of
Economics 101(4), 707-728.
Moel, A. and P. Tufano, 2002. "When are real options exercised? An empirical study of mine
closings," Review of Financial Studies 15, 35-64.
Pindyck, R., 1988. "Irreversible Investment, Capacity Choice, and the Value of the Firm,"
American Economic Review 78 (5) 969-985.
Pindyck, R. 1991. "Irreversibility, Uncertainty, and Investment." Journal of Economic
Literature XXIX:1110-1148
Summers, L. H., 1987. "Investment Incentives and the Discounting of Depreciation
Allowances," in M. Feldstein (ed.), The Effects of Taxation on Capital Accumulation. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
Stiglitz, J. and A. Weiss, 1981, "Credit Rationing in Markets with Imperfect Information",
American Economic Review.

38

Appendix A: Proofs for Basic Model
All proofs below apply for the general model with arbitrary decision horizon X . The
corresponding results discussed in the text are for the X œ # case, unless otherwise noted.
Proofs for section 3 (Extensions) are given in a separate appendix. Note that ->" denotes the
firm's prior in period >.
Lemma 1

In period X , the firm invests iff DX "  DX‡ " where DX‡ " satisfies
1ÐDX‡ Ñ
0 ÐDX‡ Ñ

œ

"-X " 1X Ð!Ñ
-X " 1X Ð"Ñ

In any period >  X , the firm invests iff Z> Ð3Ñ  Z> Ð6Ñ.
Z> Ð3Ñ œ ->" 1> Ð"Ñ  Ð"  ->" Ñ1> Ð!Ñ

Z> Ð6Ñ œ ! ->" T> ÐM= l. œ "Ñ1= Ð"Ñ  Ð"  ->" ÑT> ÐM= l. œ !Ñ1= Ð!Ñ
X

=œ>"

where

->
"->

œ

-! 1ÐD" ßÞÞÞßD> Ñ
"-! 0 ÐD" ßÞÞÞßD> Ñ

œ

-! 1ÐD" Ñâ1ÐD> Ñ
"-! 0 ÐD" Ñâ0 ÐD> Ñ

a>  !: D>‡ ÐD" ß ÞÞÞ,D>" Ñ is uniquely defined by V> Ð3ß D>‡ ß ->" Ñ œ V> Ð6ß D>‡ ß ->" Ñ,
T> ÐM>" l. œ "Ñ œ 'D ‡ 1ÐD> Ñ.D> , T> ÐM>" l. œ !Ñ œ 'D ‡ 0 ÐD> Ñ.D>
_

_

>

>

a= − {>  2ß ..., X }:

> ' >"
' =# '
T> ÐM= l. œ "Ñ œ '_
_ â _ D ‡ 1ÐD=" Ñ.D1ÐD=# Ñ.Dâ1ÐD>" Ñ.D1ÐD > Ñ.D

D‡

D‡

D‡

_

D>‡
D>‡"
D=‡# _
'_
'_
'D ‡ 0 ÐD=" Ñ.D0 ÐD=# Ñ.Dâ0 ÐD>" Ñ.D0 ÐD> Ñ.D
â'_
="
="

T> ÐM= l. œ !Ñ œ

Proof
First,

->
"->

œ

-! 1ÐD" ßÞÞÞßD> Ñ
"-! 0 ÐD" ßÞÞÞßD> Ñ

œ

-! 1ÐD" Ñâ1ÐD> Ñ
"-! 0 ÐD" Ñâ0 ÐD> Ñ

follows from Bayes rule and D> ¼ D= for > Á =.

We begin by analyzing behavior in period X . In period X , the payoff to investing ZX Ð3Ñ is
computed using the updated belief -X ÐDÑ about the probability with which . œ " occurs. The
firm invests iff ZX Ð3Ñ  !, where
ZX Ð3Ñ œ Ð"  -1 ÐDÑÑ1# Ð!Ñ  -1 ÐDÑ1# Ð"Ñ
So the firm invests iff

-X ÐDÑ
"-X ÐDÑ



1X Ð!Ñ
1X Ð"Ñ

39

By Bayesian updating, if a signal D is observed at the end of period X  ",
-X ÐDÑ
"-X ÐDÑ

Since

1ÐDÑ
0 ÐDÑ

œ

-X "
"-X "

‚

1ÐDÑ
0 ÐDÑ

Ê -X ÐDÑ œ

-X " 1ÐDÑ
-X " 1ÐDÑÐ"-X " Ñ0 ÐDÑ

is monotonically increasing, the period X decision rule is:

Invest if DX "  DX‡ " , where DX‡ " is defined by

1ÐDX‡ " Ñ
0 ÐDX‡ " Ñ

œ

"-XH" 1X Ð!Ñ
-XH" 1X Ð"Ñ

The remainder of the proof is done by backward induction starting with period X  ", where the
investor is faced with a 2 period decision problem. We first show that the ZX " functions have
the form claimed above. In period X  ", there are 2 possible actions: 3 and 6. ZX " Ð3Ñ is
computed by taking an expectation over the 1X " function:
ZX " Ð3Ñ œ -! 1X " Ð"Ñ  Ð"  -! Ñ1X " Ð!Ñ
To compute ZX " Ð6Ñ, integrate the expected payoff in period X over the prior density of D . The
payoff in period X depends upon the action taken in period X ß which follows the decision rule
derived above:

_
D
_
ZX " Ð6Ñ œ '_ Q +BÐZX Ð." Ñß ZX Ð3ÑÑ.7ÐDÑ œ '_ ZX Ð." Ñ  'D ‡ ZX Ð3ÑÑ.7ÐDÑ
‡

where .7ÐDÑ œ -! 1ÐDÑ  Ð"  -! Ñ0 ÐDÑ is the unconditional density on D .

Ê ZX " Ð6Ñ œ -! 1X Ð"Ñ'D ‡

_
XH "

1ÐDÑ.D  Ð"  -! Ñ1X Ð!Ñ'D ‡

_
XH "

0 ÐDÑ.D×

We also need to show that the firm follows a threshold rule for investment in period X  ":
b unique DX‡ # ÐD" ß ÞÞÞ,DX $ Ñ defined by VX " Ð3ß DX‡ # ß -X $ Ñ œ VX " Ð6ß DX‡ # ß -X $ Ñ s.t. that
investing is optimal iff DX #  DX‡ # .
It is sufficient to show that b unique -X‡ # s.t. VX " Ð3ß -X‡ # Ñ œ VX " Ð6ß -X‡ # Ñ and that
-X #  -X‡ # makes investing optimal because by monotonicity of the likelihood ratio, this
implies that there is a unique DX‡ # that satisfies the given expression, conditional on -X $ .
To see that there is a unique -X # : rewrite
ZX " Ð3Ñ œ -X # ,  Ð"  -X # Ñ+
ZX " Ð6Ñ œ -X # ,w  Ð"  -X # Ñ+w
where , œ 1X " Ð"Ñ ,w œ TX " ÐMX l. œ "Ñ1X Ð"Ñ

40

+ œ 1X " Ð!Ñ +w œ TX " ÐMX l. œ !Ñ1X Ð!Ñ
Now, ZX " Ð6ß -X " œ !Ñ œ !  ZX " Ð3ß -X " œ !Ñ
By assumption, b-X " s.t. ZX " Ð6ß -X " Ñ Ÿ ZX " Ð3ß -X " Ñ
By the Intermediate Value Theorem (IVT), b-X‡ # s.t. VX " Ð3ß -X‡ # Ñ œ VX " Ð6ß -X‡ # Ñ
`ZX " Ð6Ñ
` -X #

 ! Ê VX " Ð6ß -X‡ # Ñ  !

` {ZX " Ð3ÑZX " Ð6Ñ×
l-X‡ #
` -X #

œ ,  +  +w  ,  !

because V= Ð3ß -X‡ # Ñ œ V= Ð6ß -X‡ # Ñ Í
-X‡ # ,  Ð"  -X‡ # Ñ+ œ -X‡ # , w  Ð"  -X‡ # Ñ+w  !
Therefore, at any -X‡ # , we must have

` {ZX " Ð3ÑZX " Ð6Ñ×
l-X‡ #
` -X #

 ! Ê -X‡ # is unique.

Hence ZX " Ð3, -X # Ñ  ZX " Ð6, -X # Ñ iff -X #  -X‡ # .
Having characterized behavior in period X  ", we proceed to the general step:
Given that Z>" (-) has the form claimed, we will prove that Z> (-) also has the same form.
First, clearly Z> Ð3Ñ œ ->" 1> Ð"Ñ  Ð"  ->" Ñ1> Ð!Ñ.
The expected payoff to learning, Z> Ð6Ñ, is computed by recognizing that one will maximize
profits in the next period. By the inductive assumption, the firm will invest in period >  " iff
D>  D>‡ , where D>‡ has already been computed.

Z> Ð6Ñ œ 'D ‡ Ò-> 1>" Ð"Ñ  Ð"  -> Ñ1>" Ð!ÑÓÒ->" 1ÐD> Ñ  Ð"  ->" Ñ0 ÐD> ÑÓ.D> 
_

D>‡
'_
Z>" Ð6ß -> ÑÒ->" 1ÐD> Ñ  Ð"  ->" Ñ0 ÐD> ÑÓ.D>
_
_
->" 'D ‡ 1ÐD> Ñ.D> 1>" Ð"Ñ  Ð"  ->" Ñ'D ‡ 0 ÐD> Ñ.D> 1>" Ð!Ñ
>
>
X
‡
D
>
T>" ÐM= l. œ "Ñ1ÐD> Ñ.D 
->" ! 1= Ð"Ñ'_
=œ>#
X
D>‡
Ð"  ->" Ñ ! 1= Ð!Ñ'_
T>" ÐM= l. œ !Ñ0 ÐD> Ñ.D
=œ>#
>

œ



œ ->" T> ÐM>" l. œ "Ñ1>" Ð"Ñ  Ð"  ->" ÑT> ÐM>" l. œ !Ñ1>" Ð!Ñ 
! ->" T> ÐM= l. œ "Ñ1= Ð"Ñ  Ð"  ->" ÑT> ÐM= l. œ !Ñ1= Ð!Ñ
X

=œ>#

¾ Z> Ð6Ñ œ ! ->" T> ÐM= l. œ "Ñ1= Ð"Ñ  Ð"  ->" ÑT> ÐM= l. œ !Ñ1= Ð!Ñ
X

=œ>"

41

Finally, to complete the induction, we need to show that b unique D>‡"

s.t.

V>" Ð3ß D>‡" ß -># Ñ œ Vs Ð6ß D>‡" ß -># Ñ and that if D>"  D>‡" the investor will find it optimal to
invest in period >.

Again, it is sufficient to show that b unique ->‡"

s.t.

VX " Ð3ß ->‡" Ñ œ VX " Ð6ß ->‡" Ñ and that ->"  ->‡" Í Invest.
As the proof is virtually identical to that above, we are brief:
Z> Ð6ß ->" œ !Ñ œ !  Z> Ð3ß ->" œ !Ñ
`Z> Ð6Ñ
` ->"

 ! Ê V> Ð6ß ->‡" Ñ  !

Continuity + IVT Ê ->‡" exists
` {Z> Ð3ÑZ> Ð6Ñ×
l->‡"
` ->"

œ ,  +  +w  ,  ! follows from using the condition that defines ->‡"
,w œ ! T> ÐM= l. œ "Ñ1= Ð"Ñ
X

where , œ 1> Ð"Ñ

=œ>"
X

+w œ ! T> ÐM= l. œ !Ñ1= Ð!Ñ

+ œ 1> Ð!Ñ

=œ>"

The combination of arguments above implies that ->‡" and consequently D>‡" are unique. QED.

Lemma 2

There is a unique -!‡ at which the value of investing equals that of postponing.
In period 1, firms with -!  -!* postpone their investment decision.
Firms with -!

-!* invest in period 1.

Proof
The proof follows directly from the second step of Lemma 1. It was shown that in any period >,
b unique ->‡" s.t. V> Ð3ß ->‡" Ñ œ V> Ð6ß ->‡" Ñ and that ->"  ->‡" Í Invest.
Applying this result to > œ " gives the result.

Lemma 4 An increase in signal noise increases current investment
=Ð01 ß 11 Ñ  =Ð02 ß 12 Ñ Ê MÐ01 ß 11 Ñ  MÐ02 ß 12 Ñ
Proof
Take any Ð01 ß 11 Ñ, Ð02 ß 12 Ñ s.t. =Ð01 ß 11 Ñ  =Ð02 ß 12 Ñ.
For the firm with -!w œ -!‡ Ð01 ß 11 Ñ,
42

Z1 Ð6Ñ œ ! -0 T1 ÐM= l. œ "Ñ1= Ð"Ñ  Ð"  -0 ÑT1 ÐM= l. œ !Ñ1= Ð!Ñ
X

= œ2

V!
V"
Z Ð3ß -!w Ñ œ -!w Ö "<
 G×  Ð"  -!w Ñ{ "<
 G×

The shift from Ð01 ß 11 Ñ to Ð0# ß 1# Ñ only affects Z Ð6ß -!w Ñ. It follows from the definition of a
reduction in signal noise that for any =, T1 ÐM= l. œ "Ñ is higher under Ð02 ß 12 Ñ than under Ð01 ß 11 Ñ,
while T1 ÐM= l. œ !Ñ is lower. Hence,
Z Ð6ß -!w ;02 ß 12 Ñ  Z Ð6ß -!w ;01 ß 11 Ñ œ Z Ð3ß -!w Ñ
By Lemma 2, it follows that -!‡ Ð02 ß 12 Ñ  -!w œ -!‡ Ð01 ß 11 Ñ. As

`M
` -!‡

 !, the result is established.

Proposition 1 Investment demand is a backward-bending function of the interest rate.
(i) MÐ< œ !Ñ œ ! and lim `` Ir Ð<Ñ œ  _
<Ä!

‡
(ii) <‡ ´ +<17+B< MÐ<Ñ  ! and < 
< Ê

`M 
`<  !

Proof
(i) Recall
Z Ð3Ñ œ -! 1" Ð"Ñ  Ð"  -! Ñ1" Ð!Ñ

Z Ð6Ñ œ ! -! T" ÐM= l. œ "Ñ1= Ð"Ñ  Ð"  -! ÑT" ÐM= l. œ !Ñ1= Ð!Ñ
X

=œ2

where 1> Ð.Ñ œ

V.
("<)>



G
("<)>"

Suppose < œ !Þ Then
Z Ð3Ñ œ -! {V"  G }  Ð"  -! ÑÐV!  GÑ

Z " Ð6ß -! Ñ œ -! {V"  G }! T" ÐM> l. œ "Ñ  Ð"  -! Ñ{V!  G } T" ÐM> l. œ !Ñ
X

X

>œ#

>œ#

Now, for -! œ "ß the definitions in Lemma 2 imply that D>‡ œ _ for >  X and DX‡ œ _
Ê ! T" ÐM> l. œ "Ñ œ "
X

>œ#

-! œ " Ê Z Ð3,-! Ñ œ Ð1"  $ Ñ œ Z Ð6ß -! Ñ Ê -!‡ œ "
¾ MÐ< œ !Ñ œ '" GÐ-!3 Ñ . (Ð-!3 Ñ œ !
"

43

To establish that lim `` Ir Ð<Ñ œ  _, note first that
<Ä!

`I
`r

By the IFT,
Ê

` -!‡
`<

œ

` -!‡
`<

œ

`I
` -!‡

`<` Z Ð6,-! ÑÎ`<
¸
œ  ` Z` ZÐ3,Ð-3,!-ÑÎ! ÑÎ
` -! `ÐZ Ð6,-! ÑÎ` -! -‡

‚

` -!‡
`< .

!

R Ð<Ñ
HÐ<Ñ

After some algebra, it can be shown that R Ð< œ !Ñ œ G  V"  ! and HÐ<Ñ  ! a<  !.
Since HÐ< œ !Ñ œ ! and

`I
` -!‡

œ --!‡ . (Ð-!‡ Ñ  ! it follows that lim `` Ir Ð<Ñ œ  _
<Ä!

(ii) Note that G  V" Ê b<w s.t.
Then <

V"
"<w

œG

<w Ê Z Ð3ß -! Ñ  ! a-! Ÿ " Ê -!‡ Ð<Ñ œ " Ê MÐ<Ñ œ !.
w

MÐ<Ñ is continuous because it is a composition of continuous functions. Since MÐ!Ñ œ MÐ< Ñ œ !
and Ò!ß <w Ó is compactß MÐ<Ñ has an interior maximum <‡ − Ð!ß <w Ñ.

To prove uniqueness of <‡ , recall
M continuous and

`I
`r

œ

` Z Ð3,-! Ñ` Z Ð6,-! Ñ
Ð-!‡ Ñ
` -!

`I
` -!‡

‚

` -!‡
` I ` Z Ð6,-! ÑÎ`<` Z Ð3,-! ÑÎ`<
`< = ` -!‡ ` Z Ð3,-! ÑÎ` -! `ÐZ Ð6,-! ÑÎ` -!

 ! a<  ! Ê R Ð<Ñ ´

` Z Ð6Ñ` Z Ð3Ñ
`<

œ ! at any critical <.

A sufficient condition for <‡ to be unique is that R Ð<Ñ has a unique root. We will establish this
by showing that R Ð<Ñ œ ! Ê

Since

` Z Ð6Ñ` Z Ð3Ñ ‡
Ð< Ñ
`<

`R
`< Ð<Ñ

 !.

œ ! and Z Ð6,-!‡ Ð<‡ ÑÑ œ Z Ð3,-!‡ Ð<‡ ÑÑ,

`R
‡ ‡ ‡
`< Ð< ,-! Ð< ÑÑ

` Z Ð3Ñ
œ `Ò ` Z Ð6Ñ
ÓÎ`< œ
`<

Ð"<ÑÐ` Z Ð6Ñ` Z Ð3ÑÑ
"
ÓÎ`<
"<‡ `Ò
`<

œ

"
"<‡ `ÒQ Ð<ÑÓÎ`<

`ÐÐ"<ÑZ Ð6Ñ`ÐÐ"<ÑZ Ð3ÑÑ
`<
X
X
œ1Ñ
" ÐM> l.œ!Ñ
! T" ÐM> l.>"
and ! ´ ! TÐ"<Ñ
>1
Ð"<Ñ
>œ#
>œ#

where Q Ð<Ñ œ
Let " ´

By definition,

` -!‡ ‡
`< Ð< Ñ

œ !, so we can take -!‡ as fixed when differentiating w.r.t. <:

V"
V0
Q Ð<Ñ œ `Ð-! " ÐD ‡ ÑÐ "<
 G×  Ð"  -! Ñ!ÐD ‡ ÑÖ "<
 C×ÑÑÎ`<

 Ð-! ÐV"  GÐ"  <ÑÑ  Ð"  -! ÑÐV!  GÐ"  <ÑÑÑÎ`<
V!
V"
‡
œ  -! " ÐD ‡ Ñ Ð"<Ñ
2  Ð"  -! Ñ!ÐD Ñ Ð"<Ñ2  G

Now differentiate Q Ð<Ñ to obtain the second derivative:
#V"
‡ #V!
`ÒQ Ð<ÑÓÎ`< œ -! " ÐD ‡ Ñ Ð"<Ñ
$  Ð"  -! Ñ!ÐD Ñ Ð"<Ñ$ 

44

` " V"
`< Ð"<Ñ2



` ! V!
`< Ð"<Ñ2

`! ‡
`< Ð< Ñ

To sign this expression, note that

 ! and

`" ‡
`< Ð< Ñ<0.

This is easiest to see when X œ #, where
`"
`<

œ 

`D ‡
‡
`< 1ÐD Ñ

`D ‡
`<

 ! follows from

Ê

`!
`<

 ! and

`!
`<

and

œ 

1ÐD ‡ Ñ
0 ÐD ‡ Ñ

œ

`D ‡
‡
`< 0 ÐD Ñ,

"-0 GV! ÎÐ"<Ñ
-0 V" ÎÐ"<ÑG

and ` [ 01ÐDÑ
ÐDÑ ]/` z  !

`"
`< <0.

When X  #, this last step can be established using
from
Since

#

` ÖZ Ð6ß-! ÑZ Ð3ß-! Ñ×
` -! `<
`!
`<

 ! a>  ", which follows

 ! (see proof of Proposition 4 below) and the definition of T" ÐM> l-! Ñ.

`"
`< <0,

 ! and

` T" ÐM> l-! Ñ ‡
Ð< Ñ
`<

it follows that
`Q Ð<ÑÎ`<Ð<‡ Ñ  ! Ê `R Ð<ÑÎ`<Ð<‡ Ñ  !.

QED

Proposition 4 bV!  ! s.t. if V!  V! , a reduction in signal noise raises <‡ :
=Ð0# ß 1# Ñ  =Ð0" ß 1" Ñ Ê <#‡  <"‡
" ÐM> l.œ1Ñ
" ÐM> l.œ!Ñ
Let " ´ ! TÐ"<Ñ
and ! ´ ! TÐ"<Ñ
>"
>1

X

X

>œ#

>œ#

Take Ð0" ß 1" Ñ and Ð0# ß 1# Ñ s.t. =Ð0# ß 1# Ñ  =Ð0" ß 1" Ñ.

Let <"‡ and <#‡ denote the investmentww

maximizing values of < in each case, and let -!w œ -!‡ Ð< œ <"‡ ß 0" ß 1" Ñ and -! œ -!‡ Ð< œ <"‡ ß 0# ß 1# Ñ.
ww

By Lemma 4, -!  -!w Þ
It can be shown that
V"
`ÖÐ Ð"<Ñ
# 

Since

` # ÖZ Ð6ß-! ÑZ Ð3ß-! Ñ×
` -! `<

G
‡
"< Ñ" ÐD Ñ

` Z Ð6ß-!w à0" ß1" Ñ
`<

œ

` Z Ð6ß-!ww à0" ß1" Ñ
`<

V!
 Ð Ð"<Ñ
# 

` Z Ð3ß-!w à0" ß1" Ñ
`<



œ

G
‡
"< Ñ!ÐD Ñ

V!
V"
 ÐÐ "<
 GÑ  Ð "<
 GÑÑ×Î`<  !

at < œ <"‡ , it follows that

` Z Ð3ß-!ww à0" ß1" Ñ
`<

at < œ <"‡

Using logic similar to that in Lemma 4, =Ð0# ß 1# Ñ  =Ð0" ß 1" Ñ Ê "#  "" and !#  !" Þ
Now,

` Z Ð6Ñ
`<

#V"
œ  -! " Ö Ð"<Ñ
$ 

G
Ð"<Ñ# ×

#V!
 Ð"  -! Ñ!Ö Ð"<Ñ
$ 

45

G
Ð"<Ñ# ×

If V!  GÎ#, both terms become more negative when " rises and ! falls; hence
` Z Ð6ß-!ww à0# ß1# Ñ
`<

Ê

`I
` r Ð<

œ <#‡ à 0" ß 1" Ñ œ

`I
` -!‡

‚

` Z Ð6ß-!ww à0" ß1" Ñ
` Z Ð3ß-!ww à0" ß1" Ñ
` Z Ð3ß-!ww à0#ß1#Ñ

œ
`<
`<
`<
` Z Ð6,-! ÑÎ`<` Z Ð3,-! ÑÎ`<
¸
` Z Ð3,-! ÑÎ` -! ` Z Ð6,-! ÑÎ` -! -!ww  !



¾ V!  GÎ# Ê <"‡  <#‡ by Proposition 2.

Proposition 5 Let M",> Ð<Ñ denote total investment from periods 1 to >
(i) M",> Ð<Ñ, is a backward bending function of <:
‡
‡
<"ß>
´ +<17+B< M"ß> Ð<Ñ  ! and < 
 <"ß> Ê

`M"ß> 
`<  !

(ii) The upward sloping portion of the M",> Ð<Ñ curve becomes smaller at > rises:
<"‡,>  <"‡,t+1
Proof
(i) For any >  X , < œ ! Ê -!‡ œ " and D"‡ œ D#‡ œ ÞÞÞ œ D>‡ œ _ by the equations in Lemma 1.
So M"ß> Ð< œ !Ñ œ !. As above, M"ß> Ð<Ñ œ ! for <  <w  ! for <w s.t.

V"
"<w

œG

‡
By the Intermediate Value Theorem, b<"ß>
that is a critical point and global maximum for M"ß> .
‡
Uniqueness of <"ß>
follows from an argument equivalent to that given in Proposition 1 to show

that <  <"‡ß> Í

`M"ß>
`<

 !.

(ii) The claim is established by showing that for any <,

`M",>
`< Ð<Ñ

!Ê

`M",>"
`< Ð<Ñ

 !. Hence, if

‡
M",> Ð<Ñ is downward-sloping, M",>+1 Ð<Ñ must also be downward-sloping at that <. Given that <"ß>
is

unique, it will follow immediately that <"‡,>  <"‡,t+1 . We now calculate
M",> Ð<Ñ œ ! M= Ð<Ñ œ '-* G . (Ð-! Ñ  ! '! ! T" ÐM= l-! ÑG . (Ð-! Ñ
>

=œ"

`M",>
`<

œ 

` -!‡
`<

>

"

!

`M"ß>
`< :

-*

"
‡
G. (Ð-!‡ ÑÖ1  ! Ð"<Ñ
=" T" ÐM= l-! Ñ× 
=œ#

>

= l -! Ñ
G '! [! ` T" ÐM
] . ( Ð -! Ñ
`<

-!*

=œ#

>

=œ#

Now, suppose <  <‡ , the investment-maximizing interest rate for period 1. Then

` -!‡
`<

!

implies the first term is negative in the expression above. To evaluate the sign of the second

46

term, note that

` T" ÐM> l-! Ñ
`<

 ! a-!  -!‡ when <  <‡ . This follows from

` # ÖZ Ð6ß-! ÑZ Ð3ß-! Ñ×
` -! `<

!

and the definition of T" ÐM> l-! Ñ.
Since T" ÐM> l-! Ñ  !a>  " and
`M",>
`< Ð<Ñ

!Ê

`M",>"
`< Ð<Ñ

` T" ÐM> l-! Ñ
`<

 ! a>  ", it follows by inspection that

 !. QED.

Proposition 6 The average rate of return 3 is a backward-bending function of the interest rate:
‡
<
< Ê

`3 
`<  !

Proof

3Ð<Ñ œ '-* -! ÐV"  GÑ  Ð"  -! ÑÐV!  GÑÑ. (Ð-! Ñ Î'-* G. (Ð-! Ñ
"

"

!

` 3/` r œ Ð 
Eœ

!

` -!‡
G. (Ð-!‡ Ñ
Ñ
"
`< Ò' * G. (Ð-! ÑÓ# E where

'-"* Ò-!‡ ÐV"
!

-!

 GÑ  Ð"  -!‡ ÑÐV!  GÑÑÓ  Ò-! ÐV"  GÑ  Ð"  -! ÑÐV!  GÑÑÓ. (Ð-!Ñ

Since '-* Ð-!*  -! Ñ . (Ð-! Ñ  !, it follows that E  !
"

!

‡
Hence < 
< Ê

` -!‡ 
`<  !

Ê

`3 
`<  !

47

Appendix B: Proofs for Extensions (Section 3)
Proposition 2 (Scale Choice)
Let p = λ0 p1 + (1 − λ0 )p0 denote the expected price ex-ante. Let us first characterize the
firm’s optimal investment policy for a given interest rate r. In the second period, conditional
on observing z, the firm updates its beliefs to λ1 (z). It then chooses I2 to
TX
P +1

max{λ1 (z)p1 + (1 − λ1 (z))p0 }{

t=1

I2
f (I1 + I2 ) − f (I1 )
}−
t+1
(1 + r)
1+r

At an interior optimum, I2 must satisfy the following first order condition:
0

f (I1 + I2 ){λ1 (z)p1 + (1 − λ1 (z))p0 }

TX
P +1
t=1

1
=1
(1 + r)t

If there is no positive I2 > 0 that satisfies this condition, the concavity of f guarantees that
Let I ∗ (z) = I1 + I2∗ (z) denote the optimal total level of investment

the optimal I2 = 0.

conditional on observing a signal z. Then we can write I2∗ (z, I1 ) = max(I ∗ (z) − I1 , 0).

It is easy to show that the optimal investment level I2∗ (z) is monotonically increasing in

z.

Hence, there is an optimal cutoﬀ value z ∗ such that z < z ∗ implies I1 > I ∗ (z).

Let

σ(I1 , z ∗ ) denote the ex-ante probability that z > z ∗ . Note that the rational expectations
condition implies

Z

λ1 (z)p1 + (1 − λ1 (z))p0 dm(z) = p

where dm(z) denotes the marginal distribution of z as in the text. With this notation, the
value function in period 2 is given by

V2 (I1 ) = p

Z

∞

z=−∞

TX
P +1

{

t=1

f (I ∗ (z)) − f (I1 )
}dm(z) −
(1 + r)t+1

48

Z

∞

z>z ∗

σI1
I ∗ (z)
dm(z) −
1+r
1+r

Now consider the firm’s value function in period 1:
TX
P −1

V1 = p(

t=0
TX
P −1

f (I1 )
) − I1 + V2 (I1 )
(1 + r)t+1

f (I1 )
f (I1 )
σ
)I1
−
) − (1 −
t+1
t+2
(1 + r)
(1 + r)
1+r
t=0
Z ∞ TX
Z ∞ ∗
P +1
f (I ∗ (z))
I (z)
dm(z)
+p
[
]dm(z) −
t+1
z=−∞ t=1 (1 + r)
z>z ∗ 1 + r

= p(

Claim (i): I1 (r = 0) = 0
Using the definition of V1 , it follows that at r = 0,
V1 (r = 0) = −(1 − σ)I1 + K
where K is a term that does not depend on I1 .

Since σ < 1 if λ0 < 1, it follows that

I1∗ (r = 0) = 0 as claimed.
Claim (ii): lim∂I1 /∂r = +∞
r→0

Since the value function is already optimized over I ∗ (z) and I2∗ (z) at all z, envelope
conditions imply that at an interior optimum, I1 must satisfy:
T −1

P
X
1
∂V1
1
σ
−
) − (1 −
= pf 0 (I1 )(
)=0
t+1
t+2
∂r
(1
+
r)
(1
+
r)
1
+
r
t=0

which implies
pf 0 (I1 ) =

1+r−σ
1 − (1 + r)−TP

Implicit diﬀerentiation of this condition yields
1
∂I1
∂σ
1
TP (1 + r − σ)
[1 −
= 00
−
]
−T
P
∂r
pf (I1 ) 1 − (1 + r)
∂r (1 + r)TP − (1 + r)
49

Note that

∂σ
∂r

remains finite as r → 0 because
lim[1 −

r→0

∂z ∗
∂r

is bounded. Hence

∂σ
TP (1 + r − σ)
−
] = −∞
∂r (1 + r)TP − (1 + r)

Finally, since f 00 < 0 it follows that
lim∂I1 /∂r = +∞

r→0

These two claims establish that I1 (r) has an upward sloping segment at low r and a
downward-sloping segment at high r.

The uniqueness of the investment-maximizing in-

terest rate r∗ can be established along the lines of part (ii) of Proposition 1, completing the
proof.
Lemma 3 (Competition)
In period 2, a firm invests if the expected return to investment at the market-clearing
price exceeds the cost of investment:
λ1 p2
>C
1+r
Assume that

p2 (I2 =0)
1+r

> C and

p2 (I2 =1)
1+r

< C to make the problem non-trivial. Since

∂p2
∂I2c

< 0,

it follows that there is a unique cutoﬀ value λ∗1 and a corresponding price p2 (I2c (λ∗1 )) such
that
λ∗1 p2 (I2c (λ∗1 ))
=C
1+r
In equilibrium, all firms with λ1 > λ∗1 invest, all other firms stay out, and the market clears
at the resulting price p2 by construction. This implies that for any firm with given prior λ0 ,
there is a cutoﬀ value z ∗ (λ0 ) such that the firm invests in period 1 iﬀ z > z ∗ .
R∞
Now consider period 1 investment behavior. Let β(z ∗ (λ0 )) = z∗ g(z)dz and α(z ∗ (λ0 )) =
R∞
f (z)dz denote the unconditional probability of investment in the good and bad states,
z∗
50

respectively, for a firm with prior λ0 . Firms invest in period 1 if
V (i, λ0 ) =

λ0 p1
−C >
1+r

V (l, λ0 ) = λ0 β(z ∗ (λ0 ))[

p2
C
C
] + (1 − λ0 )α(z ∗ (λ0 ))[−
]
−
2
(1 + r)
1+r
1+r

Note that V (l, λ0 ) is strictly positive in equilibrium if λ0 > 0 because there is a non-zero
probability that the firm will have a posterior success probability greater than λ∗1 . It follows
from Lemma 2 that for a given price vector (p1 , p2 ), there is a unique λ∗0 such that firms
with λ0 > λ∗0 invest in period 1 and the remainder delay. Since ∂pt /∂Itc < 0, ∂λ∗0 /∂p1 < 0,
and ∂λ∗0 /∂p2 > 0 it follows that there is a unique price vector (p1 , p2 ) at which all firms are
optimizing and markets clear in both periods. Thus, equilibrium investment is characterized
by a price vector (p1 , p2 ) and a cutoﬀ value λ∗0 such that
V (i, λ∗0 , p1 ) = V (l, λ∗0 , p1 , p2 ) > 0

Proposition 3 (Competition)
Observe that
dI1 dλ∗0
∂I1
= ∗
∂r
dλ0 dr
The implicit function theorem implies
dλ∗0
N
dV (i, λ0 )/dr − dV (l, λ0 )/dr
=−
=−
dr
dV (i, λ0 )/dλ0 − dV (l, λ0 )/dλ0
D
At r = 0, the denominator of this expression is:
D = p1 − β(λ∗0 )p2 + (β(λ∗0 ) − α(λ∗0 ))C
Since β > α and p1 > p2 , it follows that D > 0.
51

The numerator is
N =−

λ0 dp1 /dr
p2
dp2 /dr
C
C
λ0 p1
+
+
+
) + (1 − λ0 )α(
)}
− {λ0 β(−2
2
3
2
2
(1 + r)
1+r
(1 + r)
(1 + r)
(1 + r)
(1 + r)2

Using the fact that V (i, λ∗0 ) = V (l, λ∗0 ), N simplifies at r = 0 to
N(r = 0)|p-fixed = λ∗0 (r = 0)β(λ∗0 )p2 − C
if dpt /dr is zero.

I now show that N(r = 0)|p-fixed =⇒

contradiction . Suppose that

∂I1
(r
∂r

∂I
(r
∂r

= 0) > 0 using a proof by

= 0) < 0. In this case,
dp1 /dr > dp2 /dr > 0

because ∂I1c /∂I1 = 1 and ∂I2c /∂I1 < 1 and ∂pt /∂Itc < 0. It follows that N(r = 0) > 0 when
p is variable. Since N > 0 and D > 0,
contradicts the supposition. Therefore

dλ∗0
dr

∂I1
(r
∂r

< 0, which implies

∂I1
(r
∂r

= 0) > 0. But this

= 0) > 0 if N(r = 0)|p-fixed > 0.

Since λ∗1 p2 = C(1 + r) in period 2 equilibrium, N(r = 0)|p-fixed > 0 if

λ∗0 β(λ∗0 )
λ∗1

> 1. Hence

λ∗0 β(λ∗0 )
∂I1
> 1 =⇒
(r = 0) > 0
∗
λ1
∂r
Corollary:
At r = 0, the period 2 threshold for investment is characterized by the following condition:
1
C0 + K = λ∗1 (f (I2c ) + K)
2
C0 + 12 K
λ∗1 =
f (I2c ) + K

52

Since I2c is bounded, it follows that
lim λ∗1 =

K→∞

1
2

I now establish that raising K lowers period 1 investment using a proof by contradiction.
Consider the behavior of the marginal period 1 investor, with λ0 = λ∗0 .

At the original

equilibrium, the marginal investor has
1
1
V (i, λ0 ) = λ0 (f (I1c ) + K − C0 ) + (1 − λ0 )[−(C0 + K)] =
2
2
1
1
∗
c
V (l, λ0 ) = λ0 β(z (λ0 ))[(f (I2 ) + K) − (C0 + K)] + (1 − λ0 )α(z ∗ (λ0 ))[−(C0 + K)]
2
2
Suppose that increasing K raises I1 . This would require that investment becomes strictly
preferable for the marginal investor, i.e. dV (i, λ0 )/dK > dV (l, λ0 )/dK.

Recall that

∂I1c /∂I1 = 1 and ∂I2c /∂I1 < 1. Hence, ∂f /∂Itc < 0 implies ∂V (i, λ0 )/∂I1 < ∂V (l, λ0 )/∂I1 .
In addition, observe that ∂V (i, λ0 )/∂K < ∂V (l, λ0 )/∂K because the V (l, λ0 ) expressions
puts more weight on the first term, where K is positive, since β > α when signals are informative. Consequently, both the direct eﬀect of increasing K and the indirect eﬀect of
equilibrium price changes lower V (i, λ0 ) relative to V (l, λ0 ) for the marginal investor. This
makes the marginal firm drop out of the period 1 investment pool, lowering I1 . But this
contradicts the supposition. Therefore increasing K must strictly lower I1 .
Hence, as K → ∞, λ∗0 → 1, while implies β(λ∗0 ) → 1. Meanwhile λ∗1 → 12 . It follows
that (9) must hold as K → ∞, as claimed.

53

