                     NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




            FLEXIBLE EXCHANGE RATES AD INTERDEPENDENCE




                        Rudiger Dornbusch



                      Working Paper No. 1035




               NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                     1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                        Cambridge MA 02138

                          November   1982




The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in International Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the
author and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                   NBER Working Paper #1035
                                                        November 1982




               Flexible Exchange Rates and Interdependence



                                ABSTRACT



     The paper was prepared for the NBER-IM' conference on Exchange

 Rate Policy and Interdependence. It reviews the experience with

 flexible exchange rates and the main policy alternatives that have

been suggested. The theoretical part develops a modern open economy

macro model with an emphasis on capital mobility, real and nominal

wage stickiness and expectations. The impact of disturbances is

discussed in terms of the underlying structure, in particular, the

relative role of real and nominal inflexibility.

    Among the main policy alternatives the paper reviews the McKinnon

proposal for world monetarism, and the band proposal. Both of these

schemes are found unsatisfactory in coping with the chief problem of

the current systems namely how to cope with the transition to low

inflation. The alternative of capital controls, likewise, would not

avoid the adverse consequences of monetary stabilization it would

only influence the particular details of the international transmission.




                                      Rudiger Dornbusch
                                      Massachusetts Institute of Technology
                                      E52 —3 57
                                      Cambridge, MA 02139

                                      (617) 253—3648
                                                           Revised, October 1982




                    FLEXIBLE EXCHANGE RATES AND INTERDEPENDENCE*



                                   Rudiger Dornbusch
                        Massachusetts Institute of Technology
                                          and
                        National Bureau of Economic Research



                   "The fundamental argument for flexible exchange rates
                is that they would allow countries autonomy with respect
                to their monetary, fiscal and other policy instruments.
                The argument for flexible rates can be put more strongly
                still: flexible exchange rates are essential to the
                preservation of national autonomy and independence consis-
                tent with efficient organization and development of the
                world economy."
                                                Harry G. Johnson, 1969.



       In moving   from exchange   control and trade discrimination of the 1950s to

the open economic system     of the 1960s, the world economy had a brief re;urn
to   the   liberal order, credited with economic progress of the   40   years period
prior      to World War I. There can be little doubt that the 1960s were the best

ten years span the world economy has experienced in this century. But the

very source of the success——an actively managed macroeconomy where the

monetary and fiscal six was directed to achieve satisfactory, sustoined

growth——also brought the disintegration. Inflation preferences were


*pinancial support was provided by a grant from the National Science
Foundation. I wish to acknowledge helpful comments from Franco Modigliani
and John Williamson and research assistance from Alberto Giovaninni and Larry
Schembri.
                                    2



irreconcilable   between the US and Europe and productivity growth

differentials were too large to accommodate a world economy on fixed exchange

rates.

     Harry Johnson's perceptive assessment quoted above, as seen from the

perspective of the late 1960s, was shared widely. Flexible exchange rates

were then seen as an essential further step toward a liberal world system,

allowing countries to have the advantages of free markets in goods and assets

and yet enjoy domestic macroeconomic independence. Now, after ten years of

experience with flexible exchange rates there is much less confidence that

flexible rates and domestic policy autonomy are reconcilable. Quite on the

contrary, exercise of policy autonomy becomes near impossible because many

countries are too small and open to accept the exchange rate variations

induced by policy. Alternatively, in the case of large countries, the

effects of policy are exported abroad and come to interfere with foreign

internal stability. What is left of flexible exchange rates is an ability to

isolate a country from the world inflation trend, but riot from the effects of

policies that initiate a change in trend, nor from any other disturbances.

     The traditional argument against flexible exchange rates, coming from

the experience of the interwar period, is that flexible rates are unstable,

move about erratically, and often aggravate the macroeconomic stability

problem. The experience of the last ten year would certainly lead an

observer to endorse that view. Anytime there is monetary and fiscal

dislocation in a major country, as has certainly been the case in the U.S.,

flexible rates perform poorly because they lead to excessive real exchange

rate changes and to the export of inflation or deflation abroad. Flexible

rates leave us with as much interdependence, or even more, as does a fixed
                                      3



 rate regime. This paper reviews the channels of interdependence and asks in

what directions we should look for a system that maintains an open world

economy but more effectively comes to terms with the priority of national

policy autonomy that is accepted as a fact.

     There are broadly three avenues: we can make exchange rates more fixed,

we can make them less flexible, or we can take the route suggested by

Nodigliani and Tobin in limiting the incentives for shortrun capital mobility

permanently or on an ad hoc basis. It seems certain that free market

economics bar consideration of a capital account tax as embodying a wicked

infringement on individual freedom. It is also likely that US macroeconomic

policies, and policies abroad, remain unpredictable and uncoordinated to an

extent that precludes establishment of an exchange rate band or even fixed

rates. What is left then is the spirit of Versailles; that there may be

circumstances where it is not impossible that there might be intervention

which could turn out not to be small. In the meantime, in a more

constructive direction, there is a strong case for a different domestic

policy mix to go with flexible rates.



1. The Channels of Interdependence

     In this part we sketch a model of interdependence on the aggregate

demand and supply side. The purpose of the model is to draw attention to

distinct channels and to identify   the pnraraeter.   that   are of relevance in

assessing   the importance of these sources of interdependence.      We first
consider   a standard macroeconomic model, focussing on prices, aggregate

demand, perfect asset substitutability and rational expectations. Extensions

follow in subsequent sections.
                                             4



Exchange Rates, Employment and Wages1

        To study cyclical interdependence we take the perspective of a country

that faces a given world rate of interest given import prices, and a given

world demand (except for real exchange rate effects) for its exports. The

log linear model is presented in equations (1) and (6):



(i) yaO-br+f                          ;OEe+p*_w


(2) m—q = hy -         ci

(3)     q       w   + (l—p)(e   +




(4) r           i-

            4

(5) i=

(6) i = yy + q—w)

Equation (1) is the IS schedule with e the real exchange rate, and f a

domestic or foreign shift variable. The real interest rate is r. The LM

schedule is represented in equation (2) where the price level is given by ci.

The    price level is a weighted average of' ciorriestLc prices, which      are   set eqsal
to    wages, and of import prices. Equation (4)        defines   the domestic real
interest rate and (5)           expresses the assumption of perfect asset


1This section combines sticky price, rational expectations models of exchange
rate dynamics and the sticky real wage literature. See Sachs, (1979),
Branson and Roternberg (1979), Dornbusch (1980), Argy and Salop (1979), Buiter
and Miller (1981, 1982), Marston (1982), Modigliani and Padoa Schioppa (1978)
and Ohstfeld (1982).
                                       5




 substitutability   with an adjustment made for anticipated depreciation. Wage

 dynamics are specified in (6) and are linked to the GNP gap, y, and to the

 level of real wages. The term q—w represents a rigid real wage effect.2

      This model is appropriate to shortruri, cyclical issues.       It neglects

 trend inflation, foreign inflation, productivity growth and the impact of

capital formation. It concentrates on aggregate demand and the cyclical

interaction between wages, interest rates and exchange rates. At any point

in time, given home wages, money, and fiscal policy there is a level of the

exchange rate and a rate of depreciation that satisfies the international

interest rate relation. The level of wages and the exchange rate determine

the external competitiveness and hence aggregate demand and employment. The

system can be simplified by noting the relation between home and foreign

interest rates:




(7)   rr*+O ; ir*+e+
The model is slightly more complex than the extended Mundeli-Fleming model

because of two modifications. On one hand care is taken to allow an impact

of import prices on the price.aevl used to deflate real balances, real wages

and to define the real rate of interest. On the other hand the domestic

producer price index (which here is the wage) responds not only cyclically

but also in reaction to    the level of the   real wagc.

      The   role of wage behuvior can be appreciated by    looking at the longrun

behavior    of the system as shown in Figure 1. For a given world

2By choice of units the foreign price level and the level       of full employment
output are equal to one and thus their logs are zero.
                   5a




0




                            IS


0'




         —--——-—-——-—————-—-—— y
     0


                 FIGURE 1
                                           6




interest rate the IS schedule shows equilibrium in the domestic goods market.

A real depreciation creates excess demand that is met by an increase in

output. Along i=O money wages are constant. A real depreciation, because it

reduces real wages, leads to wage increases. To keep wages constant the

reduction in the standard of living due to depreciation must be offset by

unemployment that dampens wage demands. Hence v=O is downward sloping. The

slope of the constant wage schedule is determined by the relative response of

wages to the cyclical position and to the standard of living via the real

exchange rate:



                 =           x




       The pattern of wage response will determine the longrun effects of

disturbances on output and the real exchange rate. A reduction in foreign

demand or a rise in world interest rates, for example, will shift the IS

schedule up and to the left. The decline in employment is larger the flatter

the 'i=O schedule or the smaller the cyclical responsiveness of wages relative

to the real wage stickiness as measured by the parameter X. If the wage is

cyclically highly responsive and real wage rigidity is near absent, X tends

toward infinity and the economy behaves as one with full wage and price

flexibility     which ensure     rapid adjustment to full   employment.   Conversely,

when   cyclical flexibility is small and real wage resistance operates
strongly,    X tends   toward zero. Adverse    disturbances then can lead to a large

impact     on the price level combined with unemployment.3



3From equations (1) and (6), setting O'O we obtain:
       y     (f—br)/(i+nX)
                                      7



     The model in equations (1) to (6) can be reduced to the behavior over

time of money wages and of the real exchange rate. (See the Appendix.) In

Figure 2 we show the dynamics by reference to the loci along which wages and

the real exchange rate respectively are constant. Moving up and along the

O schedule an increase in the wage raises the price level and thus reduces

real balances and exerts a deflationary pressure that causes wages to be

falling unless a cut in the real wage due to real depreciation exerts an

offsetting impact. The schedule PP represents the stable trajectory under

perfect foresight. Given any initial money wage the corresponding point on

FF shows the equilibrium level of the nominal and real exchange rate such

that the economy converged to longrun equilibrium at point A.

     At a point like B, for example, the wage is low and thus the price level

tends to be low making for high real balances, and low nominal interest

rates. To maintain international interest parity the exchange rate must be

appreciating, but that means the real exchange rate is above the steady state

level. At a point like B, as we can verify from the Figure, the real

exchange rate favors the home country and by (7), becao.se of real

appreciation, the real interest is below the world level. Thus aggregate

demand and employment are high. High employment and the high real exchange

rate or low real wage exert upward pressure on the wage pushing the economy

toward point A.

     The   framework can now be used to investigate the impact of         foreign

disturbances   on holllc w;os and enploy;nent.   ill igure   3 we study   the effect
of an increase in foreign interest rates. The case we analyze is that where
wages in the longrun increase, and the exchange rate depreciates. As           the
           7a




w
     F




    J           =0




    Figure 2
               7b




w


         F'
                    =0




                         e,=o




                                e


    Figure 3
                                            8



 Figure shows the exchange rate will overshoot, moving immediately from the

 initial equilibrium at point A to a shortrun equilibrium at A'. The rise in

 foreign interest rates creates an incipient capital outflow that leads to

 exchange depreciation. At point A' home interest rates will have risen

 somewhat and there is now expected appreciation thus assuring a sufficient

 return on domestic securities. Changes in employment and in the standard of

 living combine to generate wage pressure that moves the economy over time to

 A". In the longrun, of course, there will be some unemployment.

        The adjustment pattern is shaped by all the parameters including in

particular the dynamics of wages, income and interest responses of money

demand s well as the price elasticity of demand for goods. What is crucial

to the initial behavior of the exchange rate is the longrun adjustment of

money wages. If wages, increase in the longrun then the exchange rate must

overshoot in the shortrun as shown in Figure 3. By contrast, if in the

longrun wages decline, then there will be an immediate depreciation of the

nominal and real exchange rate, but a more moderate one. In the subsequent

adjustment process the exchange rate will continue to depreciate. This case

is shown in Figure 4.

        It is interesting to note now that one of the two——exchange rates or

unemployment—-must overshoot. In the case of Figure 4 unemployment must

overshoot because at point A" the real exchange rate is depreciating, which

rnean   that   real interest   rates   are above the rorid level, an the real

exchange   rate is below its longrun level. For both reasons demand and hence
employment at A' will be less than at A" the final        equilibrium. Exactly the
opposite occurs at A' in Figure 3 where         employment is above the new longrun
           8




w
           F'




    A              A'        =0




                              O=o
                        F'



                              0



        Figure 4
                                          9



 level. It is not certain, though, whether it is possible for employment to

 actually rise relative to the initial equilibrium at A.

        The overshooting in exchange rates or employment makes it interesting to

ask what factors would make one or the other case more likely. As noted the

outcome depends on the longrun adjustment of wages and that in turn depends

on several parameters. A high price elasticity of demand implies small

changes in equilibrium real exchange rates and therefore relatively little

pressure on wages and output. A high price elasticity thus implies a longrun

increase in wages to accommodate the reduced demand for real balances and

therefore exchange rate overshooting as shown in Figure 3. A high interest

rate elasticity or income elasticity of money demand works in the same

direction. By contrast, a high cyclical relative to real wage response of

wages, implies the possibility that wages could fall in the longrun. In the

same way we can analyze the impact of foreign demand disturbances or changes

in domestic fiscal policy. Again we find the possibility of employment or

exchange rate overshooting depending on the pattern of wage flexibility

relative to the parameters of aggregate demand.

        The effects of disturbances on domestic employment, and wages will

presumably differ depending on the direction of change. We would expect an

asymmetry in the real wage resistance in that workers accept gains in real

wages but resist cuts. This extends also to the cyclical behavior of wages;

wages   rise more rapidly   in a boom than they fail in a recess on.      In terms of
the model this amounts to saying       that   the coefficient of wade riexibility, k,

See the appendix for the     longrun   solutions to w and 0.
                                       10



depends   on the cyclical and real wage position. Specifically, starting from

full employment a fall in foreign demand or higher world interest rates will

lead to unemployment and to a decline in real income. But a rise in foreign

demand or a fall in rates brings about a real appreciation at full employment

rather than a lasting real appreciation beyond capacity.

     The asymmetry issue is of relevance once we consider transitory

disturbances. Suppose, for example, that a transitory rise in world demand,

because of a boom abroad, leads to a real appreciation at full employment.

Once the boom abroad subsides the issue arises whether workers are willing to

accommodate themselves to a cut in real income as is brought about by the

ensuing real depreciation. There is no reason to dismiss the possibility of

a ratchet effect in the operation of real wage resistance.

     But if ratchet effects are present the cyclical variability of real

exchange rates, as occurs under flexible exchange rates, brings with it the
          S

necessity     of considering an incomes policy that accommodates the changes in

the standard of living associated with real exchange rate movements.

Alternatively, active fiscal policy needs to be used to stabilize real

exchange rates over the cycle to avoid the real appreciation that cannot,

afterwards, be undone without adverse effects on employment. But that, of

course, raises the question whether there is more fiscal resistance than real

wage resistance. In any event, the point is that transitory disturbances

abound,   that transiLory   real appreoiation bca use   of high demand c'aiscs the
standard of living cyclically and that instruments are necessary to dampen or
to accommodate the subsequent decline.
     So far we have taken the case of a country that takes as given world

demand and interest rates. It is worth commenting briefly on the changes
                                        11




 brought about by repercussion effects. Without going into details we

 remember the Muridell—Fleming results that with prices given, a monetary

 expansion in one country has adverse employment effects abroad.
                                                                          Conversely,
 a fiscal expansion spills into increased employment abroad. These results

 depend critically on the behavior of the real money stock in each country.

 They are not sturdy the moment import prices enter the real balance deflator.

 Specifically, as a fiscal expansion spreads abroad through real appreciation

 it reinforces the expansion in the initiating country but it reduces real

balances abroad, thus tending to confine the expansion. If real wage

resistance is an issue this adverse effect of depreciation is
                                                                       strongly
reinforced. By contrast a monetary expansion now may raise income abroad.

Interest Rates and Risk Premia

       The discussion in the previous section was based on the assumption that

securities are perfect substitutes once anticipated exchange depreciation is

taken into account. Under that assumption real interest rates are equalized

in longrun equilibrium and in the shortrun can only differ by an amount equal

to the rate of change of the real exchange rate. But the assumption of

perfect asset substitution is not warranted once real exchange rates

fluctuate.

      Movements in real exchange rates introduce negative correlation in the

real returns of domestic and foreign securities and thus create an incentive

for   portfolio diversification. Only in a very       cial   case,   ih relative
asset supplies matching the minimum     variance porfo1io shares and with
identical   consumption   baskets across countries will there be     no risk premium.
In general, there is a risk premium which is related to relative asset

supplies and to the distribution of world wealth.
                                            12




      In   the presence of a risk premium the interest rate relationship
becomes:


(8)           i=i*+e+p(V/1,W/Ei) ; p >O.p <0
                                                      1       2



where V and W denote respectively domestic outside debt and domestic wealth
each measured in home currency and               denotes world wealth measured in foreign

currency. Equation (a)         thus   introduces a relationship between interest

rates, expected depreciation, the level of nominal exchange rates, nominal

wealth and asset supplies. Where in the earlier model nominal money was the

only asset to play a role, now the supply of domestic outside nominal assets

appears.5 An increase in the relative supply of domestic assets, V/viE, must

be accommodated by a more rapid rate of appreciation or by a higher nominal

interest rate differential or else must be offset by depreciation of the

level of the exchang; rate.

      The link between exchange rates and portfolio balance can be inferred

from (8) taking the case of a small country so that the level of world

wealth, W, is taken as given. Furthermore assuming given interest rates and

a given rate of depreciation, i—i—é, we can find the relation between

changes in domestic currency asset supplies, changes in wealth and the

corresponding changes in        equilibrium      exchange rates:



                          p2
(9)           E=   V +     +
                               — (wv)
                         p1 p2

5For references to the extensive risk premium literature see the review in
Dornbusch (1982) and Krugman (1980).
                                            13




Equation (9) shows that for a given depreciation adjusted interest

differential, an increase in domestic currency assets and wealth, in the same

proportion, leads to equi—proportionate depreciation. An increase in wealth,

given assets leads by contrast to appreciation. An increase in wealth, via

domestic habitat effects reduces the risk premium and thus brings about

appreciation; an increase in domestic currency asset supply, on the contrary,

leads to a higher risk premium and thus leads to depreciation.

       The risk premium introduces two important considerations. The first is

that the comDosition of domestic assets between money and debt (money being

the medium of exchange with a specific demand) matters and that therefore

open market operations exert an effect on exchange rates independently of the

change in money. We can think of this point in the fol1oing manner: The

macro—model sketched above determines interest rates as functions of the real

money stock and real income. The model is closed 'by finding an exchange rate

that satisfies the macromodel and the risk premium equation. An increase in

debt, or in home relative wealth, then must affect both interest rates and

exchange rates.

       The second role of the risk premium is to introduce a link between

wealth distribution in the world, interest rates and the exchange rate. A

t'ise in home wealth leads to changes in both interest rates and exchange

rates. Interest rates at home decline and/or the exchange rates appreciatea.

This   effoct is added   to   the rnacrotnodei   and prorides a ci:-inne',, through which

dynamic effects assoolated       with the   current account and the     budget have

implications   for   the exchange rate.

       Intervention policy must be considered in relation to the risk premium.

Intervention in that perspective takes one           of   two forms: if purchases of
                                     14



foreign   exchange are allowed to change the home money stock we have one set

of results where intersiention will be effective. But if there is

sterilisation there is an implication for the relative supply of domestic

debt and thus for the risk premium. Sterilized intervention, as has been

argued, is simply a reshuffling of the composition of domestic government

liabilitites. It has an effect on exchange rates only through the impact on

the risk premium. Thus it can work only under the conditions in which a risk

premium exists. Moreover the effectiveness—-bang per buck——depends on risk

aversion being high and variability of real interest differentials being

large. Thus intervention policy works well when uncertainty is large and

risk aversion is pervasive.

      The risk premium has been singled out as an important channel through

which the current account has effects on the exchange rate. While the

current account thus qualifies in principle as a determinant of exchange

rates it stands to reason that changes in wealth from sources other than the

current account should really move to the center of attection. In particular

capital gains from movements in the stock market certainly have an

overwhelmingly larger impact on relative wealth than does the current

account. In addition to the stock market, we would think of total domestic

saving as a source of changes in relative wealth.    Again    as a share of saving,

the   current account is typically, though not necessarily, small. Except in

those   parliu ar cas     a ncial role for   the correct   aceocn t., vio tie risk
premium, seeras a largely exaggerated source of' echange rate iaovemerits.
Third   Country Effects

      The perspective so far has been that of a country faced with external

shocks. We now move to the perspective of the system to recognize another
                                       15




important cyclical source of interdependence that arises from the behavior of

materials prices and import demands of peripheral countries. These countries

are predominant exporters of materials add importers of manufactures. They

are also debtors.

       Table 1 reports regressions of various measures of the real prices

received by LDCs as they are affected by the world business cycle, the real

price of oil and the real U.S. dollar exchange rate. The cyclical variable

is the OECD unemployment rate and the real exchange rate is measured by the

IMF relative wholesale prices in manufacturing of the U.S. relative to

trading partners. In equation 1. we show the export relative to import

prices of non—oil LDCs. The real oil price and the real dollar exchange rate

are significant explanatory variables: a dollar appreciation or a rise in

real oil prices deteriorate LDCs' terms of trade. So does a rise in OECD

unemployment although here the coefficient is not precisely estimated.

Equation 1. shows that a one percent real dollar appreciation would

deteriorate LDC terms   of   trade by one—third of a percent. This is, of

course, a very sizeable effect.

      In equation 2., the dependent variable is the IMF index of the prices of

all commodities deflated by the dollar price of manufacturers exports of

developed countries as reported by the UN. Again we see a significant

adverse impact on the real prices of materials for real dollar appreciation.

For   this measure of the real price, a one percent real dolLar appreciation
leads to a nearly proportional deterioration in real commodity prices. In
equations   3. to 5. we show that the results are not altogether sturdy but

differ significantly across commodities. Equation 3. reports the results for
                                  16




the index of 33 commodities of the World Bank deflated by the dollar prices

of manufactures as in 2. The results are substantially the same as in 2.

The index is made up of agricultural commodities (70.6%), metals and minerals

(24.3%) and timber (5.1%). Equation 4. and 5. show that real dollar

appreciation leads to an increase in the real price of minerals and metals,

but to a decline in the real price of agricultural commodities. The latter,

presumably because of their large weight, carry the results in the

regressions for the total commodity group. The difference in the more

disaggregated results suggest that the whole question is in need of more

study including the important issue of using alternative cyclical

variables 6




61n using residuals from a regression of the OECD industrial production index
on two time trends as the cyclical variable regressions performed more poorly
in establishing significant determinants of the lefthand side variable.
                                         17




                   Table 1 Real Commodity Prices and the Dollar
                             (Annual data, 1964-1981)


                       Constant       OECD     Real Oil Real
                                  Unemployment   Price $ Rate R2       DW    Rho1 Rho2

1.    Terms of Trade      1.64       -0.01     -0.0001 —0.31      .76 1.79
                          (.70)       (.02)     (.0004) (.14)


2a. Real Materials
    Price (IMP)           9.04       —0.06        —-    —0.88     .39 1.94    .07
                         (1.58)       (.028)             (.32)


2b. Real Materials
    Price (IMP)           2.96       —0.15     0.16     —0.78     .68 2.17    .28 —.73
                         (1.31)       (.03)     (.05)    (.26)


3a. Real Materials
    Prices (Bank)         2.22       —0.05        ——    —0.64     .25 1.81
                         (1.63)       (.023)             (.34)



3b.   Real Materials
      Prices (Bank)      —1.18       —0.16     0.19     —0.49     .66 2.02    .29 —.59
                         (1.36)       (0.03)    (.05)    (.27)


4. Real Minerals &
    Metals Prices        —4.53       —0.20     0.22      0.78     .89 1.97
                         (1.30)       (.027)    (.os)    (.26)



5. Real Agricultural
    Prices           3.71            —0.04        --     -0.98    .28 1.85    .15
                         (2.0)        (.03)               (.41)


Note: Standard errors in parenthesis. For data description see text and
appendix. The left-hand side variable and the real $ exchange rate are
expressed in logs. So is the real oil price except in equation 1. Rho1 and
Rho2 are the coefficients for correction of first and second order serial
correlation corrections.
                                        18




      Consider now how these third country effects operate in the case of,

say, a US tightening of monetary policy. Tightening of money would lead to

an increase in nominal and real interest rates in the US and to a slowdown in

demand. The dollar would appreciate in nominal and real terms. We have

already seen the direct effectson industrial countries of higher interest

rates and reduced exports: they uxiarnbiguously translate into unemployment

unless there is no real wage rigidity. But now we have additional effects

that arise from the impact of US events on the material producing, debtor

countries. Higher real interest rates worsen those countries' current

accounts. This is reinforced by the decline in industrial countries demand

for both manufactures and materials. Finally this is reinforced by the

effect of the dollar appreciation on the real prices of materials. The

combination then is quite devastating for material exporting debtor

countries. Typically they will require to confine their own growth because

of balance of payments constraints.

      As seen from the perspective of industrial countries the adjustments in

material exporting debtor countries have two sides. For industrial countries

as a group there is a direct terms of trade improvement relative to material

exporters, both cyclical and because of dollar appreciation. This gain may,

however, be dampened in part and perhaps s uhatantially by the decline in LDC

imports of manufactures

      Changes in the real p'ice   or   coiuaod   t Lieu   in   the cycle o   -   n by prndu

of   changes in key exchange rates play an important role in relation to real

wage rigidity. The deterioration in the LDCs' terms of trade may well be an

offset to some of the real income loss an individual industrial country

experiences as a result of say higher US interest rates.
                                            19


 Bubbles,   Pesos and Runs

       The preceding sections focussed on actual changes in exchange rate

 fundamentals, cyclical or permanent, that affect goods or asset markets and

 from there spill to the rest of the world through asset demands, goods

demands, exchange rate movements and prices. But many of the disturbances in

 the world economy are not the result of actual changes in fundamentals but

rather of changes in expectations about the future course of these

fundamentals.      These revisions in expectations exert as powerful effects on

interdependence        as   do actual changes in fundamentals.

       When asset markets are dominated by expectations about the future course

of fundamentals, exchange rates may move in ways that do not promote

macroeconomic stability. Three prospects of this possibility deserve special

attention. The first is familiar from the recent literature on financial

markets and concerns the possibility that exchange rates, in part, are

determined by irrelevant information. Market participants may have the wrong

model of fundanientals and their expectations, based on the wrong model, will

affect the actual exchange rate. If there is sufficiently high serial

correlation in the irrelevant variables it may be impossible to discern the

systematic forecast errors by convential efficiency tests.         But it is also
the case that the exchange rate would be significantly more volatile than is

iarrm ted   by   the   true aode
       This point is importaat because market particijont may be       impressed by
one   or the other plausible fundamentals variable, attribute explanatory power
to it and, through their         expectations, make their expectations actually come

to   be true. Then, when some other variable moves, attention shifts to
different "main factor" which in turn comes to dominate the exchange rate for
                                            20



a while. Exchange rates carried by irrelevant beliefs are troublesome not

only because of the excess variance but also because the shifting from one

irrelevant factor to another will precipitate major exchange rate collapses.

The possibility that exchange rates are sometimes far off fundamentals cannot

be discounted. It is important to recognize because we may have given

excessive weight to the notion that the market knows "the model" and at the

same time is rational. It is quite conceivable that a number of fashionable

factors such as "fiscal discipline," "basic monetary control," "longrun

strength in manufacturing," "Angebotofreundliche Gesellschaftspolitik" all

play their role, one at a time.

        The second source of disequilibrium exchange rates arises from

expectations about the possibility of regime changes and has been called the

"peso problem." In this perspective exchange rates are influenced by current

fundamentals but also by agents' expectations that these fundamentals may

change, with given probabilities, in specific directions. If market

participants have sufficiently strong beliefs that a given course of policy

will not be followed they may, in fact, make it impossible to follow that

course. Under flexible exchange rates this problem is acute because the

exchange rate is so flexible a price and so much governed by expectations.

It may well be argaed, as have been indeed in the discussion of the French

stabilisation experience under Poincare, that speculators are the true judges

o   f rondaricatala   an]   that a   col1ase a the exchorie nate hrt about 'ev

adverse capital ilows is irrevoca1a evidence of a program of stahilisatice
that lacked in fundamentals. But that view is certainly simplistic once it

is   recognized that stabilisation policy has a wide range of indeterminacy.7


7See Flood and Garber (1982, 1982b), Salant and Henderson (1978), lozondo
(1980) and Blanchard (1982) for discussions of regime change.
                                       21




       The third way in which exchange rates can deviate from equilibrium

corresponds to the notion of bubbles. Here holders of an asset realize that

the asset is overpriced, but are willing to hold it in the expectation that

there will only be some probability of a collapse to fundamentals within a

given holding period and that there is an expectation that the asset can be

passed on with capital gains sufficiently large to reward the risk of a

collapse.8 Bubbles correspond to a situation where a currency has

appreciated beyond what can be considered fundamentals, where an

overvaluation is widely thought to prevail, but where continuing appreciation

is underway until some disturbance causes the crash. There are no models of

the crash as yet hut it must be clear that an essential ingredient is the

arrival of new information that diverts a sufficient number of speculators

from keeping the bubble growing.

       Bubbles, peso problems and irrelevant information all have in common

that they take the exchange rate way from the particular equilibrium implied

by current fundamentals. In each of these cases there is a reevaluation of

the beliefs and when this occurs exchange rates move a lot, move a lot

relative to fundamentals, and therefore may force an accommodating change in

policies. Unless policies are very exogeneous, instability of policies may

be provoked by instability of expectations. That means flexible exchange

rates may require as an institutioflal setting much   more exogeniety of
policies thu c     fact   exit today. Without such an   anchor fiexFuiiity   of
exchange rates may aggravate macroeconomic instability.

8See   Tirole (1982)   and Blanchard (1979).
                                       22




II. Coping WithInterdependence

      In the late 1960s discussion of international monetary arrangements

centered on the idea of "flexing" the system. Exchange rates were too

fixed to be compatible with an overvalued dollar and the one-way street that

overvaluation created for internationally mobile, speculative capital. Today

much of the debate starts from the recognition that it is desirable to reduce

the excessive fluctuations in exchange rates that exert undesirable

interdependence effects. The quest then is for flixed exchange rates: the

optimal exchange rate regime would prevent persistent overvaluation or

undervaluation of a currency which would ultimately lead to protection or an

undesirable monetary—fiscal policy mix. The rate system would also have to

be flexible enough to yield longrun inflation autonomy. But at the same time

shortrun real exchange rate variability should be reduced and export of

inflation through appreciation would be limited. There is little question

that a flexible exchange rate system has desirable longrun features and that

these should not be easily sacrificed. But at the same time the shorturn

implication of dissynchronised policy actions are sufff±ciently severe to

raise the question whether exchange rates are too flexible at present. That

question of course can be answered only relative to a set of alternative

arrangements.

      Among alternativea   to   the present systeia there are three lines of

reform:    a rt:r:i to fb:d     r quai—fixed ratis ,   tir,itiLtoos   cu the

incentives   to move capital, and limited exchange rate flexibility. We
comment briefly on aspects of each of these.
       A return to outright fixed exchange rates appears     adventurous. It would

be   rendered difficult because of large discrepancies in inflation rates among
                                          23



key industrial countries. The willingness to impose trade restrictions seems

striking confimation that there is no disposition among major industrial

countries to abide by rules. An outright comrnitnient to peg would yield at

best a variety of EMS. The difficulties in a fixed rate system are

aggravated by the instability in at least two key-countries, the U.S. and the

U.K.

        An alternative to fixed rates has been proposed by McKinnon (1982). He

argues that exchange rate instability and instability of world inflation are

the outgrowth of misconceived monetarism. The right kind of monetarism would

look at the world quantity of money. Specifically he argues (p. 331):

               "... the solution to international currency instability

               is straightforward: the Federal Reserve System should

               discontinue   its policy of passively sterilizing   the domestic

              monetary    impact of foreign    official interventions. Instead,

               a symmetrical non—sterilisation rule would ensure that each

               country's money supply mutually adjusts to international

               currency   substitution in the shortrun without having official
               exchange interventions destabilize the     world's money supply."

The   basic premise   of this prescription, and its    flaw, is that it   assumes that

exchange    rate instability is induced by shifts in the currency denomination
of    the public's money holding, i.e. currency suhstituton. But surely

internat ionai c rrer speculat L' is no CL&rr Led out y Ohlfth jseen

different country's Mis,     but   by shifts beLoon interest bearing ossets. The
proposal also encounteis the non—negligible issue of the transition to low
inflation   in the U.S. It    certainly   does not help to overlook that inflation

today, in the U.S., is significantly higher than it is in Japan and in
                                     24



Germany.   As noted above, however, monetary policy seeks to achieve a

transition to low inflation and it is the byproduct of that transition which

causes the real exchange rate havoc.

     Proposals for more limited exchange rate flexibility take the form of

intervention rules. They may either involve an exchange rate band (fixed or

moving) with full intervention at the margin and none in between, or they

involve an intervention rule that seeks to dampen exchange rate movements

relative to some notion of a fundamentals—rate.

     Proponents of band—proposals are reluctant to specify how it is that the

band would actually be set. They emphasize, as does Bergaten (1982, p. ii):

            "there is no suggestion here of a return to fixed

            exchange rates, nor even to seeking "correct rates"

            with narrow margins. It should be possible, however,

            to reach international agreement on the existence of

            "wrong   rates"——as was done in November 1978, and seems
            largely possible today. Rates could then be pushed
            hack   toward appropriate zones through direct interven-

            tion, alterations in domestic policies and public

            announcements."

     One objection to an exchange rate band is that   such an arrangement
actually promotes exchange rate instability within the band. The presence of
a Land reduces risk to portfolio holders and therefore inc rease portfolio
shifts in response to perceived changes in mean returns. Thus given random
movements in mean return expectations there will he more exchange rate

variability within the band than would be the case without such limits and

the larger risk of speculation. Moreover, it is not clear why a rate should

be allowed to go too far, only to be pushed back afterwards. If there
                                     25



 can be agreement on what is too far then there can be agreement on a limiting

point. But of course that is precisely where national interests may differ

as the case of the U.S. dollar throught the 1960s has shown so clearly. It

also stands to reason that authorities who take .a view on what is a rate that

has gone too far will take a view on what is too rapid a return. Thus

intervention might dampen the correction of exchange rates and in this way

too reduce the risk of speculation, thus enhancing actual capital flows.

       The basic objection to a band proposal is that it makes no sense to set

limits for exchange rates and not for other key macroeconomic variables.

Exchange rate targets without an accompanying, well understood macroeconomic

support program can hardly be accepted to be effective. Macroeconomic

policies geared exclusively to exchange rate targets rather than a broader

range of targets including real interest rates, the real value of the stock

market, inflation and unemploynient, may well deteriorate macroeconomic

performance. In the absence of such a broader spectrum of targets one can

only expect the poor results from intervention policy observed, for example,

in the 1979 Carter period of overexpansion.

       An alternative approach to limited exchange rate variability is based on

the idea that it is possible to extract, at least approximately, from market

data the sources of disturbances in the exchange rate. To the extent that

these disturbances are portfolio shifts between currency denominations they

should be ascomaod te. by hiterre    ton.   This   the   :and   a t'uaent   kno:i

from the literature about interest rate versus money uock targets. In that
context the rule is to peg interest rates, allowing uloney to vary, if
disturbances are primarily financial. In the present context the rule is to
stabilize exchange rates if disturbances are primarily portfolio shifts
rather than events that call for changes in the equilibrium real exchange
                                        26



rate.     Specifically, if disturbances can unambiguously be identified as

shifts between domestic and foreign currency debt, the appropriate policy is

sterilized intervention keeping the exchange rate as well as interest rates

fixed. The same would be the case for portfolio shifts between home money

and home securities although this would not require intervention.

        Once, however, disturbances are both real and financial and

identification becomes ambiguous the case for rigid intervention disappears.

Formal models, in these mixed cases, suggest that managed floating becomes

the optimal exchange rate regime.9 The extent to which the exchange rate

would be more nearly fixed depends on the relative variability of real and

financial shocks, the authorities' concern with the composition of aggregate

demand as well as the level of activity and the certainty about the structure

of the economy. The strong case for sterilized intervention that arises when

all disturbances are pure portfolio shifts disappears and leaves little in

terms of sturdy rules.

        Intervention policy cannot cope with the main source of exchange rate

movements, namely divergent national monetary policies. When money is

tightened in one country to reduce inflation, the financial disturbance is in

fact deliberately produced by the govenment in the hope of reducing

inflation. Moreover, the initial real appreciation, because it reduces

inflation, is a welcome part of the disinflation process. Intervention would

menn    forcing tho   monetary contraction on the rent of the world   even   though

cyclical conditions abroad may not call for tight money.      Of course, the re3t

of   the world might ursue     tight money to stabilize the exchange rate but at
the same time implement a fiscal expansion to maintain aggregate demand in


9See Henderson (1982) and Frenkel (1976).
                                     27




the face of higher interest rates and lower net exports. This policy is open

to the objection that fiscal policy is overused and that cyclical expansions

can rarely be undone.



III. Concluding Remarks

     The preceding discussion argues that active policy measures, as much as

the business cycle itself, cannot fail to spill from one country to another,

whatever the exchange rate regime. What the exchange rate regime does

determine is the particular shape of the spill—over, namely whether it takes

the form primarily of a decline in employment with relatively unchanged

competitiveness and inflation, or whether there are large changes in

inflation and real exchange rates (and therefore in real income) but

relatively smaller changes in employemt. It is in this area that fixed and

flexible rates differ sensitively and interact with the domestic structure,

in particular real wage rigidity. It is here that one has to recognize

Mundell's (1968) point that the case for flexible exchange rate rests

fundamentally on money illusion, in the sense that there is an absence of

real wage rigidity.

     Flexible exchange rates can work well when financial disturbances are

identifiable and can be accommodated br the appropriate sterilized

intervention and when, in addition, real disturbances can be met by changes

in real exchuige eateo thit do no    Oof1fljct'ith   full   employuent.   Failind

these two requirements there are longrun   advantuges of a flexible rate

system.   But there are also shortrun costs, possibly high, that come from
the very fact that the   exchange rate is too   flexible. These    shortrun costs

in turn are higher the more policymakers, mistakenly, believe that flexible

rates are tantamount to macroeconomic independence. If this is the case,
                                       28


                                                                                  This
flexible   rates may well be a disintegrating force in the world economy.

was recognized already in the 1960s when the German government noted:

               "Fixed exchange rates are an indispensable element

               in a world committed to integration; with a system

               of flexible rates the existing readiness to cooperative

               and integrate might be destroyed at the first appearance

               of serious difficulties since flexible rates would

               offer such an easy opportunity for isolated action."1°

       If flexible exchange rates, in the course of stabilisation policy, lead

to excessive real exchange rate changes, and if these are the source of

adverse spill—over effects, a reduction in the incentives to move capital

international may be a remedy. The case for restrictions on international

capital flows of one kind or another is old. Specifically, Modigliani (1972)

argued:
   -
           a

               "...there   may arise a need, at least in the shortrun,

               for holding private capital movements in line with the

               achievable transfer of real capital. To achieve this goal,

               without outright limitation on the freedoni of capital

               movements, countries could rely on general fiscal policy

               as one of the possible devices for   influencing incentive   to

               capital movements. But they should also be allowed to opt,

               just as freely, 'or   the oitErn- Li-c   apprOai rl;
               specific tax and related incentives, which, we have argued,
               is likely o be superior under most circumstances."
 The same view has been articulated     by Tobin (1978)   and Liviathan (1979).

 10Quoted in Cooper (1968), p. 223.
                                       29



     The argument   for   specific taxes to reduce the incentives for

international capital flows has been objected to on three grounds. The

first, and most serious, is that they limit exchange rate movements and

therefore imply a transmission of macroeconomic disturbances through the

current account. A tight money policy in a large country would lead to a

decline in real income world—wide as would be the case under a regime of

fixed exchange rates thus avoiding the effects of exchange rate movements on

real wages and on the price level. The second objection argues that taxes on

capital flows cannot work because they lead rapidly to all kinds of evasions

including offshore markets. There is no doubt truth to that objection,

although its force is limited in the case of transitory taxes, as would be

appropriate during a period of divergent policy in a particular country.

     The last objection to interest equalization taxes is that they interfere

with the efficient operation of the world capital market. This argment, I

believe, is actually wrong. It mistakes the shortterm money market rate for

the social productivity of capital. Suppose a country reduces money growth

and this leads to an increase in the interest rate on financial assets, as it

will. Incipient capital flows will lead to currency appreciation and a

current account deterioration financed by borrowing abroad.1' It is hard to

argue that the current account deficit is a reflection of enhanced investment

opportunities or increase time preference that, in an efficient and

integrat   capital market;, tioulri call for redi rection   of lending to'i cii the
home country. On    the contrary, the decline in denand will have reduced the

profitability of domestic real capital. It therefore would not be optimal


'1See Dornbusch (1980) or Buiter and Miller (1981, (1982).
                                   29a


for capital to flow toward the country practicing a monetary tightening.

A policy intervention, in these circumstances, could well enhance the

efficiency of capital allocation in the world. Needlesss to say this

is an area where not much research has taken place to date.

    But even if restrictions on capital flows were imposed, and as a

consequence less of the adjustment took place through relative prices

and adverse spill—over effects on inflation, there would still be trans-

mission of disturbances through the current account. The simple fact

is that, whatever the exchange rate regime, there will be transmission of

real disturbances in some form. This suggests that the proper search

might be for a policy mix that makes disinflation less of a real disturbance.

The answer that is being widely suggested in this respect is incomes

policy combined with a monetary rule. Experience with incomes policy is

not encouraging by any means, but there is also a wide belief that a

flexible exchange rate system without a firm anchor both in monetary rulers

and effective supply side policies is proving severely disruptive to

the established liberal world order of growth and open trade and capital

markets.
                                              30




APPENDIX


       Combining (1) and (2), and using (3)—(5) as well as (7), leads to the

  following system of equations:



 A—i       m—w —     (i—)O    =   h(f+aO_br*_bO) c(r*+O+w)


 A—2       w = y(f_br*_bC+aO) + o(1—)Q



 which   defines the rates of change of wages and of the real exchange rate:



A—3           = [((l—)(bt3(y—cdj)—ctc) — a)'c)U —   ycf   —   b(m—w) + ycb(l_)r*]/A



 A—4           E   b(cy—h)—c< 0 by assumption.




A—5      0 = [(m.w)      +   (a(c-y'—h) + (ca—l)(l—))& + (c(l—by)+hb)r* + (cy—h)fJ/A



       The slopes of the schedules in Figure 1 are given by:



A—6      dw              (l—) [bi3(y—cth)—acj —   ayc
         dO
              w= 0


and



                     =   a(yc—h) + (ca—l)(l—)
                                                31




The longrun solutions for wages and the real exchange rate are:



A—8     0 =   [bXr*    —   AfjI(i    +   aX)



and



A—9    w = m +        (c-i- b(h— y/a)/(i+aX))r* —    ((h—y/a)/(1±aA))f

and are obtained b         setting   'i=S=O in A—i and A—2.
                                    32




Data



       In Table 1 the cyclical variable is the OECD unemployment rate which is

available only since 1964. The real oil price is measured as the dollar

price of oil deflated by the U.S. GNP deflator. The non—oil LDC terms of

trade are measured by the ratio of export to import prices reported in the

International Financial Statistics 74d/201 and 75d/201. The real exchange

rate for the dollar is reported in the same source in the section "Cost and

Price Comparisons in Manufacturing" where we have used the measure "Relative

Wholesale Prices."

       The real material price in equation 2. is the index of the prices of all

comniodities in line 76ax of the International Financial Statistics deflated

by the dollar export price of manufactures of industrialized countries

reported in the U.N. Monthly Bulletin of Statistics. In equation 3. an index

of 33 commodity prices is used. The index is prepared by the Commodities and

cport Projections Division of the World Bank and the most recent data are

contained in Table 15 of the July 1982 Update. The indices for agricultural

prices and the prices of the group metals and minerals are contained in the

same source.
                                     33


                                   References

Argy, V. and Salop, J. (1979) "Price and Output Effects of Monetary Policy
     and Fiscal Policy Under Flexible Exchange Rates." IMF
     June.

Artus, J. (1981) "Monetary Stabilisation With and Without Government
     Credibility." IMF Staff Papers, September.

Basevi, G. and de Grauwe, P. (1979) "Flexible Exchange Rates and Wages."
     Unplublished manuscript, University of Louvain.

 Bergsten,F. (1982) "The International Implication of Reaganomics." Kieler
     Vortrge, No. 96, 1982.

Blanchard, 0. (1979) "Speculative Bubbles, Crashes and Rational
     Expectations." Economic Letters, pp. 387—389.

             —(1982) "Credibility and Gradualism." Unpublished manuscript,
     Harvard University.

Branson, W. and Rotemberg, J. (1980) "International Adjustment with Wage
     Rigidity." European Economic Review, May.

Buiter, W. and Miller, N. (1981) "Monetary Policy and International
     Competitiveness: The Problem of Adjustment." Oxford Economic Papers,
     July.

                          (1982) "Real Exchange Rate Overshooting and the
     Output Cost of Bringing Down Inflation." Discussion Paper No. 115,
     Center for Labour Economics, LSE, February.

Caves, R. (1963) "Flexible Exchange Rates." American Economic Review, May.

Cooper, R. (1968) The Economics of Interdependence, McGraw—Hill.
Dornbusch, R. (1980) Open Economy Macroeconomics. Basic Books.

         —-—--—(1982a)      "Equilibrium and Disequilibrium Exchange Rates ."
      Unpublished manuscript.
—-—------———--—---( :L982b)   chane 1 -z et thc ac ro ecoco; of Exoha io        E- Le
      De teri: no Lion," in R. Hawkiri a and    La Lch (eds.) International
      Financial Markets, JAL Press.
Dreze, J. and Modigliafti, F. (1981) "Trade—Off Between Wages and Blaployment
     in an Open Economy." European Economic Review, January.
Flood, R. and Garber, P. (1982a) "A Model of Stochastic Process Switching."
     Unpublished manuscript, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve.
                                       34


Flood, R. and Garber, P. (1982b) "Collapsing Exchange Rate Regimes."
     Unpublished manuscript, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve.

Frenkel, J.A. (1981) "Flexible Exchange        Rates in   the 1970s." Journal of
     Political Economy, Auust.

              (1976) "The Optimal Dirty Float.". Unpublished manuscript,
     University of Chicago.

               and Mussa, M. (1980) "The Efficiency of Foreign &change
     Markets and Measures of Turbulence." American Economic Review, May.

Genberg. H. (1981) "Effects of Central Bank Intervention in the Foreign
     Exchange Market." IMF Staff Papers, September.

Henderson, D. (1982) "The Role of Intervention Policy in Open Economy
     Financial Policy: A Macroeconomic Persepective." Unpublished
     manuscript, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve.

International Monetary Fund, (1982) World Economic Outlook, Washington, DC,
     July.

Johnson, H.G. (1969) "The Case for Flexible Exchange Rates 1969."
     Reproduced in his Further Essays in Monetary Economics, George Allen &
     Unwin, 1972.

Krugman, P. (1980) "Consumption Preferences, Asset Demands and Distribution
     Effects in International Financial Markets." Unpublished manuscript,
     M.I.T.

Liviathan, N. (1979) "Neutral Monetary Policy and the Capital Import Tax."
     Unpublished manuscript, Hebrew University.

Lizondo, S. (1980) "Foreign Exchange Futures Prices Under Fixed Exchange
     Rates." Unpublished manuscript, ITA, (Mexico).

Marston, R,C. (1982) "Wages Relative Prices and the Choice Between Fixed and
     Flexible Exchange Rates." Canadian Journal of Economics, 1, February.

Modigliani,   F. (1972)   "Intorriotionol Cap:.ta1    Movciicats, Fixed   Parities, and
     Monetary   and Fiscal Policies," in J. Bhagwati and H. Eckaus (eds.)
     DeveiornentaP1annnc,         George    Allen   & Unwin.

      —--———   and Padoa Schioppa, T. Y/F3) The r iarment of on Oren
     Economy with 100 FIun Tndexation. Pnincetoa ssays in Thitemiational
     Finance, No. 130.

McKinnon, H. (1932) "Currency Substitution and Instability          in the World
     Dollar Standard." American Economic Review, June.
Mundell, H. (1981) "The Role of Official Intervention." The Group of
     Thirty, Occacional Paper, No. 6.
                                  35



Obstfeld, M. (1982) "Relative Prices, Employment and the Exchange Rate in an
     Economy with Perfect Foresight." Econometrica, September.

Sachs, J. (1981) "Wage Indexation, Flexible Exchange Rates and Macroeconomic
     Policy." Quarterly Journal of Economics.

          (1980) "Wages, Profits and Macroeconomics Adjustment in the
     Industrialized Countries in the 1970s." Brookings Papers on Economics
     Activity, 1.

Salant, S. and Henderson, D. (1978) "Market Anticipations of Government
     Policy and the Price of Gold." Journal of Political E, 4.

Tirole, J. (1982) "on the Possibility of Speculation under Rational
     Expectations." Econometrica, forthcoming.

Tobin, J. (1978) "A Proposal for International Monetary Reform."
     Unpublished manuscript, Cowles Counission, Yale University.

Williamson, J. (1982) The Open Economy and the World_Economy, Basic Books,
     fothcorning.
