NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

PORT EFFICIENCY, MARITIME TRANSPORT
COSTS AND BILATERAL TRADE
Ximena Clark
David Dollar
Alejandro Micco
Working Paper 10353
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10353
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2004

We thank Danielken Molina and Natalia Perez for valuable research assistance, Ronald Fisher and
participants at the IADB’s seminar, LACEA 2001 and IASE 2003 conference. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2004 by Ximena Clark, David Dollar, and Alejandro Micco. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Port Efficiency, Maritime Transport Costs and Bilateral Trade
Ximena Clark, David Dollar, and Alejandro Micco
NBER Working Paper No. 10353
March 2004
JEL No. F1, L41, L92
ABSTRACT
Recent literature has emphasized the importance of transport costs and infrastructure in explaining
trade, access to markets, and increases in per capita income. For most Latin American countries,
transport costs are a greater barrier to U.S. markets than import tariffs. We investigate the
determinants of shipping costs to the U.S. with a large database of more than 300,000 observations
per year on shipments of products aggregated at six-digit HS level from different ports around the
world. Distance, volumes and product characteristics matter. In addition, we find that ports
efficiency is an important determinant of shipping costs. Improving port efficiency from the 25th
to the 75th percentile reduces shipping costs by 12 percent. (Bad ports are equivalent to being 60%
farther away from markets for the average country.) Inefficient ports also increase handling costs,
which are one of the components of shipping costs. Reductions in country inefficiencies associated
to transport costs from the 25th to 75th percentiles imply an increase in bilateral trade of around 25
percent. Finally, we try to explain variations in port efficiency and find that they are linked to
excessive regulation, the prevalence of organized crime, and the general condition of the country's
infrastructure.
Ximena Clark
World Bank
David Dollar
World Bank
Alejandro Micco
Inter-American Development Bank
alejandromi@iadb.org

I. Introduction
Since the beginning of modern economics the literature concerning the
determination of living standards has been interested in trade.2 Despite some lingering
controversy, empirical studies show a positive relationship between trade and growth.
Frankel and Romer (1999) claim that “…trade has a quantitatively large, significant, and
robust positive effect on income.”3
The lack of initial consensus among researchers on the relationship between trade
and growth has been mirrored by differences in the actual trade strategies of developing
countries. During the 1960s and into the 1970s, many countries adopted import
substitution policies to protect their infant industries, though a few economies in East
Asia took a different approach. By the 1990s many developing countries, including most
of the large ones, had shifted to an outward-oriented strategy and had seen accelerations
in their growth rates.4
These recent liberalizations have reduced tariff and, in some cases, non-tariff
barriers too. For instance, Asia reduced its average tariff rate from 30% at the beginning
of the 1980s to 14% by the end of the 1990s, and Latin America reduced its average tariff
rate from 31% to 11%.5 These reductions in artificial trade barriers have implied that the
relative importance of transport costs as a determinant of trade has increased.6 As shown
in Figure 1, in 1997 total import freight costs represented 5.25 percent of world imports.
This percentage -which may seem low- is mainly driven by developed countries, which
represent more than 70 percent of world imports and whose proximity to each other is
reflected in a relatively low freight cost (4.2%). When disaggregating these costs by
region, they turn out to be substantially higher. Although Latin America appears to have
low freight costs relative to the other developing regions (7% compared to 8% for Asia
2

Adams Smith (The Wealth of Nations, 1776), in his discussion of specialization and the extent of the
market stresses the relationship between wealth and trade between nations.
3
Similarly, Ades and Glaeser (1999) find that openness accelerates growth of backward economies. For a
skeptical view of the cross-national evidence, see Rodriguez and Rodrik (1999).
4
See Dollar and Kraay (2001).
5
Central America and the Caribbean reduced its average tariff rate from 21% to 9% between these periods,
and African countries from 30% to 20%. These average tariff rates correspond to simple averages across
countries of their unweighted tariff. If we consider weighted tariffs, the resulting average tariff rates by the
end of the 90s should be smaller. (Source: World Bank)

1

and 11.5% for Africa), the Latin American figure is weighted by Mexico’s proximity to
its main trading partner, the United States, and consequently low freight costs. When
Mexico is excluded, Latin American average freight costs rise to 8.3 percent, more
similar to the rest of the developing countries.
As liberalization continues to reduce artificial barriers, the effective rate of
protection provided by transport costs is now in many cases higher than the one provided
by tariffs. Figure 2 presents a comparison of average tariffs and a measure of transport
costs for various countries around the world, and Figure 3 presents an alternative
comparison of transport costs to the US and average tariffs faced in the US market by a
group of Latin American countries. From Figure 3, it is striking to realize that for some
countries, such as Chile and Ecuador, transport costs exceed by more than twenty times
the average tariffs they face in the US market. Consequently, any additional effort to
integrate a country into the trading system should consider and analyze the effect of
transport costs and its determinants.
As a result, some immediate questions arise. How much do these transport costs
affect trade and growth? How much of these costs can be affected by government
policies? The broad literature that applies the gravity approach to the study of
international bilateral trade shows that geographical distance, which is used as proxy for
transport costs, is negatively related to trade.7 In a recent paper, Limao and Venables
(2000, henceforth LV) show that raising transport costs by 10 percent reduces trade
volumes by more than 20 percent. They also show that poor infrastructure accounts for
more than 40% of predicted transport costs. In a different analysis, Radelet and Sachs
(1998) show that shipping costs reduce the rate of growth of both manufactured exports
and GDP per capita. These authors claim that “… doubling the shipping cost (e.g. from an
8% to 16% CIF band) is associated with slower annual growth of slightly more than-half
of one percentage point.”
In spite of the relevance of transport costs for trade and growth, there are not
many other studies on transport costs. Moreover, these few studies rely on macro level
data, which is certainly useful but misses the advantages that micro data can have. An

6
7

See Amjadi and Yeats (1995) and Radelet and Sachs (1998).
An example of this literature is Bergstrand (1985).

2

exception is a recent study of Fink, Mattoo and Neagu (2000, henceforth FMN), which
analyzes the determinants of maritime transport costs in 1998, focusing on the effect of
non-competitive public and private policies. They find the latter have a significant effect
on transport costs. But, what about other factors influencing transport costs, such as port
efficiency? There is a wide consensus on the crucial importance of port activities for the
transport services. However, there are no measures of how important are inefficiencies in
transport costs within port level. This is one of the objectives of this study. We analyze
the effect of port efficiency on transport costs (in addition to other standard variables),
and then we explore the factors that lie behind port efficiency.8
We find that an increase in a 100 percent in the distance between the export
country and the U.S, increases maritime transport costs in around 20 percent. A result
that is quite consistent with the existent literature. With respect to port efficiency, we find
that improving port efficiency from the 25th to 75th percentiles reduces shipping costs by
more than 12%. This result is robust to different definitions of port efficiency as well as
different years.
In turn, when looking at the determinants of port efficiency, we find that the level
of infrastructure and organized crime exert a significant positive and negative influence
respectively. In addition, policy variables reflecting regulations at seaports affect port
efficiency in a non-linear way. This result suggests that having some level of regulation
increases port efficiency, but an excess of regulation could start to reverse these gains.
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. Section II presents a
description of factors that may be behind transport costs. Section III describes the
econometric model used to quantify the relative importance of these factors affecting
transport costs. It also contains a description of the data used as well as the results of our
analyses. In Section IV, we analyze how important are infrastructure, regulation and
organized crime in explaining port efficiency. In Section V we construct an index of
country-specific maritime transport costs that we include in a standard trade gravity
model. Section VI concludes.

8

Our analysis departs from FMN (2000) by incorporating port efficiency variables and by redefining some
variables. In addition, we address the problems of endogeneity and omitted variable bias that their

3

II.

What Factors Explain Maritime Transport Costs?
As shown, transport costs may be an important barrier to trade and could have an

important effect on income. But why do some countries have higher transport costs than
others? What are the main determinants of these transport costs? Can government
policies affect these costs? Following some previous studies,9 this section addresses these
questions, based on a qualitative and quantitative description of transport cost
determinants. Given its relative importance (and also the availability of data), the main
focus in this paper is on international maritime transport cost.
The nature of services provided by shipping companies forces them to be
transnational companies serving more than one country. In general, these companies have
access to international capital markets and they are able to hire workers from all over the
world10, although under some restrictions sometimes. In any case, we should not expect
differences in capital or labor costs to be the main factors in explaining differences of
transport costs across countries. There are many other important specific factors affecting
transport costs across countries, which we present next.
The obvious and most studied determinant of transport cost is geography,
particularly distance.11 The greater the distance between two markets, the higher the
expected transport cost is. Using shipping company quotes for the cost of transporting a
standard container from Baltimore (USA) to selected worldwide destinations, LV(2000)
find that an extra 1,000 km raises transport costs by $380 (or 8% for a median shipment).
Moreover, breaking the journey into an overland and a sea component, an extra 1,000 km
by sea raises costs by only $190 while the same distance by land raises costs by $1,380, 4
and 30 percent of a median shipment, respectively. In addition, if a country is landlocked,

estimations present, and we also extend backward the period of analysis to 1995.
9
This section follows McConville (1999) Fuchsluger (1999), Limao and Venables (2000), and Fink,
Mattoo and Neagu (2000).
10
Shipping companies prefer to sail their ships under open-registry flags. This explains that Panama,
Liberia, Cyprus and Bahamas account for more than 40 percents of world fleet (measured in dead weight
tons -dwt-) –UNCTAD (1998).
11
It has long been recognized that bilateral trade patterns are well described empirically by the so-called
gravity equation, which relates bilateral trade positively to both countries GDP and negatively to the
distance (which is used as proxy for transport cost) between them. See Bergstrand (1985).

4

transport costs rise by $2,170, almost a 50 percent increase in the average cost.12 In other
words, being landlocked is equivalent to being located 10,000 km farther away from
markets.
Trade composition additionally helps to explain transport costs differences across
countries. First of all, due to the insurance component of transport costs, products with
higher unit value have higher charges per unit of weight. On average, insurance fees are
around 2 percent of the traded value and they represent around 15 percent of total
maritime charges. Therefore, high value added exporting countries should have higher
charges per unit weight due to this insurance component. On the other hand, some
products require special transport features and therefore have different freight rates. 13
Directional imbalance in trade between countries implies that many carriers are
forced to haul empty containers back. As a result, either imports or exports become more
expensive. Fuchsluger (2000) shows that this phenomenon is observed in the bilateral
trade between the US and the Caribbean. In 1998, for instance, 72 percent of containers
sent from the Caribbean to the US were empty. This excess of supply in the northbound
route implied that a US exporter paid 83 percent more than a US importer for the same
type of merchandise between Miami and Port of Spain (Trinidad and Tobago).14 Similar
phenomena occur in the Asian-US and the Asian-European trade routes, where excess of
supply means that Asian exporters end up paying more than 50% of extra charge in
transport costs compared to suppliers in the US and Europe.15
Maritime transport is a classic example of an industry that faces increasing returns
to scale. Alfred Marshall put it clearly long ago: “… a ship’s carrying power varies as the
cube of her dimensions, while the resistance offered by the water increases only a little

12

This result controls by the extra overland distance that must be overcome by landlocked countries to
reach the sea.
13
LSU-National Ports and Waterways Institute (1998) shows that the average freight rates between Central
America and Miami for cooled load merchandise is about twice the transport cost for textiles.
14
The actual freight rates for a 20-feet dry container between Miami and Port of Spain were $1,400 and
$750 for the southbound and northbound route, respectively.
15
Ships going from Asia to the US utilize more than 75 percent of their capacity, while when going back to
Asia the utilization does not even attain a 50 percent rate. The rates from Asia to the US and in the opposite
direction are $1561/TEU (twenty-feet equivalent unit) and $999/TEU respectively. The capacity utilization
of ships from Asia to Europe is 75% and 58% in the opposite direction, while the rates charged by shipping
companies are $1353/TEU and $873/TEU respectively. See Review of Maritime Transport 1999.

5

faster than the square of her dimensions".16 Besides increasing returns at the vessel level,
there are economies of scale at the seaport level. For instance, at the port of Buenos Aires
(Argentina) the cost of using the access channel is $70 per container for a 200 TEU17
vessel but only $14 per container for a 1000 TEU vessel.18 In general, even though most
of these economies of scale are at the vessel level, in practice they are related to the total
volume of trade between two regions. Maritime routes with low trade volumes are
covered by small vessels and vice versa. 19
In addition, the development of containerized transport has been an important
technological change in the transport sector during the last decades. Containers have
allowed large cost reductions in cargo handling, increasing cargo transshipment and
therefore national and international cabotage.20 In turn, this increase in cabotage has
induced the creation of hub ports that allow countries or regions to take advantage of
increasing return to scale.21
Commercial routes more liable to competition and less subject to monopoly
power will tend to have lower markups. Monopoly powers can be sustained either by
government restrictive trade policies or by private anti-competitive practices (cartels).
The former includes a variety of cargo reservation schemes, for example the UN Liner
Code.22 Private anti-competitive practices include, among others, the practice of fixing
rates of maritime conferences.23 Some authors have claimed that maritime conferences
have lost power in recent years,24 which has forced shipping companies to merge as a
way to hold their monopoly power.25
16

Quoted by McConville (1999). Additional economies of scale come from both material to build the
vessel and labor to operate it (especially that of navigation).
17
TEU is a standard container measure and it refers to Twenty Feet Equivalent Unit.
18
See Fuchsluger (2000).
19
See PIERS, On Board Review, Spring 1997.
20
Cabotage refers to transshipment of the merchandise before it arrives to its final destination.
21
See Hoffman (2000).
22
This agreement stipulates that conference trade between two economies can allocate cargo according to
the 40:40:20 principle. Forty per cent of tonnage is reserved for the national flag lines of each exporting
and importing economy and the remaining 20 per cent is to be allocated to liner ships from a third
economy.
23
Maritime conferences enjoy an exemption from competition rules in major trading countries, like the US
and the European Union.
24
In the last years there have been some reforms in the regulation affecting international shipping. For
instance, the United States’ Ocean Shipping Reform Act of 1998 eroded the power of conferences, creating
greater scope for price competition.
25
See Fink, Mattoo and Neagu (2000) and Hoffman (2000).

6

Similar restrictions and anti-competitive practices can induce inefficiencies and/or
monopoly power in ports. For example, in many countries workers are required to have
special license to be able to provide stevedoring services, and in general these restrictions
imply high fees and low productivity.26
Finally, the quality of onshore infrastructure is an important determinant of
transport costs. LV(2000) find that it accounts for 40 percent of predicted transport costs
for coastal countries, and up to 60% for landlocked ones.27 If a country with a relatively
poor infrastructure, say at the 75th percentile in an international ranking, is able to
upgrade to the 25th percentile, it will be able to reduce transport costs by between 30 and
50 percent.28

III.

Maritime Transport Costs Estimation
Focusing on the described factors affecting transport costs, this section attempts to

quantify them on maritime transport charges paid by U.S. imports carried by liner
companies29 from countries all over the world during the period 1995-2000. Following
previous studies in the literature we use a reduced form price equation.30 In our analysis
we stress the effect of port efficiency on maritime transport costs and we address the
problems of endogeneity and omitted variable bias that price equation has.

26

In 1981 the supply of seaport service were de-regulated in Chile, and the change in legislation induced a
significant fall in seaport cost. See Trujillo and Nombela (1999) and Camara Chilena Maritima (1999) for a
discussion of this case.
27
Their infrastructure index is measured as a simple weighted average of kilometers of road, paved road,
rail and telephone main line (per square Km of country area and population, respectively). In their
regression, the authors use this index to the power of -.3.
28
LV(2000) use two alternative measures of transport costs: CIF/FOB ratios reported for bilateral trade
between countries by the IMF and quotes from a shipping company. According to them, an improvement in
own infrastructure from the 75th to the 25th percentiles reduces transport costs by 30% based on shipping
data (from $6,604 to $4,638) and by more than 50% based on the CIF/FOB ratio (from 1.40 to 1.11). In
addition, an improvement in own and transit countries’ infrastructures from the 75th to the 25th percentiles
reduces by more than half the disadvantage associated with being landlocked.
29
For most countries, US imports account for a significant share of their exports. For instance, US imports
accounted for 56 percent of Latin American exports in 1999, and they accounted for 31 percent of Japan's
exports this year.
30
This analysis closely follows FMN (2000)

7

Empirical Framework
To estimate the importance of each factor in maritime transport costs we use a
standard reduced form approach. Maritime charges are assumed to be equal to the
marginal cost multiplied by shipping companies’ markup. Expressed in logarithm, we
have:

pijk = mc(i,j,k) + µ(I, J, k)

[1]

Where pijk is the charges per unit of weight, in logarithm, for the product k transported
between locations i and j. i corresponds to foreign port, located in country I and j
corresponds to US port, located in district J. k is the traded product, aggregated at the 6
digit of the Harmonized System (HS) Classification. Finally, mc and µ are the marginal
cost and markup, respectively (in logarithm).
As expressed in equation [1], both the marginal cost and the markup should be a
function of factors depending on the port or country of origin (i,I), the port or district of
destiny in the US (j,J) and the type of product (k). In particular, we assume that the
marginal cost has the following form:

mcijk = αJ + λk + ψ wvijk + γ Tijk + ∂ diJ + η qIJ + θ ImbI+ ω PEI

[2]

Where:

αJ: dummy variable referring to US district J.
λk: dummy variable referring to product k.
wvijk: value per weight for product k, transported from foreign port i to US port j, in
logarithm. We also refer to this variable as the weight value.
Tijk: fraction of k goods shipped (from i to j) in containers.
diJ: distance between foreign port i and US custom district J, in logarithm.
qIJ: volume of imports carried by liner companies between country I and US coasts, in
logarithm.
ImbI: Directional imbalance in trade between the USA and country I, measured as US
exports minus US imports divided by total trade between both countries.
PEI: Foreign country I ports’ efficiency.

8

The first term (αJ) in equation [2] takes into account potential differences in port
efficiencies across US custom districts. The second term (λk) accounts for different
marginal costs across products. The third term – weight value, (wvijk) – is used as a proxy
for the insurance component of the maritime transport cost (pijk). The fourth term (Tijk)
represent a technological effect, and it captures reductions in costs induced by the
utilization of containers. The fifth term (diJ) refers to the maritime distance between trade
partners. The next two variables (qIJ and ImbI) account for potential economies of scale
and directional imbalance in trade, and the last term (PEI) accounts for port efficiency in
the foreign country. Thus, we expect a positive sign for ψ and ∂, and a negative sign for

γ, η, θ and ω.31
Finally, and following closely FMN (2000) formulation, we assume that shipping
companies’ markups have the following form:

µ(I, J, k) = ρk + ψPA AIJPA + ψCA AIJCA

[3]

Where
AIJPA: existence of price-fixing agreements between country I and US district J.
AIJCA: existence of cooperative working agreement between country I and US district J.
The first term (ρk) in the above equation reflects a product-specific effect that
captures differences in transport demand elasticity across goods (this is a derived demand
from the final demand of good k in the US). The last two terms account for potential
collusive agreements between shipping companies covering a same route. Two types of
agreements are distinguished: price-fixing agreements (which include most maritime
conferences), and cooperative working agreements that do not have binding rate setting
authority. Substituting the second and third equations into the first one, we obtain the
econometric model to be estimated:

31

Contrary to previous studies like FMN (2000), we include the weight-to-value variable to control for
products difference within product at 6 digit HS set of goods. Even within this narrowly define sets,
products still have important differences that may cause important omitted variable bias.

9

pijk = αJ +βk +ψ wvijk +γ Tijk +∂ diJ +ηqIJ +θ ImbI +ω PEI +ψPAAIJPA +ψCAAIJCA +εijk
[4]
Where:

βk ≡ λ k +ρ k
εijk: error term.
In the empirical section we use instrumental variables to control for the
endogeneity problem in our reduced form specification. Following gravity literature on
trade, we use foreign country’s GDP as an instrument of the volume of imports.
Data and Results32
Data on maritime transport costs, value and volume of imports, and shipping
characteristics – like the percentage of the goods transported through containers – come
from the U.S. Import Waterborne Databank (U.S. Department of Transportation) for the
years 1996, 1998 and 2000. Our dependent variable – transport costs – is constructed
using imports charges and import weight per product, aggregated at the six level HS
system. The U.S. Census Bureau defines Imports charges as: "...the aggregate cost of all
freight, insurance, and other charges (excluding U.S. import duties) incurred in bringing
the merchandise from alongside the carrier at the port of exportation -in the country of
exportation- and placing it alongside the carrier at the first port of entry in the United
States.”
Even though the U.S. Import Waterborne Databank includes all U.S. imports
carried by sea classified by type of vessel service (liner, tanker and tramp), we focus only
on liner services to be able to estimate the effect of conferences and agreements in
maritime charges.33 Liner imports account for around 50 percent of total US imports and
65 percent of US maritime imports.34 Given that our objective is to focus only on

32

Appendix A gives a complete description of the data used.
This also allow us to compare our results with FMN (2000) ones. Liner services are scheduled carriers
that advertise in publications advance of sailing. They generally have a fix itinerary and tend to carry mixed
types of containerized, non-bulk cargo. Tramp and tanker services, in turn, are (dry, liquid) bulk carriers
and have no regular scheduled itineraries, but are more depending on momentary demand.
34
The remaining US imports by sea are carried by tramp services.
33

10

maritime transport costs, we also drop all the observations for which the origin of the
import is different from the port of shipment.35
The distance variable and the data on maritime conferences and working
agreement between liners were kindly provided by FMN(2000). The first correspond to
the distance between foreign ports and US custom districts; it is expressed in nautical
miles, and comes in turn from a private service. The data on carrier agreements comes
from the Federal Maritime Commission, it covers 59 countries and is available only for
1998. Therefore, when estimating for the other years, we have no choice but to use the
same 1998 values.
Unfortunately, there is not much comparable information about port efficiency –at
port level- to be used in a cross-country analysis.36 So, we use an aggregated measure per country- of port efficiency, consisting of a one-to-seven index (with 7 being the best
score) from the Global Competitiveness Report (GCR). This annual data is available for
the period 1995-2000. Given that this index does not vary over time, we use 1999 for all
the years because it covers more countries37. As alternative measures, we also use proxies
for seaport infrastructure (therefore for port efficiency). First, we use the total square
number of largest seaports by country, normalized by the product between foreign
country’s population and area. A port is classified as large if it has lifts with a leverage
capacity of 50 tons and above38. We also use foreign countries’ GDP per capita as an
alternative proxy of port efficiency. Countries' GDP per capita are correlated with their
level of infrastructure. For our particular problem – explaining the cost of shipping the
same product from different ports in the world to the U.S. – it is hard to see why the per
capita GDP of the sending country would matter except to the extent that it is proxying
for the quality of infrastructure. As noted, we will use these indirect measures and a
direct measure of port efficiency in different specifications.
35

That is, in transit merchandise is not included.
The World Bank is launching a program (Global Facilitation Partnership for Transportation and Trade)
to focus on significant improvements in the invisible infrastructure of transport and trade in different
member countries. However, the project is in its first stage and it does not cover all the countries of our
sample yet.
37
The report, in turn, is based on micro-data from annual surveys at firm level, made to a representative
group of enterprises in every country. The particular question for port efficiency is: "Port facilities and
inland waterways are extensive and efficient. (1 = strongly disagree, 7 = strongly agree)". The number of
countries covered has been growing over time (from 44 in the 1996 report to 56 in the 2000 one).
38
This information was obtained from the database found in the Portualia website: www.portualia.com
36

11

In addition to the number of large seaports and per capita GDP, we construct a
third measure of infrastructure – this time an index à la LV (2000) – based on information
at country level on paved road, paved airports, railways and telephone lines.39 We
incorporate this variable based on the assumption that the level of infrastructure of a
country is highly correlated with the level of infrastructure of their ports, and also
because it allows us to compare our results with LV (2000). We should note that, despite
having a somewhat similar infrastructure index, our formulation differs from that of LV
(2000) in many respects. First, one of their measures of transport costs is the CIF/FOB
ratio, which has the disadvantage of being an aggregate measure for all products, while
we use transport cost information at product level. Also, this measure is well known for
having measurement deficiencies (although they try to control for that). Their second
measure of transport costs – shipping rates (for a homogeneous product) from Baltimore
to a group of different countries – tries to address these problems. However, as the same
authors point out, the shipping rates from Baltimore are not necessarily representative not even for the rest of the US ports. Our database, on the other hand, has information
from many ports around the world to different ports in the US.40 An advantage of their
second measure, however, is that it allows them to construct an estimate of inland
transport cost, which is not our purpose in this paper.
Table 1 reports our estimations for equation [4] using an Instrumental Variable
(IV) technique to control for the endogeneity of total volume. We use countries’ GDP as
instrument. We make the identifying assumption that if country size affects transport
costs, it does so through the volume of trade and economies of scale in shipping. In all
the estimations, we allow the observations to be independent across exporting countries,
but not necessarily independent within countries. At the same time, the standard errors
presented in the table correspond to the consistent Huber/White ones. We start presenting
the results only for 1998 because the variables on maritime conferences and working
agreement between liners refer to this particular year. The first column report the results
using the variable “Port Efficiency” from the GCR as a proxy for port competence,
columns (2) uses the square number of large ports normalized by foreign country’s area
39

See the Appendix for a description of its construction.

12

and population, columns (3) uses the index of infrastructure we constructed, finally
column (4) reports the results using GDP per Capita as a proxy for port efficiency. As it
can be seen, in all estimations most of the variables are highly significant and with the
expected sign.
Distance has a significant (at 1%) positive effect on transport costs. A doubling in
distance, for instance, roughly generates an 18 percent increase in transport costs. This
distance elasticity close to 0.2 is consistent with the existent literature on transport costs.
The value per weight variable is also positive and highly significant, with a t-statistic
around 50. As already stated, these regressions include dummy variables for products
aggregated at the six-digit HS level. One might think that unit values would be quite
similar across countries at that level of desagregation; not so. Feenstra (1996) shows that
there is a large variation in unit values even at the 10-digit HS level. He cites the
examples of men’s cotton shirts, which the U.S. imports from fully half of its 162 trading
partners. The unit values range from $56 (Japan) to $1 (Senegal). These differences in
unit values lead to large differences in insurance costs per kilogram, even for
“homogeneous” products. So, it is not surprising that we find that the more expensive the
product, per unit of weight, the higher the insurance and hence the overall transport
cost.41
The next variable, the level of containerization, presents a significant negative
effect on transport costs. As explained before, this variable represents technological
change at both vessels and seaport level. The idea behind this result is that
containerization reduces services cost, such as cargo handling, and therefore total
maritime charges. Our results suggest that containers reduce transport costs in around 4
percent. It is important to note that in 1998, most of the cargo coming through liners was
in containers (90%), in particular the cargo that came from developed countries.

40

In addition, we believe their second sample is biased in favor of African countries. The bad infrastructure
and port quality of African countries may be biasing upward the coefficient estimates they obtain.
41
In addition, there is the possibility that the unit weight variable could be capturing some measurement
errors. The argument is as follows. One should expect that the variables charges and (total) import value
were very carefully measured, because the US custom constructs the dutiable value of imports by excluding
the former to the latter (and it should have a special interest in calculating it correctly). However, this could
not be case for the measurement of weight. If so, measurement errors in the weight variable would induce a
positive correlation between charges per weight (our dependent variable) and value per weight.

13

Directional imbalance in trade between USA and the source country has the
expected negative sign and is significant in half of the specifications. Move from a
favorable imbalance of 50 percent to a negative one of the same amount increases
transport costs in around 6 percent.
The variable capturing economies of scale is the level of trade that goes through a
particular maritime route.42 This variable, calculated in terms of volume (weight), has a
significant negative coefficient (as expected).43 As theory and previous studies shows
maritime transport presents economies of scale. These may come from the fact that more
transited routes are covered by the largest ships, which in fact have a larger rate of
occupancy, or they present more competition due to the higher number of liner
companies covering the route. In our sample, an increase in export volume from the level
of Cyprus to the one of Indonesia reduces transport costs in around 20%.44
With respect to the two variables referring to agreements between liner
companies, only the first of them (price fixing binding agreements) turns out to be
positive -as expected- but only significant (at 10%) in only one specification45 (column
4). This result seems to suggest that maritime conferences have been exerting some mild
monopoly power – adding at most an estimated of around 5% to transport costs, ceteris
paribus. However, as we will see later, this effect is not always significant for other years
and in some specifications it has the opposite sign.46
Finally, the coefficient related to port efficiency is negative and significant (at 1%
in all cases): the greater the efficiency at port level, the lower the transport costs. This
42

Each couple foreign country and US coast is defined as a maritime route. We define three coasts in the
US: East, West and Golf coast.
43
We must note that this variable differs from the one presented by Fink, Mattoo and Neagu (2000) in two
aspects. First, they use the value of imports while we use the volume of imports (in tons). Second, the
definitions of maritime route through which economies of scale arise are different: they use the trade (in
value) between foreign ports and US districts (31), while we use the trade (in volume) between foreign
countries and US coasts (3).
44
In term of countries (not of observations), Cyprus and Indonesia are in the percentile 15 and 85
respectively.
45
FMN (2000) find the price-fixing agreement dummy variable to be significant and much larger in
magnitude: between .4 and .51; that is, the maritime agreements add at least 40% to transport costs. They
also use policy variables referring to cargo reservation policies (not significant), cargo handling services
(significant in one estimation but with wrong sign, and not significant in another), and mandatory port
services (significant, correct sign).
46
This result differs from FMN (2000). If we run our regressions without including our weight value
variable we obtain their results (significant effect of price agreement on transport costs), therefore it seems
that their results are driven by an omitted variable bias effect.

14

result is robust for our four alternative measures of port efficiency (columns 1 to 4). In
particular, the coefficient for the measure from the Global Competitiveness Report
(column 1), along with the distribution of the port efficiency index among countries,
indicates that an improvement in port efficiency from the 25th to the 75th percentile
reduces transport charges a little more than 10%.47 In terms of particular countries, if
China, Indonesia and/or Mexico -for instance- improved their port efficiency to levels
observed in countries like France and/or Sweden, their reductions in transport costs
would be around 10%. When using our two proxies for seaport infrastructure we find
similar results but slightly smaller, and higher when we use GDP per capita. 48 This may
reflect the fact that our infrastructure indexes are a more noisy measure of port efficiency
because they do not capture the quality of infrastructure nor of services.
To see if our results hold within income country groups (Table 2), we include a
dummy variable that takes the value of one if the foreign country is a developed country,
and zero otherwise. We find that all of our previous results are robust to the inclusion of
this dummy, except for the “price fixing binding agreements” variable, which is not
significant and changes sign in some specifications. All of our “port efficiency” measures
remain very significant and their coefficient increases by around 20%. The coefficient for
the variable port efficiency from the GCR indicates that an improvement in port
efficiency from the 25th to the 75th percentile reduces transport charges a little more than
12%.
We performed similar estimations for the years 1996 and 2000. For brevity of
space, Table 3 presents the estimated coefficients only for the IV regressions using the
GCR variable for port efficiency with and without our developed country dummy.49
For each year, the coefficient on distance is very significant and oscillates around
0.2. Weight-to-value are quite stable and significant (at 1%).50 Prior to 1999 (96-98), the
47

That is, when port efficiency is measured with the GCR index, an improvement in port efficiency from
25th to 75th percentile (i.e., from a score of 3.4 to 5.6 respectively) generates a maritime transport costs
decline of around 12%.
48
When proxying port efficiency with the per capita GDP, an increase from the 25th to the 75th percentile
reduces maritime transport charges in 14%.
49
We use the port efficiency index from the 1999 GCR for all years, in order to avoid a drastic decrease in
the number of countries covered by the report.
50
The exception is the coefficient for distance in 1999, which increases to 0.25. One reason why distance
may be having a bigger effect this year could be the increase in oil prices (from an average of $13/barrel in
1998 to $18/barrel in 1999).

15

first year after the US eroded the power of Conferences, the price-fixing rate agreement
has the expected sign in some specifications but it is significant only in some
specifications (10%).51 In 2000, the coefficient turns negative, a result that may be related
to a war in prices between shipping companies that were previously members of the
conferences. Cooperative agreement is only significant for the 1996 specification, but it
has the wrong sign. From these results it is difficult to conclude whether conferences
have been exerting some monopoly power or not.
From Table 3 we can see that the coefficient on containerization is negative in
1996 but shifts sign in 200052. In this year, almost all products came in containers, in fact
this year our median value for containerization is 100 percent and the percentile 90 is 93
percent. Therefore is possible that this year our containerization variable is capturing a
specific characteristic of one set of product coming from some particular countries. In the
case of directional imbalance, the coefficients reported have the expected sign, but they
are not significant in all the specifications. Total Liner Volumes coefficient is negative
in all the specifications, and is significant at standard levels.53 Finally, the estimated
coefficient for port efficiency is stable and significant from both an economic and
statistical point of view. When we use our infrastructure indexes (not shown here) we
obtain similar results in terms of stability and significance. These results allow us to
conclude that port efficiency is an important determinant of maritime transport costs. For
example, using the estimated coefficient for year 2000, if countries like Ecuador, India or
Brazil improve their port efficiency from their current level to the 75th percentile -that is,
to a level attained by France or Sweden- they would reduce their maritime transport costs
by more than 15% each.
A final caveat about these results. Our model assumes that, if inefficiency in a
port raises shipping costs by 10% for a shipment of shirts, it will increase the shipping
costs for a shipment of cars by the same 10%. Suppose, instead, that the “tax equivalent”
of port inefficiency varies by product. Then, products for which the tax is excessively
51

This variable is significant at 10 % when we use the number of large seaport as proxy for efficiency (not
reported).
52
The low variance on the containerization levels in liner transport services may be explaining the nonsignificance.
53
For the year 2000 this variable is significant in some non-reported regressions (when we include a
variable capturing regulations- equivalent to Table 7-).

16

high will not be exported and we will not observe them in the data. In other words, we
have estimated the effect of port inefficiency for products that are actually shipped. The
effect may be higher for some products, which are then not exported. In this sense our
estimate of the cost of port inefficiency may be conservative.

IV.

Determinants of Port Efficiency
The previous subsection stresses the importance of port efficiency on maritime

transport cost, but what are the factors behind port efficiency? The activities required at
port level are sometimes crucial for international trade transactions. These include not
only activities that depend on port infrastructure, like pilotage, towing and tug assistance,
or cargo handling (among others), but also activities related to customs requirements. It is
often claimed that "...the (in)efficiency, even timing, of many of port operations is
strongly influenced (if not dictated) by customs".54,55
Some legal restrictions can negatively affect port performance. For example, in
many countries workers are required to have special license to be able to provide
stevedoring services, artificially increasing seaport costs. Other deficiencies, associated
with port management itself, are also harmful to country competitiveness. For instance,
some ports still receive cargo without specifying the presentation of a Standard Shipping
Note, which is inconceivable in modern port practice. In many ports, it is quite
impossible to obtain a written and accurate account of the main port procedures, and
sometimes port regulations are not clear about the acceptance of responsibilities (for
cargo in shed or on the quay, for instance). All of this generates unreasonably long
delays, increases the risks of damage and pilferage of products (in turn raising the
insurance premiums), and as a consequence considerably increases costs associated with
port activities.
Port efficiency varies widely from country to country and, specially, from region
to region. It is well know that some Asian countries (Singapore, Hong Kong) have the
54

Thus, any unexpected delay at ports due to extra custom requirements or cargo inspections, for instance,
may increase considerably the associated port costs (due to moving containers and storage of frozen
products, for example) and hence reduce exporters competitiveness.
55
See John Raven (2000), for a description of relevant issues concerning trade and transport facilitation.

17

most efficient ports in the world, while some of the most inefficient are located in Africa
(Ethiopia, Nigeria, Malawi) or South America (Colombia, Venezuela, Ecuador). Table 4
presents some estimates of port efficiency, per geographic region.56
The first column is a subjective index based on surveys reported by the World
Economic Forum’s 1999 Global Competitiveness Report. North America and Europe
have the best rankings, followed by the Middle East, and East Asia & the Pacific. Latin
America and South Asia, in turn, are the regions perceived as having the least efficient
ports. The second column indicates the time, in median days, to clear customs (taken
from business surveys performed by the Inter-American Development Bank and World
Bank57). The striking results are the ones for Africa -Southeast Africa and West Africafor which the median number of days to clear customs is 12. Among East and South
African countries, Ethiopia (30 days), Kenya, Tanzania and Uganda (14 days each) are
the countries with bigger delays in clearing customs; while Cameroon (20 days), Nigeria
(18 days) and Malawi (17 days) are the West African countries with the biggest delays.58
The second region presenting big problems at custom levels is Latin America, with a
median delay in clearing customs of 7 days. In this group, Ecuador (15 days) and
Venezuela (11 days) appear as the worst performers.
Finally, the third column of Table 4 presents some estimates of the costs of
handling containers inside the ports (in US$/TEU). This variable was constructed based
on information provided by the Transport Division of the World Bank and information
from additional papers.59 Despite the fact that the sample of countries for this variable is a
lot more restricted than for the previous ones, the estimates are quite consistent with the
previous variables. While the efficient ports in East Asia present lower charges, the Latin
American ports have one of the most expensive handling services. This relationship is

56

We must note that these efficiency variables -per regions- are not directly comparable to each other,
because the availability of countries is not the same for each of the variables. Thus, we should think of
these as complement rather than substitute measures.
57
The specific question is: “If you import, how long does it typically take from the time your goods arrive
at their port of entry until the time you can claim them from customs?”
58
The African countries' results from this survey are totally consistent with the results presented by the
African Competitiveness Report 2000/2001 (World Economic Forum), which performed the same custom
clearance question (though the average time presented by the latter are slightly higher).
59
Camara Maritima y Portuaria de Chile (1999) and LSU-National Ports and Waterways Institute (1998).

18

even clearer when we take into account wage differential across countries. Table 5
presents the regression of handling costs -adjusted by wage or its proxy- on port
efficiency and an index of infrastructure60 (same as used in table 1 column 3). This latter
index -at country level- is included under the assumption that infrastructure at country
level is highly correlated with infrastructure at port level. We obtain similar results when
we use our seaport infrastructure index. In column (1) handling costs are adjusted by
manufacturing wages,61 in column (2) and (3) we adjust by GDP per capita (as a proxy of
wages), and in Column (4) and (5) handling costs are adjusted by GDP PPP per capita.
Port efficiency is highly correlated with handling cost. Countries with inefficient
seaports have higher handling costs. Also, countries with good infrastructure have lower
seaport costs. Figure 4 presents the relationship between handling costs and port
efficiency, controlling for PPP GDP per capita (as a proxy for wages) and infrastructure
level (Column 4 specification of Table 5). The clear negative relationship shows that
countries where ports are considered the most efficient (e.g. Singapore and Belgium, not
marked in the figure) are at the same time the ones whose ports charge the least for their
services (in comparable units). In turn, some Latin American countries (e.g. Brazil,
Ecuador, not marked in the figure) are among the worst ranked in term of their efficiency
and also present the highest charges per services (after controlling by the level of
infrastructure).62
Finally, we try to explain which are the factors behind port efficiency. As we
already mentioned in the case of transport costs, it is reasonable to think that the
determinants of port efficiency will not only consist of infrastructure variables, but also
of management and/or policy variables. Therefore, besides a proxy for port
infrastructure,63 we include among the explanatory variables two policy variables, one
referring to Cargo Handling Restrictions and the other to Mandatory Port Services. Both
60

The index corresponds to the index we construct a la LV.
Manufacturing wages are taken from UNIDO Industrial Statistics Database.
62
A similar result is obtained when manufacturing wages (from the UNIDO Industrial Statistics Database)
are used -instead of GDP per capita- to adjust handling costs. Appendix B presents the values used to
construct these series.
63
We use the index of country infrastructure we constructed as proxy for port infrastructure.
61

19

variables are zero-to-one indices from FMN (2000). The first captures restrictions and
special requirements imposed on foreign suppliers of cargo handling services, where
foreign suppliers refer to local companies with foreign participation.64 The second
captures the extent to which port services are mandatory for incoming ships.65 Both
indices represent restrictions at port level that could limit competition, so we can expect a
negative relationship between them and port efficiency. However, due to some quality
and security considerations, we also have to consider that it may be beneficial to have a
certain level of regulation at the seaports. Thus, we also explore the possibilities of nonlinearities of the effect of each of these indices on port efficiency.
As we already mentioned, we consider the overall level of infrastructure, which
we assume to be positively correlated with a country's level of seaport infrastructure. We
expect the better the infrastructure the higher the probability of an efficient port; that is, a
positive coefficient for this variable. Finally, we also include a Crime Index, taken from
the Global Competitiveness Report, and consisting of a one-to seven index ranking how
severe is organized crime in a particular country (with 7 meaning "not a problem"). The
idea behind the inclusion of this variable is that organized crime constitutes a direct threat
to port operations and merchandise in transit. With all of this in mind, we present in
Table 6 some estimations of the effects of these variables on port efficiency calculated for
1998.
As it can be seen, the coefficient on infrastructure is always positive and
significant. The results for the policy variables are somehow mixed, but make some
sense. Cargo handling restrictions are not significant, no matter the specification. The
variable for mandatory port services, on the other hand, is significant both in level and
square level, presenting a positive and negative sign, respectively. This result suggests
that having some level of regulations increases port efficiency, however, an excess of it
64

The index takes a value of 0 if no restriction exists, 0.25 for minor restrictions, 0.5 if a joint venture
condition is imposed, 0.75 if a very high national participation in the company is required, and 1 if foreign
companies are simply forbidden to provide cargo handling services.
65
This variable is constructed adding .125 for each of the following services if they are mandatory:
pilotage, towing, tug assistance, navigation aids, berthing, waste disposal, anchorage and others mandatory
services.

20

may start to reverse these gains. In terms of the countries in our sample, this result
suggests that Argentina is taking advantage of a moderate level of regulation in its
seaports, but instead Brazil is reducing its seaport efficiency because of excess regulation.
Using a non-parametric method (adjusted spline), figure 5 presents this non-linear
relationship between regulation and port efficiency.
Finally, the crime variable also turns out to be highly significant and with the
expected positive sign (remember that the variable is defined as crime "not being a
problem"). In terms of this sample, an increase in organized crime from the 25th to 75th
percentiles implies a reduction in port efficiency from 50th to 25th percentiles. In other
words, if countries like Brazil, China or India (all with indices around the 75th percentile)
reduced their organized crime to levels attained by countries like Australia, New Zealand
or the United Kingdom (all around the 25th percentile), then they would be able to
increase their port efficiency index roughly one point. This in turn would generate a
reduction of maritime transport costs of around 6%.
To corroborate the previous results, Table 7 re-estimates equation [4] from section
III, but we only include as a measure of port efficiency our measures of port
infrastructure plus mandatory port services and organized crime. In the first two columns
we do not include the developed country dummy whereas in the last two we do. As in our
previous results, the coefficient on seaport infrastructure is negative and significant at
conventional levels (it is slightly larger in absolute value than before). In all specification
mandatory port services have the inverted U shape, although their coefficient by
themselves are not always significant at standard level. Nonetheless, in all the
specifications the joint test for the two coefficients of mandatory services are significant
at standard levels. Finally, our measure of organized crime has the expected sign an it is
highly significant. In terms of this sample, an increase in organized crime from the 25th to
75th percentiles implies an increase maritime transport costs between 6 to 8 percent
depending on the specification used. Summarizing, these results using transport costs
confirms our previous results.

21

V Transport Costs and Trade.
In this section we construct a set of four indexes of country-specific maritime transport
costs that we include later in a standard gravity equation to check for their explanatory
power. Each of these indexes is derived from equations 1 to 4 respectively of table 7.
To estimate each of our four indexes, we compute the residuals of each of the equations
specified in columns 1 to 4 of table 7, to which we add the predicted component of the
country-specific costs identified by the following variables: level of containerization,
seaport infrastructure level, regulatory environment, organize crime and developed
country dummy (the latter only for

regressions 3 and 4).

For each of the four

specifications in Table 7, the simple average per country is our costs index. Formally, and
following the nomenclature presented in Section III, for each specification the computed
index (TCIk) is:
TCI k =

1
Ni

∑∈i (pijk − αˆ j − βˆk − ψˆwvi jk − δˆd jk − θˆ Im b j − ηˆqij )

where Ni is the number of observation from country i, and

α̂

∀ k = 1,..,4

, as the other coefficients, is

estimated using all independent variables in table 7 as controls66. It is important to note
that our indexes are independent of how far the country is from the US, which allows us
to use it in a more general framework (not only whenever trading with the US). Table 8
reports the pair-wise correlation among the four different indexes and the variable “Port
Efficiency” from the GCR. All correlations have the expected sign and are significant at
one percent. Pair-wise correlations among constructed indexes are extremely high.
Appendix B reports the estimated index derived from column 3 of table 7 (TCI3).
In Table 9 we estimate a standard bilateral trade gravity model using Rose and Glick
(2002) specification and dataset, and the previously estimated country specific transport
costs indexes (TCIk). In column 1, we replicate Rose and Glick (2002) results for the year
1997. In columns 2 - 6 we restrict the sample to countries from which we are able to
compute our transport cost indexes (43 countries). Even though the sample is reduced in

22

90 percent,67 the results remain qualitatively equal to the ones reported in column 1,
except that the variable Regional Trade Agreement lost significance, and the variables of
Currency Union and Landlocked Countries are dropped because the lack variability in the
restricted sample. In columns 3 to 6 we check the explanatory power of each of our
indexes, which, as we already mentioned, do not account for the costs associated with
bilateral distance68. As shown, country costs indexes have the expected negative sign and
they are highly significant. In terms of this sample, an increase in country-specific
transports costs from the 25th to 75th percentiles implies a reduction in bilateral trade of
around 22 percent. In other words, if a country like Peru or Turkey (1998) decreases its
seaport’s inefficiencies to a level similar to Iceland or Australia, it would be able to
increase its trade by roughly 25 percent.

VI.

Conclusion
By the 1990s many countries had adopted a development strategy emphasizing

integration with the global economy and therefore had reduced their tariff and non-tariff
barriers to trade. This reduction in artificial trade barriers has raised the importance of
transport costs as a remaining barrier to trade. Therefore, any strategy aimed at
integrating a country into the trading system has to take into account transport costs
seriously.
Besides distance and other variables that governments can’t change, an important
determinant of maritime transport costs is seaport efficiency. An improvement in port
efficiency from 25th to 75th percentiles reduces shipping costs by more than 12%, or the
equivalent of 5,000 miles in distance. This result is robust to different definition of port
efficiency as well as to different years. Inefficient ports also increase handling costs.

66

To construct our indexes we use the specification in table 7, but we do not include the agreement
variables due to their lack of significance.
67
We only have costs indexes for 43 countries, whereas Rose(2002) use more than 300 countries/territories
in his sample.
68
The variable included in the regression is the sum of the countries’ indexes in the pair.

23

Focusing on country specific maritime transport costs indexes, which are
constructed independently of how far the country is from their trading partners, a
decrease in inefficiencies associated to transport costs from the 25th to 75th percentiles
implies a reduction in bilateral trade of around 25 percent.
Seaport efficiency, though, is not just a matter of physical infrastructure.
Organized crime has an important negative effect on port services, increasing transport
costs. In terms of our sample, an increase in organized crime from the 25th to 75th
percentiles implies a reduction in port efficiency from 50th to 25th percentiles. In addition
our results suggest that some level of regulation increases port efficiency, but excessive
regulation can be damaging.

24

References
Ades, A. and Glaeser, E. (1999). “Evidence on Growth, Increasing Return, and the
Extend of the Market.” Quarterly Journal of Economic. 114(3): 1025-1046.
Aghion,P., and Howitt, P. (1992). “A Model of Growth through Creative Destruction.”
Econometrica 60:323-51.
Amjadi, A. and Yeats, A. J. (1995). “Have Transport Costs Contributed to the Relative
Decline of African Exports ?: Some Preliminary Empirical Evidence.” Policy
Research Working Paper 1559, The World Bank, December.
Baird, A. (1999). “Privatization Defined; Is it the Universal Panacea.” Mimeo. Napier
University.
Bergstrand, J. (1985), “The Gravity Model in International Trade: Some Microeconomic
Foundations and Empirical Evidence.” Review of Economics and Statistics,
67:474-481.
Buenos Aires Port. (2000). http://www.buenosairesport.com.ar/anuari392.htm
Burkhalter, Larry. (1999). “Privatización portuaria: bases, alternativas y consecuencias.”
CEPAL, 248p.
Cámara Marítima y Portuaria de Chile. A.G.. (1999). “Memoria annual No. 56.”
Cargo Systems – Latin American Supplement. (2000).Vol. 27 No 10. London, U.K:
Informa Business Publishing Ltd.
Dollar, D. and Kraay. A. (2001) “Trade, Growth and Poverty.” Policy Research Working
Paper No. 2615, Development Research Group, The World Bank, Washington,
DC.
Estache, A. and Carbajo, J. (1996). “Competing Private Ports- Lessons from Argentina.”
Public Policy for the Private Sector. Note No. 100. World Bank Group.
ECLAC. (1998). “Modernización portuaria: una pirámide de deseafíos entrelazados.”
Unidad de Transporte. Mimeo.
Foxley, J and Mardones, J.L. (2000). “Port Concessions in Chile.” Public Policy for the
Private Sector. Note No. 223. World Bank Group
Frankel, J. and Romer, D. (1999). “Does Trade Cause Growth?.” American Economic
Review (U.S.); 89:379-99, June.

25

Frink, C., Mattoo, A., and Neagu, I.C. (2000). “Trade in International Maritime Service:
How Much does Policy Matter? ” The World Bank Economic Review. 16(1) 81 108.
Furchsluger (2000). “Port and Shipping Services in the Caribbean -the vital link for
integration-,” mimeo.
Gaviria, J. (1998). “Port Privatization and Competition in Colombia.” Public Policy for
the Private Sector. Note No. 167. World Bank Group
Grossman, G.M., and Helpman, E. (1991a). Innovation and Growth in the Global
Economy. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
Grossman, G.M., and Helpman, E. (1991b). “Trade, Spillovers and Growth.” European
Economic Review 35:517-526.
Hoffman, Jan. (2000) “El potencial de puertos pivotes en la costa del Pacífico
sudamericano.” Transport Unit, ECLAC. ECLAC Magazine, 71.
Hoffman, Jan. (1999a). “Las privatizaciones portuarias en América Latina en los 90:
Determinantes y Resultados.” Transport Unit, ECLAC. Presented in Seminar of
World Bank held at Las Palmas, Spain.
Hoffman, Jan. (1999b). “After the Latin American ports privatization: The Emergence of
a ‘Latin American Model’.” Presented to the Fourth PdI World Port Privatization
Conference. London, September 1999. ECLAC.
http://docs.vircomnet.com/mobility/seacargohandling_vd/pdi1.htm
Juhel, M. (1998). “Globalization, Privatization and Restructuring of Ports.” World Bank
Group. Document presented at the 10th Annual Australasian Summit.
Limao, N., and Venables, A.J. (2000). “Infrastructure, Geographical Disadvantage and
Transport Costs.” The World Bank Economic Review, 15(3) 451 - 479.
LSU- National Ports and Waterways Institute. (1998) “Estudio de fletes para favorecer el
comercio exterior de Centroamérica.” Informe Final. Presentado a la Comisión
Centroamericana de Transporte Marítimo - COCATRAM
Nombela, G and Trujillo, L. (1999). “Privatization and Regulation of the Seaport
Industry.” Working Papers - Governance, Corruption, legal reform, 2181. World
Bank.
Radelet, S., and Sachs, J. (1998). ”Shipping Costs, Manufactured Exports and Economic
Growth.” Mimeo. Presented at the American Economics Association annual
meeting.

26

Rivera-Batiz,L., and Romer,P.M. (1991). “Economic Integration and Endogenous
Growth.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 106(2):5331-555.
Rodriguez, F. and Rodrik, D. (1999). “Trade Policy and Economic Growth: A Skeptic’s
Guide to the Cross-National Evidence.” NBER Working Paper No 7081.
Romer, P. M. (1990). “Endogeneous Technological Change.” Journal of Political
Economy 98(5) part 2:71-102.
Rose, A., and Glick, R. (2002). “Does A Currency Union Affect Trade? The Time
Series Evidence”. The European Economic Review , June 46(6).
Frankel, J.A., and Romer, D. “Does Trade Cause Growth.” The American Economic
Review, 89(3): 379-399.
Segerstrom, P. (1991) “Innovation, Imitation and Economic Growth.” Journal of
Political Economy 99(4):807-827.
Sommer, D. (1999). “Private Participation in Port Facilities- Recent Trends.” Public
Policy for the Private Sector. Note No. 193. World Bank Group
The Global Competitiveness Report (various issues, 1996-2000), Harvard University
(Cambridge, USA) and World Economic Forum (Geneva, Switzerland).
The African Competitiveness Report 2000/2001, Center for International Development at
Harvard University (Cambridge, USA) and World Economic Forum (Geneva,
Switzerland).
Trujillo, L. and Nombela, G. (1999) “Privatization and Regulation of the Seaport
Industry,” Policy Research Working Paper 2181, The World Bank, September.
UNCTAD secretariat. (1999). “Review of Maritime Transport 1999.” United Nations,
New York and Geneva.
Ventura, J. (1997). “Growth and Interdependence.” Quarterly Journal of Economics
112(1):57-84.
Viloria, J. (2000). “De Colpuertos a las Sociedades Portuarias: los Puertos del Caribe
Colombiano, 1990-1999,” Document presented at II Simposio sobre la Economía
de la Costa Caribe. Cartagena: Colombia.
http.//www.portualia.com
Young, A. (1991). “Learning by Doing and the Dynamic Effects of International Trade.”
Quarterly Journal of Economics 106(2): 369-406.

27

Appendix A. Data Description
Cargo Handling Restrictions: zero-to-one index that captures restrictions and special
requirements imposed to foreign suppliers of cargo handling services. The index takes a
value of 0 if no restriction exists, 0.25 for minor restrictions, 0.5 if a joint venture
condition is imposed, 0.75 if a very high national participation in the company is
required, and 1 if foreign companies are simply forbidden to provide cargo handling
services. Source: Fink, Mattoo and Neagu (2000).
Colonial Relationship: This variable was kindly provided by Rose. A (2002). For more
details, you can read “Does A Currency Union Affect Trade? The Time Series
Evidence”. The European Economic Review , June 46(6).
Common Colonizer post 1945: This variable was kindly provided by Rose. A (2002). For
more details, you can read “Does A Currency Union Affect Trade? The Time Series
Evidence”. The European Economic Review , June 46(6).
Common Language: This variable was kindly provided by Rose. A (2002). For more
details, you can read “Does A Currency Union Affect Trade? The Time Series
Evidence”. The European Economic Review , June 46(6).
Container Handling Charges: Correspond to containers handling charges inside the
ports, expressed in US$ per TEU (Twenty Feet Equivalent Unit). For nineteen countries
we have information from the Transport Division of the World Bank. For twelve
countries, from which eight are in the World Bank sample, we have information (as an
index) from the Cámara Marítima y Portuaria de Chile A.G. Finally, for four Central
American countries from which only Panama is in the previous samples, we have
information from the LSU- National Ports and Waterways Institute. Using ratios, we put
all samples in the same unit used by the data from the World Bank.
Containerization: Percentage of cargo transported by containers. Source: US Import
Waterborne Databank (US Department of Transportation).
Cooperative agreement: Dummy variable signaling the presence of carrier agreements on
maritime routes: cooperative working agreements that do not have a binding rate
authority. Source: Fink, Mattoo and Neagu (2000).
Custom Clearance: Correspond to time (days, median) to clear customs, based on surveys
performed (by the World Bank) to importers in each country. The specific question is "If
you import, how long does it typically take from the time your goods arrive at their port
of entry until the time you can claim them from customs?" Source: The World Bank.
Developed Country Dummy: This variable was constructed using The World Bank
country classification. We define as 1 the countries classified as high income countries,
and 0 all the other cases.

28

Distance: Correspond to the distance between the foreign port i and the US custom
district J. Data provided by Fink, Mattoo and Neagu (2000).
Directional Trade Imbalance: Correspond to the ratio between the difference of U.S.
exports and imports, and bilateral trade. The data was obtained from U.S. Imports and
Exports Waterborne Databank Database, 2000.
Infrastructure Index: Correspond to the simple average of three normalized indices that
take into account the country level of communications (telephones) and its physical
transport infrastructure (paved roads, railroads and airports). The exact definition of the
index is:

INFi = Avg {AI i , TI i , TTI i }

if there are a least two of them

where
AI i =

PAi2

Pi *Si
PA2j
∑j
P j *S j

TI i =

Ti

∑j

Pi
Tj

Pj

RRi2
 PRi2

TTI i = avg  PR 2Pi *Si , RR 2Pi *Si 
 ∑ j j Pj *S j ∑ j j Pj *S j 

and Ti is the fixed and mobile telephone lines per capita of country i, PAi is the number of
paved airports, Pi refers to the population, Si refers to the surface area, PRi is paved roads,
and RRi is railroads. The sources for the variables are: World Development Indicators
2000 (The World Bank) and The World Factbook 2000 (Central Intelligence Agency).
Foreign GDP per capita: GDP per capita of the exporting countries to the US. Source:
World Development Indicators 2000 (The World Bank).
GDP PPP per capita: This variable was obtained from The World Bank 2002, World
Development Indicators Database.
Islands: This variable was kindly provided by Rose. A (2002). For more details, you can
read “Does A Currency Union Affect Trade? The Time Series Evidence”. The European
Economic Review , June 46(6).
Landlocked: This variable was kindly provided by Rose. A (2002). For more details, you
can read “Does A Currency Union Affect Trade? The Time Series Evidence”. The
European Economic Review , June 46(6).
Mandatory Port Services: zero-to-one index that captures the extent to which port
services are mandatory for incoming ships. This variable is constructed adding 0.125 for
each of the following services if they are mandatory: pilotage, towing, tug assistance,
navigation aids, berthing, waste disposal, anchorage and others mandatory services.
Source: Fink, Mattoo and Neagu (2000).
Manufactures wages: Source: UNIDO Industrial Statistics Database.

29

Maritime Transport costs: calculated as import charges divided by weight. Source:
calculated from data of the US Import Waterborne Databank (US Department of
Transportation).
Organized Crime: one-to-seven index ranking "organized crime as not been a problem",
based on surveys performed to representative firms of each country. The specific
question is "Organized crime does not impose significant costs on business and is not a
burden (1=strongly disagree, 7=strongly agree)". Source: The Global Competitiveness
Report, various years (1996-2000)
Population: The Data was obtained from the World Bank 2002, World Development
Indicators Database.
Port Efficiency: one-to-seven index ranking port efficiency, based on surveys performed
to representative firms of each country. The specific question is "Port facilities and inland
waterways are extensive and efficient (1=strongly disagree, 7=strongly agree)". Source:
The Global Competitiveness Report, various years (1996-2000)
Ports normalized by country surface and population: Correspond to the logarithm of the
ratio between the number of ports (square) that have lifts with leverage capacity of 50
tons. or above ( p c ) , and the product between country surface (surf c ) and country
population ( popct ) .

p c2

Number of ports = ln
 surf * pop
c
ct







where t is year

The number of ports per country was obtained from Portualia S.A. world port database.
Price-Fixing agreement: Dummy variable signaling the presence of carrier agreements
on maritime routes: conferences and other price-fixing agreements. Source: Fink, Mattoo
and Neagu (2000).
Strict Currency Union: This variable accounts for the countries that have a currency
union, and was kindly provided by Rose. A (2002). For more details, you can read “Does
A Currency Union Affect Trade? The Time Series Evidence”. The European Economic
Review , June 46(6).
Surface: The Data was obtained from the World Bank 2002 World Development
Indicators.
Real GDP: The Data was obtained from the World Bank 2002 World Development
Indicators.
Real GDP per capita: The Data was obtained from the World Bank 2002 World
Development Indicators.
30

RTA Dummy: This variable accounts for the countries that have trade agreements and was
kindly provided by Rose. A (2002). For more details, you must read “Does A Currency
Union Affect Trade? The Time Series Evidence”. The European Economic Review ,
June 46(6).
Total Liner Volume: Total volume of imports transported per maritime route (where we
define routes as "from foreign country to US coast"). Source: constructed from data of
US Import Waterborne Databank (US Department of Transportation).
Unit Weight: Value of total US imports divided by its total weight, and calculated per
maritime route (where we define routes as "from foreign ports to US custom districts").
Calculated from data of the US Import Waterborne Databank (US Department of
Transportation).

31

Appendix B. Data Used
Container Handling Charges

Cargo
Handling
Restriction
Index

Mandatory
Services
Index

Price Fixed
Agreements
Index

Cooperative
Agreements
Index

Median
Clearance time
(Days)

Port Efficiency
Index (1-7)

Crime Index
(1-7)

Argentina

0

0.13

0

1

7

3.81

4.52

Armenia

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

4

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

Australia

0

0.13

1

1

n.a.

4.79

6.19

199

n.a.

n.a.

Azerbaijan

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

5

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

Belarus

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

4

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

Belgium

0

0.06

1

0

n.a.

6.17

5.73

120

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

5

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

Country

Belize

World Bank
US$/TEU

CMPCH Index

LSU Index

n.a.

139

n.a.

Benin

1

0

0

0

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

Bolivia

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

9.5

1.61

4.38

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

Botswana

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

4

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

Brazil

0.5

0.75

0

1

10

2.92

4.45

328

292

n.a.

Brunei

0

0

0

0

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.
n.a.

Bulgaria

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

2

3.68

3.23

n.a.

n.a.

Cambodia

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

7

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

Cameroon

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

20

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

Canada

0

0.13

0

0

2

6.42

6.27

190

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

8.5

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

Chile

0

0.25

0.43

1

3

3.76

6.05

202

100

n.a.

China

0.5

0

0

0

7

3.49

4.44

110

n.a.

n.a.

Colombia

0.5

0.13

0.5

1

7

2.26

1.88

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

Costa Rica

0

0

0

1

4

2.46

3.28

n.a.

n.a.

68

Croatia

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

2

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

Cyprus

1

0.31

0

0

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

Czech Rep.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

2

3.27

4.41

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

Trinidad
Tobago

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

7

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

0

0.06

1

0

n.a.

6.16

6.71

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

0.25

0.25

0.5

1

7

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

0

0

0.43

1

15

2.63

3.65

n.a.

139

n.a.

0.75

0.75

0

0

5.5

3.72

6.37

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

CDI

and

Denmark
Dominican
Republic.
Ecuador
Egypt
El Salvador

0

0

0

1

4

2.95

2.3

n.a.

n.a.

61

Estonia

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

1

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

Ethiopia

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

30

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

Finland

0

0.25

0

0

n.a.

6.26

6.63

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

France

0

0.38

1

0

3

5.39

6.58

201

n.a.

n.a.

Georgia

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

2

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

Germany

0

0.38

1

0

5

6.38

6.02

163

117

n.a.

Ghana

1

0.5

0

1

5

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

Greece

1

0.19

0

0

n.a.

4.28

5.6

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

Guatemala

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

7

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

55

Haiti

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

15

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

32

(continue)

Country

Honduras
Hong Kong

Cargo
Handling
Restriction
Index

Median
Clearance time
(Days)

Container Handling Charges

Mandatory
Services
Index

Price Fixed
Agreements
Index

Cooperative
Agreements
Index

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

4

n.a.

n.a.

0

0.25

0

0

n.a.

6.38

5.46

Port Efficiency
Index (1-7)

Crime Index
(1-7)

CMPCH Index

LSU Index

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.
n.a.

World Bank
US$/TEU

Hungary

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

3

2.59

4.14

n.a.

n.a.

Iceland

0

0.13

0

0

n.a.

5.78

6.64

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

India

0

0

0

1

n.a.

2.79

4.28

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

Indonesia

1

0.06

0

0.38

5

3.41

4.06

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

Ireland

0

0.13

1

0

n.a.

4.28

5.12

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

0.25

0.5

0.38

0

2

4.11

3.29

228

n.a.

n.a.

0

0.25

0

1

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

Jamaica

0.5

0

0

0.6

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

Japan

0.75

0.13

0.89

1

n.a.

5.16

5.16

250

202

n.a.

Kazakhstan

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

9

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

Kenya

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

14

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

Korea

0

0.38

0

0

n.a.

4.12

5.22

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

Kyrgyzstan

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

10

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

Lithuania

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

1

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

Madagascar

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

10

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

Malawi

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

17

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

Malaysia

0

0.25

0

0.38

7

4.95

5.76

75

n.a.

n.a.

Mauritius

1

0.38

0

0

n.a.

5.35

5.53

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

Mexico

0.5

0.38

0

1

4

3.34

2.61

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

Moldova

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

5

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

Morocco

0.5

0.13

0

0

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

Namibia

Italy
Ivory Coast

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

4

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

Netherlands

0

0.5

1

0

n.a.

6.64

5.42

156

84

n.a.

New Zealand
Nicaragua

0
0

0.38
0

1
0

1
1

n.a.
5

5.82
n.a.

6.14
n.a.

n.a.
n.a.

n.a.
n.a.

n.a.
n.a.

Nigeria

0

0.5

0

1

18

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

Panama

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

5

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

234

100

0.5

0

0

0

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

0.5

0

0.5

1

7

2.88

3.32

n.a.

142

n.a.

Papua
N.Guinea

Peru
Philippines

0.5

0

0

0.38

7

2.79

3.51

118

n.a.

n.a.

Poland

0.25

0

0

0

3

3.34

3.41

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

Portugal

0

0.13

1

0

8

3.81

6.5

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

Romania

0

0.63

0

0

3

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

7

3.33

2.23

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

Russia
Senegal

0

0

0

1

7

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

Singapore

1

0.38

0

0.33

2

6.76

6.72

117

n.a.

n.a.

Slovakia

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

2

3.5

4.35

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

Slovenia

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

2

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

33

(continue)
Cargo
Handling
Restriction
Index

Price Fixed
Agreements
Index

Cooperative
Agreements
Index

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

5

5.24

2.08

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

0

0.06

1

0

4

4.88

6.08

200

105

n.a.

Sweden

0

0.06

1

0

2

5.73

6.46

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

Taiwan

0.5

0

0

0

n.a.

5.18

4.49

140

163

n.a.

Tanzania

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

14

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

Thailand

0.5

0.63

0

0.38

4

3.98

5.12

93

n.a.

n.a.

0

0

0

0

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

Tunisia

0.5

0.13

0

0

5.5

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

Turkey

0

0

0.43

0

n.a.

3.81

5

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

Uganda

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

14

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

Ukraine

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

10

3.41

3.28

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

United
Kingdom

0

0.31

1

0

4

5.37

6.17

173

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

5

6.27

5.4

259

336

n.a.

0

0

0

1

5

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

Uzbekistan

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

7

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

Venezuela

0

0

1

1

11

3.28

3.63

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.
n.a.

Country

South Africa
Spain

Togo

United States
Uruguay

Median
Clearance time
(Days)

Container Handling Charges

Mandatory
Services
Index

Port Efficiency
Index (1-7)

Crime Index
(1-7)

World Bank
US$/TEU

CMPCH Index

LSU Index

Vietnam

0

0

0

0.5

n.a.

3.81

5.02

n.a.

n.a.

Zambia

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

10

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

Zimbabwe

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

10

3.29

5.15

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a. : Not Available
Source: Data for the first 4 columns was kindly provided by Carsten Fink, Aaditya Mattoo, and Ileana Cristina Neagu* (2000).

34

Country
Argentina
Australia
Belgium
Brazil
Canada
Chile
China
Colombia
Costa Rica
Germany
Denmark
Ecuador
Egypt
Spain
Finland
France
United Kingdom
Greece
Hong Kong
Indonesia
India
Ireland
Iceland
Italy
Japan
Republic of Korea
Mexico
Mauritius
Malaysia
Netherlands
New Zealand
Peru
Philippines
Poland
Portugal
Senegal
El Salvador
Sweden
Thailand
Turkey
Taiwan
Venezuela
Vietnam

TC3

Port Infrastructure

Infrastructure Index

0.242
0.328
0.234
0.306
0.399
0.318
0.508
0.312
0.355
0.333
0.249
0.401
0.424
0.418
0.293
0.349
0.382
0.376
0.309
0.493
0.554
0.503
0.312
0.456
0.417
0.393
0.564
0.410
0.371
0.368
0.480
0.468
0.544
0.551
0.380
0.146
0.247
0.347
0.375
0.463
0.278
0.358
0.699

-28.082
-27.193
-24.348
-29.918
-26.902
-26.465
-33.752
-28.251
-24.566
-25.730
-21.549
-26.097
-29.555
-24.734
-24.027
-25.558
-22.822
-25.186
-22.685
-28.986
-32.116
-24.901
-22.677
-24.396
-24.833
-25.267
-29.640
-36.841
-29.620
-23.984
-24.884
-27.874
-26.823
-27.959
-24.772
-21.612
-25.567
-23.597
-28.282
-27.633
-25.194
-25.140
-27.646

-2.351
-0.910
0.212
-2.825
-0.845
-2.310
-4.527
-3.075
-1.140
0.155
0.478
-2.577
-3.296
-0.631
-0.136
0.267
0.273
-0.135
n.a.
-3.110
-3.429
-0.024
-0.280
-0.202
-0.245
-0.919
-2.550
-1.225
-1.683
-0.207
-0.290
-3.758
-2.979
-0.948
-0.430
0.475
-2.623
0.456
-2.736
-2.285
n.a.
-2.060
-4.054

n.a.: Data not available. All the indexes are in logarithms
TC3, is the infrastructure index estimated
Port Infrastructure Index: Is the ratio between the number of ports per country (square) and the product of
country surface and population. Number of ports where obtained form Portualia S.A., and surface and
population were obtained form World Bank WDI - 2002
Infrastructure Index: GCR port index

35

Figure 1
Estimates of Total Imports Freight Costs Relative to Imports (CIF),
1997

15%
12.4%

11.5%

10%

8.0%
5.2%

8.0%

8.4%

Asia

Europe

7.0%

4.2%

5%

0%
Total

Dev.

NonDev.

Africa

LAC

Oceania

Figure 2
Imports Freight Costs (CIF/FOB ratio) and Import Tariffs
relative to Import value, 1996-97
.25

Peru

.2

cif_fob

Tanz
Domi
Pola

.15

.1

.05

Papu

Zimb

Jama
Boli
Sout Para
Indo
Bang
Malt Vene
Trin
Sri
El S
Cost
Hond
Mala
Ecua
Lith
LatvNica
Guat Pana
Japa
Chin
Cent
Esto
Chil Roma
New
Arge
Saud Phil
Colo
Braz
Aust
Turk Kore
Czec Urug LebaMexi
Nepa
Unit
Cana

Indi
Thai

Maur
Tuni

Hung

0
0

.05

.1

.15

36

.2
tariff

.25

.3

.35

.4

Figure 3
Export Freight Costs and US Tariff,
Latin American Countries, 1998
14%
Ecuador

12%

Chile

Trinidad and Tobago

TRANSPORT/CUST

10%

Panama

8%

Paraguay

Argentina

Antigua and Barbuda

Jamaica

Bahamas

6%

Venezuela
Suriname
Colombia
Belize
Costa Rica

4%

Guatemala
Uruguay
Brazil
Average

Peru

Bolivia
Haiti

Nicaragua

Honduras

St Kitts and Nevis

Grenada

El Salvador

St Lucia

2%

Dominica

Barbados
Dominican Republic

Mexico
St Vincent and the Grenadines

0%
0%

2%

4%

6%

8%

10%

12%

14%

TARIFF/CUST

Sources: U.S. Census Bureau, Department of Commerce.69

69

The high calculated duty presented by Central American countries are due to textile products (code 6 in
HTSUSA).

37

Figure 4
Handling Costs and Seaport Efficiency, 1998

Handling Cost adj. by GDP pc ppp

-3.11

-3.61

Figure 5
Port Efficiency and Level of Regulation (Mandatory Port Services), 1998

-4.11

-4.61

-5.11
3

2.5

3.5

4

4.5

5

5.5

6

6.5

Seaport Eff. adj by Inf.

Natural Cubic Spline
Figure 5
Port Efficiency and level of Regulation (Mandatory Port Services), 1998
5

Seaport Efficiency

4.5

4

3.5

3
.05

.1

.15

.2

.25

.3

.35

.4

.45

.5

.55

Mandatory Serv, adj by Inf. and Crime

Natural Cubic Spline

38

.6

.65

.7

.75

Variables:
Distance (ln)
Weight value (ln)
Containerization (%)
Directional Imbalance (%)
Total liner volume (ln)

Table 1: Determinants of Maritime Transport Costs, 1998
Dependent Variable: TC=(Charges / Weight)
(1)
(2)
(3)
0.183
0.166
0.170
(8.04)***
(10.44)***
(10.66)***
0.551
0.550
0.553
(51.55)***
(53.09)***
(49.69)***
-0.034
-0.038
-0.036
(2.55)**
(2.90)***
(2.71)***
-0.065
-0.060
-0.036
(2.34)**
(1.90)*
(1.48)
-0.037
-0.038
-0.032
(3.01)***
(3.57)***
(3.50)***

Policy variables
Price fixing rate agreement
Cooperative agreement
Foreign port efficiency
Port efficiency GCR

0.024
(0.71)
-0.018
(0.83)

0.005
(0.15)
0.001
(0.04)

0.015
(0.45)
-0.014
(0.61)

0.058
(1.75)*
-0.007
(0.39)

-0.043
(3.83)***

Ports normalized by size and Pop.

-0.009
(2.43)**

Infrastructure Index

-0.030
(3.23)***

Foreign GDPpc (ln)
Observations
R-squared

(4)
0.180
(10.52)***
0.555
(53.86)***
-0.037
(2.96)***
-0.037
(1.46)
-0.022
(2.70)***

314439
0.47

332348
0.47

296277
0.48

Robust t-statistics in parentheses computed using clusters by foreign country. *, **, *** significant at 10%; 5% and 1%.
All regressions include fixed effect for products (4848 HS 6 digits products) and for US customs districts (31).
Directional Imbalance is computed as US export minus import divided by bilateral trade.
Total liner volume is computed as the total volume of merchandized from the foreign country to one coast in the US.
Port efficiency GCR is a one to seven index ranking port efficiency, based on surveys performed to representative firms.
Ports normalized by size and GDP is the number of large seaport in the foreign country (squared) divided by area and GDP.
Infrastructure index is a foreign country infrastructure index constructed using telephones, roads, railroads and airports.

39

-0.048
(4.99)***
332480
0.47

Table 2: Determinants of Maritime Transport Costs Controlling by Income Group, 1998
Dependent Variable: TC=(Charges / Weight)
Variables:
(1)
(2)
(3)
Distance (ln)
0.179
0.161
0.165
(8.90)***
(10.42)***
(10.48)***
Weight value (ln)
0.549
0.549
0.553
(52.34)***
(53.74)***
(49.93)***
Containerization (%)
-0.030
-0.037
-0.035
(2.20)**
(2.84)***
(2.67)***
Directional Imbalance (%)
-0.068
-0.056
-0.036
(3.26)***
(1.90)*
(1.49)
Total liner volume (ln)
-0.044
-0.042
-0.036
(3.77)***
(3.78)***
(3.64)***
Policy variables
Price fixing rate agreement
-0.028
-0.012
0.001
(0.83)
(0.38)
(0.02)
Cooperative agreement
-0.021
0.001
-0.013
(1.04)
(0.05)
(0.56)
Foreign port efficiency
Port efficiency GCR
-0.056
(5.34)***
Ports normalized by size and Pop.
-0.011
(2.23)**
Infrastructure Index
-0.038
(3.72)***

Developed Country
(Dummy Variable)
Observations
R-squared

0.086
(2.46)**
314439
0.48

0.030
(0.69)
332348
0.47

Robust t-statistics in parentheses computed using clusters by foreign country. *, **, *** significant at 10%; 5% and 1%.
All regressions include fixed effect for products (4848 HS 6 digits products) and for US customs districts (31).
Directional Imbalance is computed as US export minus import divided by bilateral trade.
Total liner volume is computed as the total volume of merchandized from the foreign country to one coast in the US.
Port efficiency GCR is a one to seven index ranking port efficiency, based on surveys performed to representative firms.
Ports normalized by size and GDP is the number of large seaport in the foreign country (squared) divided by area and GDP.
Infrastructure index is a foreign country infrastructure index constructed using telephones, roads, railroads and airports.

40

0.045
(1.15)
296277
0.48

Table 3: Determinants of Maritime Transport Costs, 1996-2000
Dependent Variable: TC=(Charges / Weight)
(1)
(2)
(3)
Distance (ln)
0.179
0.168
0.245
(6.15)***
(6.57)***
(13.83)***
Weight value (ln)
0.552
0.549
0.528
(43.42)***
(44.32)***
(52.90)***
Containerization (%)
-0.021
-0.021
0.057
(1.18)
(1.12)
(2.48)**
Directional Imbalance (%)
-0.079
-0.080
-0.032
(2.44)**
(3.52)***
(1.09)
Total liner volume (ln)
-0.033
-0.041
-0.003
(2.47)**
(3.21)***
(0.22)
Policy variables
Price fixing rate agreement
0.059
-0.017
-0.046
(1.52)
(0.55)
(1.72)*
Cooperative agreement
-0.031
-0.032
-0.007
(1.37)
(1.86)*
(0.40)
Foreign port efficiency
Port efficiency GCR
-0.061
-0.078
-0.060
(4.13)***
(7.48)***
(5.48)***

Developed Country
(Dummy Variable)
Observations
R-squared
Year

0.119
(3.40)***
273063
0.50

273063
0.50

(4)
0.243
(14.37)***
0.527
(52.29)***
0.058
(2.54)**
-0.034
(1.22)
-0.006
(0.45)
-0.070
(3.02)***
-0.009
(0.51)
-0.066
(5.75)***
0.041
(1.40)
361691
0.46

361691
0.46

1996

2000

Robust t-statistics in parentheses computed using clusters by foreign country. *, **, *** significant at 10%; 5% and 1%.
All regressions include fixed effect for products (4848 HS 6 digits products) and for US customs districts (31).
Directional Imbalance is computed as US export minus import divided by bilateral trade.
Total liner volume is computed as the total volume of merchandized from the foreign country to one coast in the US.
Port efficiency GCR is a one to seven index ranking port efficiency, based on surveys performed to representative firms.
Ports normalized by size and GDP is the number of large seaport in the foreign country (squared) divided by area and GDP.
Infrastructure index is a foreign country infrastructure index constructed using telephones, roads, railroads and airports.

41

Table 4: Determinants of Maritime Transport Costs, Port Efficiency Variables

Region
North America
Europe (excl. East)
Middle East
East Asia & the Pacific
East & South Africa
North Africa
Former Soviet Union
East Europe
Latin Am. & the Caribbean
South Asia
West Africa

Port Efficiency
(7=best, 1=worst)

Custom Clearance
(days)

6.35
5.29
4.93
4.66
4.63
3.72
3.37
3.28
2.90
2.79
n.a.

3.50
4.00
n.a.
5.57
12.00
5.50
5.42
2.38
7.08
n.a.
11.70

Container Handling
Charges in Ports
(US$/TEU)
261.7
166.7
n.a.
150.5
Na
Na
Na
Na
251.4
n.a.
n.a.

Sources: Global Competitiveness Report (1999), World Bank Surveys, Camara Maritima y Portuaria de Chile. A.G.
(1999), and LSU (1998). (n.a: Data not available)

Table 5: Handling Costs and Port Efficiency, 1998
Dependent variable: Container Handling Charges, divided by wage or proxy (in logarithm)
(1)
(2)
(3)a
(4)
(5)a
(Adj. By (Adj. By
Variables:
(Adj. By (Adj. By (Adj. By
GDPpc
GDPpc
m.wage) GDPpc) GDPpc)
PPP)
PPP)
Port Efficiency
-0.459
-0.366
-0.288
-0.350
-0.321
(GCR 1999)
(0.043)*** (0.059)*** (0.063)*** (0.051)*** (0.069)***

Infrastructure Index b
(proxy for port infrastructure)
Constant
Observations
R-squared

-0.164
-0.418
-0.520
-0.150
-0.162
(0.081)* (0.064)*** (0.034)*** (0.040)*** (0.047)***
-2.386
-2.848
-3.331
-2.866
-3.024
(0.284)*** (0.357)*** (0.378)*** (0.295)*** (0.406)***
12
23
18
23
18
0.947
0.931
0.959
0.893
0.884

Notes: Robust t-statistics in parentheses. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. a:
regression uses handling cost data form the World Bank only. b: the infrastructure index is in logarithm.

42

Table 6: Determinants of Port Efficiency, 1998

Dependent var.: Port Efficiency (Global Competitiveness Report 1999)
Variables:
Infrastructure
Cargo Handling Restrictions
Cargo Handling Restrictions (square)
Mandatory Port Services
Mandatory Port Services (square.)
Organized Crime
(Org. crime in not a problem)
Constant
Observations
R-squared

(1)

(2)

(3)

0.328
(0.101)***
0.602
(1.177)
-0.544
(1.239)
3.206
(1.530)**
-4.783
(2.182)**
0.509
(0.117)***
2.064

0.325
(0.104)***
0.103
(0.352)

0.319
(0.101)***

3.147
(1.526)**
-4.558
(2.097)**
0.492
(0.089)***
2.163

3.231
(1.471)**
-4.600
(2.087)**
0.488
(0.087)***
2.183

(0.739)***

(0.593)***

(0.587)***

41
0.772

41
0.770

41
0.770

Robust standard errors in parentheses
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%

43

Table 7: Determinants of Maritime Transport Costs, Regulation and Org. Crime (1998)
Dependent Variable: TC=(Charges / Weight)
Variables
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Distance (ln)
0.152
0.162
0.136
0.145
(5.51)***
(7.24)***
(5.07)***
(6.34)***

Weight value (ln)

0.552
(49.73)***

0.554
(46.59)***

0.551
(50.20)***

0.553
(46.62)***

Containerization (%)

-0.041
(3.25)***

-0.040
(3.01)***

-0.038
(2.81)***

-0.037
(2.75)***

-0.026
(0.600)

-0.017
(0.620)

-0.018
(0.370)

-0.002
(0.080)

-0.064
(3.32)***

-0.051
(4.03)***

-0.077
(3.83)***

-0.064
(4.25)***

Price fixing rate agreement

0.016
(0.560)

0.009
(0.270)

-0.037
(1.150)

-0.02
(0.520)

Cooperative agreement

-0.007
(0.390)

-0.021
(1.050)

-0.01
(0.570)

-0.013
(0.660)

Directional Imbalance (%)
Total liner volume (ln)
Policy variables

Foreign port efficiency
Ports normalized by size and Pop.

-0.015

-0.019

(1.84)*

(2.37)**

Infrastructure Index

-0.028

-0.056

(1.71)*

(2.88)***

Mandatory Port Services

0.37
(1.570)

0.188
(0.820)

0.229
(1.090)

0.347
(1.530)

Mandatory Port Services (square)

-0.659
(2.02)**

-0.434
(1.320)

-0.463
(1.510)

-0.633
(2.04)**

Organized Crime
(Org. crime is not a problem)

-0.036
(3.26)***

-0.032
(3.62)***

-0.041
(4.65)***

-0.03
(4.31)***

0.100

0.100

(2.24)**

(2.25)**

308529
0.470

273403
0.480

Developed Country
(Dummy Variable)
Observations
R-squared

308529
0.470

273403
0.480

Robust t-statistics in parentheses computed using clusters by foreign country. *, **, *** significant at 10%; 5% and 1%.
All regressions include fixed effect for products (4848 HS 6 digits products) and for US customs districts (31).
Directional Imbalance is computed as US export minus import divided by bilateral trade.
Total liner volume is computed as the total volume of merchandized from the foreign country to one coast in the US.
Port efficiency GCR is a one to seven index ranking port efficiency, based on surveys performed to representative firms.
Ports normalized by size and GDP is the number of large seaport in the foreign country (squared) divided by area and GDP.
Infrastructure index is a foreign country infrastructure index constructed using telephones, roads, railroads and airports.

44

Table 8: Country-Specific Maritime Transport Cost Indexes: Pair-wise Correlations

TCI1

TCI2

TCI3

TCI1

1

TCI2

0.97*

1

TCI3

0.97*

0.97*

1

TCI4
Port Efficiency GCR

0.93*
-0.36*

0.99*
-0.39*

0.97*
-0.42*

TCI4

Port Efficiency GCR

1
-0.38*

1

* Significant at 1%. TCk represents each of the country-specific maritime transport costs indexes estimated and explained in section V.
Source: Authors own estimations

45

Table 9: Bilateral Trade and Country-Specific Transport Costs

Dependant Variable: Log Value of Bilateral Trade in Real $
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Log of Distance
-1.273
-0.942
-0.975
-0.969
(37.97)*** (16.57)*** (17.60)*** (16.68)***
Log of Product of Real GDPs
0.941
0.969
0.977
0.973
(63.70)*** (36.73)*** (37.53)*** (35.27)***
Log of Product of Real GDPs per capita
0.424
0.766
0.689
0.696
(18.58)*** (15.75)*** (12.97)*** (12.39)***
1 for Common Language
0.421
0.653
0.644
0.667
(6.46)*** (6.54)*** (6.52)*** (6.23)***
Land Border Dummy
0.745
0.276
0.138
0.109
(4.78)***
(1.24)
(0.64)
(0.49)
RTA Dummy
0.893
-0.124
-0.119
-0.093
(6.22)***
(0.84)
(0.84)
(0.63)
# Landlocked 0/1/2
-0.302
(6.27)***
# Islands 0/1/2
-0.083
-0.004
0.073
0.076
(1.54)
(0.04)
(0.86)
(0.83)
Log of Product of Land Areas
-0.093
-0.120
-0.115
-0.098
(7.69)*** (7.37)*** (7.16)*** (4.90)***
Dummy for Common Colonizer post 1945
0.386
0.533
0.502
0.675
(3.51)*** (1.76)*
(1.83)*
(1.80)*
Dummy for pairs ever in Colonial Relationship
1.310
0.254
0.293
0.302
(9.92)***
(1.51)
(1.77)*
(1.71)*
Strict Currency Union
0.904
(3.25)***
TC1
-1.342
(4.41)***
TC2
-1.291
(3.64)***
TC3
Variables:

(5)
-0.976
(17.65)***
0.996
(37.85)***
0.683
(12.75)***
0.644
(6.51)***
0.142
(0.66)
-0.133
(0.94)

0.063
0.075
(0.75)
(0.82)
-0.111
-0.095
(6.85)*** (4.68)***
0.496
0.686
(1.80)*
(1.83)*
0.290
0.299
(1.74)*
(1.69)*

-1.439
(4.47)***

TC4
Observations
R-squared

7996
0.68

809
0.84

809
0.85

769
0.84

(6)
-0.964
(16.58)***
0.983
(35.45)***
0.702
(12.56)***
0.668
(6.24)***
0.124
(0.56)
-0.089
(0.60)

809
0.85

-1.238
(3.43)***
769
0.84

Robust t-statistics in parentheses. * Significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%
TC1, TC2, TC3 and TC4 account for the country - specific maritime transport costs index, explained in section V.
Variables: Landlocked, # of Islands, Log of Product of Land Areas, Strict Currency Union, Dummy of Common Colonizers post 1945 and Colonial
Relationship were kindly provided by Rose(2002).

46

