                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                            THREE STRIKES AND YOU’RE OUT:
                             REPLY TO COOPER AND WILLIS

                                      Ricardo J. Caballero
                                     Eduardo M.R.A. Engel

                                      Working Paper 10368
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w10368


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    March 2004




The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

©2004 by Ricardo J. Caballero and Eduardo M.R.A. Engel. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that
full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Three Strikes and You’re Out: Reply to Cooper and Willis
Ricardo J. Caballero and Eduardo M.R.A. Engel
NBER Working Paper No. 10368
March 2004
JEL No. E2, J2, J6

                                          ABSTRACT

       Cooper and Willis (2003) is the latest in a sequence of criticisms of our methodology for

estimating aggregate nonlinearities when microeconomic adjustment is lumpy. Their case is based

on “reproducing” our main findings using artificial data generated by a model where microeconomic

agents face quadratic adjustment costs. That is, they supposedly find our results where they should

not be found. The three claims on which they base their case are incorrect. Their mistakes range

from misinterpreting their own simulation results to failing to understand the context in which our

procedures should be applied. They also claim that our approach assumes that employment

decisions depend on the gap between the target and current level of unemployment. That is incorrect

as well, since the ‘gap approach’ has been derived formally from at least as sophisticated

microeconomic models as the one they present. On a more positive note, the correct interpretation

of Cooper and Willis’s results shows that our procedures are surprisingly robust to significant

departures from the assumptions made in our original derivations.



Ricardo J. Caballero                                        Eduardo M.R.A. Engel
Department of Economics                                     Department of Economics
MIT, E52-252                                                Yale University
50 Memorial Drive                                           28 Hillhouse Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02142                                         New Haven, CT 06520
and NBER                                                    and NBER
caball@mit.edu                                              eduardo.engel@yale.edu
1     Summary of the case
Cooper and Willis (2003), henceforth CW, is the third version of the authors’ “The Economics of
Labor Adjustment: Mind the Gap.” In this comment CW argue that our finding (in Caballero and
Engel (1993), henceforth CE, and Caballero, Engel and Haltiwanger (1997), henceforth CEH) that
lumpy microeconomic adjustment matters for aggregate employment dynamics, is not warranted.
They base their case on “reproducing” our main findings using artificial data generated by a model
where microeconomic agents face quadratic adjustment costs. That is, they supposedly find our
results where they should not be found.
    In this reply we show that the three claims on which they base their case are incorrect. Their
mistakes range from misinterpreting their own simulation results to failing to understand the con-
text in which our procedures should be applied. They also claim that our approach assumes that
employment decisions depend on the gap between the target and current level of unemployment.
This is incorrect as well, since the ‘gap approach’ has been derived formally from at least as so-
phisticated microeconomic models as the one they present. On a more positive note, the correct
interpretation of CW’s results shows that our procedures are surprisingly robust to significant de-
partures from the assumptions made in our original derivations.
    Throughout, CE and CEH take as an assumption validated in many other studies that at the
microeconomic level adjustments are lumpy,1 and examine whether the implied features of the
distribution of microeconomic gaps are useful in explaining aggregate employment fluctuations.
Specifically, the basic regression in CE and CEH is:

                                                         (1)       (3)
                                           ∆Et = λMt + γMt ,                                                   (1)

where ∆E represents the rate of growth of aggregate employment, and M (i) is the i-th moment of
the cross section distribution of gaps between actual and desired employment at the firm level.
    When λ > 0 and γ = 0, the equation above simplifies to a linear model where the left hand side
variable depends only on aggregates (first moments of the cross section distribution of gaps). This
case can be obtained either from a microeconomic model where agents adjust infrequently but with
a probability that is independent of their gap (the constant hazard model of Calvo, 1983) or from a
model where agents face quadratic adjustment costs and adjust all the time (Sargent, 1978).2
    When γ > 0, on the other hand, higher moments of the cross-section distribution of gaps matter
    1 CW  (2003) seem to agree with this assumption, in particular, in their conclusion they refer to “overwhelming
evidence” in favor of it.
    2 See Rotemberg (1987) for a formal proof of the aggregate equivalence of Calvo’s lumpy adjustment model and

the quadratic adjustment cost model.

                                                        1
for aggregate dynamics.3 This case can be obtained from a scenario where microeconomic adjust-
ment is lumpy and the probability of such adjustment is increasing in the gap (the increasing hazard
model of CE). There is ample microeconomic evidence for this behavior, the question is whether
it matters for aggregate adjustment. We find that it does, since our aggregate regressions show a
                                                     (3)
very significant γ > 0 and a large contribution of γMt to aggregate employment fluctuations.
   CW’s critique has changed over time, but as of today, it can be split into three claims, all of them
based on applying our procedures to data generated with a model with smooth microeconomic
adjustment:

    • Claim 1: When our measure of microeconomic gaps are computed from their artificial data,
      there exist parameter configurations for which estimates of γ are similar to ours, even though
      there is no microeconomic lumpiness or nonlinearities. This has been their main claim, and
      the common denominator in CW (2001, 2002, 2003).

    • Claim 2: When the microeconomic gaps are not directly observed but can be estimated with
       microeconomic data, the procedures used in CEH give nonsensical results when applied to
       their data.

    • Claim 3: When only aggregate data are used, coupled with the Kolmogorov equations re-
      quired to keep track of the simulated cross section distribution of gaps, as in CE, our esti-
      mates can be found even when their (linear) data are used.

    Not only are these claims incorrect, as we will argue below, but they also reflect a fundamental
misunderstanding of the point of our papers. We developed a methodology to study whether lumpy
microeconomic adjustment has aggregate implications, not to infer from aggregate data whether
the underlying microeconomic adjustments are lumpy.
   In section II we show that due to a basic interpretation error of their own results, Claim 1 is
incorrect. In section III we argue that since the identification strategy we adopt for estimating
gaps with microeconomic data is built on the observation that microeconomic data are lumpy, it
should not be used if microeconomic data are not lumpy. Therefore Claim 2 is not surprising.
Furthermore, the fact that CW find nonsensical results while we find meaningful and statistically
significant results, indicates that our findings do not arise when microeconomic adjustments are
smooth.
   3 The  higher moment that matters in specification (1) is the third moment. We focus on this specification because
it is simple and shows up often both in our work and in CW’s critique. Yet there are other specifications in their and
our work that involve higher moments different from the third moment, which explains why we generically refer to
‘higher moments’.

                                                          2
   In section IV we show that Claim 3 has nothing to do with lumpy vs. non-lumpy microeoco-
nomic adjustment. Their finding comes from relaxing to an extreme the maintained assumption of
our analysis that the driving forces are random walks.4 This result is neither new nor quantitatively
comparable to what we found with actual data.
    Somewhat paradoxically, the work of CW can be used to show that our approach is robust
to departures from the random walk assumption. In fact, nothing can be found with the serial
correlation of 0.81 used in CW (2002), and (almost) nothing with the low serial correlation of 0.47
assumed in CW (2001). CW (2003) dropped it further to 0.28, and even then the gain in R2 from
adding higher moments is substantially less than half of what we found. Section V concludes.


2      Their main critique
In the main part of their critique, CW compute from their artificial data the cross-sectional moments
of static gaps and estimate an equation analogous to (1):

                                                         (1),CW         (3),CW
                                         ∆EtCW = λMt              + γMt          ,                                    (2)

where ∆E CW and M (i),CW stand for the rate of growth of aggregate employment and the ith moment
of the cross section distribution of static gaps respectively, when the underlying data are generated
with CW’s quadratic adjustment cost model.
    Their main finding is that they estimate a positive and statistically significant γ, not very differ-
ent from the one we find using actual data. Cooper and Willis then argue that this is evidence that a
researcher testing for aggregate nonlinearities on their data would conclude, erroneously, that these
are important for aggregate dynamics. It follows, they argue, that our methodology is flawed and
our results may well be due to misspecification error.
    However, finding similar values of γ does not mean that a researcher will conclude that the
nonlinear term is equally important for aggregate dynamics in the two cases. For this, one needs
to also look at whether the regressor that is multiplied by γ has similar variability in the two
cases. It turns out that it does not: The variability of M (3) in CW’s quadratic adjustment model is
much smaller than that of the corresponding moment when micro-adjustments are lumpy. Thus,
    4 In our derivations, and as is standard in much of the (S, s)-literature, we assumed that the driving forces follow a
random walk, an assumption that cannot be easily rejected in the data. In this case, one can show that the static gap (the
difference between current employment and the optimal level of employment if there are no adjustment costs) is equal
to the frictionless gap (the difference between current employment and the optimal level of employment if adjustment
costs are removed only today) plus a constant that depends on the drift. This is a very useful result since the static gap
is straightforward to calculate while its frictionless counterpart involves more complex dynamic calculations.


                                                            3
the contribution of γM (3) is minuscule in explaining aggregate employment volatility in CW’s
simulated data, while it is large and economically significant in our findings. Simply put, the
reported values of neither R2 nor λ change when adding the nonlinear term in CW’s comment,
while they change substantially in our setting (λ falls and R2 rises).
    The first column in Table 1 is based on Table 1a in CW (2003). It is apparent from their
table that the R2 reported when estimating (2) is the same with or without the third moment of
gaps: 0.90. Similarly, the estimated value of the non-linear parameter γ, even though statistically
significant,5 is economically irrelevant, as the adjustment speed varies by less than 0.013 over the
relevant range of gaps.6 By contrast, in the corresponding exercise in Table 3 of CEH, reported in
the second column of Table 1 here, the R2 increases by 0.15 when adding a non-linear parameter
and the variation of the speed of adjustment over the relevant range is more than ten times as large
as that in CW’s model.
    The economic irrelevance of the non-linearities estimated by Cooper and Willis is even more
striking in the 2002 version of their comment, where they used a more realistic value for the first
order correlation of productivity shocks (0.81 at an annual level).7 There they report an R2 of 0.97,
both for the model with and without the non-linear parameter,8 and the adjustment speed implied
by their non-linear model varies only by 0.005 over the relevant range of values taken by the gap.
   5 The statistical significance they find possibly reflects the fact that they use time series with 1000 observations in
their simulations, while CEH’s estimates are based on 35 observations.
    6 Where the ‘relevant range’ is defined as µ ± 2σ , with µ and σ denoting the mean and standard deviation of
                                                 G       G         G       G
the cross-section of static gaps, respectively. A tedious but straightforward calculation from first principles shows that

                                                           ∑k≥0 dk2 2
                                                   σ2G =           σ ,
                                                           (1 − α)2 ε

with:                                                    ·          ¸
                                            Gλ                  Gλ
                                     dk =       (1 − λ) + 1 −
                                                       k
                                                                      ρk ,
                                          λ+ρ−1               λ+ρ−1
where G = (1 − δ)/(1 − δρ), λ denotes the speed of adjustment in the partial adjustment representation of the quadratic
adjustment cost model, δ denotes the discount rate that results in this model when calculating the (correct) dynamic
target as a present value of future static targets, σε denotes the standard deviation of firm-specific productivity shocks
and α is defined on p. 23 in CW (2002).
    7 As we pointed out the errors in the first and second versions of CW’s critique, they reacted by looking for a new

parameter configurations and new model specifications that might help their case. Their lack of success, despite two
major revisions of their original comment, possibly is the best evidence of the robustness of our findings.
    8 This is for the benchmark with high adjustment costs. For the benchmark with low adjustment costs, both values

reported for R2 are 1.00.




                                                            4
3      Estimating unobserved gaps with microeconomic data
The second and third points of CW’s critique stem from the fact that in practice the gaps are not
observed and hence neither are the cross-sectional distributions of these gaps. They argue that
our procedures to estimate these gaps and moments introduce new errors which can lead to false
positives and nonsensical results. Again, Cooper and Willis are mistaken.
   To explain why, we begin by making a distinction between the procedure in Caballero, Engel
and Haltiwanger (1997) (in this section) and that in Caballero and Engel (1993) (in the next sec-
tion), since Cooper and Willis’ specific critique differs between these cases (corresponding to their
claims 2 and 3, respectively).
   In CEH we observe the microeconomic data but have no direct observation of the gaps. In
order to construct the microeconomic gaps, we use information on hours. The idea being that
when hours exceed certain normal level, there is a shortage of labor while the opposite is true
when hours are below normal. Still, one needs to estimate the mapping from the hours-gap to
the employment-gap, and the equation that does this suffers from classic simultaneity problems.
Our way out relies heavily on our observation that microeconomic adjustment is lumpy. In this
context, the relationship between hours and employment gaps can be estimated if one only uses
observations where large adjustments took place; the basic logic behind this procedure being that
during these episodes the variability of the regressor swamps the variability of the error term in that
regression. Yet if one knows that microeconomic data are not lumpy, as is the case with Cooper
and Willis’ data, no sensible researcher would use our procedure. Cooper and Willis make the
mistake of not understanding that the microeconomic estimation procedure in CEH is conditional
on the observation that microeconomic behavior is lumpy. Fortunately for us, the latter holds in
reality, a fact explicitly acknowledged by CW.9


4      Estimating unobserved gaps using only aggregate data
In Caballero and Engel (1993) we do not observe microeconomic data and hence generate the
cross-sectional moments from an internally consistent model. This model starts from the well es-
tablished fact that microeconomic adjustment is lumpy, and uses this information to construct the
Kolmogorov/Markov functional equation for the evolution of the cross-section distribution corre-
sponding to a given set of parameters. Cooper and Willis apply our procedure to data generated by
    9 “[There   is] overwhelming evidence that plant level adjustment is nonlinear”, CW (2003), first paragraph in the
Conclusion.



                                                           5
their quadratic adjustment cost model, and find evidence that γ in equation (2) is positive when it
should be zero.
    Here CW fail to identify the real reason behind their finding, which is the very low serial
correlation assumed in their driving processes.
    In our derivations we assumed that the driving forces follow a random walk. As mentioned in
the Introduction, in this case the static gap is equal to the frictionless gap plus a constant. It is well
known within the (S, s) literature that if the random walk assumption is relaxed, the static gap no
longer is a sufficient statistic for the probability of adjustment, so that the difference between static
and frictionless gap now depends on the state. The first step in CW is to rediscover this result.10
They then drop the serial correlation of the driving forces from one to around 0.28 (we report
all serial correlation coefficients at annualized rates) and go on to generate microeconomic data
with a quadratic adjustment cost model. It is only then that they find, under some circumstances,
results qualitatively similar to ours. But this is neither new (we already knew that for very large
departures from the random walk assumption static and frictionless gaps could not be exchanged)
nor quantitatively comparable to our findings.
    Paradoxically, the findings in CW are encouraging for the gap approach, since it is only when
the serial correlation is dropped to very low levels that things start breaking down. In fact, for
the values of serial correlation used in CW (2001), which are already low,11 there would be no
significant false positive finding.
    Table 2 reports the gains in R2 that we found in CE from adding a hazard term increasing in
the (absolute) gap, versus those that would be obtained from doing the CW exercise with different
degrees of serial correlation in the driving processes.12 Clearly, there is no risk of false positives
(i.e., of finding an increasing hazard when there is none) if serial correlation is not too far from the
assumed random walk. CW had to stretch things a lot to find parameters similar to ours, and even
then the gain in fit was less than half of the gain we found.
  10 Although they fail to highlight the connection between their sharp departure from the random walk assumption and

the difference between both gap measures. Also, beginning in their abstract, they mislead their readers by repeatedly
claiming that our approach assumes that the optimal policy depends on the gap. In the final sentence of Section II (in
CW, 2003) they finally acknowledge that the “gap approach” can be derived from optimizing behavior when shocks
follow a random walk, yet credit a previous version of their comment for this well known result (see, for example,
Nickell, 1985).
   11 The annualized serial correlation they use in CW (2001) is close to 0.50. The serial correlation in the actual

driving force we used in Caballero and Engel (1993) is above 0.80. Also note that the standard value used to calibrate
RBC models (see, e.g., Cooley and Prescott, 1995) is 0.81.
   12 We replicate CW’s procedure and use 1000 observations as they did. We also add i.i.d. normal noise to the

aggregate shock in order to calibrate the R2 of the constant-hazard / quadratic adjustment cost model to match the R2
in CE for this model (0.75).




                                                          6
5     Final Remarks
The first paragraph in the conclusion of CW illustrates the flawed logic of their approach. It
concludes that “despite the overwhelming evidence that plant-level adjustment is nonlinear, the
question of whether this matters for aggregate employment dynamics remains an open issue.”
But if the goal is to show whether clearly established microeconomic lumpiness matters at the
aggregate level, then the natural approach is to start from a model with microeconomic lumpiness
and determine whether aggregation removes all traces of micro nonlinearities, which is precisely
what our methodology is designed to do. Instead, Cooper and Willis start with simulated data that
does not resemble actual microeconomic data at all, and test whether a procedure designed to test
competing hypotheses that satisfy the microeconomic lumpiness condition provides false positives
when applied to their counterfactual data. This is twisted logic at best.
     In our reply, however, we have made an effort to take their claims seriously. But there is very
little than can be rescued from the sequel of CW’s attempts. The results they claim to find are
either wrong, or irrelevant, or driven by an extraneous ingredient. Let us recap what they did and
the conclusions they should have drawn:

    1. CW relax both of our maintained assumptions — that microeconomic adjustments are lumpy
       and that driving forces follow a random walk — in an extreme fashion. The evidence on
       lumpy microeconomic adjustment is overwhelming, even Cooper and Willis acknowledge
       it at times, and our assumption of a random walk is definitely closer to reality than their
       assumption of an annual first order correlation as low as 0.28.

    2. Correctly interpreted, their main result implies the exact opposite of their Claim 1. When the
       microeconomic gaps are observed, our methodology does not detect significant nonlinear-
       ities when applied to data generated even with the major departures from our assumptions
       considered by CW.

    3. When the microeconomic gaps are not observed but need to be estimated from microeco-
       nomic data, one should not use our identification strategy (which relies on microeconomic
       lumpiness) with their data, where adjustment is know to be smooth. In any event, the pa-
       rameter estimates they find with their counterfactual data are not statistically significant, in
       sharp contrast with those we found with actual data.

    4. Finally, when only aggregate data are available and the path of the cross-sectional distri-
       bution needs to be simulated, the assumptions about the serial correlation of the driving
       processes become more important. This is not new. The surprising feature of CW’s results

                                                   7
       is that even after dropping the serial correlation as much as they do in the most recent ver-
       sion of their comment, the explanatory power of the nonlinear terms in their experiments
       is less than half of what we found in the data. If one adopts more realistic assumptions on
       the persistence of the driving processes, and uses the values assumed in CW (2002), there is
       essentially no gain from adding higher moments to their regressions. Again, and contrary to
       their claim, there is no false positive finding even when applying our methodology to highly
       unrealistic data.

    The other two paragraphs in their conclusion carry the implicit messages that “the gap ap-
proach” is voodoo-economics and that they are ready to deliver a superior gap-free alternative.
First, what they call “the gap approach” has been derived formally by us and many others before
us from at least as sophisticated microeconomic models as the one they present (for this, see the
extensive literature on the optimality of (S, s) models).13 Second, and perhaps more importantly,
the methods derived from dynamic optimization that do not “rely on gap measures” already exist
in published work. In fact, the difficulties in measuring gaps was our own motivation for Caballero
and Engel (1994, 1999).14
    To end on a more positive note, CW’s approach contrasts with more constructive and interesting
recent developments in the literature on the macroeconomic implications of lumpy microeconomic
adjustments. For example, Kahn and Thomas (2003) conclude that within an otherwise standard
RBC model, fixed costs of adjusting capital do not have a significant impact on aggregate invest-
ment.15 This finding has been misinterpreted by many as a demonstration that fixed costs do not
matter for actual investment. But this is not what they did. In fact, they also show that the aggre-
gate data generated by such a model misses important features of actual aggregate data, such as the
skewness caused by investment spikes. And that such spikes can be generated by microeconomic
fixed costs if the interest rate is not endogenized (confirming the results in Caballero and Engel,
1999). This finding points to an interesting and fruitful area of research: How does the RBC model
need to be modified for it to capture the nonlinearites that are observed in aggregate investment?
Let us hope that energy will be spent on this type of question.




  13 The   first proof of optimality of (S,s) policies is in Scarf (1960). For important extensions, relevant to the models
discussed in this reply see, among others, Harrison, Sellke and Taylor (1983), Grossman and Laroque (1990), and the
pedagogical survey in Dixit (1993).
   14 In these papers we extended the (S, s) literature to incorporate stochastic adjustment costs and estimate a structural

model via maximum likelihood.
   15 See Veracierto (2002) for a similar conclusion in a model of irreversible investment.



                                                             8
                                      REFERENCES


Caballero, Ricardo J. and Engel, Eduardo M.R.A. “Microeconomic Adjustment Hazards and
   Aggregate Dynamics”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, May 1993, 108(2), pp. 359–383.

      . “Explaining Investment Dynamics in US Manufacturing: A Generalized (S, s) Ap-
    proach,” National Bureau of Economic Research (Cambridge, MA) Working Paper No.
    4887, October 1994.

      . “Explaining Investment Dynamics in US Manufacturing: A Generalized (S, s) Ap-
    proach,” Econometrica, July 1999, 67(4), pp. 741–782.

       and Haltiwanger, John C. “Aggregate Employment Dynamics: Building from Microe-
    conomic Evidence”, American Economic Review, March 1997, 87(1), pp. 115–137.

Calvo, Guillermo. “Staggered Prices in a Utility-Maximizing Framework,” Journal of Monetary
    Economics, September 1983, 12(3), pp. 383–398.

Cooley, Thomas F. and Prescott, Edward C. “Economic Growth and Business Cycles,” in
    Thomas F. Cooley, ed., Frontiers of Business Cycle Research. Princeton: Princeton Uni-
    versity Press, 1995, pp. 1–38.

Cooper, Russell and Willis, Johnathan. “The Economics of Labor Adjustment: Mind the Gap,”
   National Bureau of Economic Research (Cambridge, MA) Working Paper No. 8527, October
   2001.

      . “The Economics of Labor Adjustment: Mind the Gap.” Federal Reserve Bank of Min-
    neapolis Research Department Staff Paper 310, August 2002.

     . “The Economics of Labor Adjustment: Mind the Gap.” Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas
    Research Working Paper 03-05, July 2003.

Dixit, Avinash. “A Simplified Treatment of the Theory of Optimal Control of Brownian Motion”,
    Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, October 1991, 15(4), pp. 657–673.

Grossman, Sanford J. and Laroque, Guy. “Asset Pricing and Optimal Portfolio Choice in the
    Presence of Illiquid Durable Consumption Goods,” Econometrica, January 1990, 58(1), pp.
    25–51.


                                             9
Harrison, J. Michael; Sellke, Thomas L. and Taylor, Allison J. “Impulse Control of Brownian
    Motion,” Mathematics of Operations Research, August 1983, 8(3), pp. 454–466.

Khan, Aubin and Thomas, Julia K. “Nonconvex Factor Adjustments in Equilibrium Business
   Cycle Models: Do Nonlinearities Matter?”, Journal of Monetary Economics, March 2003,
   50(2), pp. 331–360.

Nickell, Stephen. “Error Correction, Partial Adjustment and All That: An Expository Note,”
    Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics, May 1985, 47(2), pp. 119–29.

Rotemberg, Julio J. “The New Keynesian Microfoundations,” in Olivier J. Blanchard and Stan-
    ley Fischer, eds., National Bureau of Economics (Cambridge, MA) Macroeconomics An-
    nual, 1987, pp. 69–104.

Scarf, Herbert E. “The Optimality of (S, s) Policies n the Dynamic Inventory Problem,” in Ken-
    neth Arrow, Samuel Karlin, Patrick Suppes, eds., Mathematical Methods in Social Sciences,
    Stanford University Press: Stanford, CA, 1960, 196–202.

Veracierto, Marcelo. “Plant Level Irreversible Investment and Equilibrium Business Cycles”,
    American Economic Review, 92(1), March 2002, pp. 181–197.




                                             10
                            Table 1: E STIMATION WITH S TATIC G AP
                                                             CW (quadr. adj.)       CEH (lumpy adj.)
R2 without non-linear parameter                                   0.90                   0.65
R2 with non-linear parameter:                                     0.90                   0.79
Increase in R2 after adding non-linear parameter:                 0.00                   0.14

Minimum adjustment speed (non-linear model):                        0.19                   0.31
Maximum adjustment speed (non-linear model):                        0.20                   0.46
Range of adjustment speeds (non-linear model):                      0.01                   0.15
       CW column based on Table 1a in CW (2004). CEH based on Table 3 in CEH (1997). Maximum,
     minimum and range of adjustment speeds are calculated considering adjustment hazards in the range
     µG ± 2σG , where µG and σG denote the mean and standard deviation of the cross-section of static
     gaps for the model under consideration.




                                                    11
     Table 2: E STIMATION WITH I NFERRED S TATIC G AP : M ACROECONOMIC DATA
    Data                                          Driving force ρ (annual)           Increase in R2
    BLS, as in CE (1993)                                                                 0.13
    Sim. Quadr. Adj.                                         1.00                        0.00
    Sim. Quadr. Adj.,                                        0.75a                       0.01
    Sim. Quadr. Adj. as in CW (2001)                         0.47                        0.03
    Sim. Quadr. Adj., as in CW (2004)                        0.28                        0.05
   ‘Increase in R2 ’ denotes the difference between the R2 obtained when estimating a model with a non-
constant hazard and the R2 when imposing a constant hazard, in both cases using the methodology in CE
(1993). ‘Sim. Quadr. Adj.’ stands for ‘Simulated Quadratic Adjustment’.

a Thisvalue of ρ is somewhat below both the value in the driving force used in CE and the values used when
calibrating RBC models (see Cooley and Prescott, 1995).




                                                   12
