NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

GOVERNMENT POLICIES AND THE ALLOCATION OF
CAPITAL BPWEEN RESIDENTIAL AND INDUSTRIAL USES

Patric H. ltndershott
Working Paper No. 1036

NATIONAL BUREAU OP ECONOMIC RESEARCH

1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge Uk 02138
December 1982

This paper was presented at the Annual Meetings of the National Tax
Association and the National Tax Institute, October 26, 1982. The
research swanarized in this paper has been supported by the
National Science Foundation

the

under Grant DAR—801606b and is

part

of

s research program in Taxation and project on Capital
Forntion. Any opinions expressed are those of the author and not
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working paper #1036
December 1982

Government Policies and the Allocation of
Capital Between Residential and Industrial Uses

Abs tract

This paper contains three parts: a discussion of the tax
advantages of household capital (owner—occupied housing and
consumer durables) relative to business capital (structures and
producers durables) , an analysis of alternative mechanisms for
reducing these advantages (including the use of the mechanisms
since 1965) , and a brief enumeration of various attempts to lower
the residential mortgage rate relative to other debt yields that
have been employed during the past two decades or are currently
being advocated.

Patric H. Hendershott
Finance Department
The Ohio State University
1775 College Road

Columbus, Ohio 43210
614—422—0552

November 1982

of

Government Policies and the Allocation
*
Capital Between Residential and Industrial Uses
Patric H. Hendershott

Ohio State University and the National Bureau of Economic Research

Public finance economists have been concerned for some time with the

costs of misallocation of the American capital stock. Misallocation occurs ex
post when some capital earns a lower pretax net (of depreciation charges)

return than other capital. Many of the differences in ex post pretax returns
can be attributed to vagaries of the market place or economic uncertainty.

Expectations regarding the demands for products and the costs of imputs are
seldom fully correct, and often even the best of plans do not work out.

Because much capital is not malleable, or is so only at large cost, mistakes
are not easily corrected.

On the other hand, many of the differences in average ex post pretax
returns across broad classes of capital can be attributed to systematic biases

in government tax policies that create differential wedges between ex ante

pretax and posttax returns on these classes. Because the market place tends
to equate posttax returns across investments, the wedges cause differences in

pretax returns and overinvestment in lightly taxed capital and underinvestment

in heavily taxed capital. As a result, productivity losses occur and national
income is lower than it would have been in the absence of the biases.

Some

sources of differential wedges that have been studied include: the double
taxation of corporate dividends, the relatively light taxation of short-lived
business capital (owing to its highly accelerated depreciation schedule

—2—

and eligibility for the investment tax credit), and the more favorable tax
treatment of specific industries (such as oil and gas).

1

In this paper, I feature another differential wedge, namely, the favorable taxation of income earned on household capital relative to that earned on

business capital. This general topic has been the subject of much of my
recent research, upon which I will draw extensively. My presentation is
divided into three broad parts: a discussion of the tax advantages of
household capital (owner-occupied housing and consumer durables) relative to
business—capital, an analysis of alternative mechanisms for reducing these
advantages (including the use of these mechanisms since 1965), and a brief
enumeration of various attempts to lower the residential mortgage rate
relative to other debt yields that have been employed during the past two
decades or are currently being advocated.

I. The Tax Advantages of Owner—Occupied Housing and Durables

Owner-occupied housing and durables receive two types of favorable tax

treatment relative to industrial capital. First and foremost, the cash flow
income from household capital (the implicit rents earned or net rental outlays
avoided) is not taxed, while that generated by industrial plant and equipment

is. Second, nominal capital gains realized upon sale are not taxed if the
proceeds are reinvested in another house within a reasonable period, and a
one-time gain of up to $125,000 is exempt without reinvestment for households

above age 55. With industrial structures, a realized gain from a sale is
taxed at the firm level and unrealized gains that are reflected in higher

—3—

share prices are taxed when the shares are traded. Nominal capital gains on
consumer durables are not taxed at all, but these are unlikely to occur except
in a high inflation period owing to the generally high depreciation rate on
durables.

Note that I have not identified the deduction of household interest
expense from the taxable income base as the fundamental source of the tax

subsidy to owner-occupied housing and durables. To understand this, consider
a household with marketable wealth equal to or in excess of the value of its

house and whose best alternative investment is home mortgages. The ability to
borrow mortgage money to invest in mortgages where the interest on the one is

deductible and on the other is taxable is obviously of no value.2 The tax
advantage to this household is the absence of taxation of the return on the

own equity invested in the house.3 Whether the house is equity or debt
financed, the magnitude of the advantage is directly related to the household's marginal tax bracket and to the level of nominal pretax returns in the
economy; the higher the bracket and the level of returns, the more valuable

the exemption. Because the tax advantage varies by marginal tax bracket of
household, overinvestment in owner-occupied housing and durables is greater
the

higher is the tax
Now this is not

bracket of the household.

to say that the deductibility of household interest

payments is of no value to most households or that removal of this deduction
from the tax statutes would have no impact on the demand for owner-occupied

housing and durables. Such is hardly the case. The deductibility of interest
is a means of extending the

full

tax advantage of owner-occupied housing and

durables to the numerous less wealthy households who cannot entirely equity

finance their real assets. The deductibility is thus analogous to safe-harbor
leasing which extends the full advantages of tax credits and accelerated write

—4—

offs available to profitable, slow or moderately growing firms to non-

profitable and/or rapidly growing firms.4 The underlying tax credits and
accelerated write off s, not the leasing, are the fundamental source of the tax
advantage.

Again let me emphasize that the deductibility of household interest
expense is merely an extension of the basic tax advantage of household capital

to less wealthy households, not an additional advantage. It has been sometimes said that householdcapital isnegatively taxed owing to the ability to

deduct this interest from wage income. This view is incorrect. While there
is a negative

tax, there is an offsetting positive implicit tax in

that households will purchase owner—occupied housing and consumer durables
that yield them a lower pretax return than could be earned on other assets.5
At the margin, the implicit positive tax exactly outweighs the explicit
negative tax so that household capital is properly viewed as being zero taxed.
The result of favorable tax treatment for owner-occupied capital is in-

creased demand. The increased demand for housing takes three forms. First,
owning households with given real incomes demand more housing than they would
otherwise, the increase being greater for those in higher marginal tax brack-

ets. Second, the number of households is greater than otherwise, and because
there are economies of scale in the provision housing services, more households with a lower average income demand more housing in total than do fewer

households with a higher average income. Third, the homeownership rate is
higher than if there were no tax advantages. Note that the first two of these
raises the share of capital in residential use.
The tax advantage of owner—occupied housing increased with the acceleration of inflation between the middle l960s and late 1970s because nominal
pretax interest rates increased and tax bracket creep occurred.6 The price of

—5—

housing services fell because posttax real interest rates fell, the decline

being greater the higher was one's marginal tax bracket. As a result, the
demand for housing increased for households with a given real income, household formations accelerated (headship rates rose), the home ownership rate
increased, and some of the increased demand for housing units was met by
conversions of structures from industrial to residential use.

II. Methods of Reducing the Tax Bias in Favor of Owner-Occupied Capital

There are at least •three means through which the tendency to overinvest

in owner—occupied housing and durables can be dampened or removed altogether.
I will discuss each in turn. Because the major concern from an allocation
point of view has been owner—occupied housing, the discussion is in terms of
this asset.

The Standard Fixed Rate Mortgage and Credit Market Constraints
As just noted, the bias toward housing tended to intensify with the

increase in inflation in the 1970s. I say tended because constraints caused
by imperfections in the housing finance instrument could have offset the

tendency. Given the rising inflationary premium in interest rates (and the
observed increase in the real asset price of housing) mortgage payments on the

standard fixed-rate mortgage tended to increase far more rapidly for potential home buyers than did nominal incomes. While households could expect the
real value of mortgage payments to be eroded rapidly by inflation, the initial
payments were tilted upward, making them "unaffordable,' even though the cost

of obtaining housing services actually fell.7 At the same time, existing
homeowners with standard fixed-rate mortgages found themselves paying a

below—market interest rate. To the extent that they would lose this rate if

—6—

they "traded up" in response to the decline in the price of housing services,
they would be reluctant to do so.8 One might argue, then, that the effect of
the increased tax bias in favor of housing was largely offset by the usage of

the standard fixed rate mortgage.9 Thus there wasn't further overinvestment
in housing, and the economy did not suffer additional productivity losses.

There are two problems with this argument. First, usage of the standard
mortgage instrument may not have greatly dampened housing demand in the

1970s)0 Most sellers were able to capture much of the value of their below—
market mortgage financing via loan assumptions and various owner-financing

arrangements. Also, many young households adjusted to the affordability
problem by altering the pattern of their real labor income to better match the

pattern of real mortgage payments. By postponing child raising, households
were able to tilt their real income forward in time to match the pattern of
real mortgage payments. The second problem with the offsetting-tendencies
argument was that the tax-bias effect is applicable to a broad range of
households, while the mortgage-instrument effect was generally applicable to

only a small subset of households: largely young, first—time homebuyers who
had not accumulated sufficient wealth generally or earned sufficient housing
capital gains specifically to allow them to achieve a moderate initial mortgage payment to income ratio via a large downpayment. If the mortgage-instrument effect were sufficient in magnitude to lead to an optimal aggregate
distribution of structures between residential and industrial, then the
maldistribution of the housing stock among households would have been enor-

mous. Older, established households would have consumed too much housing, and
younger, starting-out households, far too little. One misallocation problem
would have been replaced by another, possibly worse one.

—7—

An alternative would be to attack directly the residential—industrial

capital misallocation problem. At the same time, the misallocation of the
housing stock among households could be minimized by the development and
usage of more efficient mortgage market instruments.

A number of relatively

new instruments would reduce the initial mortgage payment in an inflationary
environment.

11

With price—level adjusted mortgages or PLANs, the initial

mortgage payment is based on a real, rather than nominal, interest rate,

and payments rise through time with the price level. With shared—appreciation mortgages or SAMs, the initial payment is based on a below—market
nominal rate, in return for which the lender receives a share of the actual

appreciation in the underlying house. With graduated—payment mortgages,
payments rise from a reduced initial level at a prescribec rate for a specified

period. Finally, the negative impact of the mortgage capital gains on household mobility could bereduceci by use of adjustable—rate mortgages.

Removal of the Tax Bias for Owner—Occupied Housing
The most obvious and direct method of eliminating the tax bias is to
remove its source, i.e., to tax the imputed rental income from owner—occupied

housing and maybe some of the capital gains. Economists have long advocated
this, but politicians generally do not want even to discuss it.

In fact, the

one—time exemption of a $100,000 gain (now $125,000) after age 55 is of recent

vintage. It was enacted well after most people understood the already favorable tax treatment of owner—occupied housing.

Nonetheless, some proposals

have been made to limit the deductibility of mortgage (and consumer credit)

interest. One would replace the interest tax deduction with a flat tax credit
of, say, 15 to 25 percent. This would reduce the maldistribution of housing
among households——the tax advantage would be the same for all, rather than

—8—

rising with one's tax bracket--and, if the credit were low enough, it would
reduce the maldistribution of capital between residential and industrial.
Jimmy Carter's infamous effort to place a ceiling on the amount of interest

that could be deducted had a similar intent. This effort was especially enlightening regarding the politics of the matter because Congress rejected the
proposal even though the ceiling was set so high that few households were
expected to be affected.12
The flat-tax proposals currently being debated in Congress would also

affect household interest deductions. Under the pure Hall-Rabushka plan, the
deduction would be eliminated. The Bradley-Gephardt multiple-layer plan would
be quite similar in effect to the above-mentioned tax credit proposal. Interest would continue to be fully deductible, but at the taxpayers' initial tax
rate (14 percent under the plan), rather than at their higher marginal tax

rate. I should reemphasize, however, that removal of the mortgage interest
deduction is not equivalent to removal of the tax bias. The bias for wealthy
households who can fully equity-finance their houses would remain intact. The
bias would be reduced for other households in proportion to the amount of
external or debt financing required.
Given the obvious political problems of removing the tax advantages for
owner—occupied housing, attention shifted in the late l970s to indirect
methods of discouraging overinvestment in housing.

Reduced Taxation of Industrial Capital
In a paper Sheng Hu and I wrote four years ago, we argued that the bias
in favor of owner—occupied housing could be removed by taxing income from
industrial capital the same as income from housing, rather than doing the

reverse.13 That is, rather than taxing income from housing more heavily,
income from industrial capital could be taxed less heavily.

We then de—

—9—

scribed a set of business tax cuts that would remove biases against long—lived
business capital (extend an enlargened investment tax credit to structures)

against unincorporated businesses (cease double taxation of corporate
dividends) ,

and against business capital generally. The latter was to be

achieved by switching to replacement cost depreciation and shortening tax
service lives. The mechanism by which the demand for owner-occupied housing
was to be reduced was an increase in real pretax interest rates driven by an
increased demand for funds by businesses to finance their capital expansion.

Three years later, Congress enacted the Economic Recovery Tax Act

(tRTA). While this legislation enlarged some tax biases, most obviously that

against long—lived business capitai,' the general bias against business
capital was reduced by the sharp shortening of tax service lives tincluuing

that of rental housing). Of course, many woula contend that the high level
of real interest rates in the second ralf of 1981 ana the first halt of
l98z has been due to a very restrictive monetary policy designed to wring
out intlation, not to a surge in the tinancing of business investment.
ihe point, though, is that even with a monetary policy conducive to real
growth in the economy, real interest rates will remain higher than in the
pre ERTA years.
ERTA has reduced the tax bias in favor of owner—occupied housing direct-

ly as well as indirectly via higher real interest rates. Recall that the
fundamental source of the bias is the failure to tax the return on equity

invested in one's own home. The magnitude of the bias then depends, at least
in part, on how heavily investments in assets other than one's own home are

taxed. The cut in the maximum tax rate on unearned income, the expansion of
allowable tax—exempt contributions to IRA accounts, the creation of the taxexempt All Savers certificate and eventual partial exclusion of interest
income from taxation, and the new exclusion for dividends reinvested in

—10—

utilities all tend to lessen the relative tax advantages of homeownership.
In order to deduce the likely impact of ERTA on the allocation of the
real capital stock, James Shilling and I constructed a simulation model of the

American economy.15 The model is highly simplified in that there are only
three types of private tangible capital -- owner-occupied and rental housing
and industrial capital -- and the aggregate capital stock is taken as given.
The special feature of the model is the division of households into four
income classes, each of which makes tenure choice and portfolio decisions.

All classes hold taxable debt and equities, while only the highest two classes

hold rental housing and tax-exempt securities. The fractions of the classes
that are homeowners initially rise from 0.49 (lowest income) to 0.90 (highest

income). The model was parameterized to conform with the American economy in
1977, the last year of income tax data available when the study began.

Three aspects of the 1981 legislation were analyzed: the shortened tax
service lives of industrial capital and rental housing and the reduction in
the maximum tax rate on unearned income to 50 percent (this has a negliglble
impact on capital allocation) .

The major result of these provisions in our

analysis is a sharp increase in the demand for industrial capital that raises

interest rates (real) by 1.85 percentage points. The latter clearly reduces
the demand for owner—occupied housing. In our analysis, the demand for
housing by individual renters also declines, the impact of the increase in
interest rates overwhelming that of the more favorable tax treatment of rental

housing investment. However, the real price of housing services from rental
units rises by less than that from owner—occupied units so the number of
renting households increases (the aggregate honieownership rate falls by 1.3

percentage points). The net result is a roughly unchanged rental housing
stock. Most important, the share of total capital in industrial use rises by

-11-

3½

percentage points and that in owner—occupied housing falls by a like

amount. While these results are only suggestive, the suggestion is that the
tendency to over-invest in owner—occupied housing (and, by analogy, consumer
durables) would be greatly dampened.

III. Other Subsidies for Housing

To this point, I have discussed only one bias in favor of owner-occupied
housing, that attributable to the favorable (zero) taxation of income from

this asset. In this section, I note briefly a number of additional governmental policies that alter the allocation of capital toward residential use by
lowering the cost of residential mortgage debt relative to other forms of

debt. These policies, which either have been employed in the past or are
advocated in the present, include: direct interest rate subsidies, the use of
tax—exempt mortgage revenue bonds, and tax advantages for lenders (the tax
preferences of thrifts and the mortgage interest tax credit proposed by the
President's Commission on Housing)

Interest Rate Subsidies
Below—market interest rate subsidies were initiated in 1961 under the
Section 221 (d) (3) program, but they did not become an important factor until

the Section 235 and 236 programs established in 1968. Under these programs,
households were able to borrow at rates as low as one percent. In early 1973,
high levels of defaults and abandonments, as well as scandals entailing
bribery of FHA inspectors, led to the suspension of these programs.

Below-market rate financing reappeared in 1974 with the Tandem plan in
which borrowing rates were lowered to 7½

percent.

The original Tandem was

designed to stimulate housing production during the 1974-75 housing recession,

—12—

but the plan has continued in effect for multifamily housing. While a 7½
percent borrowing rate was a minor subsidy in 1976-78; in 1980-82, the subsidy

has been enormous. The Reagan administration is fully committed to getting
out of the business of providing 7½ percent multifamily mortgages as soon as
the in place pipeline of projects the Administration inherited is completed,

which will be shortly. Further, the Administration's position against any new
below—market rate subsidies can be inferred from its flat opposition to the
Lugar subsidy bill this past summer.

Mortgage Revenue Bonds
Another means of lowering interest rates for homeowners has been the use

of tax-exempt mortgage revenue bonds (MRB5). With this financing, the
interest cost has been cut by about 20 percent, i.e., 3 percentage points when

mortgage rates are 15 percent. (Businesses, with 1DB issues, are well aware
of the advantages of tax-exempt financing.) A surge in the issuance of MRB5
occurred in the second half of 1978, and in the absence of restrictive
legislation, much of the housing stock would have eventually been so
financed.

The 1980 Mortgage Subsidy Bond Act limited tax-exempt financing to
first—time home buyers who purchased inexpensive or moderately priced houses
(those having a price less than 90 percent of the average area purchase

price). That is, MRBs were to be used largely to overcome problems created by
the standard fixed-rate mortgage instrument in an inflationary period--to

correct for underinvestment by financially constrained households. Moreover,
the legislation prohibited issues of MRBs after the end of 1983. The Tax
Equity and Fiscal Responsibility Act of 1982——with that title it is a wonder
that passage was ever in doubt——raised the price limit to 110 percent of the
average area purchase price and allows 10 percent of the financing to be used

-13-

by multiple, rather than first-time, buyers. However, the end-of-1983 cut off
remains.

Some have been particularly critical of MRB5 because they tend to drive

up tax-exempt yields. In fact, this side effect is a plus from the viewpoint
of efficient capital allocation if one considers the tax-exempt status of

state and local governments to be economically inefficient. State and local
capital formation is favored under current tax law in a manner similar to

owner—occupied housing. The income generated by the capital is not taxed,
while the opportunity cost of funds is below-market owing to the exemption of

interest received on state and local debt. Under this view, it is preferable
to substitute housing for state and local capital via MRB financing than for
industrial capital via below-market rate taxable debt financing.

Tax Preferences for Investors in Mortgages
Our last topic is tax preferences for investors in residential

mortgages. In the Revenue Act of 1962, tax preferences (computation of loan
loss reserves that far exceed a reasonable provision for expected loan losses)

of savings and loan associations were explicitly tied to a minimum investment

in housing-related loans and liquid assets. In the Tax Reform Act of 1969,
the tax preferences of mutual savings banks were similarly tied. Because of
these preferences, these institutions would be willing to earn a lower pretax

return on mortgages than on otherwise comparable debt instruments. If these
institutions were the marginal investors in mortgages, then competition among
them would result in borrowers paying the lower rate.

Depending on the

profitability of the institutions, the reduction could be as much as a half

percentage point.17 On the other hand, if these institutions are not the
marginal investors in mortgages (possibly because binding deposit rate

ceilings limit their ability to attract funds) or are not profitable (in

—14--

which case the tax preferences lose value), then mortgage rates will not be
lowered by the tax preferences.

One way to insure relatively low mortgage rates is to extend tax
preferences to all investors in mortgages, and one method of doing this is to

enact a universal mortgage interest tax credit (MITC). While a MITC has never
been adopted, it was part of the Financial Institutions Act of 1975 (which
passed the Senate but not the House) and it has been recently advocated by The

President's Commission on Housing. Although a specific level of credit was
not stated in the Report of the Commission, a 2 percent credit was apparently

contemplated. With yields on comparable debt securities at 14½ percent, investors in the 44 percent tax bracket would be willing to accept a 14 percent
pretax return on mortgages.18
This half point reduction is, of course, small compared to the depth of
the interest rate subsidy available with the Tandem program and MRB financing.
Note, however, that the subsidy would apply to all housing, not just a small,

targeted part. The administration is not pushing passage of the MITC.

IV. Summary
Where all this leaves us in terms of the efficient allocation of capital

between industrial and residential uses? Probably in better shape than we
have been in a long time. The business tax cuts of 1981, even after the 1982
correction, and the personal saving incentives of 1981 (the cut in the maximum
tax on unearned income, the expansion of IRAs, etc.) have sharply lowered the
rate at which income from industrial capital is taxed at both the business and

personal levels. At current inflation rates, producer's durables are, like
consumer durables, effectively exempt from taxation. However, structures in

—15—

industrial use are still taxed somewhat more heavily than structures in

residential use. On the other hand, the extent of below-market residential
mortgage financing is probably at a 20 year low. The Tandem funds have been
depleted, the Lugar plan was not adopted, no one is seriously pushing the
MITC, and the restrictions on MRBs remain relatively tight (and the end—l983
cut off is still intact)

It would appear, then, that investment in real capital in the 1980s is
likely to be allocated more efficiently between residential and industrial

uses than in the 1970s. Two factors could upset this conjecture. First,
there is always the possibility of new legislative initiatives to favor

household borrowing. The strong support in Congress for the Lugar bill is one
indication. Second, there is also the possibility that the economy will be
reinflated. Because the taxation of business capital rises with inflation,
owing to FIFO accounting and historic cost depreciation, a higher inflation
rate would tend, again, to lead to overinvestment in household capital and
underinvestment in indusfrial capital.

—16—

Footnotes
*

The research summarized in this paper has been supported by the National

Science Foundation under Grant DAR-8016064 and is part of the NBER's project
on capital formation.

1For a recent calculation of the productivity or efficiency loss from these

wedges, see J.G. Gravelle, "The Social Cost of Nonneutral Taxation: Estimates
for Non-Residential Capital," in Hulten (ed.) Depreciation, Inflation, and the
Taxation of Income from Capital, The Urban Institute Press, 1981, and Don
Fullerton, "Why Do Varying Effective Corporate Tax Rates Matter?," Special
Report, 1981 Effective Tax Rate Supplement, Tax Notes.

2lnsofar as high income households can borrow indirectly at taxable rates and
invest in tax—exempt securities (direct borrowing for these purposes is
against IRS regulations), the deduction of mortgage interest can have value to

such households. Note, however, that transactions or intermediation costs
limit this. Say that the cost of borrowing mortgages is 14 percent but that
the return for investing in mortgages (say GNMA securities) is only 12 percent
and that the return on tax exempts is 70 percent of 12 percent or 8.4 percent.

Households in the 40 percent tax bracket pay 8.4 percent after tax for
mortgage funds and cannot arbitrage between mortgages and tax exempts.

3Thus owner—occupied housing has a tax advantage in Canada even though
interest is not deductible.

4For an enlightening discussion of tax leasing, see A.C. Warren and A.J.

Auerbach, "Transferability of Tax Incentives and the Fiction of Safe Harbor
Leasing," Harvard Law Review, 8, 1982.

—17—

5For an early discussion of this phenomenon, see M.J. Bailey, "Progressivity
and Investment Yields Under Income Taxation," Journal of Political Economy,

November—December 1974. For a general equilibrium view of explicit and
implicit taxes, see Harvey Galper and Eric Toder, "Measuring the Incidence of
Taxation of Income from Capital," Proceedings of the Seventy-Fifth Annual
Conference on Taxation, National Tax Association, 1982.

6For empirical evidence upon which this paragraph is based, see P.H.
Hendershott, "Real User Costs and the Demand for Single-Family Housing,"
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2, 1980.

7For an excellent discussion of this problem, see Donald Lessard and Franco

Modigliani, "Inflation and Housing Finance: Problems and Potential
Solutions," in New Mortgage Designs for Stable Housing Finance in an
Inflationary Environment, Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, Cambridge Mass.,
1975.

8See P.H.Hendershott and Sheng Hu, "Accelerating Inflation and Nonassumable

Fixed—Rate Mortgages: Effects on Consumer Choice and Welfare," Public Finance
Quarterly, April 1982.

9For a simulation study illustrating the combined impacts of increased tax
bias and the effects of the standard fixed-rate mortgage, see P.H. Hendershott
and Sheng Ho, "The Allocation of Capital between Residential and Industrial

Uses: Taxes, Inflation and Capital Market Constraints," Journal of Finance,
forthcoming.

—18—

See P.H. Hendershott, "Nominal Interest Rates and Housing Demand," "Mortgage
Capital Gains and Housing Demand," and "The Development and Future of Owner
Financing," all in the Quarterly Review, Federal Home Loan Bank of Cincinnati,
2, 1982.

11For a discussion of these instruments and their merits, see the articles by
McCulloch, Villani, and Alm and Follain in the Quarterly Review, Federal Home

Loan Bank of Cincinnati, 3: 1982.

12The expectations were incorrect. The subsequent sharp run up in mortgage
rates and house prices would have resulted in a significant number of
households being affected.

'3The paper was published as P.H. Hendershott and Sheng Hu, "GovernmentInduced Biases in the Allocation of the Stock of Fixed Capital in the United
States," in von Furstenberg (ed.) Capital Efficiency and Growth, Ballinger
Publishing Company, 1980.

14See A.J. Auerbach, "Whither the Corporate Tax?: Reform After ACRS," National
Tax Journal, forthcoming.

15See P.H. Hendershott and J.D. Shilling, "Capital Allocation and the Economic
Recovery Tax Act of 1981," Public Finance Quarterly, April 1982.

16For discussions of MRBs, see P.H. Hendershott, "Mortgage Revenue Bonds: Tax
Exemption with a Vengeance,: and H. Galper and E. Toder, "Modelling Revenue
and Allocation Effects of the Use of Tax-Exempt Bonds for Private Purposes"

—19--

both in Kaufman (ed.) Efficiency in the Municipal Bond Market, JAI Press Inc.,
1981.

17For detailed discussions of the tax preferences and their possible impact on
relative mortgage rates, see P.H. Hendershott and K.E. Villani, "Residential

Mortgage Markets and the Cost of Mortgage Funds," AREUEA Journal, Spring 1980
(especially the appendix) and "Savings and Loan Usage of the Authority to

Invest in Corporate Bonds," Savings and Loan Asset Management Under
Deregulation, Federal Home Loan Bank of San Francisco, 1981.

'8For analyses of the 1975 MITC, see P.H. Hendershott, "An Analyses of the
Expected Impact of the Financial Institutions Act of 1975," in Buckley,

Tuccillo and Villani (eds), Capital Markets and the Housing Sector, Ballinger
Publishing Company, 1977, and E.J. Kane, "Costs and Benefits of the Proposed
Credit on Residential—Mortgage Income," Journal of Bank Research, Summer 1975.
On the MITC proposed by the President's Commission on Housing, see P.H.

Hendershott, 'n Analysis of Five Proposals to Subsidize Single-Family

Housing," Symposium on Countercyclical Stimulus for Single—Family Housing,
U.S. General Accounting Office, 1982.

