NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

SUBJECTIVE OUTCOMES IN ECONOMICS
Daniel S. Hamermesh
Working Paper 10361
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10361
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2004

This was the Association Lecture delivered at the Southern Economic Association meetings, San
Antonio, Texas, November 22, 2003. I thank Stephen Haider and Stephen Trejo for helpful
comments. The views expressed herein are those of the author and not necessarily those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2004 by Daniel S. Hamermesh. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Subjective Outcomes in Economics
Daniel S. Hamermesh
NBER Working Paper No. 10361
March 2004
JEL No. J000, I000
ABSTRACT
This study examines the various uses of subjective outcomes as a focus of interest for economists.
It outlines the possible channels by which economists can usefully add to what are already massive
literatures on such outcomes in the other social sciences. Generally we contribute little if we merely
engage in fancier empirical work and still less if we describe subjective outcomes by other
subjective outcomes. Our biggest contributions can be in adducing economic theories that allow a
better understanding of objective behavior using subjective outcomes, or of the determinants of
subjective outcomes; or in understanding subjective outcomes, such as expectations, that underlie
objective economic behavior.

Daniel S. Hamermesh
Department of Economics
University of Texas
Austin, TX 78712-1173
hamermes@eco.utexas.edu

1. Introduction
There has been an upsurge in the use and analysis in economics of subjective
outcomes. A long survey paper (Frey and Stutzer 2002) discussed some of the literature, but
even that was restricted to only one part of the interest in this type of outcome. A relevant
question is why economists are looking at these expressions of behavior now. I think it is
partly due to the fact that we are seeking things to do with the large amounts of data that we
have suddenly discovered—the Mt. Everest phenomenon, if it’s there, we must climb it.
Partly too, it may be that we believe that our skills enable us to do better jobs of analyzing
outcomes that have previously been in the sole purview of other social scientists.
In the mid-1970s I did some research on a subjective outcome—job satisfaction. The
comment from the editor of a journal to which I submitted the paper was “This is not
economics.” Was the editor correct, and would he still be correct today? There is a lot of
work being done on these topics, but what kind of work should we be doing? Here I go
through a variety of examples of my own and others’ research in trying to distinguish
between the kinds of topics where we have something to offer and others where we do not.
I neglect many examples with which I am not familiar that may be at least as good as those
that I present. This brief discussion indicates that there is a disjuncture between what we
economists are doing in these areas and what we should be doing.
This discussion raises a larger question, which I am not going to answer: “Is there
anything beyond the scope of economics?” I have some bona fides in asking this question,
having written papers on such bizarre topics as suicide, beauty and sleep that some people
argue are not subjects that we should be working on. If those topics are off limits for us,
discussing the economics of subjective outcomes is even further away from what we should
be considering. Some of it is; but I will try to demonstrate that some of these things are very

2
much within our purview, and that we should be thinking about them. While I cover a fair
number of topics, there are other subjective measures (e.g., preferences toward risk, rates of
time preference) that I do not discuss but that have been studied by economists and used in
empirical analyses of economic outcomes.
2. Life Satisfaction
The first research area that I deal with is life satisfaction: How happy one is with
one’s life. Economists’ work on this topic comprises, if not the majority of our research on
subjective outcomes, at least surely a plurality. The general idea here is to obtain data on
how satisfied the subjects are, based on their subjective responses, and to look at the effects
of economic variables on their satisfaction. The typical economic variable is income. The
general research question is, “How happy does your income make you?” Many of the people
who work in this area try to equate this happiness measure with utility (with Lévy- Garboua
and Montmarquette 1997, being the best example so far). On the surface this is very
appealing. Utility is one of the two foundation ideas that we deal with in our intro micro
classes, and it is a topic we should be able to say something about. How happy are people
over time within a country? How happy are people across countries? What are the effects of
various demographic correlates on differences in happiness?
I find most of the analysis by economists on this issue to be rather silly. The first
difficult issue is the scaling problem—the problem of converting what must be some
continuous ordinal measure into a measure described by a few categories. How people scale
it in their own minds is a question that we economists have barely begun to think about,
although cognitive psychologists have paid this issue substantial attention.
The larger problem, however, is not the scaling problem. I am willing to admit that
we might not be able to solve the scaling problem; but at least we can wave our hands and

3
say that somehow there is an underlying ordinal index of people’s behavior that could be
captured if we were able to spy on them sufficiently carefully. But there is another problem
here: There is no apparent link of these subjective responses to any underlying measure of
utility, at least measures that maintain the properties that we desire for utility functions. On a
theoretical basis, Homans (1961) pointed out that there is no reason to believe that long-run
improvements in objective circumstances will generate long-run increases in subjective
responses. While we generally believe that utility rises with additional inputs of goods and
the time to consume them, many psychologists believe that satisfaction adjusts to
expectations about living standards. If we believe that utility equals expressed satisfaction,
there is little justification for any policy designed to raise living standards.
On the empirical side, there are books and articles surveying hundreds of empirical
studies of life satisfaction by psychologists (e.g., the survey by Diener and Biswas-Diener
2002). If you examine this literature, you find that every specification that economists have
used has also been included in at least several psychological studies. For example, I
discussed a paper at the 2002 AEA meetings (Gardner and Oswald 2001), which received
immense amounts of press, in which the focus was on lottery winners. If I won the Texas
Lotto, I would be very happy for a while. But after I was used to the lottery win, I would
think, “The lottery’s my due, I deserve to have won it.” My satisfaction would revert to its
mean. This is exactly what was observed in this study. It is also exactly what was shown in
two very similar studies of lottery winners done by psychologists in the 1970’s.
Our ability to push buttons in STATA, SAS, TSP, or whatever, is not unique:
Psychologists and sociologists are perfectly capable of doing that. Our strength, I would
argue, and the thing that should underlie whether we do anything in this area, is the extent to
which we can bring economic theory to bear on the specifications that we try to formulate.

4
On this topic in particular I have seen nothing where any economic theory has been brought
to bear. Thus, in terms of a hierarchy that I will summarize at the end of this article, it is
clear that economists’ work on this topic has not progressed very far.1 Now perhaps
somebody will generate more ideas that use economics here; but simply running fancy
regressions on this subject is not new (except to economists). Although I would like to see
more people working in this area, thus far we have not done much to justify our incursions.
3. Job Satisfaction
I have published two papers on job satisfaction, one each quarter century
(Hamermesh 1977, 2001). To show that I am not completely self-congratulatory, I rather
doubt that we have offered much in this area either. We have only one notion here that other
fields do not have, and that is the idea of equilibrium. If people choose an occupation based
on the returns to working in it, then a permanent shock to those returns will in the long run
have no effect on the average satisfaction of workers in the occupation. A little testing of
that idea—putting it into the context of wage determination, which psychologists do not seem
to have done—might have some small value. There is no real basis in economic theory; there
is just the notion of equilibrium, of adjustment to what one expected upon making one’s
investments in human capital—end of story.
To demonstrate that there is some evidence of equilibration in people’s stating
subjectively their job satisfaction I looked at information for the United States (Hamermesh
2001) that links changes in job satisfaction across earnings quartiles to interquartile changes
in income inequality. This is essentially a double-difference study, estimated using data from
various National Longitudinal Surveys for the United States.
Interquartile differences in job satisfaction and earnings inequality grew in tandem
over the period 1978-88—a time when the very rapid growth in earnings inequality began in

5
the U.S. When one looks at changes over the longer period, 1978-96, the picture looks
entirely different. Workers in the top earnings quartile no longer exhibited higher job
satisfaction than those in the second and third earnings quartiles. They appear to have
become somewhat used to their increased relative earnings—to the increased returns to their
skills.
A similar analysis in that study used data from the German Socioeconomic Panel. In
Germany there was almost no change in interquartile earnings inequality over 1984-94; and
interquartile differences in the fractions of people responding that they were highly,
somewhat or fairly satisfied during this period compared to the fraction stating that they were
dissatisfied were also quite small. Between 1994 and 1996, however, earnings inequality,
especially the advantage of the top earners over other workers, rose rapidly. At the same
time, the difference in average satisfaction of top earners over others became much greater.
The stimulus of a rapid rise in earnings generated an immediate response of a sharp rise in
job satisfaction.
One might argue that, by using double differences, this approach also circumvents the
problem of scaling in categorical subjective variables, so that it might handle both of the
problems I alluded to in discussing life satisfaction. I am dubious about that; and surely
without detailed work on cognitive responses to these questions (a task for which economists
are ill-prepared), one cannot make any such claims. Perhaps the best to be said about this
literature is that we economists have made a very small contribution to a large socialscientific literature.
4. Subjective Health Outcomes
The next area is one in which I have not worked, although many people have. The
standard measure of health status asks survey respondents to rate their health on a numerical

6
scale, typically denoting excellent, very good, good, fair or poor. Many labor economists,
including me, have used this measure as a control variable on the right-hand side of wage and
other equations. Why do we use this subjective outcome? Very simply, we usually cannot
take blood samples, measure heart rates or count cholesterol when we conduct the large
surveys that provide most of our data. Instead, we ask the respondents how healthy they are.
Is there any economic content in explaining these subjective health outcomes? There
is a large literature on health production functions, and we can measure the effects of inputs
on this subjective outcome. There is an important economic question here: Does spending on
health improve health? While we can measure health objectively through morbidity and
mortality measures, in large micro data sets of living people we typically do not have those
measures. Since the evidence (Bound 1991) indicates that this subjective measure is fairly
highly correlated with some objective measures of health status, as a cost-effective first-pass
at the issue it has some value. We can thus use it as a way around our inability to get
objective measures of health outcomes. Marrying it to what we believe might be objective
determinants of health status through the notion of a production function is something we
should approve of.
5. Measuring Expectations
Expectations are inherently subjective—they deal with events on which objective
measures cannot as yet be provided. A number of purely subjective expectations are central
to testing basic theories of economics. When we write down the lifetime maximization of the
consumer, for example, we derive paths of consumption, labor supply, wealth and other
outcomes from the dynamic optimization problem defined over a horizon, T. How long is T?
This is rather important. As another example, what is the subjective discount rate in this
maximand, something that surely differs across people?

7
As an illustration I deal here with expectations about the horizon, T, and about
expectations of the probability of survival through various future years. The idea in this
example was to elicit from people information about their expectations of longevity and to
append it to a representative dataset to examine the role of expectations in the consumer’s
lifetime maximization problem. To do this I undertook two mail surveys of randomly
selected adult males, economists and others (Hamermesh 1985), obtaining information on
expected length of life and various personal characteristics. The surveys included questions
about the length of life of the respondent’s parents and grandparents.
To infer the impact of the objective measures on expected longevity I estimated the
regressions presented in Table 1. (Other variables in the equations tested for the rationality
of forecasts by using information from life tables and are unimportant here.) The crucial
variables are those for old and young grandparents and parents (whether one’s forebears died
naturally before age 60 or lived beyond age 79), as their estimated impacts on subjective
longevity in these samples can be used to create forecasts of longevity in some of the large
random samples that empirical economists use. The results are heartening, in the sense that
the forecasts of members of both samples are sensitive to the life experiences of their parents
and grandparents. Indeed, they are too sensitive—they overstate what the epidemiological
evidence suggests is the objective relationship (Hamermesh and Hamermesh 1983), but that
excess enhances their value in creating forecasts of expectations in large samples.2
Using the 1975 wave of the Retirement History Survey, and the Terman sample of
high-IQ Californians and their families, I linked these results to information on the
respondents’ parents’ ages at death to create variables proxying the respondents’ horizons
(Hamermesh 1984). These were then used to examine whether, other things, including
financial wealth, equal, these older Americans’ consumption of goods and leisure differed as

8
their imputed horizons differed. The results, contained for the RHS sample in Table 2,
suggest that the length of the horizon does affect these important life-cycle outcomes.
Consumption spending in particular is reduced among otherwise identical people if their
horizons are longer. The effects of increases in the subjective horizon on market work are
relatively much smaller and less significant statistically, but they are in the expected
direction.
The samples from which subjective expectations were obtained were quite small, and
the respondents whose behavior was examined were not those whose expectations about
longevity were elicited. More recently, the Health and Retirement Survey has obtained
information from a panel of older Americans on their expectations of longevity and their
spending and labor-force behavior. Within this one data set researchers (e.g., Gan, Hurd and
McFadden, 1998; Haider and Stephens 2004) have begun to examine the interactions
between the subjective horizon and the crucial variables that result from lifetime utility
maximization. This combination avoids the loss of information on idiosyncratic behavior
that plagued my now-ancient research.
This stuff is great fun—and it speaks to some of the central issues in both
microeconomics and macroeconomics. By itself, however, the work on expectations
contains no economic analysis—it merely estimates regressions on a subjective outcome
using a set of variables that I believed, with no theoretical justification, might affect
expectations, and I then appended the results to standard econometric models. The
justification for an economist undertaking this kind of analysis—this atheoretical empirical
discussion of a subjective outcome—is that the results are important inputs to our basic
research and are not likely to be considered (and were not discussed) by other social
scientists.

9
6. Time Stress
Some issues are inherently subjective and describe outcomes that would seem to be
entirely outside the purview of economists. The crucial word here is “seem”—topics like
fertility, discrimination, sumo wrestling, and many others may at one time have seemed
outside our area of expertise; but if by using economic theory we can advance knowledge of
these subjects, they become economic topics. Jacob Viner once remarked that economics is
what economists do. I would modify that to note that economics is what economists do if
economists use economic theory.
One area that I believe fits this description is the analysis of time stress, on which I
have recently been working (Hamermesh and Lee 2003). The issue here is purely
subjective—what determines how rushed people feel? Previous analysis, by social
psychologists and sociologists, has linked these feelings to the presence of children and to
time allocation at home and in the workplace. Economic theory, particularly the theory of
household production (Becker 1965), allows us to recognize that time use is affected by
financial resources, and thus that the extent to which a time constraint binds is in the end an
increasing function of the opportunity cost of the time of an individual and other members of
his/her household. The explicit prediction, which is far from intuitively obvious (and even,
from many discussions, clearly unthinkable by intelligent laypeople or many other social
scientists) is that otherwise identical people whose incomes are greater will feel more rushed
for time. The same prediction holds even more strongly if one does not hold constant for
differences in time use.
We examined this hypothesis for a number of countries (Hamermesh and Lee 2003)
by relating subjective responses about how stressed respondents in large micro data sets are
for time. The determinants in each sample were the individual’s hours of market work, hours

10
of non-market work, earnings (and thus full income, since hours of market work are held
constant) and spouse’s earnings and time allocation. Various demographic and locational
controls were included for each of the data sets.
Otherwise identical men and women in couples with higher incomes are more
stressed for time—feel more rushed—holding constant their use of time. The effects are not
insubstantial—one-standard-deviation increases in household pay raise the percentages of
workers who state that they are stressed by three to fifteen percentage points (over sample
means ranging from 33 to 45 percentage points). In North America and Canada the effects of
interquantile increases in earnings in increasing time stress begin to approach those of
interquartile increases in hours of market work. Someone might claim that common traits
generate positively correlated errors in both income and expressed time stress (although as an
economist I would rather assume that differences in traits are uncorrelated with income).
Even that essentially non-economic objection would seem vitiated by the additional finding
(for Germany) that non-working (in the market) women with high-earning husbands are more
stressed for time than their otherwise identical compatriots whose husbands earn less. The
results demonstrate that people with a higher value of time are more stressed for time, not
only because they may work more, but because the command that they possess over goods
makes them busy spending their incomes.
Here is an example where simple economic theory generates a prediction that is novel
and utterly unattainable without using theory. While the outcome is subjective and not
inherently interesting to economists, it is directly linked to areas—time use and
consumption—that we study extensively. While we do not study how people feel about
issues in these areas, other social scientists do; and we have something useful and unique to
say about these feelings.

11
7. Some Recent Negatives and Positives
What is disturbing is that, in addition to our welcome forays into using economic
theory to describe the determinants of subjective outcomes, and to analyzing the formation of
the subjective determinants of economic outcomes, we are also increasingly making forays
into studying how subjective outcomes are affected by subjective measures. Thus, for
examples: 1) Coleman and DeLeire (2003) have analyzed how youths’ expectations about
their incomes at age 30 are affected by the extent to which the youth “felt in control” at age
13; 2) Boex (2000) examined how students’ instructional ratings of their professors are
affected by the same students’ perceptions of the professors’ lecturing ability; 3) McGarry
(2002) used using respondents’ self-assessed health status to describe retirement
expectations.
There is nothing wrong with this if we are interested in how expectations affect
expectations per se, although I see no economic content in that issue. If, however, we are
using a subjective measure to proxy an objective determinant of a subjective outcome, the
difficulty is readily apparent from the following simple set-up. We are interested in the
determinants of subjective outcome S* by objective determinant B and controls X, and we
have information on a large set of respondents indexed i. We wish to estimate:
S*i = αXi + βBi + ε i ,

(1)

where ε i is an error term. The difficulty is that we do not observe B, instead having
information only on some subjective proxy for it, BS. Now BS may be a fairly good
predictor of B, as in the case of self-assessed health. But like any subjective outcome it will
be shaded by some person-specific effect, θi, reflecting person i’s general optimism or
pessimism. A person-specific effect ηi also shades the subjective response S* and is likely to
be highly positively correlated with θi. We thus have as observables:

12
BSi = Bi + θi ,

(2a)

and:
Si = S*i + ηi

.

(2b)

When we estimate using the observables S and BS:
Si = αXi + β[BSi + θi] + ε i .

(3b)

we are really estimating:
[S*i + ηi]= αXi + β[Bi + θi] + ε i .

(3b)

The same difficulty arises if we wish to describe some objective outcome by a
subjective measure and proxy the dependent variable by some subjective measure. The extent
of the difficulty in both cases depends on the relative contributions of σθ to σBS and ση to σS,
and on how strongly positive is the correlation between θ and η. The degree of bias thus
varies from case to case. It is hard to believe, however, given the R2 that we typically
produce in micro data, that the positive correlations between the observed variables of
interest that are induced by this problem are not large in nearly all cases. In short, even if we
rationalize equations like (1) as having a basis in objective behavior, the need to use
subjective proxies usually obviates any hope of correctly estimating a behavioral
relationship.3
A number of other inherently subjective expectational and other outcomes should
be of interest to economists, as the extent of rationality in their revision is important. Thus,
for examples, Charles (2002) examined how depression among older Americans is affected
by their retirement status, cleverly using kinks in retirement incentives under the American
OASI scheme to circumvent problems of simultaneity. Lochner (2003) used the NLSY97 to
examine whether arrest led young people to alter their perceptions of the criminal justice
system.

13
One could at least as well analyze the impacts of these and other subjective
measures on economic outcomes. Thus it would be interesting to know how changing
expectations about arrest and punishment probabilities affect individuals’ propensities to
commit crimes. In another area, it would be interesting to learn how individuals’ preferences
for neighbors of the same income (or race) as themselves affect patterns of residential
location.4
8. A Hierarchy for Research
The availability of interesting questions; the immense amount of data; and, despite the
burgeoning interest among economists, the relative paucity of economic research make the
analysis and use of subjective outcomes a fertile field for us, and one that is likely to be
heavily ploughed by economists in the next decade. We need to be careful, however, to
ensure that we use our skills and do not merely replicate what other social scientists have
accomplished; still worse, we should not abandon our comparative advantage—our
frameworks for analyzing maximizing behavior by individuals and how that behavior affects
individual and group outcomes.
We should keep in mind the following hierarchy that moves from less to more desirable
approaches to research using subjective measures:
1. Atheoretical statistical models examining subjective outcomes and explaining them by
their subjective determinants. We economists should view this approach as a no-no—we can
learn nothing about objective behavior from this approach, and in most cases cannot even use
it to describe the determinants of subjective outcomes.
2. Atheoretical statistical models examining the objective determinants of subjective
outcomes that are not relevant inputs into describing economic behavior. These kinds of
studies that have proliferated in other disciplines. They are interesting to the intelligent

14
layperson and to other social scientists, but as economists we have little novel to add to the
discussion.
3. Atheoretical statistical models examining the objective determinants of subjective
outcomes that are important inputs into describing economic behavior. While other social
scientists might have studied these, in most cases we know better what subjective measures
are the most important variables in our models of objective economic behavior.
4. Theoretically based statistical models of important, albeit non-economic outcomes. There
are no doubt many other areas besides time stress where we can analogize a subjective
outcome of general interest to a concept in one of our models and derive how individual
agents’ maximizing behavior affects the outcome.
5. Theoretically based statistical models of the determinants of economically relevant
subjective outcomes. I have seen nothing of this type yet, but I view it as the summit that we
should be trying to reach.
Research on the determinants of subjective outcomes and work using those outcomes
to describe objective behavior are booming areas among economists. As the boom
continues, we need to be careful to base the research on our comparative advantage—our
coherent models of underlying behavior—lest we either duplicate what other social scientists
have already done many times over or, worse still, generate results that have no absolutely
economic meaning.

15
REFERENCES
Becker, Gary. 1965. A theory of the allocation of time. Economic Journal 75: 492-517.
Boex, L.F. Jameson. 2000. Attributes of effective economics instructors: An analysis of
student evaluations. Journal of Economic Education 31: 211-227.
Bound, John. 1991. Self-reported versus objective measures of health in retirement models.
Journal of Human Resources 26: 106-138.
Charles, Kerwin K. 2002. Is retirement depressing? Labor force inactivity and
psychological well-being in later life. NBER Working Paper No. 9033.
Coleman, Margo and Thomas DeLeire. 2003. An economic model of locus of control and
the human capital investment process. Journal of Human Resources 38: 701-721.
Diener, Edward, and Robert Biswas-Diener. 2002. Will money increase subjective wellbeing? Social Indicators Research 57: 119-69.
Di Tella, Rafael, Robert MacCulloch, and Andrew Oswald. 2001. Preferences over inflation
and unemployment:

Evidence from surveys of happiness. American Economic

Review 81: 335-41.
Frey, Bruno, and Alois Stutzer. 2002. What can economists learn from happiness research?
Journal of Economic Literature 40: 402-435.
Gan, Li, Michael Hurd, and Daniel McFadden. 1998. Subjective Probabilities and Saving
Behavior. In Inquiries in the economics of aging, edited by David Wise. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, pp. 259-305.
Gardner, Jonathan and Andrew Oswald. 2001. Does money buy happiness? A longitudinal
study using data on windfalls. Unpublished paper, University of Warwick, March.

16
Haider, Steven, and Melvin Stephens. 2004. Is there a retirement-consumption puzzle?
Evidence using subjective retirement expectations. Unpublished paper, Michigan
State University, January.
Hamermesh, Daniel. 1977. Economic aspects of job satisfaction. In Essays in labor market
and population analysis, edited by Orley Ashenfelter and Wallace Oates. New York:
J. Wiley & Sons, pp. 53-72.
------------------------. 1984. Life-cycle effects on consumption and retirement. Journal of
Labor Economics, 2: 353-370.
------------------------. 1985. Expectations, life expectancy and economic behavior. Quarterly
Journal of Economics 100: 389-408.
------------------------. 2001. The changing distribution of job satisfaction. Journal of Human
Resources 36: 1-30.
-----------------------, and Frances Hamermesh. 1983. Does perception of life expectancy
reflect health knowledge? American Journal of Public Health 73: 911-914.
-----------------------, and Jungmin Lee. 2003. Stressed out on four continents: Time crunch or
yuppie kvetch? NBER Working Paper No. 10186.
Homans, George. 1961. Social behavior: its elementary forms. New York: Harcourt Brace.
Lévy-Garboua, Louis, and Claude Monmarquette. 1997. Reported job satisfaction: What
does it mean? CIRANO Working Paper 97s-09, University of Montreal.
Lochner, Lance. 2003. Individual perceptions of the criminal justice system. NBER Working
Paper No. 9474.
McGarry, Kathleen. 2002. Health and retirement: Do changes in health affect retirement
expectations? NBER Working Paper No. 9317.

17
Winkelmann, Rainer. Subjektive Daten in der empirischen Wirtschaftsforschung: Probleme
und Perspektiven. 2002. Unpublished paper, Institute for Empirical Economic
Research, University of Zürich, June.

18
FOOTNOTES
1

An example of useful work on this topic that, although it lacks an economic-theoretic basis,

at least uses subjective outcomes to analyze questions that only economists would consider,
is Di Tella, MacCulloch and Oswald (2001).
2

Unlike these, the estimated impacts of smoking on subjective longevity accord well with

objective evidence, a finding that has been used repeatedly by other economists to defend
tobacco companies against lawsuits by ex-smokers or their heirs.
3

Winkelmann (2002) discusses other econometric issues in analyzing subjective outcomes.

4

I am indebted to Stephen Ross for suggesting this example.

Table 1. Determinants of Subjective Life Expectancya
Economists
Old grandparents:
1

SMSA sample

0.65
(0.78)

0.28
(0.28)

2

2.07
(2.34)

1.05
(0.89)

3 or 4

2.62
(2.54)

1.44
(0.97)

Young grandparents:
1
- 2.10
(-2.88)

- 0.70
(-0.68)

2

- 2.43
(-2.16)

- 0.13
(-0.07)

3 or 4

- 5.39
(-1.64)

- 4.87
(-1.20)

3.01
(2.92)

1.27
(0.95)

5.94
(4.26)

4.14
(1.87)

-1.78
(-2.18)

- 2.64
(-2.09)

-1.92
(- 2.00)

- 3.47
(- 2.98)

0.08
(0.12)

0.93
(1.05)

- 3.96
(-3.94)

- 5.65
(-3.93)

Old parents:
1
2
Young parent(s)
1 or 2
Smoke
Exercise
Illness

a

Reproduced from (Hamermesh 1985, p. 401). t-statistics in parentheses here

and in Table 2.

Table 2. Parameter Estimates on Leisure and Goods Consumption, RHS, 1975
(N=1,422)a
Leisure

Goods ($000)

(1)

(2)

Social security

-.0012

.011

wealth

(-1.62)

(2.48)

Pension wealth

.0045

.029

(8.43)

(9.23)

-.00037

.016

(-1.83)

(12.37)

---------

.l42

Other wealth

After-tax earnings

(13.02)
T

Weighted R2

-.0095

-.073

(-1.04)

(-1.30)
.300

a

Reproduced from (Hamermesh 1984, p. 365). A wide array of demographic and

locational controls is also included. The equations are estimated as a system.

