                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      MONETARY AND FISCAL POLICY SWITCHING

                                          Troy Davig
                                         Eric M. Leeper
                                          Hess Chung

                                       Working Paper 10362
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w10362


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    March 2004




We thank Michael Binder, Chuck Carlstrom, Betty Daniel, Behzad Diba, Jon Faust, Dale
Henderson, Jim Nason, Lars Svensson, Martin Uribe and seminar participants at Banco de Portugal,
Duke University, the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland, the Federal Reserve Board, and the ECB
for helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2004 by Troy Davig, Eric M. Leeper, and Hess Chung. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Monetary and Fiscal Policy Switching
Troy Davig, Eric M. Leeper, and Hess Chung
NBER Working Paper No. 10362
March 2004
JEL No. E4, E5, E6

                                            ABSTRACT

       A growing body of evidence finds that policy reaction functions vary substantially over

different periods in the United States. This paper explores how moving to an environment in which
monetary and fiscal regimes evolve according to a Markov process can change the impacts of policy
shocks. In one regime monetary policy follows the Taylor principle and taxes rise strongly with
debt; in another regime the Taylor principle fails to hold and taxes are exogenous. An example
shows that a unique bounded non-Ricardian equilibrium exists in this environment.

       A computational model illustrates that because agents' decision rules embed the probability

that policies will change in the future, monetary and tax shocks always produce wealth effects.
When it is possible that fiscal policy will be unresponsive to debt at times, active monetary policy
(like a Taylor rule) in one regime is not sufficient to insulate the economy against tax shocks in that
regime and it can have the unintended consequence of amplifying and propagating the aggregate
demand effects of tax shocks. The paper also considers the implications of policy switching for two
empirical issues.



Troy Davig                             Eric M Leeper                   Hess Chung
College of William and Mary            Department of Economics         Department of Economics
Department of Economics                304 Wylie Hall                  304 Wylie Hall
Morton Hall 110                        Indiana University              Indiana University
PO Box 8795                            Bloomington, IN 47405           Bloomington, IN 47405
Williamsburg, VA 23187-8795            and NBER                        htchung@indiana.edu
tadav3@wm.edu                          eleeper@indiana.edu
             MONETARY AND FISCAL POLICY SWITCHING

                    TROY DAVIG, ERIC M. LEEPER, AND HESS CHUNG



                                      1. Introduction
   Two themes run through policy analysis: rules determining policy choice are func-
tions of economic conditions; those rules may change over time. The themes reflect
the views that actual policy behavior is purposeful, rather than arbitrary, and that
good policy adapts to changes in the structure of the economy or to improvements in
understanding how policy aﬀects the economy.
   A growing body of evidence finds that policy reaction functions vary substantially
over diﬀerent periods in the United States.1 In light of this evidence of regime shifts,
it is surprising that there is little formal modeling of environments where on-going
regime change is stochastic and the objects subject to change are parameters deter-
mining how the economy feeds back to policy choice.
   This paper is the first step of a broader research agenda that explores how moving
to environments in which monetary and fiscal regimes evolve according to a Markov
process can change the impacts of and, more generally, the analysis of monetary and
fiscal policies. We consider interest rate rules for monetary policy and tax rules for
fiscal policy; the rules switch stochastically between two regimes. In one regime mon-
etary policy follows the Taylor (1993) principle and taxes rise strongly with increases
in the real value of government debt; in another regime the Taylor principle fails to
hold and taxes follow an exogenous stochastic process. Using convenient specifications
of policy rules, an analytical example shows that a unique bounded non-Ricardian
equilibrium exists in this environment.
   Date: This version: February 29, 2004. Previous version: November 4, 2003. We thank Michael
Binder, Chuck Carlstrom, Betty Daniel, Behzad Diba, Jon Faust, Dale Henderson, Jim Nason,
Lars Svensson, Martin Uribe and seminar participants at Banco de Portugal, Duke University, the
Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland, the Federal Reserve Board, and the ECB for helpful comments.
Aﬃliations: Davig, The College of William and Mary (tadav3@wm.edu); Leeper, Indiana University
and NBER (eleeper@indiana.edu); Chung, Indiana University (htchung@indiana.edu).
   1
     For example, see Taylor (1999a) or Clarida, Gali, and Gertler (2000) for estimates of monetary
policy rules and Taylor (2000) or Auerbach (2002) for estimates of tax policy rules. Favero and
Monacelli (2003) explicitly model regime switching in their estimates of monetary and tax policy
rules.
                                      POLICY SWITCHING                                          2

   More standard forms of policy rules require that the model be solved numerically.
We use a computational model to derive the impacts of exogenous changes in mone-
tary and tax policies in a regime-switching environment and contrast those impacts
with their fixed-regime counterparts. When regimes switch, agents’ decision rules
embed the probability that policies will change in the future and, in consequence,
monetary and tax shocks always produce wealth eﬀects. Conventional fixed-regime
analyses have found that active monetary policy (like a Taylor rule), which is designed
to stabilize aggregate demand and inflation, requires that fiscal policy adjust taxes
in response to debt. In contrast, when regimes change and it is possible that taxes
will be unresponsive to debt at times, active monetary policy in one regime is not
suﬃcient to insulate the economy against tax shocks in that regime, and may have the
unintended consequence of amplifying and propagating the aggregate demand eﬀects
of tax shocks.
   The paper also considers the implications of policy switching for two empirical
issues. First, the “price puzzle” that plagues monetary VARs is a natural outcome
of periods when monetary policy fails to obey the Taylor principle and taxes do
not respond to the state of government indebtedness. Second, dynamic correlations
between fiscal surpluses and government liabilities, which have been interpreted as
consistent with Ricardian Equivalence, can be produced by an underlying equilibrium
that is non-Ricardian.
   Because we are driven to model regime switching by actual policy behavior in the
United States, it is useful to review the evidence.

1.1. A Quick Post-WW II History of Regime Change. Many macroeconomists
believe that U.S. monetary policy changed regime in late 1979. The view holds that
monetary policy changed from a period where increases in inflation were passively
accommodated to one where incipient inflation was actively combatted with tighter
policy.2 Taylor (1999a), Clarida, Gali, and Gertler (2000), and Lubik and Schorfheide
(2003b), among others, found that from 1960-1979 the Fed followed an interest rate
rule that responded only weakly to inflation, failing to satisfy the Taylor principle.
Since the early 1980s, the Taylor principle is satisfied, according to this empirical
work. But even the most sanguine observers of recent Fed successes cannot exclude
the possibility of a return to the days when monetary policy accommodated inflation,
as in Sargent’s (1999) analysis of American inflation.
  Less well appreciated is the fact that fiscal policy may also have experienced changes
in regime.3 In some periods, taxes are adjusted passively in response to changing
  2
   Sargent (1999) and Cogley and Sargent (2002a,b) are consistent with this view, but see Bernanke
and Mihov (1998), Sims and Zha (2002), and Hanson (2003) for an alternative view.
                                        POLICY SWITCHING                                           3

debt levels; at other times, tax changes are active attempts to achieve non-budgetary
macroeconomic goals.
   The history of tax policy illustrates the pendulum swings in policy. In the 1950s
taxes were increased three times on the grounds of budget balancing, in large part to
finance the Korean War [Ohanian (1997)]. By the 1960s, with the rise of the “new
economics,” tax changes were initiated primarily as a countercyclical tool [Heller
(1967)]. Budget balance had slipped into the background of tax debates. This trend
continued for two decades. The resulting explosion in Federal government debt and its
associated interest payments shifted priorities once again toward budget balancing,
and eventually in the 1980s and 1990s, Presidents Reagan, Bush, and Clinton all
signed legislation that raised taxes to reduce budget deficits. By the time the tax
cut of 2001 was ratified by Congress, the rationale had shifted from budget concerns
to economic stimulus. Both of the last two tax reductions–2002 and 2003–were
unambiguously motivated by countercyclical objectives. Evidently over the past 50
years fiscal policy behavior has fluctuated between periods when taxes were adjusted
in response to the state of government indebtedness and those when other priorities
drove tax decisions.
   That both monetary and fiscal regimes have fluctuated is confirmed by Favero
and Monacelli (2003) who explicitly model regime switching in their estimates of
monetary and tax policy rules in the United States. Taylor (1996, 2000) and Auerbach
(2002) document changes in the responsiveness of taxes to macro conditions, providing
further evidence that tax policy rules changed.
   Against this history of shifts in policy rules, we use very simple models to take
first steps toward examining the implications of the kinds of regime changes that
the United States has actually experienced. Although stark, the models highlight
that regime switching generates mechanisms that will continue to be present in richer
models where the mechanisms are harder to isolate.

                            2. Contacts with the Literature
  This paper makes contact with existing work in several areas. Sargent and Wallace
(1981) were among the first to emphasize intertemporal aspects of monetary and fiscal
policy interactions. With monetary and fiscal policy, there are two policy authorities
that jointly determine the price level and ensure the government is solvent. When
one policy authority pursues its objective unconstrained by the behavior of the other
authority, its behavior is “active,” whereas the constrained authority’s behavior is
“passive.”4
  3
      For details see Pechman (1987), Poterba (1994), Stein (1996), Steuerle (2002), and Yang (2003).
                                       POLICY SWITCHING                                     4

   If policy regime is fixed, active monetary policy coupled with passive fiscal policy–
the policy mix implicit in the literature on the Taylor principle–produces conven-
tional monetarist and Ricardian predictions of monetary and fiscal policy impacts.
In contrast, when active fiscal policy combines with passive monetary policy–the
combination associated with the fiscal theory of the price level5 –monetary and tax
changes generate wealth eﬀects that shift aggregate demand, and policy impacts are
non-monetarist and non-Ricardian.
   Lucas (1976) taught macroeconomists to think about policy changes in terms of
shifts in regime. But Lucas’s examples all involve once-and-for-all changes, rather
than the on-going process described in the history above. Cooley, LeRoy, and Raymon
(1982, 1984), among others, have argued that treating policy as making once-and-
for-all choices is logically inconsistent. After all, if policy authorities can contemplate
changing regime, then regime is not permanent. If there has been a history of changes
in policy regimes, private agents will ascribe a probability distribution over those
regimes. Agents’ expectations, and therefore their decision rules, will reflect their
belief that policy changes are not once-and-for-all. This point resonates especially
crisply in the United States, where the policy changes we aim to model are intrinsically
temporary; they arose largely because of the personalities of the political players,
rather than through the creation of new policy institutions or changes in existing
institutions’ legal mandates.
   Clarida, Gali, and Gertler (2000, p. 149) argue that when the Fed failed to obey
the Taylor principle before 1979, it left “open the possibility of bursts of inflation
and output that result from self-fulfilling changes in expectations.” The possibility
of multiple equilibria relies on the implicit assumption that fiscal policy was passive
during this period. Woodford (1999) suggests that fiscal policy may have been active
during that period, implying that observed inflation emerged from a unique equilib-
rium. Favero and Monacelli (2003) and Sala (2003) oﬀer empirical evidence that fiscal
policy was active and monetary policy was passive in the 1960s and 1970s, supporting
Woodford’s argument.
   All this work is couched in terms of changes in policy regime, and there have
been some eﬀorts to incorporate switching policy specifications into dynamic stochas-
tic general equilibrium models to study the fiscal theory of price level determina-
tion (FTPL) [Sims (1997), Woodford (1998), Loyo (1999), Mackowiak (2002), Weil
(2003), and Daniel (2003)]. But each of these papers considers only one-time changes
in regime. In addition, Loyo (1999), Weil (2003), and Daniel (2003) consider only

  4
      This follows Leeper’s (1991) taxonomy.
  5
      See, for example, Leeper (1991), Sims (1994), Woodford (1995), and Cochrane (1999).
                                 POLICY SWITCHING                                   5

changes in fiscal regime, holding monetary policy behavior fixed. Given a history
of both monetary and fiscal regime switching, it is important to allow both policies
to change. This paper generalizes the theoretical literature on monetary and fiscal
policy interactions by explicitly modeling regime change as an on-going process. Both
one-time changes in regime and changes in only fiscal or monetary policy behavior
are special cases of our specification.
   There is work that models on-going regime change [Andolfatto and Gomme (2003),
Davig (2002, 2003), Leeper and Zha (2003), Schorfheide (2003), and Andolfatto,
Hendry, and Moran (2002)]. That work considers only exogenous processes for policy
variables that switch regime. This paper makes substantive and technical contribu-
tions by extending work on on-going regime change to allow the objects subject to
change to be parameters that determine how the economy feeds back to policy choice.
This is the first example of which we are aware that allows for regime switching in
parameters of endogenous policy rules in an equilibrium model, where the parameters
determine existence and uniqueness.
   Empirical findings that policy regimes have changed in important ways are diﬃ-
cult to interpret without theory that models regime changes explicitly [Favero and
Monacelli (2003) and Sala (2003)]. This paper fills some of the theoretical holes.
   Finally, the paper connects to two bodies of empirical work. It oﬀers an interpre-
tation of the price puzzle in monetary VARs that diﬀers from the cost channel put
forth by Barth and Ramey (2002) and Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Evans (2001).
The paper also provides a counterexample to the empirical inferences drawn by Bohn
(1998) and Canzoneri, Cumby, and Diba (2001) about the behavior of fiscal policy in
the United States.



            3. An Analytical Example with Regime Switching
   Canzoneri, Cumby, and Diba (2001) (CCD) argue that Ricardian equilibria are, in a
certain sense, more general than non-Ricardian equilibria. They make this argument
by proving a proposition that states that over time the response of the government
surplus to total government liabilities merely needs to be bounded away from zero
infinitely often for the equilibrium to exhibit Ricardian Equivalence. The key point
is that the private sector must expect taxes to adjust “sooner or later,” though the
adjustment can be arbitrarily small and infrequent. Because the proposition does
not require the fiscal response to be strong enough to make the evolution of govern-
ment debt stable, the Ricardian equilibria CCD consider are potentially ones with an
unbounded debt-output ratio.
                                   POLICY SWITCHING                                      6

   Equilibria with unbounded debt-output ratios may not be the most interesting or
relevant ones to consider. And they may be misleading if the impacts of taxes hinge
on the unboundedness assumption. Unbounded debt-output ratios are well outside
any country’s experience, so it is impossible to tell if policy authorities would permit
such equilibria to occur. It is quite possible that if a country’s policies made its debt-
output ratio appear to grow without limit, the country would undergo fundamental
macro policy reforms of the type that neither we nor CCD consider. We assume the
political process ensures the debt-output ratio is bounded.
   This section presents an analytical example in which policies that satisfy the as-
sumptions of CCD’s proposition deliver a non-Ricardian equilibrium that is unique
within the set of equilibria with bounded debt-output ratios. Important conclusions
appear to hinge on CCD’s assumption of unboundedness.
   Consider a constant endowment version of Sidrauski (1967), modified to include an
interest rate rule for monetary policy and a tax rule for fiscal policy. If government
consumption is constant, then in equilibrium the representative agent’s consumption,
c, is also constant, as is the real interest rate. Preferences over consumption and real
money balances are logarithmic. This model implies a Fisher equation

                                 1/Rt = βEt [1/πt+1 ] ,                               (1)
where 0 < β < 1 is the discount factor, Rt is the gross nominal interest rate on one-
period nominal government debt, π t+1 is the gross inflation rate between t and t + 1,
and the expectation is taken with respect to a set Ωt that contains information dated
t and earlier, including the history of regimes up to t. The money demand function is

                                             Rt
                                     mt =          c,                                 (2)
                                            Rt − 1
where mt = Mt /Pt is the real value of money balances.
  Monetary policy adjusts the nominal interest rate in response to inflation according
to the rule

                             Rt = exp (α0 + α(St )π̂ t + θt) ,                        (3)
      bt ≡ ln π t , θt is an i.i.d. shock, St is the current regime and α(St) is a regime-
where π
dependent parameter. Tax policy follows a rule that adjusts lump-sum taxes in
response to the real value of total government liabilities:

                          τ t = γ 0 + γ(St)(bt−1 + mt−1 ) + ψt ,                      (4)
                                       POLICY SWITCHING                                                   7

where τ t is the level of lump-sum taxes, bt−1 = Bt−1/Pt−1 and mt−1 are the real values
of debt and money at the beginning of period t, and ψt is an i.i.d. disturbance. The
response of taxes to liabilities takes on values that depend on the realization of regime.
St obeys an N-state Markov chain with transition probabilities P [St = j|St−1 = i] =
pij ,where i, j ∈ {1, N}.
   The government’s flow budget identity holds at each date t ≥ 0:
                           Bt + Mt              Mt−1 + Rt−1 Bt−1
                                    + τt = g +                   ,                     (5)
                              Pt                       Pt
given initial nominal liabilities M−1 > 0, R−1B−1 > 0.6
  Define the expectation error
                                                   Rt
                                                  πt+1                  Rt
                                   η t+1 ≡        ³           ´ =β          ,                          (6)
                                             Et        Rt              πt+1
                                                      π t+1

where the equality comes from using the Fisher equation. Combining (1) and (3) and
using (6), the inflation process obeys

                           b            πt + α0 + θt − b
                           πt+1 = α(St )b              η t+1 + ln β.                                   (7)
   Let lt = bt + mt . Equations (4) and (5) together with (2) imply that government
liabilities evolve according to:
                            µ              ¶
                              Rt−1                 Rt−1
                      lt =         − γ(St ) lt−1 −      c + D − ψt .              (8)
                               πt                   πt
where D = g − γ 0 .       £     ¤
   Assume that: (i) Et γ t+1 = γ; (ii) γ satisfies |1/β − γ| > 1; (iii) the inflation
process given by (7) is stable in expectation (that is, Et πt+k < ∞ for all k). As-
sumptions (i) and (ii) mean that on average fiscal policy is active and assumption
(iii) means that on average monetary policy is passive (the Taylor principle does not
hold on average).7
   Iterate forward on (8) to obtain (for k ≥ 0)

         k µ
         Y                     ¶          Y µ Rt−1+i+j
                                        k k−j
                                        X                                       ¶
             Rt−1+j                                                                      Rt−1+j
lt+k =                 − γ t+j lt−1 +                                   − γ t+i+j (D +          c − ψt+j ).
         j=0
               πt+j                      j=0 i=1
                                                              πt+i+j                      πt+j
                                                                                                       (9)
  6By  assuming initial government debt is positive, we do not address the criticism that the fiscal
theory of the price level falls apart when B−1 = 0. The criticism is made in a perfect foresight model
by Niepelt (2001) and countered in a stochastic model with incomplete markets by Daniel (2003).
   7Appendices B and C provide the stability conditions for the inflation process.
                                    POLICY SWITCHING                                          8

To solve (9), take expectations as of t − 1, apply the law of iterated expectations, and
use the Fisher equation. Then we can replace the terms Rπt−1+j    t+j
                                                                       with β1 . Under the
assumption that Et[γ t+1 ] = γ, (9) becomes
                                 ·         µ             ¶¸       µ              ¶
                             k+1              1/β − D/c              1/β − D/c
    Et−1 [lt+k ] = (1/β − γ)      lt−1 − c                   +c                    .   (10)
                                             1/β − γ − 1            1/β − γ − 1
                                                   ³         ´
                                                     1/β−D/c
  Stability in expectation requires that lt−1 = c 1/β−γ−1      , which is positive if D/c <
1/β. The value of η t is obtained from the budget constraint after substituting in the
value of l:
                                                                   µ               ¶
        (1 + γ(St )) (1/β − D/c) − (D/c) (1/β − γ − 1) β               1/β − γ − 1
 ηt = β                                               +                              ψ t . (11)
                          1 + γ − D/c                   c              1 + γ − D/c
Equation (11) is the unique equilibrium mapping from the tax disturbance, ψt , and
the realization of the tax feedback parameter, γ(St), to the forecast error in inflation.
The solution for η and the stable inflation process, (7), uniquely determine inflation.
For an equilibrium of this type to exist, we restrict the parameters to assure that
η t , which is the ratio of two positive numbers, is positive for any realization of ψ t.
A suﬃciently small value for D/c, coupled with a suﬃciently high bounded negative
support for ψ will do the job.
     As a concrete example, suppose there are two regimes, N = 2, and that the policy
parameters take on the values
                       ½                                   ½
                           α(1) for St = 1                     γ(1) for St = 1
            α(St ) =                           γ (St ) =                       .
                           α(2) for St = 2                     γ(2) for St = 2
Further suppose that α(1) and α(2) are suﬃciently small such that, given the transi-
tion probabilities, the inflation process, (7), is stable in expectation. The assumption
that the tax parameters have constant mean implies

                          E[γ t+j |St = 1, Ωt ] = γ(1)p11 + γ(2)p21
                                                                                     (12)
                     = E[γ t+j |St = 2, Ωt ] = γ(1)p12 + γ(2)p22 ≡ γ,
                        ¯          ¯
j > 0. By assumption ¯β −1 − γ ¯ > 1. If either γ(1) or γ(2) is positive and jointly they
satisfy (12), then the model satisfies CCD’s premise that taxes adjust to debt infinitely
often. But as (11) makes clear, negative tax disturbances generate wealth eﬀects that
raise the inflation rate. The only equilibrium with bounded debt is non-Ricardian.
   This does not deny the existence of Ricardian equilibria of the kind that CCD
emphasize. But if those equilibria do exist, they must imply debt-output ratios that
grow without bound.
                                  POLICY SWITCHING                                   9

                          4. A Computational Model
   We turn now to a variant on the model in section 3, which is less convenient
analytically but more closely tied to actual policy behavior. Because the variant does
not admit an analytical solution, we use Coleman’s (1991) monotone map method to
find a fixed point in the economy’s decision rules.


4.1. Households. As before, the representative consumer receives a constant en-
dowment each period, yt = y, of which a constant gt = g < y is consumed by the
government. Agents choose consumption, ct, and decide how to allocate portfolio
holdings between values of money, mt = Mt /Pt , and bonds, bt = Bt /Pt. The house-
hold’s problem is:
                                  X
                                  ∞
                         max E0         β t [log(ct ) + δ log (mt )] ,           (13)
                                  t=0

subject to
                                                   mt−1        bt−1
                      ct + mt + bt + τ t = y +          + Rt−1      ,            (14)
                                                    πt          πt
where δ > 0. The household takes initial nominal assets as given: M−1 > 0, R−1 B−1 >
0. Expectations at date t are taken with respect to Ωt . Policy is the sole source of
uncertainty.
   In equilibrium, ct = c = y − g and the first-order necessary conditions reduce to
the Fisher equation, (1), and the money demand relation
                                          ·        ¸
                                             Rt
                                 mt = δc             .                           (15)
                                            Rt − 1

The optimal paths for real balances and bonds must also satisfy their respective
transversality conditions.


4.2. Policy Specification. The policy specifications in the computational model
connect to existing literature and actual policy behavior. The monetary and tax
rules are:


                          Rt = α0 (St) + α1 (St)π t + θt ,                       (16)
                          τ t = γ 0(St ) + γ 1 (St )bt−1 + ψ t ,                 (17)
                                        POLICY SWITCHING                                            10

where St ∈ {1, 2} , θt ∼ IDN (0, σ2θ ) and ψt ∼ IDN(0, σ2ψ ). The reaction coeﬃcients
take values that depend on regime:
                            ½
                               αi (1) for St = 1
                αi (St ) =                        ,  for i = {0, 1} ,            (18)
                               αi (2) for St = 2
                            ½
                               γ j (1) for St = 1
                γ j (St ) =                       ,  for j = {0, 1} .            (19)
                               γ j (2) for St = 2
   In this economy with perpetually full employment, an interest rate rule for mon-
etary policy is clearly not optimal. If anything, it will reduce private welfare. We
employ (16) for two reasons. First, it closely resembles monetary policy rules that
have received detailed study in recent years [Taylor (1999b)]. Second, (16) produces
features of an equilibrium that will continue to hold in models with frictions in which
rules from the general class to which (16) belongs are optimal. Fiscal rules like (17)
that make taxes respond to debt (rather than total liabilities, as in (4)) are widely
used in model simulations [Bryant, Hooper, and Mann (1993)], analytical studies of
monetary and fiscal policy interactions [Leeper (1991), or Sims (1997)], and empirical
work [Favero and Monacelli (2003)]. Specification (4) has the conceptually appealing
feature that it separates monetary and fiscal policy: an open-market operation that
has oﬀsetting eﬀects on m and b does not aﬀect taxes under (4), while it does under
(17). Specification (17), however, has the realistic feature that fiscal authorities re-
spond to the state of government debt, rather than the sum of debt and high-powered
money.
   The government uses a combination of lump-sum taxes, new one-period nominal
bonds and money creation to finance government purchases and debt payments and
satisfy the government’s flow budget identity, (5).
   In a fixed-regime version of this model, Leeper (1991) shows that existence and
uniqueness depend on the policy feedback parameters. In a linear approximation
to the model, a monetary authority that reacts aggressively to inflation, |α1β| > 1
combined with a fiscal authority that
                                   ¯ −1 raises¯ taxes suﬃciently to cover interest pay-
ments and principle on the debt, ¯β − γ 1 ¯ < 1, imply a locally unique equilibrium
consistent with Ricardian equivalence. This policy combination is referred to as ac-
tive monetary and passive fiscal policy (AM/PF).8 A monetary authority that reacts
weakly to inflation, |α1 β| < 1 together with a fiscal authority that reacts weakly to
  8Logarithmic    preferences make money essential and eliminate Obstfeld and Rogoﬀ’s (1983) spec-
ulative hyperinflations as potential equilibria. This allows the Taylor principle, coupled with passive
tax policy, to deliver uniqueness. As Sims (1997) shows, if money is inessential, this policy mix does
not produce a determinant equilibrium.
                                       POLICY SWITCHING                                            11
           ¯          ¯
real debt, ¯β −1 − γ 1¯ > 1, imply a locally unique equilibrium where the path of taxes
aﬀects the inflation rate. This policy combination is referred to as passive monetary
and active fiscal policy (PM/AF). One version of the fiscal theory of the price level
emerges as the special case α1 = γ 1 = 0.
  We use the local results from the linearized (fixed-regime) model to guide para-
meter choices for the non-linear switching model. For most of this paper regime 1
combines
     ¯ −1 active monetary
                  ¯           policy with passive fiscal policy (AM/PF): |α1 (1)β| > 1
     ¯            ¯
and β − γ 1 (1) < 1. Regime 2 combines           passive
                                       ¯              ¯ monetary policy with active fiscal
policy (PM/AF): |α1 (2)β| < 1 and ¯β −1 − γ 1 (2)¯ > 1.9
  Regimes follow a two-state Markov chain governed by the transition matrix
                                     ·                     ¸
                                           p11     1 − p11
                                Π=                           ,                       (20)
                                         1 − p22     p22
                        P [St = j|St−1 = i] = pij ,       where i, j = 1, 2
                                           10
and p12 ≡ 1 − p11 and p21 ≡ 1 − p22 .
  We assume agents observe current and past realizations of regimes and of exogenous
disturbances.

4.3. Competitive Equilibrium. The bounded equilibrium for the economy with
regime-switching policy rules is defined as:
Definition 1. Given the state vector Φt = {wt−1 , bt−1, θt , ψ t, St } , where wt−1 =
Rt−1 bt−1 + mt−1 , a bounded competitive equilibrium for the economy consists
of a continuous decision rule for real debt, bt = hb (Φt ) , and a continuous pricing
function, πt = hπ (Φt) , such that
      (1) taking sequences {Rt , τ t , π t, θt , ψt , St } as given, the representative agent’s op-
          timization problem is solved;
      (2) the fiscal authority sets τ t according to (17) and the monetary authority sets
          Rt according to (16);
      (3) the government budget identity, (5), and the aggregate resource constraint,
          yt = ct + gt , are satisfied.
  9
    The model is specified to ensure that the problems arising from multiple steady state equilibria,
which Benhabib, Schmitt-Grohe, and Uribe (2001a,b, 2002) emphasize, cannot occur.
   10 Although our reading of macro policy history and Favero and Monacelli’s (2003) estimates

suggest that monetary and fiscal policy have not switched synchronously, as a first step we assume
that they do. Full non-synchronous switching would allow the economy to evolve for a time under
policies that are both passive. A PM/PF mix, if it were expected to last forever, yields indeterminacy
of equilibrium. We postpone to later work grappling with the numerical aspects of indeterminacies
and sunspots in non-linear models.
                                       POLICY SWITCHING                                            12

                             5. A Benchmark Specification
  This section describes the computational aspects of a benchmark specification,
including the choice of parameter values, the computation of non-linear impulse re-
sponse functions, and details about the numerical solution.
5.1. Parameter Selections. Our objective is to obtain qualitative, rather than
quantitative, implications from the model, and the parameter values were chosen
with that aim in mind. Several parameter choices were based on their implications
for the model’s deterministic steady state, which we set equal across regimes. We take
the model to be at an annual frequency, so we set β = .9615, implying a 4 percent real
interest rate. Output is normalized to 1 and government consumption is 25 percent
of GDP. The debt-output ratio is .4 and inflation is 3 percent in the deterministic
steady state; both numbers are in the ballpark for post-war U.S. data. In choosing
the weight on real money balances in preferences, δ, we sought to make the model’s
consumption velocity close to U.S. data.11 This implied δ = .0296.
    The feedback parameters in the policy rules, (α1(St ), γ 1 (St )), were chosen to cor-
respond to values used in the literature. In regime 1–active monetary policy and
passive fiscal policy–α1 (1) = 1.5, a common value in the Taylor rule literature, and
γ 1 (1) = .275, implying a very strong response of taxes to debt. In regime 2–passive
monetary policy and active fiscal policy–we chose the rules most often analyzed in
the FTPL literature: α1 (2) = 0 and γ 1(2) = 0, making both the nominal interest rate
and taxes exogenous.
    Given the settings for (α1 (St ), γ 1 (St )) and the assumptions on the deterministic
steady state values for debt and inflation, the intercept terms for the policy rules,
(α0 (St ), γ 0(St )), are determined.
    For the benchmark specification, we make the transition probabilities between
regimes equal, with the regimes only moderately persistent. With p11 = p22 = .85, the
average regime duration is 6-2/3 years. This duration is briefer than seems plausible,
but it makes the diﬀerences between regimes clear.12
    The variances of the i.i.d. policy shocks, (θt , ψt ), are fixed across regimes. We set
σ 2θ = 3.125e − 6 and σ2ψ = 2.05e − 5. A constant σ 2ψ implies the same-sized tax shock
in each regime: two standard deviations amount to a change in taxes relative to its
stationary mean of about 3-1/2 percent. Because of simultaneity between Rt and πt
in the monetary policy rule, a constant σ2θ can imply very diﬀerent changes in the
  11 The   average ratio of consumption of non-durables plus services to the real monetary base over
1959-2002 is about 2.4.
   12 In section 7 we examine the equilibrium’s sensitivity to variation in policy settings, including

feedback parameters and regime duration.
                                        POLICY SWITCHING                                            13

nominal interest rate from a given shock: a two standard-deviation shock to θt lowers
Rt 5 basis points in regime 1 and 35 basis points in regime 2.

5.2. Non-linear Impulse Response Analysis. The methods of Gallant, Rossi,
and Tauchen (1993) are used to assess the dynamic impacts of shocks to fiscal and
monetary policy. Impulse response functions report how a shock makes the paths
of variables diﬀer from their baseline paths. We take the baseline to be the regime-
dependent steady state, which is defined as
                                                                  © ª
Definition 2. A regime-dependent steady state, π(j), b (j) , is values for the
state vector such that
                              ¯            ¯ ¯                 ¯
                              ¯[π t, bt ]0 ¯ − ¯[πt−1 , bt−1]0 ¯ <
and St−1 = St = j, where j = {1, 2} .
   For example, the impact eﬀect of an i.i.d. shock to lump-sum taxes on inflation,
conditioning on an AM/PF policy (regime 1), is described by
                                   ¡               ¢    ¡ ¢
                           bt = hπ w, b, 0, ψ t , 1 − hπ Φ ,
                           π                                                    (21)
           ¡ ¢
where hπ Φ̄ is the regime-dependent steady state value for inflation. The paths
for inflation and debt are then recursively updated, holding regime constant. The
analysis that follows uses derivations analogous to (21) to trace out the impacts of
perturbing one shock, holding all other sources of randomness fixed.

5.3. Average versus Marginal Sources of Financing. This paper follows Sargent
and Wallace (1981) by emphasizing the fiscal financing consequences of alternative
monetary and tax policy rules. We wish to highlight a distinction that does not
appear in Sargent and Wallace: there can be an important diﬀerence between the
average and the marginal source of financing.13 In the model’s deterministic steady
state direct taxation through τ constitutes over 96 percent of total revenues, leaving
seigniorage to cover a little over 3 percent. Although the means of the stochastic
steady states across regimes diﬀer slightly from the deterministic steady state values,
the message is the same: on average seigniorage is a trivial source of fiscal financing.
  13 This  distinction is sometimes overlooked. King and Plosser (1985), for example, point to the
fact that averaged across time inflation financing is a trivial source of revenues in the United States
as suggesting that inflation taxes should also be inconsequential in response to various shocks to
the economy. In addition, many observers dispute the relevance of the dynamic policy interactions
that Sargent and Wallace describe on the grounds that most developed countries do not rely heavily
on seigniorage revenues [King (1995)]. Castro, Resende, and Ruge-Murcia (2003) draw a similar
conclusion for OECD countries. See Grilli (1989), Cohen and Wyplosz (1989), and Centre for
Economic Policy Research (1991) for related discussions in the context of European Monetary Union.
                                            POLICY SWITCHING                                           14

In regime 1 (AM/PF), seigniorage averages about 3.6 percent of total revenues (.99
percent of output), and in regime 2 it averages 3.4 percent (.95 percent of output).
These numbers are consistent with the U.S. evidence that King (1995) cites.
  There are three distinct marginal sources of financing that exogenous disturbances
may generate. The first arises from an instantaneous jump in the price level that
revalues existing nominal government liabilities. The other two sources are dynamic,
arising from changes in the present values of the primary surplus and seigniorage.
Define the present value at date t of the primary surplus from date t + 1 onward as
                              "Ã s                !               #
                           X
                           ∞      Y
                     xt =             πt+j+1 R−1
                                              t+j   (τ t+s+1 − g)               (22)
                                   s=0      j=0
and of seigniorage as
                                   "Ã s                   !                         #
                             X
                             ∞       Y                        ¡                   ¢
                                                    −1
                      zt =                 π t+j+1 Rt+j        mt+s+1 − mt+s π−1
                                                                              t+s     .              (23)
                             s=0     j=0

The government’s present value budget identity implies
                                  Bt
                                     = xt + zt .                                                     (24)
                                  Pt
   After taking expectations at date t of both sides of 24, Cochrane (2001b) refers to
this relationship as a “debt valuation equation,” which he uses to exposit the FTPL.
When expected xt and zt are fixed by policy behavior, a bond-financed tax cut must
make Pt jump to ensure the equilibrium value of debt does not change. This is the
instantaneous marginal source of financing.
   Under diﬀerent policy assumptions, exogenous shocks may bring forth expected
changes in xt or zt . Given the benchmark parameters, when regimes are permanent,
i.i.d. shocks to taxes and to monetary policy generate no change in the present value of
seigniorage in regime 1 (AM/PF), though they do aﬀect the present value of surpluses.
Tax shocks in regime 2 (PM/AF) leave both xt and zt unchanged, while monetary
policy shocks change both xt and zt . In contrast, in the switching model only tax
disturbances in regime 2 leave the present values in (22) and (23) unchanged.14
5.4. Computational Details. It may seem natural to solve the model by first lin-
earizing around the regime-dependent steady states. But in the switching model,
policy parameters as well as policy shocks are random variables. For some policies of
interest it can turn out that the one-step-ahead forecast error in inflation from the
Fisher relation is correlated with future policy parameters. Linear methods fail to
  14 If   regime 2 set γ 1 (2) > 0 but small and 0 < α1 (2) < 1, both present values would change.
                                     POLICY SWITCHING                                  15

capture this correlation, leading the approximations to incorrectly classify existence
and uniqueness of equilibrium. Appendices A-C show this in detail for two diﬀerent
linearization methods.
   The complete model consists of the first-order necessary conditions from the repre-
sentative agent’s optimization problem, constraints, specification of the policy process,
and the transversality conditions on real balances and bonds. The solution method,
based on Coleman (1991), conjectures candidate decision rules that reduce the sys-
tem to a set of non-linear expectational first-order diﬀerence equations. The solution
consists of two functions that yield values for real debt and inflation given the state.
   The decision rule for real debt and the pricing function for inflation are found by
substituting the conjectured rules into the complete model, represented by


                                    Rt = α0 (St) + α1 (St)hπ (Φt ) + θt ,           (25)
                                    τ t = γ 0(St ) + γ 1 (St )bt−1 + ψ t            (26)
                                             ·         ¸
                                                  Rt
                                    mt = δc                                         (27)
                                               Rt − 1
                               Rt−1 = β [Et [hπ (Φt+1 )]]−1                         (28)
                  hb (Φt ) + mt + τ t = g + wt−1 (hπ (Φt ))−1                       (29)
where the future state, Φt+1 , is
                                 ©                             ª
                           Φt+1 = wt , bt , θ t+1, ψ t+1 , St+1 ,
and wt = Rt bt + mt .
  Substituting (25)-(27) into (28) and (29) and using numerical quadrature to eval-
uate the triple integral representing expected inflation, reduces the system to two
equations in two unknowns, πt and bt . The system is solved for every set of state
variables defined over a discrete partition of the state space, yielding updated approx-
imations to hπ (Φt ) and hb (Φt) at every node in the state space. When evaluating
the integral, non-linear interpolation is used to compute inflation for states that lie
oﬀ the discretized state grid. This procedure is repeated until iterations update the
current decision rule by less than some > 0 (set to 1e − 12).
  The solution is verified using three criteria. First, residuals for the government
budget identity and first-order conditions must be close to zero on each node of the
state space. Second, we check that the government’s present value budget identity,
(24), holds to some tolerance. Third, the unconditional mean of expectational errors
must be approximately zero in random simulations. We verify suﬃcient conditions by
observing the solution implies stationary paths for real debt and real balances. The
                                     POLICY SWITCHING                                         16

solution is verified to be locally unique by randomly perturbing the converged rule
and checking that it converges back to the initial rule. Across discrete nodes in the
state space, the largest residual is 2e − 15. The convergence criterion was satisfied at
each node.

                              6. Computational Results
  This section describes results from the benchmark specification and contrasts those
results with predictions from the model with fixed policy regime.

6.1. Impacts of Policy Shocks in Regime 1 (AM/FP). The impacts of mone-
tary and fiscal policy shocks are reported in figures 1 (conditioning on regime 1) and
3 (conditioning on regime 2); solid lines are responses to an i.i.d. tax cut and dashed
lines are responses to an i.i.d. monetary easing.

6.1.1. Tax Shocks. In Regime 1, fiscal policy would be Ricardian if policy regime were
expected to last forever. A bond-financed tax cut brings forth an expectation of future
taxes whose present value exactly equals the increase in the value of debt. With no
change in net wealth, demand for goods is unchanged at initial prices and interest
rates. Unchanged inflation implies unchanged nominal rates, leaving the present value
of seigniorage also unchanged.15
   When regime can change, agents treat a tax cut as an increase in wealth. Because
they place positive probability on switching to regime 2 (PM/AF), where taxes are
exogenous, the current tax reduction exceeds the expected present value of tax in-
creases in the future. A switch to regime 2 with fixed taxes brings with it a discrete
devaluation of government debt through an increase in the price level. Higher wealth
increases aggregate demand and the current inflation rate in this economy with a
fixed supply of goods [figure 1].
   With α1 (1) = 1.5 in regime 1, monetary policy reacts to the higher inflation rate
by raising the nominal interest rate. This creates an expectation that inflation will
remain above its stationary level in regime 1, which is consistent with the anticipated
debt devaluation. With the impulse response functions conditional on regime 1, active
monetary policy propagates the transitory tax cut, generating persistently higher
inflation and nominal rates. The persistence is so strong that variables remain away
from their pre-shock levels over 10 periods after the tax cut.
   In periods following the tax cut, taxes increase in a manner suggestive of Ricardian
fiscal behavior, as regime 1 policy passively raises taxes when debt increases. But
  15 Leeper
          (1993) reports responses to monetary and tax policy shocks for a closely related fixed-
regime model under regimes 1 and 2.
                                       POLICY SWITCHING                                    17

the rise in the value of debt exceeds the present value of these tax increases, with the
diﬀerence made up by an increase in the present value of inflation taxes.
   Inflation exhibits stable responses to policy shocks, as figure 1 shows. Based on
intuition derived from single-equation linearized models, this outcome may seem coun-
terintuitive. Conditional on staying in a regime with active monetary policy, in lin-
earized models the Taylor principle makes the inflation equation unstable: after an
i.i.d. policy shock, inflation jumps immediately to oﬀset the eﬀect of the policy shock
on expected inflation; in the next period, inflation jumps back to its steady-state
value. In the non-linear computational results, by contrast, the response of inflation
is serially correlated. Moreover, one might think that, since we have a fiscal the-
ory equilibrium, the surprise revaluation of debt must stabilize the debt dynamics
in expectation. But in regime 1 monetary policy is active, so the inflation process
must also be stabilized. How can both dynamical equations be stabilized by the same
revaluation?
   The Fisher equation and the monetary policy rule together imply that
                                          µ                           ¶
                                              α0 (St ) + α1 (St )πt
                              πt+1 = β                                    ,             (30)
                                                       η t+1
where η t+1 ≡ Et1/π t+1
                 [1/πt+1 ]
                           = β πRt+1
                                  t
                                     , using the Fisher relation to obtain the equality. η is
a type of expectation error whose economic role is as a revaluation variable. Let η be
determined by the function g

                      ηt+1 = g(πt , bt , θt+1 , ψ t+1 , α0 (St+1 ), γ 0 (St+1 )).       (31)
Holding regime fixed, after a one-time shock the inflation dynamics of (30) are de-
scribed by a deterministic system. Taking as given the g function implied by the
computational model, we can calculate numerically the system’s stability properties
in a neighborhood of the regime-dependent steady-state. It turns out that these
dynamics are stable for any point in some neighborhood of the steady state.
  The stability stands in contrast to the outcome for a linearized model, where the
Taylor principle creates post-shock deterministic dynamics that are explosive. The
key diﬀerence is that in a linearized model the revaluation variable η can depend
only on i.i.d. shocks. In the computational model, η depends on lagged inflation and
lagged real debt, as well as i.i.d. shocks, as in equation (31). In particular, η depends
positively on the lagged inflation rate and negatively on lagged real debt. As one
might expect, this dependence on past variables stems from the wealth eﬀects present
in the regime-switching model. Through the Taylor rule, higher π t implies higher
Rt , which leads to higher future interest payments on the debt. Because regime can
                                   POLICY SWITCHING                                     18

switch, agents expect some of those interest payments to be met with seigniorage
in the future. But the impulse response functions in figure 1 condition on staying
in regime 1, so taxes are surprisingly high, making aggregate demand and inflation
surprisingly low, and η t+1 larger. A higher value of bt , holding Rt fixed, makes wealth
higher at the beginning of period t + 1 (because of the likelihood of switching to a
regime with exogenous taxes in the future). Higher wealth increases demand and
inflation at t + 1, which lowers η t+1 .
    Decision rules in the switching environment diﬀer markedly from the rules when
regime is fixed. Figure 2 shows the equilibrium rules for bt and πt under AM/PF
policies for both fixed and switching regime models. The rules are expressed as
functions of ψ t and θt , holding all other state variables at their regime-dependent
steady state values. The lower left panel of the figure illustrates the contemporaneous
impacts of taxes on inflation. When regime is permanent Ricardian equivalence makes
taxes irrelevant, but taxes matter when regimes can change.
    Regime switching also increases the elasticity of real debt to policy disturbances
by propagating the shocks’ impacts and changing the present values of taxes and
seigniorage [right panels of figure 2]. For example, as figure 1 showed, a negative
shock to ψt raises the nominal interest rate and generates an expectation that both
direct and inflation taxes will rise in the future, supporting the increase in the current
value of debt. Of course, the higher value of debt is associated with a higher present
value of surpluses when the switching model conditions on staying in regime 1 where
γ 1 (1) = .275.
    If agents expect tax policy to be non-Ricardian in the future, having the Taylor
principle hold in one regime is not suﬃcient to oﬀset the inflationary impacts of tax
disturbances. Indeed, in that regime the Taylor principle may have the unintended
eﬀect of giving i.i.d. tax shocks persistent impacts, increasing the variances of demand
and inflation.

6.1.2. Monetary Shocks. When regime 1 is fixed, a transitory monetary policy shock
creates a one-time increase in inflation by the conventional mechanism of a one-time
increase in liquidity. The Taylor principle ensures the nominal interest rate stays
fixed. A decline in the value of debt is matched by a decline in the present value of
surpluses, guaranteeing that both wealth and future inflation taxes are constant.
   Regime switching alters the eﬀects of a transitory monetary easing by expanding
liquidity and reducing wealth [figure 1]. Because agents anticipate policy will shift to
PM/AF, they no longer expect lower future taxes to match the decline in debt’s value;
wealth falls. Lower wealth attenuates the liquidity-induced expansion of demand.
Along with the expectation that fiscal policy will switch to exogenous taxes comes
                                   POLICY SWITCHING                                      19

the expectation of a discrete drop in the inflation rate to revalue debt. The present
value of seigniorage and the current nominal interest rate fall accordingly. Lower
financial wealth at the beginning of next period, with no new injections of liquidity,
reduces inflation in that and subsequent periods.
   Note that the monetary shock generates a small “price puzzle”: a monetary easing
that lowers the nominal interest rate is followed by lower future inflation. As we
see below, this pattern emerges because agents perceive there is a chance policy will
change to regime 2 in the future.

6.2. Impacts of Policy Shocks in Regime 2 (PM/AF). Regime 2 policy behav-
ior corresponds to the standard FTPL exercise: both taxes and the nominal interest
rate are exogenous.

6.2.1. Tax Shocks. A permanent regime 2 is the canonical FTPL exercise. Fixed
future taxes and constant current and future interest rates mean that a tax cut
cannot be financed by future revenues. At initial interest rates and prices, agents
feel wealthier and try to increase their consumption paths. This increase in demand
drives up the current price level until the value of debt is returned to its original level
and agents are happy with their initial consumption plans. By fixing the interest
rate, monetary policy prevents the tax shock from propagating.
   Regime switching does not alter the fixed-regime results [figure 3]. The current
inflation rate jumps to devalue the newly issued nominal debt; on the margin, the
full tax cut is financed by a contemporaneous jump in the price level. An unchanged
value of debt is consistent with unchanged present values of taxes and seigniorage.
Money growth reacts passively to the higher price level to ensure the money market
clears at the fixed nominal interest rate. These eﬀects coincide with those under
a fixed PM/AF regime because even though agents impute a positive probability
to a Ricardian tax rule and a Taylor rule in the future, unchanged real debt and
an unchanged present value of surpluses are consistent with such a switch in rules.
Indeed, the decision rules as a function of ψ t are identical.
   Daniel (2003) considers a once-and-for-all probabilistic shift in tax policy from
being strongly responsive to debt to being exogenous. She maintains that monetary
policy pegs the nominal interest rate forever. In the present setup, Daniel is assuming
the tax rule can switch from regime 1 (γ 1 (1) > 0) to regime 2 (γ 1 (2) = 0), while
monetary policy is always in regime 2 (α1 (1) = α1(2) = 0). She shows that as long
as the probability is positive that taxes will be exogenous in the future, fiscal policy
determines the price level. Because the nominal rate is pegged, there is no mechanism
in Daniel’s model by which a tax shock can be propagated. Even if taxes are currently
                                   POLICY SWITCHING                                     20

in regime 1, therefore, their impacts are those that the present work attributes to
regime 2: a one-time change in the price level that revalues debt.

6.2.2. Monetary Shocks. When regime 2 is fixed, a monetary policy shock at time
t lowers the nominal interest rate and induces oﬀsetting portfolio substitutions by
agents out of debt and into money. With agents’ budget sets unperturbed by the
shock, there is no change in aggregate demand or inflation initially. The lower nominal
interest rate creates an expectation of lower future inflation and, therefore, seigniorage
revenues (supporting the drop in the value of debt). How is the lower expected
inflation realized? Although initial changes in real balances and real debt oﬀset each
other, the drop in Rt makes financial wealth, wt , lower at the beginning of period
t + 1. This reduces demand and inflation in that period.
   When regime can switch, surprise monetary easing produces a similar pattern of
impacts. The only diﬀerence is the small contemporaneous uptick in inflation [figure
3], which arises because agents impute a positive probability to switching to regime
1 (AM/PF), where expansionary monetary policy raises inflation.
   With monetary policy in this model couched in terms of an interest rate rule,
the expansionary monetary shock produces a sizeable “price puzzle.” As we explore
in section 8, this pattern of correlation oﬀers an explanation for the “price puzzle”
findings in the monetary VAR literature.

                      7. Exploring the Parameter Space
  This section considers alternative parameter settings across two dimensions of the
parameter space. First we vary regime duration and report the sensitivity of inflation
to taxes when regime 1 (AM/PF) prevails. The benchmark settings for the PM/AF
regime assume the monetary authority sets interest rates independently of inflation,
implying tax reductions are financed entirely by a contemporaneous inflation tax
(as in the FTPL). The second dimension we explore is to allow monetary policy to
respond weakly to inflation.

7.1. An Active Monetary/Passive Fiscal Regime. As section 6 demonstrated,
agents’ expectations that regime will switch in the future play a crucial role in de-
termining the impacts of policy disturbances. Here we explore how regime duration
aﬀects the result that tax cuts generate wealth eﬀects in regime 1. The expected
duration of a regime is given by
                                                       1
                                E [dj |St = j ] =           ,
                                                    1 − pjj
                                   POLICY SWITCHING                                     21

for j = {1, 2} and dj = T − t, where St = St+1 = · · · = St+T = j and St+T +1 6= j. The
benchmark specification assumes that both regimes are relatively persistent: p11 > .5
and p22 > .5.
   The degree to which tax shocks aﬀect inflation in an AM/PF regime depends on
the transition matrix. Figure 4 illustrates how the impact of a tax cut on inflation
increases as p11 → 0 and p22 → 1. Each decision rule represents diﬀerent probabilities
in the transition matrix, where
                                         E [d1 |St = 1]
                           λ=
                                E [d1 |St = 1] + E [d2 |St = 2]
represents the proportion of time spent in the AM/PF regime. As the expected
proportion of time spent in the PM/AF regime increases, the inflation eﬀects of tax
disturbances increase because agents expect to switch to the PM/AF regime in the
future and then remain there longer relative to the AM/PF regime.
   As figure 5 illustrates, the transition matrix aﬀects the sensitivity of inflation to a
tax cut. The paths for inflation condition on the AM/PF regime and use that regime’s
steady state as the baseline; the tax cut occurs in period 2. As agents expect to spend
relatively more time in the PM/AF regime, a tax cut generates a larger increase in
inflation on impact and increases the variance of inflation. The larger increase on
impact arises from the expectation of a regime change to a more persistent PM/AF
regime in the near future, which creates a lower expected present value of direct taxes
relative to a scenario where the AM/PF regime is highly persistent.

7.2. A Passive Monetary/Active Fiscal Regime. In the fixed-regime model,
with exogenous taxes and a pegged interest rate, the revaluation of nominal debt
following an i.i.d. shock to taxes occurs instantaneously. But even when regime is
fixed, transitory tax shocks can generate serially correlated changes in inflation if
the monetary authority responds weakly to inflation (α1 > 0). This prevents the
complete devaluation of nominal debt from occurring in the period of the tax shock.
Instead, a tax cut is financed by issuing debt that will be repaid with inflation taxes
spread over future periods.
   As α1 increases, the monetary authority responds more aggressively to inflation and
the tax cut causes a larger increase in the interest rate and a smaller contemporaneous
rise in inflation. The higher interest rate, along with a higher real value of debt (due
to a smaller jump in the current price level), induces substitution from real balances
to bonds. As α1 increases, so must the present value of seigniorage following a tax
cut. However, regardless of the value of α1 in the fixed-regime model, the persistence
in inflation is quite weak, as the present value of future seigniorage returns to its
                                   POLICY SWITCHING                                      22

initial level relatively quickly. These eﬀects are illustrated in figure 6 for a tax cut in
period 2.
   In the switching model, the positive probability of regime change propagates in-
flation to a much greater degree relative to the fixed-regime model [figure 7]. With
α1 (2) > 0, debt rises more in response to a tax cut because agents expect both
primary surpluses and seigniorage to adjust in the future. Agents impute positive
probability to a change to AM/PF policies where the higher value of debt will be re-
paid with taxes. This generates a negative wealth eﬀect, reducing aggregate demand
and lowering the rate of inflation relative to the fixed regime model. These eﬀects are
in place until the policy regime changes.

                         8. Some Empirical Implications
  This section derives two empirical implications from the theoretical regime-switching
environment using time series produced by simulating the benchmark model for
100,000 periods. The simulation allows regime to evolve according to the transition
probabilities in (20) and draws (θt , ψ t ) from their normal distributions.

8.1. The “Price Puzzle”. The “price puzzle” that emerges from many attempts
to identify exogenous shifts in monetary policy is well documented [Sims (1992),
Eichenbaum (1992), Hanson (2002)]. It was regarded as a puzzle because a monetary
expansion that lowers the nominal interest rate is often followed by lower inflation,
rather than higher inflation, as many theories would predict. Several papers try to
resolve the puzzle by changing identifying assumptions or by expanding the informa-
tion set on which policy choices are based [Gordon and Leeper (1994), Leeper, Sims,
and Zha (1996), Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Evans (1999), Bernanke, Boivin, and
Eliasz (2002), Leeper and Roush (2003)].
   Another reaction has been that lower inflation following a lower interest rate is not
a puzzle at all. To the extent that firms must borrow to finance wage bills and new
investment, lower interest rates reduce the costs of production and can lead naturally
to lower inflation, at least for some period [Barth and Ramey (2002), Christiano,
Eichenbaum, and Evans (2001)].
   As suggested in section 6, a positive correlation between the interest rate and future
inflation is also a natural outcome of the switching model. It appears subtly under
regime 1 (AM/PF) and forcefully under regime 2 (PM/AF). We now show that if
time series data were generated by this setup, one should expect to find that positive
interest rate innovations predict higher inflation.
   Figure 8 shows the responses of inflation and the nominal interest rate to an orthog-
onalized innovation in the nominal rate. Ordering inflation before the interest rate
                                        POLICY SWITCHING                                              23

is consistent with much of the VAR work, which treats inflation as predetermined,
and is also consistent with estimates of the Taylor rule, which regress the nominal
rate on inflation (and potentially other variables). Although the policy disturbances
are i.i.d. and the monetary policy rule is purely contemporaneous, the interest rate
displays substantial serial correlation. Inflation rises sharply in the short run, and
remains above its initial level for 10 periods.
   The model’s results are consistent with the Hanson’s (2002) careful analysis. He
finds that the “price puzzle” cannot be solved by the conventional method of adding
commodity prices to the Fed’s information set. And more to the point for the present
work, Hanson finds that the “puzzle” is more pronounced in the period 1960-1979. But
Favero and Monacelli (2003) identify that period as one where monetary policy was
passive and fiscal policy was active. As figure 3 shows, the model predicts precisely
this outcome when conditioning on PM/AF.

8.2. Surplus-Debt Regressions. A number of authors have computed regressions
of budget surpluses and government debt to draw inferences about the source of
fiscal financing [Canzoneri, Cumby, and Diba (2001), Bohn (1998), Janssen, Nolan,
and Thomas (2001)]. Canzoneri, Cumby, and Diba (CCD), for example, estimate a
bivariate VAR with the government surplus and total liabilities.16 Their figure 3 (p.
1228) reports that a positive innovation in the surplus is followed by persistently lower
liabilities and a surplus that is significantly positive for only two periods. They argue
that a Ricardian interpretation of the data is “more plausible” than is a non-Ricardian
one, as the increase in the surplus is used to retire debt.
   Simulated data from the regime-switching model produce a pattern of correlation
strikingly similar to the top panel of CCD’s figure. A positive innovation to the surplus
produces an immediate and persistent decline in liabilities [figure 9].17 Of course, as
figure 1 makes clear, even conditional on current tax policy being Ricardian, tax
shocks always generate wealth eﬀects and non-Ricardian outcomes.
   Our setup is completely straightforward and plausible. Both a reading of Amer-
ican tax history over CCD’s sample period and the corroborating formal statistical
evidence that Favero and Monacelli (2003) present support the view that monetary
and fiscal policy regimes have switched in a manner that our setup aims to capture.

  16 The   surplus is defined to include seigniorage and total liabilities are the sum of net government
debt and the monetary base.
   17 Given the paucity of independent disturbances in the model and the simple form of the tax rule,

which excludes any contemporaneous response to other variables, in the reverse Choleski ordering–
liabilities, surplus–an orthogonalized innovation to the surplus has no predictive value for liabilities.
                                   POLICY SWITCHING                                     24

                              9. Concluding Remarks
   In most countries monetary and fiscal authorities cannot credibly commit to always
follow either active monetary policy and passive fiscal policy or passive monetary pol-
icy and active fiscal policy. If, as a consequence, private agents place probability mass
on both kinds of regimes, then something like the regime-switching environment that
we model will apply. That environment makes wealth eﬀects–from both monetary
and tax policy disturbances–important components of policy impacts.
   The implications of this switching setup raise some doubts about two pillars of
recent policy analysis. First, because tax changes have wealth eﬀects, even if the
prevailing regime combines the Taylor principle for monetary policy with taxes that
respond strongly to debt, Ricardian equivalence may be a misleading benchmark.
Second, if the Taylor principle holds in only one regime, it can actually be destabilizing
in the sense that it propagates disturbances and can increase the variance of aggregate
demand and inflation.
   There are at least two dimensions along which to extend the current framework.
Is it possible for both policy authorities to act passively in one regime, yet have
the price level uniquely determined? The analytical example in section 3 shows this
is possible. The current computational approach must be modified to deliver and
appropriately characterize a solution with multiple equilibria or sunspots, as Lubik
and Schorfheide (2003a) have done for linear models. The second extension addresses
the question: how “big” are the fiscal eﬀects when the current regime is AM/PF? To
address this, we need a carefully calibrated model with frictions, possibly of the kind
in the workhorse New Keynesian model extended to include long-term government
debt as in Cochrane (2001a). In the New Keynesian model monetary policy has
more conventional macro eﬀects, in addition to the fiscal financing eﬀects this paper
analyzes. With such a model in hand, we could also extract a more complete set of
empirical implications.
                       Appendix A. Why Linear Methods Fail
   This appendix examines the suitability of various linearization approaches to solv-
ing the regime-switching model. Our conclusion is that none of these linearization
approaches can be expected to give an accurate characterization of the stability of the
full non-linear system in all of the cases of interest to us. This conclusion is somewhat
surprising, given the nearly linear dynamics of the full system. Essentially, linearized
models miss the role of the endogenous expectation error in determining the long-run
behavior of the system. Since the qualitative properties of the dynamics are deter-
mined by the system’s long-run behavior, these linearized models fail to present an
accurate picture of it. In particular, they may fail to classify existence and uniqueness
of equilibrium correctly.
   To get an intuitive sense of the problem with linearized models, consider first a
straightforward linearization around a deterministic steady-state associated with one
of the regimes. For the next few paragraphs, we will work with a simplified version of
the model, in which seigniorage is identically zero. The government budget identity
is therefore

                                 Rt−1 bt−1
                            bt =             − γ 1t bt−1 + g − γ 0t − ψ t ,                       (32)
                                    πt
where (γ 0t , γ 1t) are the regime-dependent parameters
                                                      h i      of the tax rule, (γ 0 (St ), γ 1 (St )).
                                           1            1
  Define the expectation error η t = π t /Et−1 πt . Using this definition and the Fisher
equation, the government budget identity can be re-written as
                                   µ     ¶
                                ηt
                        bt =       − γ 1t bt−1 + g − γ 0t − ψt .                                 (33)
                                β
  The linearized version of this equation is
                        µ      ¶
                        1                                 b
               ∆bt =      − γ 1 ∆bt−1 + g − ∆γ 0t − ψt + ∆η t − b∆γ 1t,              (34)
                       β                                  β
where ∆b ≡ bt − b, and b is the steady-state value of real bonds under one of the
regimes.
   In the single-regime version of the model, the expectation error is i.i.d. and, there-
fore, the linearized version accurately captures the stability properties of the model.
(See end of appendix C for proof.) However, in the full non-linear regime-switching
model, the expectation errors η t are correlated with γ 1t+k , k > ³0. Consequently,
                                                                                 ´     ηt
                                                             Q∞ ηt+k
cannot be replaced by 1/β in expectations of the form Et k=1 β − γ 1t+k , and,
in general, the long-run properties of the linearized model will be diﬀerent from those
                                       POLICY SWITCHING                                           26

of the full non-linear model, as the long-run behavior is governed by the expected
value of such products.18
   Now consider an alternative linearization approach. Since the equilibrium policy
functions in this model appear to be nearly linear, one might imagine that a state-
contingent linearization approach would be successful in reproducing the long-run
properties of the full system. In this case, at each date we linearize around the
steady-state associated with the regime holding at that date. The resulting random-
coeﬃcients equation is
                             µ           ¶
                                 1                                b
                     ∆bt =         − γ 1t ∆bt−1 + g − γ 0t − ψ t + ∆η t .                       (35)
                                 β                                β
Again, when η is deviates significantly from its unconditional mean of unity, the long-
run dynamics of the random-coeﬃcient models may fail to represent the stability
properties of the full system.
   To get a sense of the importance of this possibility, we can compare the results
of the linearized models to the full non-linear model for special parameter values for
which it is possible to solve the full model exactly. Suppose that monetary policy
obeys the rule

                                  Rt = exp(α0t + α1t π1t + θt ).
Using the Fisher equation, and using the definition of the endogenous expectation
error, the dynamics for inflation can be written as

                            bt+1 = α1t π
                            π          bt + θ t + α0t + ln β − b
                                                               η t+1 ,
where ˆ denotes the natural log of the variable.
  In appendix B, we show how to determine some long-run properties of this diﬀerence
equation. For certain parameter values it will turn out that imposing stability on
the inflation process is suﬃcient to determine the mapping between inflation and
the exogenous shocks. These are the determinate Ricardian equilibria of this model.
Having solved for π, we can then obtain an expression for the endogenous expectation
error η.
  Now return to the government budget identity (this time with seigniorage):

  18 This possibility precludes using many ofthe standard second-order accurate expansions available
in the literature. Typically, it is an assumption of these methods that the first-order linearization
accurately determines the long-run behavior of the system and this assumption is not necessarily
satisfied for our model [Kim, Kim, Schaumberg, and Sims (2003), Schmitt-Grohe and Uribe (2004)].
                                   POLICY SWITCHING                                      27


                                      µ            ¶
                                          ηt
                               bt =          − γ 1t bt−1 + Υt,                        (36)
                                          β

where Υt ≡ mπt−1  t
                     − mt + gt − γ 0t − ψ t . The solution for π implies that inflation
depends only on the current regime St and realization of the monetary policy shock,
θt . Therefore, Υt depends only on current and lagged θ and S. Appendix C shows
that the stability of this equation can be determined because η has been determined
by monetary policy behavior.
    In Ricardian equilibria, we can compare the results of the full non-linear model
with those of the straightforward linearization around a single steady state. Results
are predictably poor and we will not describe them in detail. More interestingly,
we can also compare the random-coeﬃcients linearization with the non-linear model.
With the random-coeﬃcients model, however, the only qualitative diﬀerence between
the two models arises in results concerning the stability of the process for government
debt: the random-coeﬃcients model may suggest stability when the non-linear model
is not stable and vice-versa.
    As a baseline, consider the model with γ 1 (1) = .275 and γ 1 (2) = 0, p11 = p22 = .99,
α0 (1) = −.5, α0 (2) = .5. With this setting, the two linearization schemes report that
the bond dynamics are stable if inflation dynamics are. However, such is not the case
in the non-linear system. Figures 10-12 report the results of varying α1 systematically
between 1 and 5. The lightly-shaded areas represent regions identified as Ricardian
by both linear methods and by the exact solution to the non-linear system; in this
area, linear methods are accurate. Areas shaded in the middle tone are regions of
the parameter space that do not support an equilibrium in the non-linear system,
but which are equilibria for the linearized system: linear methods fail in this area.
Finally, dark regions are areas that, according to the non-linear model, lie outside of
the Ricardian space, including non-Ricardian and indeterminate equilibria.
    As is apparent from figure 10, with the baseline settings there is a substantial region
in which the linearized methods fail to capture the long-run behavior of the system,
even though the dynamics conditional on regime are nearly linear. Intuitively, these
results arise because the regimes are long-lived, while inflation behavior may diﬀer
substantially across regimes. Say, for example, that inflation is much higher in regime
1 than in 2. Then, when the system switches from regime 1 to 2, the inflation rate
falls and so η is large. Moreover, while in regime 2, the inflation rate is persistently
and substantially below expectations, since households form their expectations taking
into account the possibility of switching back into the high inflation regime 1. The
growth rate of debt is therefore higher than the ex ante real interest rate, at the
                                        POLICY SWITCHING                                      28

same time that taxes fail to respond to lagged debt. A linearized model with state-
contingent coeﬃcients recognizes that debt is explosive in this regime. However, it
may not accurately reflect the covariance between interest payments on debt and tax
policy and, hence, may misclassify the stability properties of debt.
   To gauge the sensitivity of the model to these eﬀects, we varied several parameters
of the baseline, including the persistence of the regimes, the standard deviations of
the shocks and the intercept terms in the monetary policy rule.19 Results of these
variations are presented in figures 11-12. Reducing the persistence of the regimes leads
to smaller diﬀerences in inflation behavior between regimes. Correspondingly, the
forecast errors, on average, are not as large, while also not as informative about future
tax policy, reducing the correlation between ηt and γ 1t+k , k > 0. Linear methods then
are quite successful in tracking the long-term behavior of the system, as shown in
figure 11, which increases the transition probability to .70. Increasing the gap between
the intercepts in the two regimes increases the spread in inflation rates across regimes
and for similar reasons the performance of linear models becomes commensurately
poor. (Figure 12 presents results from a run with the intercepts set at 1 and -1.
The region of the parameter space over which the linear model mis-characterizes the
long-run behavior of the model is much larger than the corresponding region for the
baseline.)
   Nevertheless, given our wish to explore the parameter space over fairly broad re-
gions (including non-Ricardian regions) and with relatively persistent regimes, the
linearized models are clearly not suitable. With widely separated, persistent regimes,
the expected growth rate of debt is significantly aﬀected by much lower-than-expected
(or higher-than-expected) inflation rates. Neither of the linearization approaches
matches this feature of the non-linear model, and so cannot match its dynamics in
general.

    Appendix B. Stability Properties of Random-Coefficient Linear
                                      Models
  For our purposes, it is suﬃcient to consider the stability properties of a simple
univariate model of the following form:

                                 xt = a(St−1 )xt−1 + ξ t−1 + Ψη t ,
where a(St−1) follows an M-state Markov chain, ξ t is an exogenous shock process
possibly depending on both the state of the Markov chain and on Q additional i.i.d.
  19 Altering the variance of the i.i.d. shock does not have a
                                                          very dramatic impact on the performance
of the linear model. Therefore, we do not display a graph for this case.
                                                POLICY SWITCHING                                           29

processes Θt and η t is an endogenous expectation error satisfying the restriction
Et η t+1 = 0. Let the transition matrix of the Markov chain be given by Π, where
Πij = prob(st+1 = i|st = j). Finally, the expectation Et is taken with respect to
the time t information set {xt−j , St−j , ξ t−j , ζ t−j |j ≥ 0}, where ζ represents a non-
fundamental (“sunspot”) shock.
   We are interested in the behavior of Etxt+T as T becomes large. Iterating forward
on the model shows that
                      ÃT −1     !               ÃT −j−1          !
                       Y                  X T        Y             ¡              ¢
         Et xt+T = Et       at+j xt + Et                   at+k+j ξ t+j−1 + Ψη t+j ,
                             j=0                         j=1       k=0

where at+j denotes a(St+j ). This expectation can be calculated explicitly using the
following recursion relation:

     "T                 #                     "T −1                      #
      Y                          X
                                 M             Y
Et         at+j |St = k =              Et+1           αt+j |St+1 = l a(St = k) · prob(St+1 = l|St = k),
     j=0                         l=1            j=0

for k ∈ {1, M}.
   Define the matrix Γ(a) by Γij ≡ a(j) · prob(St+1 = i|St = j) and let the symbol
 (l)   Ql
at =      at+j . Now define the vector
       j=0
                                 Ã        " l                  #             " l                  #!
                                           Y                                  Y
               Et (at(l) |•) ≡       Et         at+j |St = 1 , ..., Et             at+j |St = M        ,
                                          j=0                                j=0

                 (l)
so that dim(Et(at |•)) = 1 × M. With this notation, the previous recursion relation
can be written Et (at(l) |•) = Et (at(l−1) |•)Γ(a). Accordingly, Et (at(l) |•) = ωΓl (a), where
ω is a 1 × M vector of ones and Γl (a) denotes a matrix product.
  From this relation, it follows that for j > 1,

             (l)
      E (a ξ        |S = m) =
      Pt M t+j t+j−1 t               PM
         n=1 prob(St+j−2 = n|St = m)   k=1 Et+j−2 (ξ t+j−1 |St+j−1 = k, St+j−2 = n)
                                                     ·prob(St+j−1 = k|St+j−2 = n)
                              PM        (l)
                             · p=1 Et (at+j |St+j = p) · prob(St+j−1 = k|St+j = p)
and therefore

                                      (l)
                                  Et(at+j ξ t+j−1 |•) = ωΓl (a)(ΠµΠj−2 ),
where µij ≡ Et (ξ t+1|St+1 = i, St = j) · prob(St+1 = i|St = j).
                                      POLICY SWITCHING                                      30

                  (l)
  For j = 1, Et (at+1 ξ t |St = m) = ξ t ωΓl (a)Π.
  Finally, the endogenous expectation errors can be handled as follows. Consider
terms of the form d(St )η t . Then define the basis random variables χj (St ) associated
with the Markov state St , which are defined so that χj (St ) = 1 if St = j and 0
otherwise.
  Project d(St )ηt onto the χj and Θt , the Q additional i.i.d. processes:
                                                            Q
                                      X
                                      M                     X
                         d(St)η t =         an χn (St ) +         bl Θlt + εt ,
                                      n=1                   l=1
                                                                            (l)
where εt is uncorrelated with the χj and Θt . Note that Etat+j |St = m is measurable
with respect to St , so must be expressible as a linear combination of the χj . It follows
that                h                        i        h                        i
                 Et at+j+1 Ψd(St+j )η t+j |St = Et at+j+1 Ψd(S^
                      (l)                                (l)
                                                                       )η   |S
                                                                    t+j t+j t ,
                          PM                 PQ
where d(S^  t+j )ηt+j ≡    n=1 an χn (St ) +   l=1 bl Θlt . Ultimately, therefore, we can treat
the expectation errors just as we treat the ξ, since any dependence on the sunspot
shocks ζ drops out of the expectations of interest.
  From here on, let us assume that Γ and π have M distinct non-zero eigenvalues. Fur-
ther, let x(i), i = 1...M, be the state-contingent mapping of the i.i.d shocks into stable
solutions of the diﬀerence equation, at time t. Finally, define X ≡ diag(x(1)...x(M )),
a matrix with the x(i) on its diagonal. With these recursion relations, write
                       Ã                                                            !
                                                  X k
         Et xt+k = ω Γ(a)k (X + ξ/a(St )) +            Γk−j (a)(ηΠ−1 + ΠµΠ−2 )Πj .
                                                      j=1
  Now decompose Γ and Π into linear combinations of projectors onto their eigen-
                P                           PM
vectors: Γ(a) = M j=1 λj Pj (Γ(a)) and Π =     j=1 φj Pj (Π). Then the sum over future
shocks can be calculated explicitly to arrive at
                            "     µ                   ¶      M µ k       ¶                      #
              X
              M
                                               ξ            X   λm − φkn
                               k
Et xt+k = ω         Pm (Γ(a)) λm · X +                    +                (ηΠ−1 + ΠµΠ−2 )Pn (Π) .
              m=1
                                             a(St )         n=1
                                                                λm − φ n

Therefore, the long-run expected properties of x are characterized by the number of
explosive roots of Γ.

                      Appendix C. Solving a Ricardian Model
  From the Fisher equation and the monetary policy rule, we have that
                       1/Rt = βEt 1/πt+1 = exp(−α1t πt − α0t − θt ),
                                        POLICY SWITCHING                                                    31

where θt is i.i.d. Defining
                                                      1/πt+1
                                         η t+1 =                ,
                                                     Et 1/π t+1
we can rewrite these equations in logs as
                             π          bt + θ t + α0t + ln β − b
                             bt+1 = α1t π                       η t+1 .
In this case, b
              η is not mean-zero, as is apparent from its definition. Therefore, we
decompose b η into its mean and deviations from the mean: b      η t+1 = e
                                                                         η t+1 + Etb
                                                                                   η t+1.
Because the monetary policy shock is i.i.d., the mean is purely dependent on the
Markov state St . From here on, let ν t(St ) = Etb
                                                 ηt+1.
   In terms of the formalism from the previous section, we take xt = π̂t and α1t =
at. For the sake of convenience, consider the case in which the intercept α0t = 0.
Written in this form, inflation dynamics are of the form described in Appendix B,
and, therefore, stability in expectation requires that, for every explosive root λm ,
                             Ã                  ½                     ¾           !
                                    X
                                    2
                                                    θt   ηΠ−1
                    ωPm (Γ) X +            φn          +                   Pn (Π)       = 0,
                                    n=1
                                                    λm λm − φn
where, as above, X denotes the initial state-contingent values of the log-inflation
process.
                         P
  The operator Qm ≡ 2n=1 ξ n λPmn−φ(Π)
                                       is invertible, so, assuming that both roots of
                                     n
Γ(α1 ) are explosive, we can write
                              Ã                              !( 2                              )
          X
          2
                                    θt X
                                       2                       X λ m − φn
              ωPm (Γ(α1)) X +     φn Pn (Π)                                         Pn (Π)         =0
          m=1                 n=1
                                    λm                              n=1
                                                                             φn
since ωη = 0. This leads to the following sequence of implications:
                              (                                                                    )
          X
          2                          X
                                     2
                                       λm − φ                        X
                                                                     2
                                                                       λm − φ
                                                      n                             n
      ⇒         ωPm (Γ(α1 )) X ·                          Pn (Π) +                      θt Pn (Π)      =0
          m=1                        n=1
                                                φn                   n=1
                                                                             λm

                    X
                    2                  2 ½
                                       X                  ¾
                                                  1   1
              ⇒         ωPm (Γ(α1 ))            X   +   θt (λm − φn )Pn (Π) = 0
                  m=1                  n=1
                                                  φn λm
                    X
                    2
                                      ©                               ª
                ⇒         ωPm (Γ(α1 )) X · (Π−1λm − I) + θt(I − Π/λm ) = 0
                    m=1
                       ©                                          ª
                    ⇒ ω Γ(α1) · X · Π−1 − X) + θt (I − Γ(a1 )−1 Π) = 0
  Now expand this expression to yield
                                             POLICY SWITCHING                                       32


   µ µ                      ¶      ¶
       α1 (1)b
             π(1)     0        −1
  ω Π                         Π − X + (1 − 1/α1 (1), 1 − 1/α1 (2))θ t = 0.
            0     α1(2)b
                       π(2)
   Finally, after some further algebra with this expression, we can obtain explicit
solutions for the inflation function. In this case, the inflation function is very simple:
π̂(St ) = −θt/α1 (St ).
   With the intercept term, we would have obtained π̂(St ) = −θt /α1(St ) + ∆(St),
where ∆(St) depends on the still-undetermined Etb     η t+1 . This term can be determined
by imposing the condition that Et η t+1 = 1.
   Substituting the result for π̂(St ), we have

                      βEt {exp (−b
                                 π t+1 + α1 (St )πt + θt + α0 (St ))} = 1
                 ½         µ                                                              ¶¾
                         θt+1
         ⇒ βEt exp               − ∆(St+1 ) + α1 (St)∆(St ) + α0 (St )                         =1
                       α1(St+1 )
  If θ ∼ N(0, σ), then
                      ½        µ              ¶                ¾         µ                ¶
                                θt+1                                           σ
                 Et       exp                     |St+1 , St       = exp
                              α1(St+1)                                   2[α1 (St+1 )]2
and therefore
             ½        µ                                                   ¶¾
                           σ
         βEt exp                    − ∆(St+1 ) + α1 (St)∆(St ) + α0 (St )    = 1.
                     2[α1 (St+1 )]2
This condition, for each initial St , is suﬃcient to determine ∆(St ).
  Once the expectations errors η have been determined, the long-run properties of
the bond dynamics can be derived using a variation of the methods in Appendix B.
When steady-state inflation rates are diﬀerent across regimes, the relevant eigenvalues
are those associated with the matrix
                       ³                      ´    ³                 ´      
                            η(1,1)                    η(1,2)
                                      − γ 1 (1) Π11          − γ 1 (1) Π12
                          ³ β                 ´    ³ β               ´      .
                            η(2,1)                    η(2,2)
                              β
                                      − γ 1 (2) Π21     β
                                                             − γ 1 (2)  Π 22

  When γ 1 is independent of regime, however, the law of iterated expectations implies
that

                                k µ
                                Y                              ¶
                                    η t+j
                           Et                 − γ 1 (St+j )        = (1/β − γ 1 )k .
                                j=1
                                         β
                                 POLICY SWITCHING                                    33

This result holds when the conditional mean of γ 1 is independent of the initial state.
Thus, under these circumstances, the state-contingent linearization scheme will per-
fectly capture the long-run behavior of the full non-linear system.
                                 POLICY SWITCHING                                  34

                                   References
Andolfatto, D., and P. Gomme (2003): “Monetary Policy Regimes and Beliefs,”
 International Economic Review, 44(1), 1—30.
Andolfatto, D., S. Hendry, and K. Moran (2002): “Inflation Expectations and
 Learning about Monetary Policy,” Bank of Canada Working Paper No. 2002-30.
Auerbach, A. J. (2002): “Is There a Role for Discretionary Fiscal Policy?,” in Re-
 thinking Stabilization Policy: Proceedings of a Symposium Sponsored by the Federal
 Reserve Bank of Kansas City, pp. 109—150.
Barth, M. J., and V. A. Ramey (2002): “The Cost Channel of Monetary Trans-
 mission,” in NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2001, ed. by B. S. Bernanke, and
 K. Rogoﬀ, pp. 199—239. MIT Press, Cambridge.
Benhabib, J., S. Schmitt-Grohe, and M. Uribe (2001a): “Monetary Policy and
 Multiple Equilibria,” American Economic Review, 91(1), 167—186.
        (2001b): “The Perils of Taylor Rules,” Journal of Economic Theory, 96(1-2),
 40—69.
         (2002): “Avoiding Liquidity Traps,” Journal of Political Economy, 110(3),
 535—563.
Bernanke, B. S., J. Boivin, and P. Eliasz (2002): “Measuring the Eﬀects
 of Monetary Policy: A Factor-Augmented Vector Autoregressive (FAVAR) Ap-
 proach,” Mimeo, Princeton University.
Bernanke, B. S., and I. Mihov (1998): “Measuring Monetary Policy,” Quarterly
 Journal of Economics, 113(3), 869—902.
Bohn, H. (1998): “The Behavior of U.S. Public Debt and Deficits,” Quarterly Jour-
 nal of Economics, 113(August), 949—963.
Bryant, R. C., P. Hooper, and C. L. Mann (eds.) (1993): Evaluating Policy
 Regimes: New Research in Empirical Macroeconomics. The Brookings Institution,
 Washington, D.C.
Canzoneri, M. B., R. E. Cumby, and B. T. Diba (2001): “Is the Price Level
 Determined by the Needs of Fiscal Solvency?,” American Economic Review, 91(5),
 1221—1238.
Castro, R., C. Resende, and F. J. Ruge-Murcia (2003): “The Backing of
 Government Debt and the Price Level,” Mimeo, Universite de Montreal.
Centre for Economic Policy Research (1991): Monitoring European Integra-
 tion: The Making of Monetary Union. CEPR Annual Report, London.
Christiano, L. J., M. Eichenbaum, and C. L. Evans (1999): “Monetary Policy
 Shocks: What Have We Learned and to What End?,” in Handbook of Macroeco-
 nomics, ed. by J. B. Taylor, and M. Woodford, vol. 1A, pp. 65—148. Elsevier Science,
                                POLICY SWITCHING                                  35

  Amsterdam.
         (2001): “Nominal Rigidities and the Dynamic Eﬀects of a Shock to Monetary
  Policy,” Mimeo, Northwestern University.
Clarida, R., J. Gali, and M. Gertler (2000): “Monetary Policy Rules and
  Macroeconomic Stability: Evidence and Some Theory,” Quarterly Journal of Eco-
  nomics, 115(1), 147—180.
Cochrane, J. H. (1999): “A Frictionless View of U.S. Inflation,” in NBER Macro-
  economics Annual 1998, ed. by B. S. Bernanke, and J. J. Rotemberg, pp. 323—384.
  MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
          (2001a): “Long Term Debt and Optimal Policy in the Fiscal Theory of the
  Price Level,” Econometrica, 69(January), 69—116.
         (2001b): “Money as Stock,” Mimeo, University of Chicago.
Cogley, T., and T. J. Sargent (2002a): “Drifts and Volatilities: Monetary Poli-
  cies and Outcomes in the Post WWII U.S.,” Mimeo, Arizona State University.
         (2002b): “Evolving Post-World War II U.S. Inflation Dynamics,” in NBER
  Macroeconomics Annual 2001, ed. by B. S. Bernanke, and J. J. Rotemberg. MIT
  Press, Cambridge.
Cohen, D., and C. Wyplosz (1989): “The European Monetary Union: An Ag-
  nostic Evaluation,” in Macroeconomic Policies in an Interdependent World, ed. by
  R. C. Bryant, D. A. Currie, J. Frankel, P. Masson, and R. Portes, pp. 311—337. The
  Brookings Institution, Washington, D.C.
Coleman, II, W. J. (1991): “Equilibrium in a Production Economy with an Income
  Tax,” Econometrica, 59(4), 1091—1104.
Cooley, T. F., S. F. LeRoy, and N. Raymon (1982): “Modeling Policy Inter-
  ventions,” Mimeo, University of California Santa Barbara.
          (1984): “Econometric Policy Evaluation: Note,” American Economic Re-
  view, 74(3), 467—470.
Daniel, B. C. (2003): “Fiscal Policy, Price Surprises, and Inflation,” Mimeo, SUNY
  Albany.
Davig, T. (2002): “Regime-Switching Debt and Taxation,” Journal of Monetary
  Economics, forthcoming, Mimeo, The College of William and Mary.
          (2003): “Regime-Switching Fiscal Policy in General Equilibrium,” Mimeo,
  The College of William and Mary.
Eichenbaum, M. (1992): “Comment on ‘Interpreting the Macroeconomic Time Se-
  ries Facts: The Eﬀects of Monetary Policy’,” European Economic Review, 36, 1001—
  1011.
                                 POLICY SWITCHING                                   36

Favero, C. A., and T. Monacelli (2003): “Monetary-Fiscal Mix and Inflation
  Performance: Evidence from the US,” CEPR Discussion Paper No. 3887.
Gallant, A. R., P. E. Rossi, and G. Tauchen (1993): “Nonlinear Dynamic
  Structures,” Econometrica, 61(4), 871—907.
Gordon, D. B., and E. M. Leeper (1994): “The Dynamic Impacts of Monetary
  Policy: An Exercise in Tentative Identification,” Journal of Political Economy, 102,
  1228—1247.
Grilli, V. (1989): “Seigniorage in Europe,” in A European Central Bank? Perspec-
  tives on Monetary Unificiation after Ten Years of the EMS, ed. by M. DeCecco,
  and A. Giovannini, pp. 53—79. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Hanson, M. S. (2002): “The ‘Price Puzzle’ Reconsidered,” Mimeo, Wesleyan Uni-
  versity.
         (2003): “Varying Monetary Policy Regimes: A Vector Autoregressive Inves-
  tigation,” Mimeo, Wesleyan University.
Heller, W. W. (1967): New Dimensions of Political Economy. Norton, New York.
Janssen, N., C. Nolan, and R. Thomas (2001): “Money, Debt and Prices in the
  UK 1705-1996,” forthcoming, Economica.
Kim, J., S. Kim, E. Schaumberg, and C. A. Sims (2003): “Calculating and Using
  Second Order Accurate Solutions of Discrete Time Dynamic Equilibrium Models,”
  Mimeo, Princeton University.
King, M. (1995): “Commentary: Monetary Policy Implications of Greater Fiscal
  Discipline,” in Budget Deficits and Debt: Issues and Options, pp. 171—183. Federal
  Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Jackson Hole Symposium.
King, R. G., and C. I. Plosser (1985): “Money, Deficits, and Inflation,” vol. 22
  of Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, pp. 147—196. North-
  Holland.
Leeper, E. M. (1991): “Equilibria Under ‘Active’ and ‘Passive’ Monetary and Fiscal
  Policies,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 27(1), 129—147.
         (1993): “The Policy Tango: Toward a Holistic View of Monetary and Fiscal
  Eﬀects,” Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta Economic Review, 78, 1—27.
Leeper, E. M., and J. E. Roush (2003): “Putting ’M’ Back in Monetary Policy,”
  Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, forthcoming, NBER Working Paper No.
  9552.
Leeper, E. M., C. A. Sims, and T. Zha (1996): “What Does Monetary Policy
  Do?,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2, 1—63.
Leeper, E. M., and T. Zha (2003): “Modest Policy Interventions,” Journal of
  Monetary Economics, 50(8), 1673—1700.
                                POLICY SWITCHING                                  37

Loyo, E. (1999): “Tight Money Paradox on the Loose: A Fiscalist Hyperinflation,”
  Harvard University, mimeo.
Lubik, T. A., and F. Schorfheide (2003a): “Computing Sunspot Equilibria in
  Linear Rational Expectations Models,” Journal of Economic Dynamics and Con-
  trol, 28(2), 273—285.
          (2003b): “Testing for Indeterminacy: An Application to U.S. Monetary Pol-
  icy,” American Economic Review, forthcoming, Mimeo, Johns Hopkins University.
Lucas, Jr., R. E. (1976): “Econometric Policy Evaluation: A Critique,” vol. 1
  of Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, pp. 104—130. North-
  Holland.
Mackowiak, B. (2002): “Macroeconomic Regime Switching and Speculative At-
  tacks,” Mimeo, Humbolt University.
Niepelt, D. (2001): “The Fiscal Myth of the Price Level,” Mimeo, IIES, Stockholm.
Obstfeld, M., and K. Rogoff (1983): “Speculative Hyperinflations in Maximiz-
  ing Models: Can We Rule Them Out?,” Journal of Political Economy, 91(August),
  675—687.
Ohanian, L. E. (1997): “The Macroeconomic Eﬀects of War Finance in the United
  States: World War II and the Korean War,” American Economic Review, 87(1),
  23—40.
Pechman, J. A. (1987): Federal Tax Policy. The Brookings Institution, Washington,
  D.C., fifth edn.
Poterba, J. M. (1994): “Federal Budget Policy in the 1980s,” in American Eco-
  nomic Policy in the 1980s, ed. by M. Feldstein, pp. 235—270. University of Chicago
  Press, Chicago.
Sala, L. (2003): “Testing the Fiscal Theory of the Price Level,” Mimeo, Universita
  Bocconi.
Sargent, T. J. (1999): The Conquest of American Inflation. Princeton University
  Press, Princeton, NJ.
Sargent, T. J., and N. Wallace (1981): “Some Unpleasant Monetarist Arith-
  metic,” Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly Review, 5(Fall), 1—17.
Schmitt-Grohe, S., and M. Uribe (2004): “Solving Dynamic General Equilibrium
  Models Using a Second-Order Approximation to the Policy Function,” Journal of
  Economic Dynamics and Control, 28(4), 755—775.
Schorfheide, F. (2003): “Learning and Monetary Policy Shifts,” Mimeo, Univer-
  sity of Pennsylvania.
Sidrauski, M. (1967): “Rational Choice and Patterns of Growth in a Monetary
  Economy,” American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, 57(2), 534—544.
                                 POLICY SWITCHING                                    38

Sims, C. A. (1992): “Interpreting the Macroeconomic Time Series Facts: The Eﬀects
  of Monetary Policy,” European Economic Review, 36, 975—1000.
         (1994): “A Simple Model for Study of the Determination of the Price Level
  and the Interaction of Monetary and Fiscal Policy,” Economic Theory, 4(3), 381—
  399.
         (1997): “Fiscal Foundations of Price Stability in Open Economies,” Mimeo,
  Yale University.
Sims, C. A., and T. Zha (2002): “Macroeconomic Switching,” Mimeo, Princeton
  University.
Stein, H. (1996): The Fiscal Revolution in America. AEI Press, Washington, D.C.,
  second revised edn.
Steuerle, E. (2002): “Tax Policy from 1990 to 2001,” in American Economic Policy
  in the 1990s, ed. by J. Frankel, and P. Orszag, pp. 139—169. MIT Press, Cambridge.
Taylor, J. B. (1993): “Discretion versus Policy Rules in Practice,” vol. 39 of
  Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, pp. 195—214. North Hol-
  land.
           (1996): “Monetary Policy Implications of Greater Fiscal Discipline,” in
  Budget Deficits and Debt: Issues and Options, pp. 151—170. Federal Reserve Bank
  of Kansas City, Jackson Hole Symposium.
          (1999a): “An Historical Analysis of Monetary Policy Rules,” in Monetary
  Policy Rules, ed. by J. B. Taylor, pp. 319—341. University of Chicago Press, Chicago.
         (1999b): Monetary Policy Rules. University of Chicago Press, Chicago.
           (2000): “Reassessing Discretionary Fiscal Policy,” Journal of Economic
  Perspectives, 14(3), 21—36.
Weil, P. (2003): “Reflections on the Fiscal Theory of the Price Level,” Mimeo,
  ECARES.
Woodford, M. (1995): “Price-Level Determinacy Without Control of a Monetary
  Aggregate,” vol. 43 of Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, pp.
  1—46. North-Holland.
         (1998): “Public Debt and the Price Level,” Mimeo, Princeton University.
         (1999): “Comment on Cochrane’s ‘A Frictionless View of U.S. Inflation’,” in
  NBER Macroeconomics Annual 1998, ed. by B. S. Bernanke, and J. J. Rotemberg,
  pp. 390—419. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
Yang, S.-C. S. (2003): “Evidence of Tax Foresight,” Mimeo, John Carroll University.
                        3.2                       POLICY SWITCHING
                                                                 0.39                                       39
                                                       ψ
                                                       θ
                        3.1                                      0.38


                         3                                                         0.37




                                                                      b
        π




                        2.9                                                        0.36


                        2.8                                                        0.35
                              0     5        10          15                                    0   5   10        15


                        7.3                                                    0.255

                        7.2
                                                                                   0.25
                        7.1
             R




                                                                               0.245




                                                              τ
                         7
                                                                                   0.24
                        6.9

                        6.8                                                    0.235
                              0     5        10          15                                    0   5   10        15


                         6                                                                10

                                                                                           8
                         4
             M growth




                                                                               B growth




                                                                                           6
                         2
                                                                                           4
                         0
                                                                                           2

                        −2                                                                 0
                              0     5        10          15                                    0   5   10        15


             0.145                                                                 0.24


                  0.14
                                                              PV seigniorage
PV surplus




                                                                               0.235

             0.135

                                                                                   0.23
                  0.13


             0.125                                                             0.225
                              0     5        10          15                                    0   5   10        15


                        Figure 1. Impacts of Policy Shocks Conditional on Regime 1 (AM/FP)
                                      POLICY SWITCHING                                               40


      0.5                                               0.025

      0.4                                                   0.02

      0.3                                               0.015

      0.2                                                   0.01

      0.1                                               0.005




                                                ∆ ln( b )
                                                      t
 t
∆π




       0                                                      0

     −0.1                                           −0.005

     −0.2                                               −0.01

     −0.3                                           −0.015

     −0.4                                               −0.02

     −0.5                                           −0.025
      −0.01   −0.005   0       0.005     0.01           −0.01        −0.005   0       0.005   0.01

                       θt

                                                                              θt

      0.5                                                   0.15

      0.4
                                                             0.1

      0.3
                                                            0.05
      0.2
 t




                                                ∆ ln( b )




                                                              0
∆π




      0.1
                                                      t




       0                                                −0.05

     −0.1
                                                            −0.1
     −0.2

                                                        −0.15
     −0.3

     −0.4                                                   −0.2
      −0.02   −0.01    0       0.01      0.02                −0.02   −0.01    0       0.01    0.02

                       ψ                                                      ψ
                           t                    RS−model                          t
                                                Fixed−Regime


 Figure 2. Regime 1 (AM/PF): Decision Rules in Switching- and
 Fixed-Regime Models
                                                  POLICY SWITCHING                                           41

                        4.5                                                     0.395
                                                      ψ
                         4                            θ                              0.39

                        3.5                                                     0.385




                                                               b
        π




                         3                                                           0.38

                        2.5                                                     0.375

                         2                                                           0.37
                              0       5      10           15                                    0   5   10    15


                        7.2                                                          0.26

                        7.1
                                                                                0.255
                         7
             R




                                                               τ
                        6.9
                                                                                     0.25
                        6.8

                        6.7                                                     0.245
                              0       5      10           15                                    0   5   10    15


                         8                                                                  8

                         6                                                                  6
                         4
             M growth




                                                                                B growth




                                                                                            4
                         2
                                                                                            2
                         0

                        −2                                                                  0

                        −4                                                                 −2
                              0       5      10           15                                    0   5   10    15


             0.165                                                              0.235


                  0.16                                                               0.23
                                                               PV seigniorage
PV surplus




             0.155                                                              0.225


                  0.15                                                               0.22


             0.145                                                              0.215
                                  5         10            15                                    0   5   10    15


                        Figure 3. Impacts of Policy Shocks Conditional on Regime 2 (PM/AF)
                                  POLICY SWITCHING                                                   42


          1
                                                                                    λ=0
                                                                                    λ = .25
         0.8                                                                        λ = .5
                            Fixed−Regime : PM−AF
                                                                                    λ = .75
                                                                                    λ=1
         0.6


         0.4


                                                               Fixed−Regime : AM−PF
         0.2
    t
   ∆π




          0


        −0.2


        −0.4


        −0.6


        −0.8
         −0.02   −0.015   −0.01    −0.005          0   0.005      0.01      0.015             0.02
                                               ψt



Figure 4. Regime 1 (AM/PF): Contemporaneous Impact of Taxes on
Inflation as a Function of λ, Proportion of Time Spent in Regime 1.
                                                          POLICY SWITCHING                                     43

                              0.8
                                                                                             λ=0
                                                                                             λ = .25
                                                                                             λ = .5
                              0.7
                                                                                             λ = .75


                              0.6



                              0.5
                              t
           ∆π




                              0.4



                              0.3



                              0.2



                              0.1



                                  0
                                      1           2        3       4         5       6                 7



Figure 5. Regime 1 (AM/PF): Response of Inflation to Tax Cut in
Period 2 as a Function of λ, Proportion of Time Spent in Regime 1.
                                  0.025
                                                                                                  α = .1
                                                                                                  α = .2
                                                                                                  α = .3
                                                                                                  α = .4
                                   0.02
    ∆ ln(PV of Seigniorage)




                                  0.015




                                   0.01




                                  0.005




                                          0
                                              1       2        3       4         5       6                 7



Figure 6. Fixed Regime (PM/AF): Response of Present Value of
Seigniorage to Tax Cut in Period 2 as a Function of the Monetary
Policy Response of the Interest Rate to Inflation
                                                         POLICY SWITCHING                                       44

                              0.025
                                                                                                   α = .1
                                                                                                   α = .2
                                                                                                   α = .3
                                                                                                   α = .4
                               0.02


    ∆ ln(PV of Seigniorage)


                              0.015




                               0.01




                              0.005




                                     0
                                         1       2             3       4           5       6                7



Figure 7. Regime 2 (PM/AF): Response of Present Value of Seignior-
age to Tax Cut in Period 2 as a Function of the Monetary Policy Re-
sponse of the Interest Rate to Inflation
                               0.2


                              0.15


                               0.1
         π




                              0.05


                                0
                                     1       2       3     4       5       6   7       8       9        10



                               0.2


                              0.15


                               0.1
              R




                              0.05


                                0
                                     1       2       3     4       5       6   7       8       9        10



Figure 8. Responses to a Nominal Interest Rate Innovation: Using
Data Simulated from Regime-Switching Model
                                       POLICY SWITCHING                    45

                     0.5

                     0.4

                     0.3




     Surplus
                     0.2

                     0.1

                      0

                    −0.1

                    −0.2
                           1   2   3     4    5    6      7   8   9   10



                      0

                   −0.05

                    −0.1

                   −0.15
     Liabilities




                    −0.2

                   −0.25

                    −0.3

                   −0.35
                           1   2   3     4    5    6      7   8   9   10



Figure 9. Responses to a Surplus Innovation: Using Data Simulated
from Regime-Switching Model




Figure 10. Light shading: linear methods and nonlinear model agree;
middle shading: linear methods imply existence, nonlinear model
implies nonexistence; dark shading: nonlinear model implies non-
Ricardian fiscal policy or indeterminacy.
                        POLICY SWITCHING                              46




Figure 11. Light shading: linear methods and nonlinear model agree;
middle shading: linear methods imply existence, nonlinear model
implies nonexistence; dark shading: nonlinear model implies non-
Ricardian fiscal policy or indeterminacy.




Figure 12. Light shading: linear methods and nonlinear model agree;
middle shading: linear methods imply existence, nonlinear model
implies nonexistence; dark shading: nonlinear model implies non-
Ricardian fiscal policy or indeterminacy.
