                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




             THE EFFECT OF STRUCTURAL REFORMS ON PRODUCTIVITY
                 AND PROFITABILITY ENHANCING REALLOCATION:
                          EVIDENCE FROM COLOMBIA

                                        Marcela Eslava
                                       John Haltiwanger
                                        Adriana Kugler
                                        Maurice Kugler

                                      Working Paper 10367
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w10367


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   March 2004




This paper is forthcoming in the Journal of Development Economics. We thank Alberto Serrano,
Juan Manuel Contreras and Pablo Medina for excellent research assistance, Alvaro Suárez and José
Eduardo Granados at DANE for providing access to data, the staff in charge of the AMS for
answering our queries on methodological issues regarding the data, and participants at various
seminars at DANE for their comments and suggestions. We thank the participants of the IASE
conference in Chile in November 2003 and, especially, Andy Bernard, Raphael Bergoeing, Jon
Eaton, Sebastian Edwards, Mark Roberts and Ernesto Schargrodsky for excellent comments.
Support for this project was provided by the World Bank. John Haltiwanger also acknowledges
financial support from the NSF and the IDB, Adriana Kugler from the Spanish Ministry of Science
and Technology through grant No. SEC-2003-04429, and Maurice Kugler from the IDB and the
Stanford Center for International Development. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2004 by Marcela Eslava, John Haltiwanger, Adriana Kugler and Maurice Kugler. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Effect of Structural Reforms on Productivity and Profitability Enhancing Reallocation:
Evidence from Colombia
Marcela Eslava, John Haltiwanger, Adriana Kugler, and Maurice Kugler
NBER Working Paper No. 10367
March 2004
JEL No. O14, O40, L16, F43

                                           ABSTRACT

In the U.S., some sectoral evidence suggests that growth is driven mainly by productivity enhancing
reallocation. In countries with greater barriers to entry and imperfect competition, the reallocation
process may be inefficient. Therefore, for developing countries, an open question is whether
reallocation is productivity enhancing. Using a unique plant-level longitudinal dataset for
Colombia for the period 1982-1998, we examine the interaction between market allocation,
productivity and profitability. Given the important trade, labor and financial market oriented
reforms in Colombia in 1990, we explore whether and how the contribution of reallocation
changed. Our data include plant-level quantities and prices. Using plant prices, we propose a
sequential methodology to estimate productivity and demand shocks. First, with plant-level
physical output data, we estimate total factor productivity (TFP) using downstream demand to
instrument for inputs. Then, with plant-level price data, we estimate demand shocks and mark-ups
in the inverse-demand equation, using TFP to instrument for output. We characterize the evolution
of TFP and demand shock distributions. Market reforms are associated with rising overall
productivity that is driven by reallocation away from low- and towards high-productivity
businesses; and, the allocation of activity across businesses is less driven by demand factors.



Marcela Eslava                                    John Haltiwanger
University of Maryland                            University of Maryland
Department of Economics                           Department of Economics
College Park, MD, 20742-7225                      College Park, MD, 20742-7225
and Universidad de los Andes/CEDE                 and NBER
eslava@econ.umd.edu                               haltiwan@econ.umd.edu

Adriana Kugler                                    Maurice Kugler
University of Houston                             University of Southampton
Department of Economics                           Economics
204 McElhinney Hall                               School of Social Sciences
Houston, TX, 77204-5019                           Southampton, SO17 1BJ
and Universitat Pompeu Fabra                      United Kingdom
adkugler@uh.edu                                   Maurice.Kugler@soton.ac.uk
1     Introduction
Market economies are continually restructuring in response to changing condi-
tions. The burgeoning evidence from longitudinal micro business databases has
shown that productivity growth at the aggregate level is closely connected to
the eﬃciency of the economy at the micro level to allocate outputs and inputs
across businesses. That is, a large fraction of measured productivity growth is
accounted for by more productive expanding businesses displacing less produc-
tive contracting businesses.1
    These issues loom especially large in developing economies — although, they
have hardly been settled in advanced economies. In developing economies, there
are potentially a variety of barriers to promoting eﬃcient ongoing reallocation.
These barriers might stem from distortions in market structure as well as the
market institutions and policies in place. Aware of the impediments that distor-
tionary policies may place on reallocation and, more generally, on productivity
growth, during the past decade Latin American countries have undertaken a
whole series of reforms (including, labor, financial, and trade reforms) to pro-
mote flexibility.
    In this paper, we characterize the distributions of productivity and prof-
itability in Colombia, one of the Latin American economies that underwent
extensive structural reforms in the early nineties. We examine the relation-
ship between reallocation, on the one hand, and productivity and profitability
on the other. We then ask how this relationship changed after market reforms
were introduced in Colombia in the early 1990’s. Colombia is a superb country
to study these issues for two reasons. First, Colombia underwent a substan-
tial and relatively fast market reform process, mainly in 1990 and 1991. The
1990 labor market reform, which introduced individual severance payments sav-
ings accounts, reduced dismissal costs by between 60% and 80% (Kugler (1999,
2002)). The 1991 trade liberalization reduced the average tariﬀ from over 62%
to around 15% (Lora (1997)). The financial reform first introduced in 1990
and extended in 1991, liberalized deposit rates, eliminated credit subsidies and
modernized capital market and banking legislation (Lora (1997)). In addition,
restrictions on inflows of foreign direct investment (FDI) were removed in 1991
   1 For the labor market, the eﬃcient churning of businesses implies a need to reallocate jobs

at a high pace without long and costly spells of unemployment. The latter is important for
not only productive eﬃciency of the economy but also obviously important for welfare.



                                              2
as multinational firms were given national treatment (Kugler (2000)). The 1993
social security reform allowed voluntary transfers from a pay-as-you-go system
to a fully-funded system with individual accounts, though it increased employer
and employee pension contributions up to 13.5% of earnings (Kugler and Kugler
(2003)).
    Second, Colombia has unique longitudinal microeconomic data on busi-
nesses. The unique feature of the Colombian data is that both plant-level
quantities and prices can be measured. The ability to measure plant-level
prices of both outputs and inputs is potentially very important in this context
for both measurement and conceptual reasons. Much of the existing literature
measures establishment output as revenue divided by a common industry-level
deflator. Therefore, within-industry price diﬀerences are embodied in output
and productivity measures. If prices reflect idiosyncratic demand shifts or
market power variation rather than quality or other diﬀerences in product at-
tributes, then high measured “productivity” businesses may not be particularly
eﬃcient. In this sense, the relationship between productivity and reallocation
in the literature may be misleading.2
    In the context of a developing economy undergoing structural reforms these
measurement and conceptual issues are especially important. A key objective
of structural reforms is to make markets more competitive. Without the ability
to measure plant-level prices it is very diﬃcult to quantify and, in turn, analyze
the respective contributions of demand and eﬃciency factors in the allocation
of activity and how they may have changed in response to market reforms.
In this paper, we attempt to measure the separate influences of idiosyncratic
productivity and demand on the allocation of activity in Colombia.
    In exploiting these unique micro data, our paper makes a number of re-
lated methodological innovations relative to much of the literature. First, in
measuring eﬃciency we estimate production functions using an extension of the
instrumental variable approach pioneered by Syverson (2003). In the latter,
Syverson uses local downstream demand instruments to estimate returns to
scale of production functions. Building on this approach, we use downstream
demand instruments as well as plant-level input prices for materials and energy
as instruments in estimating production functions. From this structural estima-
tion of production functions, we generate measures of plant-level eﬃciency (i.e.,
plant-level total factor productivity). Second, since we can measure plant-level
output prices, we estimate demand elasticities using the total factor produc-
tivity estimates as instruments in the demand equations. That is, we first use
downstream demand instruments to estimate production functions and then use
   2 Since Marschak and Andrews (1944), there has been awareness about the possible diﬃcul-
ties involved in using revenue-based deflated output in establishment level data. Klette and
Griliches (1996) consider how intra-industry price fluctuations can aﬀect production function
and productivity estimates. Melitz (2000) explores this problem further and extends the anal-
ysis to consideration of multi-product producers. Katayama, Lu, and Tybout (2003) argue
that both revenue-based output and expenditure-based input measures can lead to productiv-
ity mismeasurement and incorrect interpretations about how heterogeneous producers respond
to shocks and the associated welfare implications. Foster, Haltiwanger and Syverson (2003)
use plant-level data on quantities and prices for the U.S. to study market selection dynamics.



                                              3
supply shocks (i.e., total factor productivity) to estimate the demand functions.
    Having estimated production and demand functions, we study the evolu-
tion of the distributions of total factor productivity, demand shocks, and prices
through the market reforms in Colombia. We find that TFP growth exhibited
a secular decline before the reforms, but this tendency was reverted in the post
reform period. Moreover, the dispersion of TFP also rises after the reforms.
Our main focus though is on the allocation of activity and its relationship to
total factor productivity and demand shocks in Colombia throughout the entire
period as well as during periods prior to and subsequent to the reforms. Over-
all, we find that the allocation of activity reflects both eﬃciency and demand
factors. That is, market shares are higher for businesses that are more eﬃcient
and face higher demand. Following the reforms, we find that eﬃciency fac-
tors have become more important in the allocation of activity across businesses
while demand factors have become less important. Interestingly, we find that
the rising overall productivity growth in Colombia over this period is accounted
for almost entirely by the improved allocation of activity across businesses.
    Before proceeding, it is useful to emphasize that the welfare implications
(and even the productivity implications) are complex in this context with im-
perfect competition. Our paper is intended to be a contribution on charac-
terizing the positive implications of market reform rather than the normative
implications. There are several interesting complicating factors in considering
welfare implications. For one, the market power of firms may derive from eco-
nomic fundamentals or from institutional factors. For example, it may be that
market power derives from product diﬀerentiation by each producer and that
markets are best characterized by monopolistic competition. The exploitation
of market power in this context by firms still generates a welfare loss with prices
being above marginal cost, but even in the absence of markups substantial price
heterogeneity across firms would still be a feature of a first-best equilibrium.
Alternatively (or in addition), market power may derive from institutional bar-
riers (e.g., trade restrictions). Simple intuition suggests that elimination of such
barriers will improve welfare, but even here one should be cautious given po-
tential second-best considerations. Another related complicated factor is that
market power may play an important role in product and process innovations
that lead to technological progress. In some creative-destruction models of in-
novation and growth (e.g., Aghion and Howitt (1992)), market power plays an
important role for innovators in an environment in which there are fixed costs
of innovation. We do not have much to say directly about this latter class
of models since we do not directly investigate the role of product and process
innovation. Part of the reason for this is that our empirical focus is on oper-
ating plants in manufacturing (not R&D facilities). Our analysis has more to
say about heterogeneity resulting from diﬀerences in adoption rather than in-
novation. However, a long standing issue in the empirical innovation literature
is how much innovation occurs in R&D facilities and how much occurs on the
factory floor.
    The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 describes the Colombian
context and the market reforms undertaken during the period of study. Section

                                         4
3 describes the unique data we use in this analysis. Section 4 presents results
of the estimation of plant-level total factor productivity and demand shocks.
Section 5 describes basic patterns of productivity, demand, and prices in terms
of dispersion, persistence, and cyclicality. Section 6 examines the contribution
of eﬃciency and demand in accounting for the allocation of activity both before
and after the reforms. Section 7 provides concluding remarks.


2    Market Reforms in Colombia
In 1990, the administration of President Cesar Gaviria conceived a comprehen-
sive reform package, which included not only measures to modernize the state
and liberalize markets but also a constitutional reform. In contrast to the expe-
rience in many reformist countries, there was no underlying economic crisis pre-
ceding the reform in Colombia. Rather, ample social and political unrest were
the catalysts for institutional change (see, e.g., Edwards (2001)). Structural
reforms to remove distortions from product and factor markets were introduced
in parallel with constitutional changes to political institutions as part of a wider
eﬀort to control internal strife associated with violent activities of both illicit
drug cartels and guerrilla groups. The absence of an economic crisis meant that
there was no clear consensus for the need of market-oriented reforms, but at the
same time good economic conditions were initially an asset as distributive con-
flict was addressed by elaborate resource transfer schemes (see, e.g. Kugler and
Rosenthal (2003)). However, the inability to reconcile market oriented reforms
with the continued and pervasive need for redistribution to compensate losers
meant that by 1993 the spurt of reform of the early nineties came to a halt.
Although there was no reversal of reforms, Colombia did not make additional
progress in terms of further removing distortions while many other countries
in Latin America, and around the world, actually deepened reform eﬀorts (see,
e.g., Burki and Perry (1997)). The fact that the structural reform process in
Colombia was a one-oﬀ phenomenon aids our identification strategy in trying
to assess its impact on the relation between reallocation and productivity.
     Before Gaviria’s administration, the government of President Virgilio Barco
made some partial progress in trade liberalization but did not gain any signif-
icant ground in removing other distortions. The gradual decrease in tariﬀs
initiated by Barco was accelerated by Gaviria after June 1991. By the end of
1991, nominal protection reached 14.4% and eﬀective protection 26.6%, down
from 62.5% a year earlier, and 99.9% of items were in the free import regime.
These measures clearly generated unrest among the owners of capital, who faced
lower profit margins after trade liberalization due to increased foreign competi-
tion. The impact from market penetration by foreign exporters, and by foreign
investors as pointed out below, on the market participation of domestic busi-
nesses in product markets was mitigated by more favorable conditions in factor
markets, which lowered both capital and labor costs. In labor markets, Law
50 of December 1990 promoted the flexibilization of contracts and reduced la-
bor costs by between 60% and 80% (see, e.g., Kugler (1999, 2002)). In 1990,


                                         5
the government also tried to introduce changes in the social security system as
part of the labor reform package, but Congress forced an independent process
to reform pension provision. The opposition to the original reform plan by the
Executive stemmed partly from the proposal to lower labor costs by reducing
employer’s contributions. Later during the Gaviria administration, the execu-
tive compromised with Congress by passing Law 100 in 1993. Although Law
100 allowed for voluntary individual conversion from a pay-as-you-go system to
a fully-funded system with accounts, this law also introduced a mandatory hike
in employer and employee contributions up to 13.5% of salaries, of which 75%
was paid by employers (see, e.g., Kugler and Kugler (2003)).
    A number of measures also reduced frictions in financial markets. In 1990,
Law 45 was introduced with the goal of reducing state control and ownership
concentration in the banking sector. Interest rate ceilings were eliminated and
requirement reserves were reduced. At the same time, supervision was rein-
forced in line with the Basle Accords for capitalization requirements, though
there were no requirements for banks to invest in government securities. Law 9
of 1991 established the abolition of exchange controls eliminating the monopoly
of the central bank on foreign exchange transactions and lowering substantially
the extent of capital controls. Finally, Resolution 49 of 1991 eliminated re-
strictions to foreign direct investment. This resolution established national
treatment of foreign enterprises and eliminated limits on the transfer of profits
abroad as well as bureaucratic procedures requiring the approval of individual
projects (see, e.g., Kugler (2000)). This measure not only facilitated capital
inflows across all sectors, but also induced entry of foreign banks increasing
competition in the financial sector, thereby yielding lower intermediation costs.
    After the end of Gaviria’s term, in 1994 President Ernesto Samper gained
power on a platform partially based on opposition to market institutions.3
While the new government was unsuccessful in terms of dismantling existing
reforms, the coalition supporting the new government managed to bring the
momentum for additional reforms to a halt.
    While the economic structural reform package was eﬀectively implemented,
some distortionary governance features were introduced through the new con-
stitution (see, e.g., Kugler and Rosenthal (2003)). Overall, though, the reform
process was relatively smooth and successful in transforming a highly distorted
economy into one burdened with many fewer frictions. We expect trade lib-
eralization and the removal of FDI restrictions to have increased competition
and to have shifted production away from low- and towards high-productivity
businesses. In addition, we expect liberalization of factor markets to have
eased reallocation in the economy after the structural reform process. If the
goal of inducing productivity-enhancing reallocation was achieved, it should be
reflected in diﬀerent patterns of industrial dynamics between the 1980’s and the
1990’s, with market allocation being driven to a large extent by productivity
rather than profitability in the latter period.
  3 Note   that the Colombian electoral system rules out re-election.




                                               6
3     Data Description
Our data come from the Colombian Annual Manufacturers Survey (AMS) for
the years 1982 to 1998. The AMS is an unbalanced panel of Colombian plants
with more than 10 employees, or sales above a certain limit (around US$35,000
in 1998).4 The AMS includes information for each plant on: value of output and
prices charged for each product manufactured; overall cost and prices paid for
each material used in the production process; energy consumption in physical
units and energy prices; production and non-production number of workers and
payroll; and book values of equipment and structures. The dataset also provides
information on plant location as well as industry classification codes (5 digits
CIIU).
    Our aim in this paper is to estimate and describe the behavior of productiv-
ity and demand shocks in Colombia during the pre- and post-reform periods and
to document how reallocation contributed to productivity and demand increases
during the period of study and, especially, whether the relation changed after
the reforms. To this end, we estimate total factor productivity (TFP) values
for each plant using a capital-labor-materials-energy (KLEM) production func-
tion and demand shock values for each plant using a standard inverse-demand
function. To estimate production and inverse-demand equations, we need to
construct physical quantities and prices of output and inputs, capital stock se-
ries, and total labor hours.

3.1     Plant-level Price Indices
With the rich information on prices collected in the AMS, we can construct
plant-level price indices for output, materials, and energy. This represents an
enormous advantage with respect to other sources of data, as the use of more
aggregate price deflators is a common source of measurement error, due to plant-
specific demand shocks. Prices of output and materials are constructed using
Tornqvist indices. Tornqvist indices for a composite of products or materials
i of each plant j at time t are constructed by taking the weighted average of
the growth in prices for all products or materials h generated by the plant and
constructing an index based on this yearly growth, using 1982 as the base year.
The weighted average of the growth of prices for all products or materials h
produced by plant j at time t is:

                                       H
                                       X
                             ∆Pijt =         shjt ∆ ln(Phjt ),
                                       h=1
   4 In the Appendix, we describe the methodology used to generate longitudinal linkages

that allow following plants over time. As explained in the Appendix, the identification of
establishments in the period of study has undergone changes in sampling and labeling of
plants, which requeired very involved work to be able to generate these linkages and reduce
spurious entry and exit of plants.




                                             7
where i = Y, M, i.e., output or materials,

                            ∆ ln(Phjt ) = ln Phjt − ln Phjt−1 ,

and
                                             shjt + shjt−1
                                    shjt =
                                                   2
and Phjt and Phjt−1 are the prices charged for product h, or paid for material
h, by plant j at time t and t − 1, and sht and sht−1 are the shares of product
h in plant j’s total production, or the shares of material h in the total value of
plant j’s materials purchases, for years t and t − 1.5 The indices for the levels
of output (or material) prices for each plant j are then constructed using the
weighted average of the growth of prices and fixing 1982 as the base year:

                                 ln Pjt = ln Pijt−1 + ∆Pijt

for t > 1982, where Pj1982 = 100, and where the price levels are then simply
obtained by applying an exponential function to the natural log of prices, Pijt =
expln Pijt .6

3.2     Capital Stock Series
Given prices for materials and output, the quantities of materials and output
are constructed by dividing the cost of materials and value of output by the
corresponding prices. Quantities of energy consumption are directly reported by
the plant. In addition, we need capital stocks to estimate a KLEM production
function. We use the nominal capital stock directly reported by the plant in
each year, but correcting the series for each plant to make them consistent over
time.7 In particular, we subtract the inflation adjustment component that
was added in the last year, and take the directly reported capital stock net
of previous-year-depreciation. We, then, deflate that nominal measure using
sector-level deflators for capital accumulation from the input-output matrices
of the national accounts for every year.
   5 The distribution of the weighted average of the growth of prices has large outliers, espe-

cially at the left side of the distribution. In particular, the distribution shows negative growth
rates of 100% and more. In a country like Colombia, with inflation around 20%, negative
growth rates of these magnitudes seem implausible. For this reason, we trim the 1% tails at
both ends of the distribution as well as any observation with a negative growth rate of prices
of more than 50%.
   6 Given the recursive method used to construct the price indices and the fact that we do

not have plant-level information for product and material prices for the years before plants
enter the sample, we impute product and material prices for each plant with missing values
by using the average prices in their sector, location, and year. When the information is not
available by location, we inpute the national average in the sector for that year.
   7 Reported beginning-of-year book values incorporate additions and substractions in the

previous year, including purchases of new or used assets plus assets produced for own use plus
assets transferred from other plants less sales of assets and retirements less transfers of assets
to other plants less depreciation.



                                                8
    The plant capital stock is constructed recursively on the basis of the expres-
sion:
                                                   Ijt
                           Kjt = (1 − δ) Kjt−1 +
                                                   Dt
for all t such that Kjt−1 > 0, where Ijt is gross investment, δ is the depreciation
rate and Dt is a deflator for gross capital formation. Our measure of Dt is
derived from input-output matrices for years 1991-1994, and from the output
utilization matrices for later years.
    Gross investment is generated from the information on fixed assets reported
by each plant, using the expression:
                                 NF    NI
                          Ijt = Kjt − Kjt + djt − π A
                                                    jt
          NF
where Kjt     is the reported value of fixed assets by plant j at the end of year
      NI
t, Kjt is the reported value of fixed assets reported by plant j at the start of
year t, djt is the depreciation reported by plant j at the end of year t, and π A  it
is the reported inflation adjustment to fixed asset value by plant j at the end of
year t (only relevant since 1995, when plants were required by law to consider
this component in their calculations of end-of-year fixed assets).
     The capital stock series is initialized at the year the plant enters the sample,
t0 . To obtain the initial value, we use the equation:

                                            NI
                                           Kit0
                           Kit0 =                      ,
                                    0.5Dt0 + 0.5Dt0 −1
          NI
where Kjt  0
             is the first reported nominal capital stock from book value of fixed
assets at the start of the year. In constructing the capital stock series we include
equipment, machinery, buildings and structures, while excluding vehicles and
land.

3.3    Total Labor Hours
Finally, we construct a labor measure as total hours of employment. Since the
AMS does not have data on production and non-production worker hours, we
construct a measure of total employment hours at time t for sector G(j), to
which plant j belongs, as,
                                        earningsG(j)t
                             hG(j)t =                 ,
                                           wG(j)t
where wG(j)t is a measure of sectoral wages at the 3-digit level from the Monthly
Manufacturing Survey, and earningsG(j)t is a measure of earnings per worker
constructed from our data as
                                           P
                                               payrolljt
                                          j∈G
                        earningsG(j)t =        P
                                                  ljt
                                                j∈G



                                          9
Then, the total employment hours measure is constructed as,8

                                      Ljt = ljt hG(j)t ,

where ljt is the total number of employees in firm j at time t.

3.4     Descriptive Statistics
Table 1 presents descriptive statistics of the quantity and price variables just
described for all plants. The quantity variables are expressed in logs, while the
prices are relative to the aggregate yearly producer price index to discount in-
flation. Output increased between the pre- and post-reform periods. Similarly,
capital, materials and energy use increased between the pre- and post-reform
periods. On the other hand, labor use decreased slightly between the two peri-
ods. Relative prices of both output and materials prices declined between the
pre- and post-reform periods.9 By contrast, energy prices increased between
the pre- and post-reform periods.
    Table 2 reports simple correlations of the various variables reported in Table
1, which display by and large the expected patterns. Output is positively corre-
lated with all inputs and negatively correlated with its own price and energy and
materials prices. Inputs are positively correlated with each other. All inputs
are negatively correlated with energy prices, except for materials. All inputs
are negatively correlated with materials prices, except for labor. Energy and
materials use are negatively correlated with their own prices. Also, as expected,
output prices are positively correlated with materials prices, and negatively but
weakly correlated with energy prices. Finally, energy and materials prices are
negatively correlated.
    In the next section, we use these variables to estimate the production func-
tion and inverse-demand equation.


4     Estimation of TFP and Demand Shocks
We estimate total factor productivity with plant-level physical output data,
using downstream demand to instrument inputs. In turn, we estimate demand
shocks and mark-ups with plant-level price data, using TFP to instrument for
output in the inverse-demand equation.
   8 While we observe total employment at the plant-level, we do not observe total hours. Our

method is to impute total hours per worker for plant i using the average for plants in the
same industry as plant i. A large share of the variation in total employment hours stems from
total employment variation.
   9 Caution needs to be used in interpreting the aggregate (mean) relative prices in this

context since the relative price at the micro level is the log diﬀerence between the plant-level
price and the log of the aggregate PPI. On an an appropriately output weighted basis, the
mean of this relative price measure should be close to zero in all periods (or one in levels)
since the PPI is dominated by manufacturing industries.




                                              10
4.1     TFP Estimation
We estimate total factor productivity for each establishment as the residual
from a capital-labor-energy-materials (KLEM) production function:
                                       α β     γ   φ
                                Yjt = Kjt Ljt Ejt Mjt Vjt ,
where, Yjt is output, Kjt is capital, Ljt is total employment hours, Ejt is energy
consumption, Mjt are materials, and Vjt is a productivity shock. We estimate
this production function in logs,
         log Yjt = α log Kjt + β log Ljt + γ log Ejt + φ log Mjt + log Vjt ,
so that our total factor productivity measure is estimated as:
         T F Pjt = log Yjt − α           b log Ljt − γ
                             b log Kjt − β                       b log Mjt .
                                                     b log Ejt − φ                        (1)

where α    b γ
       b , β, b, and φb are the estimated factor elasticities for capital, labor, en-
ergy, and materials. In addition, we estimate a value-added production function
with only capital and employment to provide a benchmark of comparison with
other studies. Whether we estimate value-added or KLEM specifications, using
OLS to estimate the production function is likely to generate biased estimates of
factor elasticities as productivity shocks are likely to be correlated with capital,
labor, energy, and materials. For example, the introduction of capital-biased
technologies is likely to be associated with greater use of capital and energy and
with less employment.
    We deal with this omitted variable bias by using demand-shift instruments
which are correlated with input use but uncorrelated with productivity shocks.
In particular, we construct Shea (1993) and Syverson (2003) type instruments
by selecting industries whose output fluctuations are likely to function as ap-
proximately exogenous demand shocks for other industries. The instruments
are total output measures in downstream industries, or combinations of down-
stream industries, that satisfy two conditions: (1) they buy a large enough
fraction of the output generated by the upstream industry (i.e., the relevance
condition), and (2) their purchases from the output industry are a relatively
small share of their costs (i.e., the exogeneity condition). The latter condition
is important to ensure that the upstream industry is not aﬀecting the down-
stream industry, so that the instrument - downstream demand - is uncorrelated
with productivity shocks upstream. The first condition is important to ensure
relevance of the instruments, i.e., strong correlations between the instruments
and use of inputs upstream. Following Shea (1993), we use the input-output
matrix for every year to construct instruments for the equivalent of two-digit
industries in the U.S.10 For the instruments to meet the two criteria above, we
  10 We use input-output matrices from the national accounts for the pre-1994 period. For the

later years, a new methodology was put in place for the national accounts, and input-output
matrices were replaced by output-use and output-supply matrices. For these later years, we
rely on output-use matrices to determine cost and sales shares, and on output-supply matrices
to determine sectoral output. It is also important to note that input-output matrices do not
use ISIC codes to classify industries. The level at which we could create concordance is close
to the 2-digits ISIC codes.


                                             11
impose that: (1) the demand share of the downstream industry for upstream
production has to exceed 15%, and (2) the cost share of the upstream industry
products in the downstream’s total costs is less than 15 percent.11 We also use
one- and two-period lags of the demand shifters. The rationale for doing this
is that some factors, such as capital and labor, may face non-linear adjustment
costs and irreversibilities, so that demand shifts may take various periods to
aﬀect factor utilization. In addition, we use regional government expenditures,
excluding government investment, in the region where the plant is located as an
instrument to capture shifts in local demand.12 We regard this instrument as
particularly relevant to identify the coeﬃcient on labor, given that labor markets
in Colombia are largely region-specific. Finally, we use energy and materials
prices as instruments, which are negatively correlated to energy consumption
and use of materials, but likely to be uncorrelated with productivity shocks.
    Table 3 reports results for the value-added specification with only capital
and employment and for the KLEM specification of the production function.
Column (1) reports the OLS results from the estimation of the value-added
specification. The results show an elasticity for capital of about 0.3 and an
elasticity for employment of about 0.74, which are in line with other studies.
The problem with this specification in terms of estimating total factor pro-
ductivity is, however, that it imposes implausible restrictions in terms of the
elasticity of output to energy and materials. For this reason, we estimate a
KLEM specification which uses physical output in the left-hand side and also
includes energy and materials as inputs. Column (2) presents the OLS results
from the estimation of the KLEM specification. As expected, factor elastici-
ties for capital and labor become smaller, as energy and materials are allowed
to impact output in a nonlinear fashion. The results now suggest elasticities
   11 While Shea(1997) uses a criterion of exogeneity based on the ratio of demand share to

cost share (i.e., this ratio being less than 3), our criterion is based on absolute cost shares
(i.e., having a cost share of less than 15%). This absolute criterion is more binding than the
ratio criterion for downstream industries that represent large demand shares, and less binding
for other dowsntream industries. Using the above criteria, adding exports to the downstream
demand set and also aggregrating downstream industries to two or three industries to meet
the greater than 15% threshold, we obtain instruments for 8 of the 12 upstream industries
(i.e., Drinks and Beverages, Wood, Food, Textiles, Oil, Paper, Chemicals and Rubber, and
Glass and other non-metallic products). The 4 sectors without demand-shift instruments are
Tobacco, which makes up a very low share of sales for other industries; Metals and Machinery,
which comprise too high a share of costs when the sales share is high enough; and Other
Manufacturing for which the two criteria are not met.
   12 There may be a common component in technology shocks, although given the enormous

heterogeneity across plants the idiosyncratic component dominates. However, this common
component of technology shocks is unlikely to be correlated with regional government expen-
ditures, since it takes time for government expenditures to respond to changes in the local
economy. Moreover, although certain types of government expenses can constitute aggregate
productivity shocks (e.g., construction of road ways), these are likely to show up in the invest-
ment side of the government accounts. This is the reason why we use regional government
expenditures, excluding government investment, as an instrument. It is also worth empha-
sizing that results in the remainder of the paper are robust to exclusion of this instrument, or
changing it to total regional government expenditure (which include government investment),
and even to state GDP. That is, we obtain virtually the same results for the estimation of
the production functions and all the results that depend upon our TFP estimates.



                                               12
for capital, labor, energy, and materials of about 0.08, 0.24, 0.12, and 0.59,
respectively.
    However, as pointed out above, these elasticities are likely to be biased if
productivity shocks are correlated with input use. Columns (3) and (4) of Table
3 present results using 2SLS estimation, which rely on the current and lagged
demand-shift instrument, the one- and two-period lag of the demand-shift in-
strument, regional government expenditures, and input prices. Even if we think
these instruments are weakly correlated with productivity shocks, large biases
could be introduced when using IV estimation if instruments are weakly corre-
lated with the inputs.13 To check whether inputs are highly and significantly
correlated with the instruments, Table 4 reports results for the first-stages of the
inputs on the various instruments. The results suggest use of energy and ma-
terials increases significantly with downstream demand, but employment hours
decrease significantly with downstream demand. Moreover, capital, energy use
and materials are negatively and significantly correlated with the one-period
lag of downstream demand, and all inputs are positively and significantly cor-
related with the two-period lag of downstream demand. Regional government
expenditures are positively and strongly correlated with capital and labor and
negatively correlated with materials and energy consumption. Also, as ex-
pected, materials and energy prices significantly reduce energy consumption
and use of materials and capital, respectively. Given that we are considering
instrument relevance with multiple endogenous regressors, we report the partial
R2 measures suggested by Shea (1997) for the first-stages, which capture the
correlation between an endogenous regressor and the instruments after taking
away the correlation between that particular regressor with all other endoge-
nous regressors.14 The partial R2 ’s for capital, employment hours, energy, and
materials in the KLEM specification are 0.1276, 0.139, 0.231, and 0.324, respec-
tively, and 0.2563 and 0.1324 for capital and employment in the value-added
specification, showing that the relevant instruments for each input can explain
a substantial fraction of the variation in the use of that input.
    The IV results for the value-added specification in Column (3) of Table 3
  13 We also considered longer lags and exponential terms of the demand-shifters as well as

other measures of regional shocks, including total regional government expernditures and state
GDP. To select our baseline instruments, we tested for overidentifying restrictions using a
variant of Basmann’s (1960) test, where we estimate a regression of the production function
residual on the instruments. While lags of more than two periods and exponential terms of
the demand shifters turn out to be significant in these regressions, the rest of our instruments
are individually and jointly insignificant. We restrict our instrument list to include those
instruments which are not jointly significant in this regression. Although regional government
expenditures (excluding government investment), total regional government expenditures, and
state GDP all turn out to be insignificant in this regressions, we rely on regional government
expenditures (excluding investment) for the reasons pointed out in Footnote 15.
  14 The standard R2 simply reports the square of the sample correlation coeﬃcient between

Ijt and Iˆjt , where I = K, L, E, M and Iˆjt are the predicted values of the inputs from a regres-
sion of Ijt on the instruments. The partial R2 reports the square of the sample correlation
coeﬃcient between gjt and gbjt , where gjt are the residuals from an OLS regression of Ijt on
all other inputs I1jt and gbjt are the residuals from an OLS regression of Iˆjt on the predicted
values of all other inputs Iˆ1jt .



                                               13
show larger capital and employment elasticities relative to the OLS estimated
elasticities. The results in Column (4) of Table 3 also show larger elasticities
for capital and energy, but smaller elasticities for labor hours and materials,
when inputs are instrumented.15 The results from the value-added and KLEM
specifications, thus, indicate that productivity shocks during the period of study
are positively correlated with hours and materials and negatively correlated with
capital, employment and energy, suggesting the adoption of hour-intensive and
energy-saving technologies in Colombia during the 1980’s and 1990’s.

4.2     Estimation of Demand Shocks
While productivity is likely one of the crucial components of profitability, other
components of profitability are also probably important determinants of reallo-
cation. For example, even if plants are highly productive, they may be forced to
reduce their market shares if faced with large negative demand shocks. We cap-
ture the demand component of profitability by estimating establishment-level
demand shocks as the residual of the following inverse-demand equation:16

                                     Pjt = Yjt−ε Djt ,

where Djt is a demand shock faced by firm j at time t and −ε is the inverse of the
elasticity of demand and 1+ε is the mark-up. We estimate this inverse-demand
function in logs,

                            log Pjt = −ε log Yjt + log Djt ,

and our demand shock measure is estimated as the residual from this regression,
                                  d
                          djt = log Djt = log Pjt + b
                                                    ε log Yjt ,                          (2)

where −b ε is an inverse measure of the elasticity of demand. Using OLS to
estimate the inverse-demand function is likely to generate an upwardly biased
estimate of demand elasticities because demand shocks are positively correlated
to both output and prices, so that b ε will be smaller in absolute value than the
true ε. To eliminate the upward bias in our estimates of demand elasticities, we
propose using TFP as an instrument for Yjt since TFP is positively correlated
with output (by construction) but unlikely to be correlated with demand shocks.
    Table 5 reports the results of the inverse-demand equations using both OLS
and IV estimation. Columns (1)-(3) present OLS results of inverse-demand
equations, some of which impose the same elasticity while others allow diﬀer-
ent elasticities for the pre- and post-reform periods. Columns (4)-(6) present
  15 The value-added specification ignores changes in labor utilization. If technology shocks

are negatively correlated with employment but positively correlated with labor hours, this
would explain why the elasticity of labor increases when the value-added specification is in-
strumented, while the elasticity of labor hours falls when the KLEM specification is instru-
mented.
  16 There are other important components of profitability that we do not measure, such as

access to credit markets.


                                             14
equivalent 2SLS results. Column (1), which presents OLS results when impos-
ing the same elasticity before and after the reforms, suggests a large elasticity
of 11.05 for the entire period of study. The results in Column (2) which allow
for diﬀerent elasticities before and after the reforms suggest demand elasticities
of 11.66 and 10.94 during the pre- and post-reform periods, respectively. By
contrast, the results in Column (3), which allow for diﬀerent intercepts and dif-
ferent elasticities after the reforms, show elasticities of 22.37 and 7.37 during
the pre- and post-reform periods, but higher demand after the reforms. As
indicated, however, caution needs to be exercised in interpreting these as elas-
ticities since these coeﬃcients capture the fact that higher demand implies a
positive correlation between output and prices.
    The 2SLS results, which use TFP as an instrument for output, indeed show
much lower elasticities.17 The results in Column (4) show a demand elasticity
of 2.28, while the results in Column (5) show a demand elasticity of 2.24 during
the pre-reform period and of 2.3 during the post-reform period. By contrast,
allowing for diﬀerent intercepts and elasticities before and after the reforms
suggests elasticities of 3.17 before the reforms and of 1.88 after the reforms, but
higher demand after the reforms at given price levels.18 The last three columns
in Table 5 report high total and partial R2 ’s.19 The partial R2 ’s for physical
output and physical output interacted with the post-reform dummy on TFP, a
post-reform dummy, and TFP interacted with the post-reform dummy are of
0.427 and 0.4621, indicating relevance of the instruments. These results suggest
quantities responded less to changes in prices but overall demand was higher
after the reforms. Increased demand after reforms may be explained by scale
eﬀects generated by trade liberalization measures and by the downward shift in
average production costs induced by factor market reforms.
  17 The negative R-squares for the 2SLS are not surprising and should not be viewed as

alarming. Output and the demand shocks are highly positively correlated (this is the entire
reason for using 2SLS rather than OLS). Using the simple inverse-demand equation, the
variance of prices will be equal to terms involving the variance of output, the variance of
demand shocks and a term that depends negatively on the covariance of output and demand
shocks (given that the demand elasticity is negative). Thus, the variance of demand shocks
will exceed the variance of prices and, hence, the negative R-squares.
  18 Robustness analysis suggests that while it is important to use a TFP measure as an

instrument in the demand equations for output (i.e., elasticities are quite diﬀerent between
OLS and 2SLS in demand equation), it matters much less whether the TFP used is from
OLS or 2SLS estimation of production equation. This reduces concerns about sensitivity of
results to instrument selection for production equations. In addition, we considered energy
and materials prices as instruments for physicial output in the inverse-demand equations and
we find that the results are very similar whether we use TFP alone or TFP and energy and
materials prices as instruments.
  19 The total R2 simply reports the square of the sample correlation coeﬃcient between Y
                                                                                                 jt
and Ybjt , where Ybjt is the predicted value of output from a regression of Yjt on the instruments.
The partial R2 reports the square of the sample correlation coeﬃcient between ujt and u        bjt ,
where ujt are the residuals from an OLS regressions of Yjt on Yjt × P ost − ref orm and u       bjt
are the residuals from an OLS regression of the predicted value of Yjt on the predicted value
of the other regressors of the demand equation.




                                                15
5     Evolution of TFP, Demand, and Output Prices
In this section we rely on the TFP and demand shock measures estimated in the
last two sections as well as on output prices to document the evolution of the
productivity and demand components of profitability in Colombia during the
1980’s and 1990’s in terms of heterogeneity, persistence, and cyclicality. We are,
for example, interested in documenting whether productivity is as heterogeneous
and persistent in Colombia as it is in other countries; as well as in documenting
whether productivity in Colombia is procyclical as has been observed in the
U.S.
    Before turning to these issues, however, we report in Table 6 basic descriptive
statistics of TFP, demand shocks and output prices for the periods before and
after the reforms. The table shows an increase in the means of total factor
productivity and our demand shock measure, but a decrease in the mean of
output prices.20 On the other hand, the table shows a substantial increase
in the dispersion of TFP, demand shocks, and output prices. The standard
deviations of TFP, demand shocks and prices increased from 0.68 to 0.91, from
0.78 to 0.88, and from 0.44 to 0.74, respectively. In addition, as expected,
Table 6 shows a negative correlation between TFP and output and prices, and
a positive correlation between demand shocks and prices both before and after
the reforms, though the correlations are stronger after the reforms. By contrast,
TFP and demand shocks are positively correlated during the pre-reform period
but negatively correlated after the reforms. This correlation points to the eﬀects
of trade reform: after trade liberalization, producers in sectors most exposed to
import competition will simultaneously increase productivity and lose demand.
In contrast, manufacturers in sectors least exposed to import competition will
have relatively less incentives for productivity enhancement and will less likely
face a drop in demand. In addition, the table shows that firms facing higher
demand and productivity shocks produce more output, both before and after
reforms. However, while the relation between output and productivity becomes
stronger after the reforms, the relation between output and demand becomes
weaker. This correlation suggests, again, that the reforms were successful in
strenghtening the link between a business’s performance and its productivity.
Moreover, this table shows that not only do more productive firms increase
production after the reforms, but they also increase their share in the market.
This points to the increased importance of productivity-enhancing reallocation
after the reforms, which we document in Section 6.

5.1     Heterogeneity
Previous evidence for the US suggests a pattern of evolving common produc-
tivity and prices among heterogeneous plants (Baily, Hulten and Campbell
  20 Caution should be used in interpreting these average relative prices and demand shocks.

Note that the average price is the average price of plant output relative to the PPI. The
average demand shock is the average of the demand shocks constructed from a micro model
of relative prices across plants.



                                            16
(1992); Foster, Haltiwanger and Krizan (2002); Foster, Haltiwanger and Syver-
son (2003); Supina and Roberts (1996)). Like in the U.S., dispersion measures
in Table 6 suggest much heterogeneity in productivity and prices across Colom-
bian plants. Figures 1-3 show the evolution of dispersion measures of TFP,
demand shocks and output prices over the entire period of study.21 The figures
show large percentage increases in the dispersion of productivity and prices over
the last two decades. In particular, Figure 1 shows large rises in the disper-
sion of productivity after 1990, while Figure 3 shows a constant increase in the
dispersion of output prices throughout the entire period. By contrast, Figure
2 shows a much smaller percentage increase in the dispersion of demand over
the last two decades. The greater heterogeneity in productivity is consistent
with greater process experimentation across businesses after reforms, while the
modest increase in the dispersion of demand is consistent increased competi-
tion, and also with modest increased experimentation in product variety across
businesses.
    Figures 4-6 show Kernel distributions of TFP, demand shocks and output
prices for the pre- and post-reforms periods, which illustrate changes in higher
moments of the distributions. Figures 4-6 show fatter tails (i.e., increased
kurtosis) of the distributions of TFP, demand shocks and output prices after
the reforms, suggesting that more firms were experiencing either positive or
negative shocks after the reforms.

5.2     Persistence
To examine whether Colombian plants, like U.S. plants, are characterized by a
large degree of persistence, we estimate AR(1) models for productivity, demand
shocks and prices. Columns (1), (3) and (5) in Table 7 report the coeﬃcients on
the lags of productivity, demand and output prices for AR(1) models with year
eﬀects. The results show a great deal of persistence of productivity, demand
shocks and prices in Colombia and much greater than for the U.S. The results
suggest that 67% of all plants continue with their initial productivity after 5
years, 93% of plants face the same demand shocks after 5 years, and 96% charge
the same prices as 5 years ago. Studies for the U.S. find much lower degrees
of persistence. For example, Bartelsman and Dhrymes (1998) find that after 5
years only about a third of all plants remain in the same productivity quintile.
Foster, Haltiwanger and Syverson (2003) also find that about a third of plants
remain in their original position in the productivity and price distributions after
5 years. In spite of the reforms increasing competition, the greater persistence
  21 Two related measurement points are worth noting in this context. First, we found that

dispersion in TFP increased dramatically in 1996 for what we perceive to be spurious reasons.
For the plots of TFP dispersion we have simply interpolated the 1996 values. Second, we have
examined these patterns using alternative robust measures of dispersion (in particular, the
90-10 diﬀerential) and have found very similar patterns overall for TFP, prices and demand
shocks. Interestingly, we also found a seemingly spurious increase in dispersion in 1996 using
these more robust measures of dispersion suggesting the measurement problems for dispersion
of TFP in 1996 are not being driven by outliers.




                                             17
in the Colombian context probably reflects that the economy remains relatively
distorted.
    Columns (2), (4), and (6) in Table 7 also report how the degree of per-
sistence changes after the market reforms. The results suggest persistence in
productivity and output prices increased after the reforms, while the persistence
of demand shocks did not change. At first glance, this pattern might be surpris-
ing as one might conjecture that market reforms would lead to greater mobility
in the distributions of eﬃciency, demand shocks, and prices. However, it is
important to emphasize that these persistence measures are conditional on sur-
vival. Our results are thus perfectly consistent with plant survival responding
more to fundamentals after the reforms, but lower mobility of surviving plants
after reforms.

5.3       Cyclicality
While there is quite a lot of persistence in productivity and demand shocks,
productivity and demand shocks also tend to move over the business cycle.
Previous papers for the U.S., including papers by Hall (1990), Bartelsman,
Caballero and Lyons (1994), and Basu and Fernald (1997), document and try
to explain the procyclicality of productivity in the U.S. Baily, Bartelsman
and Haltiwanger (2001) show that the procyclicality at the aggregate level is
mimicked at the micro level. Overall, however, the procyclical productivity
puzzle remains unresolved. Here, we examine whether such procyclicality is
also observed in the Colombian context.
    Figures 7-9 show productivity, demand shock and price movements from
1982-1999, where the figures include GDP growth on the right-hand side axis to
be able to understand movements with the cycle. Colombia experienced three
recessions and two booms during the period of study. The first recession took
place during the early 1980’s, the second during the period from 1988 to 1991,
and the third and strongest recession since the Great Depression after 1995 and
until the present. The two booms took place from 1985 to 1988 and from 1991
to 1995.
    Figure 7 shows a highly volatile productivity growth for the average plant.
Volatility has increased over time and, interestingly, the pattern of average
productivity growth at the plant level changes from being procyclical prior to
reforms to being acylical after the reforms. For example, the correlation of
average plant productivity growth with GDP growth is 0.369 pre-reform and
0.009 post-reform. Less procyclicality during the post-reform period may be due
to the greater reallocation of market share from low- towards high-productivity
plants during the downswing that started in 1995, as documented in the next
section.
    Figure 8 and Figure 9 show the patterns of the average demand shocks and
average relative price for all plants. Almost by construction average relative
prices exhibit little movement.22 Figure 8 shows that the average demand
 22 The   relative prices do become significantly procyclical after reforms, but the magnitude



                                              18
shocks are more volatile, especially after market reforms when they become
procyclical. As pointed out above, caution should be used in interpreting
these are averages of plant-level demand shocks and not averages of aggregate
demand or even manufacturing demand (say relative to other sectors) shocks as
the relative price for the plant is the price of the output for the plant relative to
the PPI (which is essentially the weighted average price across all manufacturing
plants).


6     Productivity- and Profitability-enhancing Re-
      allocation
In this section, we examine whether the increases in productivity and demand
documented in the previous section reflect increases in the shares of production
by more productive and higher demand plants or they simply reflect an overall
increase in eﬃciency and demand for all plants in the manufacturing sector.
In particular, we are interested in whether increased competition as a result
of the reform process induced reallocation from less to more productive plants
and from lower demand to higher demand plants. Diﬀerent types of models
have been proposed which can explain productivity-enhancing reallocation of
this sort. In learning models (e.g., Jovanovic (1982), and Ericson and Pakes
(1989)), experimentation generates diﬀerences in productivity and successful
experimenters gain market share over unsuccessful ones. Similarly, vintage
capital models can explain gains in market share of plants with newer vintages
over those with older vintages. If more eﬃcient plants can aﬀord more frequent
retooling, initial productivity diﬀerences would be exacerbated. Moreover, if
trade liberalization and FDI increased competition in product markets after the
reform process, this may have speeded up learning and productivity-enhancing
reallocation. Similarly, if financial liberalization in 1992 improved access to
credit markets, this may have provided access to better capital vintages and
increased productivity-enhancing reallocation after the reforms.
    We use a cross-sectional decomposition methodology, first introduced by
Olley and Pakes (1996), to examine whether the allocation of activity in the
economy has become more or less productivity-enhancing over our period of
study. We conduct the following decomposition of our total TFP and total
demand shock measure:

                                         J
                                         X ¡              ¢¡                    ¢
               T F Pt    = TFPt +              fjt − ft        T F Pjt − T F P t ,
                                         j=1
                                   J
                                   X     ¡         ¢¡       ¢
                    dt   = dt +           fjt − f t djt − dt ,
                                   j=1

of the variation is quite small.




                                               19
where T F Pt and dt are the weighted total factor productivity and demand shock
measures for a given 3-digit manufacturing sector in year t, where the weights
are market shares (calculated as described below). T F P t and dt are the cross-
sectional (unweighted) means of total factor productivity and demand shock
measures across all plants in that sector in year t, T F Pjt and djt are total fac-
tor productivity and demand shock measures of plant j at time t estimated as
described in Section 4, and fjt is the share or fraction of plant j 0 s output out sec-
toral output at the 3-digit level in year t, and f t is the cross-sectional unweighted
mean of fjt .23 The second term in this decomposition allows us to understand
whether production is disproportionately located at high-productivity or high-
demand plants. Moreover, by examining this decomposition over time we can
learn whether the cross-sectional allocation of production has become more or
less productivity- and profitability-enhancing over time, especially before and
after the reforms.24
    Table 8 shows the cross-sectional decompositions for TFP and demand shock
measures from 1982 to 1998. We report the results for the average 3-digit sector.
Column (1) shows a positive trend in weighted aggregate total factor produc-
tivity over the period of study. Columns (2) and (3) show the decomposition of
aggregate productivity into the simple average and the cross-sectional correla-
tion between market share and total factor productivity. In all years, virtually
all of the productivity growth is accounted for by the improved allocation of
activity to higher productivity businesses. This stands in sharp contrasts with
the results of similar exercises for the U.S., where the contribution of this term
is only marginal (see Foster, Haltiwanger and Syverson (2003)). In a context in
which the production possibilities frontier is not improving sharply over time,
reallocation seems to be the crucial factor accounting for aggregate productivity
growth.
    The cross-sectional correlation between market share and total factor pro-
ductivity decreased somewhat in the mid-1980’s but remained roughly constant
over the 1980’s. By contrast, the correlation between market share and TFP in-
creased sharply during the 1990’s, most specially after 1993, once most reforms
were fully implemented. This time-series pattern can be seen in Figure 10 and
suggests that market share increasingly shifted towards more productive plants
and away from less productive plants during the 1990’s. In fact, while average
  23 This means that our focus here is on within sector allocation and reallocation rather than

between sector allocation. For measurement and conceptual reasons, comparisons of TFP
and relative demand across sectors (in levels) are more problematic to interpret. Focusing
on within sector allocation permits us to emphasize the degree to which market reforms
have led to an improved allocation of activity across businesses due to higher competition.
Nevertheless, we have also tried a decomposition using the shares or fraction of plant output
out of total output. The results based on this alternative decomposition are similar to those
reported below.
  24 An advantge of this cross-sectional method over other methods, which decompose changes

in productivity over time, is that cross-sectional diﬀerences in productivity are more persistent
and less dominated by measurement error or transitory shocks. Another advantage is that
this method does not rely on accurate measurement of entry and exit. The downside being,
of course, that this decomposition does not allow charactererizing the role of entry and exit.
We plan to explore the latter in future work.



                                               20
productivity explains about 8.6% of overall productivity during the pre-reform
period, productivity-enhancing reallocation explains about 91.4%. By contrast,
increased productivity of all plants explains about 5.5% of overall productivity
during the post-reform period, while increased market share of more productive
plants and decreased market share of less productive plants explain 94.5% of
overall productivity after the reform process.
    The last three columns of Table 8 show a similar decomposition of our de-
mand shock measure, since we are also interested in whether the reform process
shifted market share from low demand towards high demand plants. Column
(4) suggests that plant-level demand shocks have become less important over the
period of study. Moreover, in contrast to the results on productivity, Column
(6) suggests that the concentration of activity in high demand plants became
less important during the 1990’s. Before the reforms, average demand shocks
contributed 5.9% and the correlation between market share and demand shocks
contributed 94.1%. After the reforms, average demand contributed 13.8% and
the correlation between market share and demand contributed only 86.2% to
total demand. Figure 12 shows the time-series pattern of this decomposition.
    Our results suggest that trade liberalization, the removal of FDI restrictions
and the liberalization of factor markets contributed to raise productivity by im-
proving the allocation of activity with higher market shares at high-productivity
plants and lower market shares at low-productivity plants. At the same time,
we find that, after the reforms, the allocation of activity was driven less by high
demand plants commanding larger shares.


7    Conclusion
In this paper, we examine how reallocation contributes to productivity and
profitability in Colombia, and we then ask how the relation between reallocation
and productivity and profitability changed after market reforms were introduced
in Colombia during the early 1990’s. The extent, breadth and swiftness of the
reforms make Colombia a superb country to study these issues. In addition, a
unique feature of the Colombian data is that it allows us to measure both plant-
level quantities and prices, making these data ideal for measuring plant-level
productivity and demand.
    We propose a sequential methodology for estimating both productivity and
demand shocks at the plant level. First, we generate measures of plant-level
total factor productivity by estimating KLEM production functions using plant-
level physical output data. To eliminate biases from the correlation between
productivity shocks and inputs, we use downstream demand shifts and plant-
level energy and materials prices as instruments in estimating production func-
tions. We then generate plant-level demand shocks by estimating inverse-
demand equations using plant-level output prices, where output is instrumented
with TFP to eliminate biases from the correlation between demand shocks and
output.
    We find some interesting patterns with regards to total factor productiv-


                                        21
ity, prices and demand shocks in Colombia, which sometimes contrast with the
patterns found for the U.S. First, as in the U.S., we find a great deal of het-
erogeneity in terms of productivity and output prices, and we find that this
heterogeneity has been increasing over the past decades. Second, we find a
large degree of persistence in productivity, prices and demand, which doubles
or triples the degree of persistence found in the U.S. Third, as in the U.S.,
we find procyclical movements in productivity before the reforms, but acycli-
cal movements in productivity after the reforms. Less procyclicality after the
reforms may be explained by greater reallocation of market shares from low-
towards high-productivity businesses during downturns following the trade and
factor market liberalization. Greater foreign competition and greater flexibil-
ity in adjusting factors of production appear to increase the importance of the
cleansing eﬀect of recessions by shifting resources towards high productivity
plants during recessions.
    Our main focus is on the allocation of activity and its relationship to pro-
ductivity and demand factors in Colombia during the entire period of study as
well as before and after the introduction of reforms. We find that the allocation
of activity across businesses reflects both eﬃciency and demand factors. Busi-
nesses with higher TFP and higher demand have a higher market share. In
addition, we explore how these patterns changed in response to market reforms.
After the reforms, the role of eﬃciency factors increases while the role of de-
mand factors decreases. Interestingly, virtually all of the productivity growth
in Colombia over this period (for the average 3-digit industry) is accounted for
by the improved allocation of activity across businesses. This stands in sharp
contrast with the results of similar exercises for the U.S., where the contribu-
tion of this term is only marginal (see Foster, Haltiwanger and Syverson (2003)).
In a context in which the production possibilities frontier is not shifting sub-
stantially over time, reallocation is even more crucial as it accounts for most
aggregate productivity growth. In Colombia, the contribution of reallocation to
manufacturing productivity growth rose further after reform.
    Our paper takes a first look at the impact of the reforms on the relation
between eﬃciency and demand-side factors and the allocation of activity by es-
sentially asking whether the covariance structure of productivity, demand shocks
and the allocation of activity changes after the reforms. While instructive, there
remains much research that should be done in this context and, in particular, to
investigate the reforms with more information and structure. In future work,
we plan to explore the temporal and cross-sectional variation of the various re-
forms more fully. Not all the market reforms happened at the exact same time,
and many of the market reforms likely impacted firms diﬀerentially depending
upon sector and other characteristics (e.g., factor intensities, size, and location)
of the businesses. Moreover, we plan to explore the dynamic implications of the
reforms in terms of their impact on the entry and exit dynamics of businesses
in Colombia.




                                        22
References
 [1] Aghion, Philippe and Peter Howitt. 1992. “A Model of Growth Through
     Creative Destruction,” Econometrica, 60(2): 323-351.
 [2] Aw, Bee-Yan, Siaomin Chen, and Mark Roberts. 1997. “Firm-level Evi-
     dence on Productivity Diﬀerentials, Turnover and Exports in Taiwanese
     Manufacturing, NBER Working Paper 6235.
 [3] Bartelsman, Eric, Martin Baily and John Haltiwanger. 2001. “Labor Pro-
     ductivity: Structural Change and cyclical Dynamics,” Review of Economics
     and Statistics, 83(3): 420-433.
 [4] Bartelsman, Eric and Mark Doms. 2000. “Understanding Productivity:
     Lessons from Longitudinal Microdata,” Journal of Economic Literature,
     38(2): 569-594.
 [5] Bartelsman, Eric and Phebus Dhrymes. 1998. “Productivity Dynamics:
     U.S. Manufacturing Plants 1972-1986,” Journal of Productivity Analysis,
     9(1): 5-34.
 [6] Bartelsman, Eric, Ricardo Caballero and Richard Lyons. 1994. “Customer-
     and Supplier-Driven Externalities,” American Economic Review, 84(4):
     1075-1084.
 [7] Baily, Martin, Charles Hulten and David Campbell. 1992. “Productivity
     Dynamics in Manufacturing Establishments,” Brookings Papers on Eco-
     nomic Activity: Microeconomics, 187-249.
 [8] Basmann, Robert. 1960. “On Finite Sample Distributions of Generalized
     Classical Linear Identifiability Test Statistics,” Journal of the American
     Statistical Association, 55: 650-659.
 [9] Bernard, Andrew, Jonathan Eaton, Bradford Jensen and Samuel Kortum.
     2003. “Plants and Productivity in International Trade,” American Eco-
     nomic Review, 93(4): 1268-1291.
[10] Bernard, Andrew and Bradford Jensen. 1999. “Exceptional Exporter Per-
     formance: Cause, Eﬀect, or Both?,” Journal of International Economics,
     47(1): 1-38.
[11] Bigsten, Arne, Paul Collier, Stefan Dercon, Bernard Gauthier, Jan Gunning
     Anders Isaksson, Abena Oduro, Remco Oostendrop, Cathy Pattillo, Mans
     Soderbom, Michel Sylvain, Francis Teal and Albert Seufack. 1997. “Exports
     and Firm-level Eﬃciency in the African Manufacturing Sector,” University
     of Montreal.
[12] Basu, Susanto and John Fernald. 1997. “Returns to Scale in U.S. Produc-
     tion: Estimates and Implications,” Journal of Political Economy, 105(2):
     249-283.

                                      23
[13] Burki, Shajid and Guillermo Perry. 1997. The Long March: A Reform
     Agenda for Latin America and the Caribbean for the Next Decade. Wash-
     ington D.C.: World Bank.
[14] Caballero, Ricardo, and Mohamad Hammour. 1994. “The Cleansing Eﬀects
     of Recessions,” American Economic Review, 84(5): 1356-68.
[15] Caballero, Ricardo, and Mohamad Hammour. 1996. “On the Timing
     and Eﬃciency of Creative Destruction,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
     111(3): 805-852.
[16] Chen, Tain-jy and De-piao Tang. 1987. “Comparing Technical Eﬃciency
     Between Import-Substitution-Oriented and Export-Oriented Foreign Firms
     in a Developing Country,” Journal of Development Economics, 36: 277-289.
[17] Clerides, Sofronis, Saul Lach and James Tybout. 1998. “Is Learning by
     Exporting Important? Micro-dynamic Evidence from Colombia, Mexico
     and Morocco,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 113(3): 903-947.
[18] Davis, Steven, John Haltiwanger and Scott Schuh. 1996. Job Creation and
     Destruction. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
[19] Edwards, Sebastian. 2001. The Economic and Political Transition to an
     Open Market Economy: Colombia. Paris: OECD.
[20] Ericson, Richard and Ariel Pakes.1995. “Markov-Perfect Industry Dynam-
     ics: A Framework for Empirical Work,” Review of Economic Studies, 62(1):
     53-82.
[21] Foster, Lucia, John Haltiwanger, and Chad Syverson. 2003. “Reallocation,
     Firm Turnover, and Eﬃciency: Selection on Productivity or Profitability?,”
     University of Maryland, Mimeo.
[22] Foster, Lucia, John Haltiwanger, and Cornell Krizan. 2001. “Aggregate
     Productivity Growth: Lessons from Microeconomic Evidence,” in Edward
     Dean Michael Harper and Charles Hulten, eds., New Developments in Pro-
     ductivity Analysis. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
[23] Hall, Robert. 1990. “Invariance Properties of Solow’s Productivity Resid-
     ual,” in Peter Diamond, ed., Growth/Productivity/Unemployment. Cam-
     bridge: MIT Press.
[24] Haltiwanger, John. 2000. “Aggregate Growth: What Have We Learned
     from Microeconomic Evidence?,” University of Maryland, Mimeo.
[25] Harrison, Ann. 1994. “Productivity, Imperfect Competition, and Trade Re-
     form: Theory and Evidence,” Journal of International Economics, 36: 53-
     73.
[26] Hopenhayn, Hugo. 1992. “Entry, Exit, and Firm Dynamics in Long Run
     Equilibrium,” Econometrica, 60(5): 1127-50.

                                      24
[27] Jovanovic, Boyan. 1982. “Selection and the Evolution of Industry,” Econo-
     metrica, 50(3): 649-670.
[28] Kugler, Adriana and Maurice Kugler. 2003. “The Labor Market Eﬀects
     of Payroll Taxes in a Middle-Income Country: Evidence from Colombia,”
     CEPR Working Paper No. 4046.
[29] Kugler, Adriana. 2002. “From Severance Pay to Self-Insurance: The Eﬀects
     of Severance Payments Savings Accounts in Colombia,” CEPR Working
     Paper No. 3197.
[30] Kugler, Adriana. 1999. “The Impact of Firing Costs on Turnover and Un-
     employment: Evidence from the Colombian Labor Market Reform,” Inter-
     national Tax and Public Finance Journal, 6(3): 389-410.
[31] Kugler, Maurice. 2000. “The Diﬀusion of Externalities from Foreign Direct
     Investment: The Sectoral Pattern of Spillovers,” Essays on International
     Technology Diﬀusion, Chapter 1, Ph.D. Dissertation, UC Berkeley.
[32] Kugler, Maurice and Howard Rosenthal. 2003. “Checks and Balances: An
     Assessment of the Institutional Separation of Powers in Colombia,” in Al-
     berto Alesina, ed., Institutional Reforms in Colombia, MIT Press.
[33] Levinshohn, James and Amil Petrin. 1997. “Productivity, Industry Dynam-
     ics, and International Competition: A Structural Econometric Approach,”
     University of Michigan, Mimeo.
[34] Liu, Lili. 1996. “Entry-Exit, Learning and Productivity Change: Evidence
     from Chile,” Journal of Development Economics, 42: 217-42.
[35] Lora, Eduardo. 2000. “What Makes Reforms Likely? Timing and Sequenc-
     ing of Structural Reforms in Latin America,” Inter-American Development
     Bank Working Paper No. 424.
[36] Lora, Eduardo. 1997. “A Decade of Structural Reforms in Latin Amer-
     ica: What Has Been Reformed and How to Measure It,” Inter-American
     Development Bank Working Paper No. 348.
[37] Marschak, Jacob and William Andrews. 1944. “Random Simultaneous
     Equations and the Theory of Production,” Econometrica, 12 (3) 143-172.
[38] Melitz, Marc. 2003. “The Impact of Trade on Intra-Industry Reallocations
     and Aggregate Industry Productivity,” forthcoming in Econometrica.
[39] Melitz, Marc. 2003. “Estimating Firm-Level Productivity in Diﬀerentiated
     Product Industries,” Harvard University, Mimeo.
[40] Pack, Howard. 1984. Productivity, Technology, and Industrial Development:
     A Case Study in Textiles. New York: Oxford University Press.



                                     25
[41] Pombo, Carlos. 1999. “Productividad Industrial en Colombia: Una Apli-
     cacion de Numeros Indices,” Revista de Economia del Rosario.
[42] Roberts, Mark and Emmanuel Skoufias. 1997. “The Long-run Demand for
     Skilled and Unskilled Labor in Colombian Manufacturing Plants,” Review
     of Economics and Statistics, 79(2): 330-337.
[43] Roberts, Mark and James Tybout. 1997. “The Decision to Export in
     Colombia: An Empirical Model of Entry with Sunk Costs,” American Eco-
     nomic Review, 87(4): 545-565.
[44] Roberts, Mark and James Tybout. Industrial Evolution in Developing
     Countries: Micro Patterns of Turnover, Productivity and Market Struc-
     ture. New York: Oxford University Press, 1996.
[45] Roberts, Mark and Dylan Supina. 1996. “Output Price, Markups, and Pro-
     ducer Size,” European Economic Review, 40(3-5): 909-21.
[46] Roberts, Mark and Dylan Supina. 1996. “Output Price and Markup Dis-
     persion in Microdata: The Roles of Producer Heterogeneity and Noise,” in
     Michael Baye, ed., Advances in Applied Microeconomics, Vol. 9. JAI Press.
[47] Roberts, Mark and James Tybout. 1996. Industrial Evolution in Developing
     Countries: Micro Patterns of Turnover, Productivity and Market Structure.
     New York: Oxford University Press.
[48] Shea, John. 1997. “The Input-Output Approach to Instrument Selection,”
     Journal of Business and Economic Statistics, 11(2): 145-155.
[49] Shea, John. 1993. “Do Supply Curves Slope Up?” Quarterly Journal of
     Economics, 108(1): 1-32.
[50] Syverson, Chad. 2003. “Market Structure and Productivity: A Concrete
     Example, University of Chicago, Mimeo.
[51] Syverson, Chad. 2002. “Price Dispersion: The Role of Product Substi-
     tutability and Productivity,” University of Chicago, Mimeo.
[52] Tybout, James. 2000. “Manufacturing Firms in Developing Countries: How
     Well Do They Do, And Why?, Journal of Economic Literature, 38(1): 11-
     34.
[53] Tybout, James and Daniel Westbrook. 1995. “Trade Liberalization and
     Dimensions of Eﬃciency Change in Mexican Manufacturing Industries,”
     Journal of International Economics, 39(1-2): 53-78.




                                     26
                       Appendix:
         Longitudinal Linkages in the AMS Data
    The identification of establishments in the AMS for the period 1982-1998 has
overcome changes in sampling and labeling of plants. In essence, there are three
groups of plant identifiers: a system that allows following plants from 1982 to
1991,25 another system that can be used to follow plants from 1993 onwards, and
finally a transition system that is supposed to provide the necessary link over the
transition period (1991-1993). Nevertheless, the latter set is quite incomplete, so
that many plants that existed prior to 1992 and survived until after 1993 cannot
be successfully identified as continuers. As a result, matching plants using the
transition identifiers leads to spurious calculations of entry and exit. To solve
this problem, we relied on some existing records of additional identifiers that,
although incomplete, provide some information about the diﬀerent identifiers a
given plant was assigned over the period. This additional eﬀort eliminated a
large fraction of the spurious entry and exit. For instance, after performing this
additional matching, we are unable to follow only 740 plants after 1991, while in
previous independent attempts documented by DANE the corresponding figure
was 4083. However, 740 ”deaths” in a year is still too high a figure compared to
the historic yearly exit rates. Seemingly, some spurious exit remains. Similarly,
we obtain too high an entry rate for 1992 relative to historic levels, to be fully
explained by fundamentals.
    Spuriously high exit and entry rates stem from two sources. First, changes
in the sample resulting from the change of survey unit from establishment to
enterprise. In particular, from 1992 if a firm that owns various establishment
satisfies the requirements to enter the sample, each of its establishments is in-
cluded, independently of whether the plant itself satisfies the requirements or
not. Before 1992, meanwhile, only establishments that satisfied the require-
ments were included in the sample, independently of their ownership.26 To
solve the problem of sample change, we deleted from our base of each year the
establishments that do not satisfy the requirements of the sample.27
  25 This is the time period covered by the data set derived from the AMS that Roberts and

Tybout (1996) and Clerides, Lach and Tybout (1998) use. Note that their sample does not
include any years after the implementation of structural reforms in Colombia, nor does it have
plant-level price indices.
  26 One point to note is that, apparently, the change in methodology also included surveying

establishments that were not in the sample even though they did satisfy the requirements (due
to previous failures in enforcing the requirement to report to the AMS). This modification is
not formally documented, but DANE staﬀ have reported that an eﬀort was made in 1992 to
improve the actual coverage of the survey. To the extent that this is the case, the solution
proposed above to the problem of change in sample (namely, to keep only establishments that
satisfy the sample criteria) will not fully alleviate the problem.
  27 These requirements are that an establishment must have 10 or more employees or have a

production superior to a given limit. Such limit was 25 million Colombian Pesos (in current
terms) for 1982-1991, 50 million for 1992-1995, 60 million for 1996-1997, and 70.5 million for
1998. One obvious problem of these requirements is that the minimum production has always
been established in current pesos, and has not been properly modified to reflect inflation. With
an average PPI inflation of around 20% , the minimum real production required for inclusion



                                              27
    Secondly, there are possible mistakes in the assignment of codes, that make
impossible to match an establishment between 1991 and 1992, even though the
establishment continues over the period. The solution to this problem implies
matching what now is a ”death of 1991” with what now appears to be an
“entry of 1992”. This matching must use additional information, such as the
one contained in the directories where data on the name, tax identification
number, location, and other characteristics of the plant are recorded. We
therefore resorted to these directories. Due to diﬀerences in the format of
the information, only the data on phone number, sector identification code and
municipality were used for this match. Unfortunately, this new attempt yielded
very few matches.
    Given the failure of the eﬀorts documented above to fully solve the prob-
lem of spurious entry and exit over the transition period, we implemented a
probabilistic approach to eliminate the remaining problems. Our methodology
involves estimating the probabilities, on the basis of observable characteristics,
of entering and exiting of the plants that, after the previous procedures, appear
as exiting in 1991 or entering in 1992. We used a Probit estimation procedure
to model the probability of entry and the probability of exit in any given year.
We defined the discrete variables ENTER and EXIT for entry and exit, respec-
tively, with the values of 1 for event and 0 for nonevent. In our model, a plant
of a given sector and a given geographic region enters (exits) when its expected
profits are higher (lower) than an exogenously given limit. Profits πjt are a
linear function of (real) output and number of employees. The probability of
entry and exit within a sector and a geographic region is, therefore, a function
of output and employment.
    Let s be a subscript for 2 digits sector and r be a subscript for region
(Atlantic, Pacific, Central, and Antioquia plus Viejo Caldas). Then, for plant j
that belongs to sector s and region r, let ejt = 1 if plant j enters in year t, with
ejt = 0 otherwise, and xjt = 1 if plant j exits in year t, with xjt = 0 otherwise.
    The entry probability may be expressed as,


  Pr(ejt = 1) = Pr(π jt > π ∗ ) = Pr(β 0,sr + β 1,sr Yjt + β 2,sr Ljt + ²jt > π∗ )
    Assuming ²jt follows a cumulative normal distribution denoted by F ,

                                             0           0
                      Pr(ejt = 1) = 1 − F (−Xjt ψ) = F (Xjt ψ)
where the
      £ last step¤ follows from the fact that F is a symmetric distribution, and
Xjt = 10 , Yjt0 , L0jt and ψ 0 = [β 0 − π∗ , β 1 , β 2 ] .
in the sample decreased dramatically over those years where the limit was kept constant. This
may be aﬀecting the levels of entry and exit; our measure of entry will actually be an upper
bound of entry, while the opposite will happen with our measure of exit. Notwithstanding
this problem, we decided not to change the requirements to enter the sample because the only
non-arbitrary method we found (deflating the limits by some known deflator, like PPI) leads
to an underestimation of the growth of the industry. Moreover, the limit on the number of
employees is the binding requirement in most cases.


                                             28
    When estimating the model for entry in 1992 (exit in 1991), we used in-
formation by sector and geographic region, where all years and plants where
pooled. For each estimation we excluded the plants for which we wanted to pre-
dict the probability of event (plants that after the previous procedures appear
as entering in 1992 or exiting in 1991). For the data used in the estimations,
the model predicted correctly between 50% and 88% of the observed responses,
depending on the sector-region combination. For most groups the model pre-
dicted correctly about 70% of the responses. With the estimated parameters we
calculated the predicted probabilities of entering in 1992 (exiting in 1991) using
the data for plants that in our database appeared as entries of 92 (exits of 91).
Out of these groups, we kept in our database only the 179 (372) plants that
presented highest predicted probabilities of entering (exiting). The number of
plants we actually kept in the sample corresponds to the average of entries in
1991 and 1993 (exits in 1990 and 1992).




                                       29
                                                                           Figure 1: TFP Dispersion



                           1.2



                           1.1



                            1



                           0.9
TFP (Standard Deviation)




                           0.8



                           0.7



                           0.6



                           0.5



                           0.4



                           0.3



                           0.2
                                 1982   1983   1984   1985   1986   1987   1988   1989   1990    1991   1992   1993   1994   1995   1996   1997   1998

                                                                                           TFP
                                            Figure 2: Dispersion of Demand Shock


1.2



1.1



 1



0.9



0.8



0.7



0.6



0.5



0.4



0.3



0.2
      1982   1983   1984   1985   1986   1987   1988   1989    1990    1991   1992   1993   1994   1995   1996   1997   1998

                                                              Demand Shock
                                            Figure 3: Output Price Dispersion


1.2



1.1



 1



0.9



0.8



0.7



0.6



0.5



0.4



0.3



0.2
      1983   1984   1985   1986   1987   1988   1989    1990       1991      1992   1993   1994   1995   1996   1997   1998

                                                        Relative Output Prices
                                                        Figure 4: Kernel Distribution of TFP


0.7




0.6




0.5




0.4




0.3




0.2




0.1




 0
      -5.0


             -4.5


                    -4.0


                           -3.5


                                  -3.0


                                         -2.5


                                                -2.0


                                                       -1.5


                                                              -1.0


                                                                       -0.5


                                                                              0.0


                                                                                    0.5


                                                                                          1.0


                                                                                                  1.5


                                                                                                        2.0


                                                                                                              2.5


                                                                                                                    3.0


                                                                                                                          3.5


                                                                                                                                4.0


                                                                                                                                      4.5


                                                                                                                                            5.0
                                                                     Pre-reform     Post-reform
                                                  Figure 5: Kernel Distribution of Demand Shocks


0.7




0.6




0.5




0.4




0.3




0.2




0.1




 0
                                                                              0.0


                                                                                    0.5


                                                                                           1.0


                                                                                                   1.5


                                                                                                         2.0


                                                                                                               2.5


                                                                                                                     3.0


                                                                                                                           3.5


                                                                                                                                 4.0


                                                                                                                                       4.5


                                                                                                                                             5.0
      -5.0


             -4.5


                    -4.0


                           -3.5


                                  -3.0


                                         -2.5


                                                -2.0


                                                       -1.5


                                                              -1.0


                                                                       -0.5




                                                                     Pre-reform      Post-reform
                                     Density (fraction of observations)




                         0.2
                               0.4
                                     0.6
                                               0.8
                                                                    1.2
                                                                          1.4
                                                                                1.6
                                                                                      1.8




                     0
                                                         1
              -5.0


              -4.5


              -4.0


              -3.5


              -3.0


              -2.5


              -2.0


              -1.5


              -1.0


              -0.5




Pre-reform
              0.0


              0.5


              1.0




Post-reform
                                                                                            Figure 6: Kernel Distribution of Relative Prices




              1.5


              2.0


              2.5


              3.0


              3.5


              4.0


              4.5


              5.0
                                                        Figure 7: Evolution of TFP growth, 1982-1998


                  0.08



                  0.06



                  0.04



                  0.02
Log Differences




                     0



                  -0.02



                  -0.04



                  -0.06



                  -0.08



                   -0.1
                          1982   1983   1984   1985   1986   1987   1988    1989     1990   1991     1992   1993   1994   1995   1996   1997

                                                                        GDP growth      TFP growth
                                                          Figure 8: Evolution of Demand Shocks, 1982-1998


                                                                                                                                                  0.07
                0.1




               0.05                                                                                                                               0.06




                  0
                                                                                                                                                  0.05



               -0.05
                                                                                                                                                  0.04
Demand Shock




                                                                                                                                                         GDP Growth
                -0.1

                                                                                                                                                  0.03

               -0.15


                                                                                                                                                  0.02
                -0.2



                                                                                                                                                  0.01
               -0.25




                -0.3                                                                                                                              0
                       1982   1983   1984   1985   1986     1987   1988     1989   1990   1991   1992   1993   1994   1995   1996   1997   1998

                                                                          Demand Shock     GDP growth
                                                             Figure 9: Evolution of Relative Output Prices, 1982-1998


                                                                                                                                                        0.07
                          0.1




                         0.05                                                                                                                           0.06



                            0
                                                                                                                                                        0.05



                         -0.05
Relative Output Prices




                                                                                                                                                        0.04




                                                                                                                                                               GDP Growth
                          -0.1

                                                                                                                                                        0.03

                         -0.15


                                                                                                                                                        0.02
                          -0.2



                                                                                                                                                        0.01
                         -0.25




                          -0.3                                                                                                                          0
                                 1983   1984   1985   1986   1987   1988   1989      1990      1991   1992    1993   1994   1995   1996   1997   1998

                                                                           Relative Output Prices     GDP growth
                                Figure 10: Cross-Sectional Decomposition of TFP, 1982-1998


0.7



0.6



0.5



0.4



0.3



0.2



0.1



0.0
  1982   1983   1984   1985   1986   1987   1988    1989     1990   1991     1992    1993    1994   1995   1996   1997   1998


-0.1



-0.2
                                                             Year

                                            TFP Simple Average      Share-TFP Cross Term
                              Figure 11: Cross-Sectional Decomposition of Demand Shock, 1982-1998


1.4




1.2




1.0




0.8




0.6




0.4




0.2




0.0
  1982   1983   1984   1985     1986    1987    1988     1989    1990   1991     1992    1993     1994   1995   1996   1997   1998

                                       Demand Shock Simple Average      Share-Demand Shock Cross Term
      Table 1: Descriptive Statistics Before and After Market-Oriented Reforms

                                             Pre-Reforms                       Post-Reforms
 Variable

 Output                                          10.494                           10.9031
                                                (1.6718)                          (1.8765)
 Capital                                         8.2111                            8.7476
                                                (2.0469)                          (2.1774)
 Labor Hours                                    10.9656                           10.9547
                                                (1.0987)                          (1.2525)
 Energy                                         11.3031                           11.5536
                                                 (1.877)                          (1.9857)
 Materials                                       9.6074                           10.2531
                                                (1.8503)                          (1.8848)
 Output Prices                                   -0.0764                           -0.151
                                                (0.4395)                          (0.7414)
 Energy Prices                                   0.2519                            0.5465
                                                (0.5009)                          (0.4264)
 Material Prices                                 0.0224                           -0.0997
                                                (0.3542)                          (0.5707)
 N                                               55,298                            44,816

Notes: This table reports means and standard deviations of the log of quantities and of prices deviated
from yearly producer price indices. The pre-reform period includes the years 1982-90 and the post-
reform period includes the years 1991-98.
                                            Table 2: Correlations of Variables

                 Output         Capital        Labor         Energy       Materials       Output        Energy        Materials
                                                                                          Prices         Price         Prices
Output            1.0           0.7550        0.7393         0.7649        0.8982        -0.2918   -0.0591            -0.0705
               [100,114]       [96,232]      [99,102]       [99,476]      [90,938]      [100,114] [100,095]           [91,540]
Capital                           1.0         0.6904         0.7592        0.7267        -0.0092   -0.0082            -0.0241
                               [96,232]      [95,303]       [95,684]      [87,519]       [96,232] [96,213]            [88,066]
Labor                                           1.0          0.6963        0.6761         0.0084   -0.0389             0.0067
                                             [99,102]       [98,484]      [90,073]       [99,102] [99,083]            [90,671]
Energy                                                         1.0         0.7492         0.0087   -0.1198            -0.0188
                                                            [99,476]      [90,394]       [99,476] [99,457]            [90,944]
Materials                                                                    1.0         -0.0063    0.0207            -0.2384
                                                                          [90,938]       [90,938] [90,929]            [90,938]
Output                                                                                      1.0    -0.0047             0.2469
Prices                                                                                  [100,114] [100,095]           [91,540]
Energy                                                                                                1.0             -0.0118
Prices                                                                                            [100,095]           [91,531]
Materials                                                                                                                1.0
Prices                                                                                                                [91,540]

Notes: The table includes bivariate correlations of logs of quantities and price deviations from yearly producer price indices. The
numbers in square brackets are the number of observations.
                             Table 3: Production Function Equations

                                           OLS                                         2SLS

                                 (1)                   (2)                     (3)                  (4)

Capital                        0.3026               0.0764                 0.4646                0.3027
                               (0.004)             (0.0025)               (0.0165)              (0.0225)
Labor                          0.7411                                      1.0398
                              (0.0071)                                    (0.0596)
Labor Hours                                         0.2393                                       0.2125
                                                   (0.0037)                                     (0.0313)
Energy                                               0.124                                       0.1757
                                                   (0.0028)                                     (0.0143)
Materials                                           0.5891                                       0.2752
                                                   (0.0026)                                     (0.0095)
R²                             0.5806                0.8621                0.4787                0.8107
N                              42,235                48,114                42,235                48,114

Notes: The standard errors are reported in parentheses. The regressions in Columns (1) and (3) use the log of
value added as the dependent variable, where value added is revenue minus materials and energy costs, and
capital and employment as the regressors. The regressions in Columns (2) and (4) use the log of physical output
as the dependent variable, and capital, employment hours, energy, and materials as regressors. All regressors
are in logs. The two-stage least squares regressions use the following variables to instrument the inputs: Shea’s
(1993) downstream demand instruments constructed as the demand for the intermediate output (calculated using
the input-output matrix); one- and two-period lags of downstream demand; regional government expenditures,
excluding government investment; and energy and material plant-level prices, deviated from the yearly PPI.
               Table 4: First-Stage Regressions of Inputs for Production Function Equations

                                             Capital                 Labor                    Energy                  Materials
Instrumental Variables                        (1)                     (2)                       (3)                    (4)

Downstream Demand-shift                       0,0157                 -0,1059                  0,2005                   0,2506
                                            (0,0362)                 (0,0207)                 (0,032)                 (0,0317)
One-period Lag of                           -0,1368                  -0,0483                 -0,1456                  -0,1619
Downstream Demand-shift                     (0,0499)                 (0,0286)                (0,0441)                 (0,0437)
Two-period lag of                             0,3752                  0,0558                  0,3142                   0,3005
Downstream Demand-shift                     (0,0318)                 (0,0182)                (0,0281)                 (0,0278)
Regional Current Governmen                    0,0484                   0,085                 -0,0633                  -0,0166
Expenditure                                 (0,0069)                  (0,004)                (0,0061)                 (0,0061)
Plant-level Energy Price                     -0,2415                 -0,1257                 -0,5676                   -0,166
                                            (0,0199)                 (0,0114)                (0,0176)                 (0,0175)
Plant-level Materials                       -0,0253                   0,0386                  0,0166                  -0,8157
Price                                       (0,0188)                 (0,0108)                (0,0166)                 (0,0164)
R²                                          0.0319                   0.0127                   0.064                   0.1129
Physical Output Partial R²                  0.1276                    0.139                   0.231                    0.324
Value-added Partial R²                      0.2563                   0.1324                     -                        -
N                                           48,113                   48,113                   48,113                  48,113

Notes: Standard errors are in parenthesis. The variables are in logs. The price variables are deviations from the yearly PPI.
Following Shea (1993), downstream demand-shift instruments are total output measures in downstream industries that meet the
following two conditions: (1) their demand share for upstream production has to exceed 15%, and (2) the share of the upstream
industry in their total costs does not exceed 15%. The R² simply reports the square of the sample correlation coefficient between
Ijt and Îjt, where I=K,L,E,M and Îjt are the predicted values of the inputs from a regression of Ijt on the instruments. The partial R²
reports the sample correlation coefficient between sjt and ŝjt, where sjt are the residuals from a regression of Ijt on all other inputs
I1jt and ŝjt are the correlations between Îjt and the predicted values of all other inputs Î1jt.
                                                    Table 5: Inverse Demand Equations

                                       OLS                                        2SLS                                    First Stages
                                                                                                                            Partial R² Partial R²
                                                                                                                            Regression Regression
 Regressor                 (1)           (2)         (3)             (4)            (5)           (6)              R²          (5)        (6)

 Physical               -0.0905      -0.0858   -0.0447             -0.4381       -0.4456      -0.3158           0.2177       0.4696         0.427
 Output                (0.0011)     (0.0011)  (0.0015)            (0.0034)      (0.0035)      (0.0051)
 Post-reforms                                   0.9433                                          2.4203             -             -            -
                                               (0.0232)                                        (0.0730)
 Physical Output ×                    -0.0056   -0.0909                           0.0104       -0.2152          0.9585       0.9599        0.4621
 Post-reforms                        (0.0003) (0.0021)                           (0.0005)      (0.0067)
 R²                     0.0766       0.0793       0.0966          -1.0540        -1.0643       -0.9578             -            -             -
 N                      86,251       86,251       86,251          86,251         86,251         86,251          86,251       86,251        86,251

Notes: Standard Errors are in parentheses. The dependent variable is the plant-level price minus the yearly PPI (all in logs). Two-stage least
squares regressions instrument physical output and the interaction of physical output with the TFP measure estimated using Column (4) of Table 3
and with the post-reform dummy and the TFP measure interacted with the post-reform dummy. The post-reform dummy takes the value of 1 for
the period 1991-98 and 0 otherwise. The R² simply reports the square of the sample correlation coefficient between Yjt and Ŷjt, where Ŷjt is the
predicted value of output from a regression of Yjt on the instruments. The partial R² reports the sample correlation coefficient between ujt and ûjt,
where ujt are the residuals from a regression of Yjt and Yjt × Postt and ûjt are the correlations between Ŷjt and with the predicted value Ŷjt × Postt,
when only shift changes are considered, and with the interaction between the predicted value of output, Ŷjt, and the predicted value of the post-
reform dummy.
              Table 6: Descriptive Statistics of TFP, Demand Shocks and Prices,
                                Before and After the Reforms

                                               Pre-reforms                             Post-reforms
 Total Factor        Productivity                  0.0125                                  0.046
 (TFP)                                            (0.6817)                                (0.909)
                                             ρTFP,D = 0.1114                         ρTFP,D = -0.0995
                                             ρTFP,P = -0.5205                       ρTFP,P      = -0.6934
                                             ρTFP,output = 0.427                    ρTFP,output = 0.506
                                             ρTFP,share = 0.1297                    ρTFP,share = 0.1836
 Demand Shock (D)                                 -0.0723                                  0.0324
                                                 (0.7826)                                (0.8836)
                                              ρD,P = 0.391                            ρD,P = 0.4995
                                             ρD,output = 0.8337                      ρD,output = 0.6243
                                             ρD,share = 0.3778                       ρD,share = 0.2863

 Output Price (P)                                  -0.0764                                 -0.1509
                                                  (0.4395)                                (0.7414)
                                             ρP,output = -0.1822                      ρP,output = -0.365

Notes: The table reports means, standard deviations in parenthesis, and bivariate correlations. The physical output
measure of TFP is estimated as the residual of the production function in Column (4) of Table 3. The demand shock
is estimated as the residual of the inverse demand equation in Column (4) of Table 5. Output prices are plant-level
prices relative to yearly PPI. Shares are estimated as the fraction of plant output in total output.
                        Table 7: Persistence of TFP, Demand Shocks, and Output Prices

                                                       TFP                   Demand Shocks                    Output Prices
 Regressor                                       (1)          (2)             (3)      (4)                    (5)        (6)

 One-period Lag of                             0.9221    0.896               0.9853        0.9871           0.9925          0.982
 Dependent Variable                           (0.0018) (0.0029)             (0.0009)      (0.0014)         (0.0013)       (0.0026)
 One-period Lag of Dependent                             0.043                            -0.0033                          0.0144
 Variable × Post Reforms                               (0.0037)                           (0.0019)                         (0.003)
 Year Effects                                   YES          YES              YES           YES              YES            YES
 R²                                             0.782       0.7824           0.9305        0.9305            0.868          0.868
 N                                             73,063       73,063           85,576        85,576           85,576         85,576

Notes: Standard errors are in parenthesis. The table reports coefficients on lagged TFP, lagged demand shocks, and lagged output
prices in the first and second, third and fourth, and fifth and sixth columns, respectively. All regressions include year effects. The
TFP variable is estimated as the residual from the regression in Column (4) of Table 3 and the demand shock variable is estimated as
the residual from the regression in Column (4) of Table 5. Output prices are plant-level prices relative to yearly PPI.
               Table 8: Cross-Section Decomposition of Three-Digit Level TFP and Demand Shocks, 1982-1998

                                                       TFP                                                           Demand Shocks

       Year                  Agregate               Simple               Cross-term                Agregate               Simple               Cross-term
                            (Weighted)              Average                                       (Weighted)              Average
                               (1)                    (2)                     (3)                    (4)                    (5)                     (6)

       1982                       0.28                  -0.05                 0.33                      1.26                  0.04                 1.22
                                 (100)                (-16.46)              (116.46)                   (100)                 (3.30)               (96.70)
       1983                       0.29                  -0.09                 0.38                      1.22                  0.03                 1.20
                                 (100)                (-30.80)              (130.80)                   (100)                 (2.12)               (97.88)
       1984                       0.26                  -0.07                 0.33                      1.27                  0.08                 1.19
                                 (100)                (-28.57)              (128.57)                   (100)                 (6.31)               (93.69)
       1985                       0.33                 0.00                   0.33                      1.27                  0.07                 1.20
                                 (100)                (-0.28)               (100.28)                   (100)                 (5.73)               (94.27)
       1986                       0.33                 0.06                  0.28                       1.27                  0.07                 1.19
                                 (100)                (16.49)               (83.51)                    (100)                 (5.76)               (94.24)
       1987                       0.36                 0.07                  0.29                       1.30                  0.09                 1.22
                                 (100)                (18.99)               (81.01)                    (100)                 (6.73)               (93.27)
       1988                       0.42                 0.14                  0.29                       1.32                  0.12                 1.20
                                 (100)                (32.21)               (67.79)                    (100)                 (8.86)               (91.14)
       1989                       0.40                 0.11                  0.29                       1.28                  0.08                 1.20
                                 (100)                (28.71)               (71.29)                    (100)                 (6.23)               (93.77)
       1990                       0.45                 0.10                  0.35                       1.28                  0.10                 1.18
                                 (100)                (22.82)               (77.18)                    (100)                 (7.63)               (92.37)
       1991                       0.48                 0.12                  0.36                       1.24                  0.07                 1.16
                                 (100)                (24.40)               (75.60)                    (100)                 (6.04)               (93.96)
       1992                       0.46                 0.05                  0.41                       1.26                 0.17                  1.09
                                 (100)                (10.59)               (89.41)                    (100)                (13.62)               (86.38)
       1993                       0.43                 0.05                  0.38                       1.28                 0.23                  1.06
                                 (100)                (11.99)               (88.01)                    (100)                (17.74)               (82.26)
       1994                       0.47                  0.03                 0.44                       1.28                 0.24                  1.05
                                 (100)                 (6.55)               (93.45)                    (100)                (18.35)               (81.65)
       1995                       0.46                 -0.04                  0.50                      1.28                 0.21                  1.07
                                 (100)                (-8.44)               (108.44)                   (100)                (16.74)               (83.26)
       1996                       0.53                 -0.05                  0.58                      1.21                 0.17                  1.04
                                 (100)                (-8.77)               (108.77)                   (100)                (14.15)               (85.85)
       1997                       0.54                  0.01                 0.53                       1.21                 0.16                  1.05
                                 (100)                 (2.71)               (97.29)                    (100)                (13.31)               (86.69)
       1998                       0.58                  0.04                 0.54                       1.13                  0.11                 1.03
                                 (100)                 (6.95)               (93.05)                    (100)                 (9.52)               (90.48)


   Pre-reforms                    0.35                  0.03                 0.32                       1.27                  0.08                 1.20
                                 (100)                 (8.56)               (91.44)                    (100)                 (5.88)               (94.12)
  Post-reforms                    0.50                  0.03                 0.47                       1.24                 0.17                  1.07
                                 (100)                 (5.50)               (94.50)                    (100)                (13.78)               (86.22)


Notes: All figures are simple means of 3-digit sector level statistics. Columns (1) and (4) show the weighted mean of TFP and the demand shocks respectively,
where market shares are the weights. The market shares are measured as the share or fraction of output contributed by each plant to sectoral output defined at the
3-digit level. Columns (2) and (5) show the contribution to those weighted means of the simple means of TFP and the demand shock, respectively. Columns (3)
and (6) show the contribution of the cross-sectional correlation between market share and TFP and demand shocks, respectively. The numbers in parentheses are
the fractions represented by each component.
