                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        THE DYNAMICS OF SELLER REPUTATION:
                          THEORY AND EVIDENCE FROM eBAY

                                          Luís Cabral
                                          Ali Hortaçsu

                                       Working Paper 10363
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w10363


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    March 2004




We thank Kenny Ballendir, Tim Miller and Jeremy Shapiro for truly outstanding research assistance.
We also thank Damien DeWalque, Svetlozar Nestorov, Mike Riordan, Anne Rogers, Steve Tadelis,
and seminar participants at Chicago, Essex, Copenhagen, SED meetings, NBER Summer Institute,
Georgetown, Tufts, Rochester, NYU and Columbia for helpful comments and suggestions. Hortaçsu
acknowledges financial support from the National Science Foundation (Grant SES-0242031). The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

©2004 by Luís Cabral and Ali Hortaçsu. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
The Dynamics of Seller Reputation: Theory and Evidence from eBay
Luís Cabral and Ali Hortaçsu
NBER Working Paper No. 10363
March 2004
JEL No. D44, L15, L86

                                            ABSTRACT

       We propose a basic theoretical model of eBay's reputation mechanism, derive a series of

implications and empirically test their validity. Our theoretical model features both adverse selection

and moral hazard. We show that when a seller receives a negative rating for the first time his

reputation decreases and so does his effort level. This implies a decline in sales and price; and an

increase in the rate of arrival of subsequent negative feedback. Our model also suggests that sellers

with worse records are more likely to exit (and possibly re-enter under a new identity), whereas

better sellers have more to gain from "buying a reputation" by building up a record of favorable

feedback through purchases rather than sales. Our empirical evidence, based on a panel data set of

seller feedback histories and cross-sectional data on transaction prices collected from eBay is

broadly consistent with all of these predictions. An important conclusion of our results is that eBay's

reputation system gives way to strategic responses from both buyers and sellers.


Luís Cabral                                                    Ali Hortaçsu
New York University                                            Department of Economics
Henry Kaufman Mgmt Ctr.                                        University of Chicago
44 W 4th Street, 7-70                                          1126 East 59th Street
New York, NY 10012                                             Chicago, IL 60637
and CEPR                                                       and NBER
lcabral@stern.nyu.edu                                          Hortacsu@uchicago.edu
1     Introduction
Electronic commerce presents the theoretical and the empirical economist with
a number of interesting research questions. Traditional markets rely signifi-
cantly on the trust created by repeated interaction and personal relationships.
Electronic markets, by contrast, tend to be rather more anonymous. Can the
same level of trust and efficiency be obtained in these markets?
    One possible solution, exemplified by eBay auctions, is to create reputation
mechanisms that allow traders to identify and monitor each other. In this
paper, we study eBay-type reputation mechanisms, both from a theoretical and
from an empirical point of view. Specifically, we propose a basic theoretical
model of eBay’s reputation mechanism, derive a series of implications and
empirically test their validity.
    Our focus on eBay’s reputation mechanism is justified for two reasons.
First, electronic commerce in general and eBay in particular are a significant
economic phenomenon: in 2003, more than $21bn were transacted on eBay by
69 million users. Second, with its well defined rules and available information,
eBay presents the researcher with a fairly controlled environment for theory
testing. Specifically, a reasonable assumption on eBay is that the information
one trader has about other traders is the same as the researcher’s. Essentially,
this information consists of a series of positive and negative feedback com-
ments given by past trading partners. In this context, we can make sharper
predictions about agent behavior than in other markets, in particular in mar-
kets where buyers and sellers share information that is not observed by the
researcher.
    Our theoretical model features both adverse selection and moral hazard
on the seller’s side. In the spirit of Diamond (1989), we show that in equilib-
rium there is a positive correlation between seller reputation and seller effort.
Specifically, when a seller receives a negative rating for the first time, his rep-
utation decreases and so does his effort level. This implies a decline in sales
and sale price; and, moreover, an increase in the rate of arrival of subsequent
negative feedback. Our empirical evidence is broadly consistent with these
predictions. Specifically, we find that the growth rate of a seller’s transactions
drops from about 7% per week to about -7% following the first negative feed-
back. We also find that the rate of negative feedback arrival increases twofold
following this event. Both findings are strongly statistically significant across a
variety of empirical specifications. We also find that the sale price for identical
goods varies across sellers with differing feedback records: a 1% level increase
in the fraction of negative feedback is correlated with a 9% decrease in price


                                        1
A natural experiment based on a change in eBay’s reporting format suggests
there is indeed a causal relation between seller reputation and sale price.
    We consider two extensions of our basic model. First we allow for the
possibility of seller “exit”, which we assume corresponds to a secret change in
identity. We show theoretically that exit is more likely the worse the seller’s
record is. Our empirical findings are once again consistent with this result. We
find that a tenfold increase in a seller’s transaction record length is correlated
with a 18 to 27% lower probability of exit within the observation period.
Moreover, a 1% level increase in the fraction of negative feedback is correlated
with a 1 to 2% increase in probability of exit (however, this coefficient is not
statistically significant).
    Second, we consider the possibility of sellers building up a record (“buying
a reputation”) by starting off as buyers and then switching to selling (anecdotal
evidence suggests that it is easier and cheaper to accumulate positive feedback
as a buyer than as a seller). Our theoretical model suggests that better sellers
have more to gain from building such a record, a prediction that is borne out
by the data. Specifically, we define a seller as a “switcher” if more than 50%
of the first 20 transactions were purchases whereas more than 70% of the last
20 transactions were sales. About 30% of all sellers fall in this category; sellers
with 1% lower percentage of negative feedback are 6% more likely to have
started out “switchers”.
    A number of authors have conducted empirical studies of eBay’s repu-
tation mechanism. Almost all of these prior studies focus on the buyer re-
sponse to published feedback aggregates. In particular, a large number of
studies estimate cross-sectional regressions of sale prices on seller feedback
characteristics: Dewan and Hsu (2001), Eaton (2002), Ederington and De-
wally (2003), Houser and Wooders (2003), Kalyanam and McIntyre (2003),
Livingston (2002), Lucking-Reiley, Bryan, Prasad and Reeves (2000), McDon-
ald and Slawson (2002), Melnik and Alm (2002), Resnick and Zeckhauser
(2001).1 Resnick, Zeckhauser, Swanson and Lockwood (2003) point out the
potential for a significant omitted variable bias in these cross-sectional regres-
sions, and conduct a controlled field experiment in which a seasoned seller
sells identical postcards using his real name and an assumed name. They
find an 8% premium to having 2000 positive feedbacks and 1 negative over a
feedback profile with 10 positive comments and no negatives. Ba and Pavlou
(2002) conduct a laboratory experiment in which subjects are asked to de-
clare their valuations for experimenter generated profiles, and find a positive
  1
    See Dellarocas (2002), Resnick, Zeckhauser, Swanson and Lockwood (2003), and Bajari
and Hortaçsu (2004) for surveys of these results.


                                          2
response to better profiles. Jin and Kato (2004) assess whether the reputation
mechanism is able to combat fraud by purchasing ungraded baseball cards
with seller-reported grades, and having them evaluted by the official grading
agency. They report that while having a better seller reputation is a positive
indicator of honesty, reputation premia or discounts in the market do not fully
compensate for expected losses due to seller dishonesty.
    Our main contribution to the study of online reputation mechanisms is to
devise a number of theory-driven empirical tests to investigate the incentives
created by eBay’s feedback system. Our focus is on the empirical implica-
tions of sellers’ equilibrium behavior. By contrast, with the exception of Jin
and Kato (2004), previous work has studied buyers’ reaction to seller’s feed-
back record. Moreover, our empirical tests are primarily based on panel data,
whereas most of the previous work is primarily based on cross-section data.
Using panel data allows us to account for seller-level heterogeneity in most of
our empirical tests.2
    In addition to the literature on eBay and its reputation mechanism, our
paper also relates to the empirical study of models with adverse selection and
moral hazard. In particular, one of the most striking and robust results in
our paper is that, once a seller receives negative feedback from buyers, the
frequency of such feedback increases dramatically. We show that this is con-
sistent the presence of moral hazard and rejects a pure adverse selection model.
Abbring, Chiappori, and Pinquet (2003) suggest a related test for the presence
of moral hazard in auto insurance by looking at interarrival times of reported
accidents in panel data on claims histories. Their test exploits discontinuous
changes in driver incentives created by an exogenously specified experience
rating scheme determining insurance premia. They fail to find evidence for
moral hazard in a sample of French drivers. In our setting, seller incentives
are created endogenously through buyers’ expectations of what the seller will
do in the future, and hence a discontinuity in incentives in response to an “ac-
cident” (i.e. a negative comment) is more difficult to establish. Nevertheless,
we succeed in deriving a robust empirical implication that is strongly verified
   2
    We believe the difference between panel and cross-section data is important. In fact, our
results from panel data are typically very significant, whereas our results from cross-section
data, consistently with much of the previous literature, have weak statistical significance.




                                              3
in the data.3
    The paper is structured as follows. In Section 2, we briefly describe the
institutional setup of eBay, in particular the mechanics of its reputation mech-
anism. In Section 3, we present our basic model of buyer and seller behavior,
as well as a number of extensions. Section 5 tests the implications from our
basic model regarding sales rate (Section 5.1), price (Section 5.2), frequency
of negative feedback arrival (Section 5.3), exit (Section 5.4), and reputation
building (Section 5.5). Section 6 concludes the paper.


2       The eBay reputation mechanism
Since its launch in 1995, eBay has become the dominant online auction site,
with millions of items changing hands every day. We will not attempt a de-
tailed account of how eBay has evolved and what its trading rules are; the
interested reader may find this in a number of survey articles and in the pop-
ular press.4 Thus we are going to largely ignore the intricacies of the price
formation process on eBay in what follows; however, from our modelling pur-
poses it will not be too inaccurate to characterize the auction mechanism as a
variant of the second-price auction.5
    eBay does not deliver goods: it acts purely as an intermediary through
which sellers can post auctions and buyers bid. eBay obtains its revenue from
seller fees collected upon successfully completed auctions.6 Most importantly,
to enable reputation mechanisms to regulate trade, eBay uses an innovative
feedback system.7 After an auction is completed, both the buyer and the seller
can give the other party a grade of +1 (positive), 0 (neutral), or −1 (negative),
    3
      Abbring, Chiappori, and Pinquet (2003) show that, in the French auto insurance market,
an accident increases the cost of future accidents. An implication of moral hazard is that
the arrival rate of accidents decreases when an accident takes place. By contrast, our model
predicts that the marginal benefit of effort decreases when an “accident” (negative feedback)
happens. Therefore, the arrival rate of “accidents” should go up when the first “accident”
happens.
    4
      See Cohen (2002) for an entertaining historical account of eBay. Survey articles on
Internet auctions include Lucking-Reiley (1999), Dellarocas (2003), and Bajari and Hortaçsu
(2004).
    5
      In reality eBay auctions are dynamic auctions in which bidders place (possibly multiple)
“proxy bids” indicating their maximum willingness-to-pay. See Roth and Ockenfels (2002),
Ockenfels and Roth (2003), and Bajari and Hortaçsu (2003) for detailed analyzes of dynamic
bidding behavior on eBay.
    6
      Success is defined as a bid above the minimum bid or a secret reserve price set by the
seller. eBay collects its fee even if the physical transaction does not take place.
    7
      eBay does offer an escrow service for use with especially valuable goods, though this
service is used for only a small fraction of the transactions.


                                              4
along with any textual comments.8
   eBay then displays several aggregates of the grades received by each seller
and buyer. These are:

   1. Overall rating: this is the sum of positives minus negatives received by
      a seller from unique buyers throughout her entire history. Until March
      1, 2003, this was the most prominently displayed feedback aggregate on
      eBay — it appeared next to the sellers’ user ID on the auction listing
      page, as can be seen in the sample eBay page in Figure 1. (Here, seller
      wsb5 is shown to have 127 net positive ratings from unique buyers.)

   2. Percent of positives: As can be seen from Figure 1, eBay also reports
      the ratio of positives received by the seller during her entire history. We
      should point out that this information was not reported by eBay prior
      to March 1st, 2003. We will exploit this temporal variation in Section
      5.2.

   3. Seller’s age: Since March 1st, 2003 eBay also reports the date when the
      seller registered on the site. Prior to March 1st, 2003, this information
      was not directly available from the site.

   4. Summary of most recent reviews: A mouse-click on the seller’s ID on the
      auction listing page leads a potential bidder to a more detailed break-
      down of the seller’s record, as shown in Figure 2. In this page, eBay
      breaks down the positive, negative, and neutral ratings received by the
      seller in the past week, past month and past six months.

   5. The entire feedback record: In addition, this page also provides the
      exhaustive list of reviews left for the seller (sorted by date), giving in-
      formation about the score (praise, complaint or neutral), who left the
      feedback, textual comments, the date when the comment was left and
      the transaction the review pertains to, and whether the reviewer was a
      seller or a buyer. (The latter piece of information was not available prior
      to June 16, 2001, a fact that we will take into account.)

   As can be seen, eBay provides a complete record of the comments received
by each seller, along with various summary statistics, and this information is
   8
    There have been several changes on eBay regarding how these ratings can be given by
the users. Since 1999, each grade/comment has to be linked to a particular transaction
on eBay. Typically, eBay stores transaction (in particular price) data looking back only 90
days, hence this restricts the extent of “historical research” that a buyer can conduct.



                                            5
publicly available. Hence, as claimed in the introduction, this is an environ-
ment where the economic analyst has the same information that a new buyer
has about a seller.9 We will thus take this informational equivalence as given
when formulating our theoretical model and its empirical implications.


3           Basic model and empirical predictions
Although, as described in the previous section, eBay presents the economic
modeler with a fairly structured and controlled framework that is harder to
replicate in other real-world empirical settings, we need to make some simpli-
fying assumptions regarding the behavior of agents before developing a theo-
retical model.

Assumption 1 A transaction has two possible outcomes: successful or un-
successful, with consumer benefit equal to 1 and 0, respectively.

    More generally, we could assume that consumer benefit is given by ω and
ω, respectively. However, for the remainder of the paper and with no loss of
generality we assume ω = 1 and ω = 0. Another possible extension is that the
outcome is continuous and the transaction considered successful if the outcome
is above some critical value; see Section 5.

Assumption 2 A successful transaction is reported with probability one as a
successful transaction. An unsuccessful transaction is reported with probability
one as an unsuccessful transaction.

    All of the results in the paper can be extended to the case when there
is a small probability of error in feedback or a less than 100% feedback rate.
However, the analysis becomes substantially more complicated. A more crucial
assumption we need is that the probability and accuracy the feedback be
independent of the seller and of the seller’s history, an assumption that we
will attempt to test empirically in section 5.3. Following eBay’s terminology,
we will refer to a successful transaction as a “positive,” or simply P ; and an
unsuccessful transaction as “negative,” or simply N .

Assumption 3 Buyers are risk neutral.
      9
          Of course, “old” buyers may know about private transactions that they did not comment
on.




                                                 6
     Given Assumption 1, Assumption 3 implies that willingness to pay is simply
the expected probability of a P transaction.10
     Our basic model combines elements of adverse selection and moral hazard.
It is similar in structure to Diamond’s (1989) model of reputation acquisition in
credit markets.11 Although the context in which we apply it is quite different,
the basic mechanism is the same. In his model, the informed party is a firm
who knows its type and must choose effort level. The uninformed parties
are lenders, who must determine the interest rate. In our formulation, the
informed party is a seller who knows her type and must choose effort level.
The uninformed parties are the buyers, who must determine whether to bid
and, if so, how much to bid.
     Specifically, we assume that each seller can be of two types. A good seller
always produces P transactions.12 A bad seller produces a P transaction with
probability α < 1 at an effort cost e or with probability β < α at no effort
cost. Let µ0 be the buyers’ prior belief that the seller is good. Each seller lives
for an infinite number of periods and discounts the future according to the
discount factor δ. In each period, the seller auctions one unit with a second
price auction with no secret reserve price or minimum bid.13
     On the buyer’s side, we assume that, in each period, there are B potential
identical bidders who live for one period. Each bidder has a valuation given
by
                                                                  
                       v(µ, ρ) = µ + (1 − µ) ρα + (1 − ρ)β ,

where µ is the posterior belief that the seller is good and ρ is the belief that the
seller, being bad, will make an effort to improve transaction quality. Basically,
v(µ, ρ) is the buyers’ expected probability of a P transaction: with probability
µ, the seller is good, in which case P happens with probability one; with
probability 1 − µ, the seller is bad, in which case the outcome is P with
probability α or β, depending on whether the seller exerts effort (probability
ρ) or not (probability 1 − ρ).
  10
      Whenever feasible, we will also discuss the implications of risk aversion regarding our
empirical hypotheses.
   11
      Diamond’s model, in turn, builds on the earlier work of Kreps, Milgrom, Roberts and
Wilson (1982), Kreps and Wilson (1982), Milgrom and Roberts (1982). See also Hölmstrom
(1999) for a related model featuring similar dynamics.
   12
      Later in the paper we consider the case when a good seller produces a P with probability
less than one.
   13
      A straightforward extension is to assume the seller puts an object up for auction at an
exogenously given rate, independent of its type. At the end of the section we consider an
extension where the decision to auction an object is endogenously determined.


                                              7
    Each bidder must pay a cost c in order to enter an auction.14 Each time
an object is put up for auction, all B potential bidders simultaneously decide
wether to enter the auction, paying a cost c if they decide to enter and bid.
We assume bidders play the unique symmetric entry equilibrium. In this
equilibrium, each bidder enters the auction with probability p, where p is
determined by the indifference condition between entering and not entering
the auction. Finally, the bidders that decided to enter simultaneously set
their bids and payoffs are paid.
    There are three relevant possible outcomes of the bidder entry game. If two
or more bidders enter, then the seller gets v and each bidder gets zero. If one
or zero bidders enter, then the seller gets zero and the bidder (if there is one)
gets v.15 The entry probability p is thus given by the indifference condition
(1 − p)B−1 v = c, or simply

                                               c
                                                  r
                                  p(v) = 1 −     B−1
                                                 ,                                     (1)
                                               v
Note that p is increasing in v. The seller’s expected payoff is given by
                                               B−1                B 
               π(v) = 1 − Bp(v) 1 − p(v)                 − 1 − p(v)          v.        (2)

(The expression in parentheses on the right-hand side is the probability that
there is more than one bidder, the only case when the seller makes a profit.)
Both p(v) and π(v) are increasing in v. Finally, since v is increasing in µ, it
also follows that p and π are increasing in µ.
    We now turn to the characterization of the seller’s equilibrium strategy.
We do so in the context of the following important assumption, which we will
maintain throughout:
                                e                               e
Assumption 4           βe+(α−β)(π(1)−π(β))
                                             <δ<       βe+(α−β)(π(α)−π(β))
                                                                           .

    In words, we assume that the value of the discount factor, δ, is intermediate.
A very high value of the δ implies that there is a multiplicity of equilibria. In
fact, for δ sufficiently close to one any feasible, individually rational payoff
profile is attainable as a perfect Bayesian equilibrium of the game. A very low
value of δ, in turn, implies that there is only one equilibrium, one where the
(bad) seller never exerts effort.
  14
    See Levin and Smith (1994), Bajari and Hortaçsu (2003).
  15
    We implicitly assume that the seller’s object is perishable. A possible extension is to
assume that an unsold object has value vU to the seller.



                                             8
    The following result characterizes a Perfect Bayesian equilibrium of this
game. This result is different from Diamond’s (1989), who considers a finitely
lived seller. However, the basic intuition is the same, namely, the idea that
reputation and effort are “correlated” in equilibrium.

Proposition 1 In a perfect Bayesian equilibrium,

  1. After the first N , the buyers’ willingness to pay decreases.
  2. After the first N , the seller chooses low effort.
  3. There exists a t0 such that the seller chooses high effort if he has a perfect
     record longer than t0 .

Proof: Consider first the case when the seller’s history includes an N .
Bayesian updating implies µ = 0, where µ is the posterior that the seller
is good. The only possibility of an equilibrium where the seller chooses high
effort is one where an N is punished by never believing the seller will choose
high effort again, ρ = 0. Such a punishment implies a discounted profit of
π(β)/(1 − δ), where β is the buyer’s willingness to pay a bad seller who does
not exert effort.
    If instead buyers expect the seller to choose high effort, that is ρ = 1,
then the seller’s expected payoff from high and low effort, assuming maximal
punishment, is given by

              V H = π(α) − e + αδV H + (1 − α)δπ(β)/(1 − δ)
              V L = π(α) + βδV H + (1 − β)δπ(β)/(1 − δ).

Straightforward computation shows that the condition V L > V H is equivalent
to δ < βe+(α−β) eπ(α)−π(β) . It follows that the only equilibrium following an N
                (         )
is low effort.
    Consider now the case of a bad seller with a perfect record. Bayesian
updating implies that µ → 1, and thus v → 1, as T → ∞. In the limit, the
seller’s expected payoff from high and low effort is given by

              Ṽ H = π(1) − e + αδV H + (1 − α)δπ(β)/(1 − δ)
              Ṽ L = π(1) + βδV H + (1 − β)δπ(β)/(1 − δ).

Straightforward computation shows that the condition V H > V L is equivalent
to δ > βe+(α−β) eπ(1)−π(β) .
               (          )
    The above calculations imply that ρ declines (weakly) as the first N ap-
pears. Moreover, Bayesian updating implies that µ drops from a positive value

                                        9
to zero. We thus conclude that v decreases as the first N is given.

    Notice that Proposition 1 says nothing about uniqueness of equilibrium.
What it does state is that, for the particular interval of values of δ, any Perfect
Bayesian equilibrium calls for the seller to choose low effort following the arrival
of an N . If µ0 is close to one (and for the same interval of values of δ),
then there exists a unique perfect Bayesian equilibrium: high effort until the
first negative arrives, low effort thereafter. For lower values of µ0 , multiple
equilibria are possible, some with initial high effort, some with initial low
effort. However, any perfect Bayesian equilibrium has the property that, if
the string of initial P s is long enough, then the seller chooses high effort.
    We should note that Proposition 1 is not a knife-edged result: following the
steps of the proof, one can see that continuity arguments apply if we assume
that a good type produces a P with probability γ lower than, but close to,
one. In fact, below we consider an extension of the basic model where γ is
strictly less than one.
    Having said that, we should restate that the result depends crucially on
the particular values of δ we consider. If δ is very high, then the folk theorem
applies: any equilibrium path that is feasible and individually rational is the
result of a perfect Bayesian equilibrium for a high enough value of the discount
factor δ. In other words, if the discount factor is high enough, then equilibrium
theory has no predictive power. At the other extreme, if δ is very low then
there is a unique equilibrium where the seller chooses low effort in every period.
Points 1 and 2 in Proposition 1 still hold true, but not Point 3.
    The results above have various empirical implications which we now con-
sider.

Corollary 1 Let R(P, N ) be the rate of transactions per period for a seller
with history (P, N ). Then

                      R(P, 0) > R(P, 1) = R(P, i) ∀i > 1.

Proof: From (2), we see that p(v) is increasing in v. The result then follows
from the first part of Proposition 1.


Corollary 2 Let Π(P, N ) be the average sale price for a seller with history
(P, N ). Then
                  Π(P, 0) > Π(P, 1) = Π(P, i) ∀i > 1.



                                        10
Proof: From (2), we see that π(v) is increasing in v. The result then follows
from the first part of Proposition 1.

    In words, Corollaries 1 and 2 state that, as the seller receives his first
negative, both the sales rate and price go down. This is because the buyers’
willingness to pay, v, and the buyers’ entry probability, p(v), are increasing
in v. Although we are considering a particular auction mechanism, the above
results are valid for more general settings. The important feature is that both
p(v) and π(v) be increasing.
    Note that Corollaries 1 and 2 follow from our model with adverse selection
and moral hazard, they are also consistent with a pure adverse selection model,
the case when α = β. Our next result, however, is specific to the case of moral
hazard:

Corollary 3 Let T (P, N ) be the expected number of transactions between the
N th and the N + 1st Negative. Then

                          T (P, 0) > T (P, 1) = T (P, i) ∀i > 1.

Proof: In equilibrium, the seller chooses low effort after the first N and a new
N arrives at the rate 1 − β. Moreover, for any µ0 the seller chooses high effort
after a sufficiently long string of initial P s, a positive probability event. It
follows that expected average effort during the perfect record phase is greater
than minimal effort, whereas average effort after the first N is minimal.

    In words, Corollary 3 implies that, once an N appears, additional N s will
appear at a higher rate. Notice that, for low µ0 , there may be equilibria
realizations such that the seller chooses low effort in every period. However,
there are positive probability equilibrium realizations such that effort goes
down after the first negative. In expected terms, therefore, the arrival rate of
N s goes up.

   Extension: endogenous entry.           We now extend the basic model by
making endogenous the seller’s decision of whether to auction a given object.16
Suppose, as before, that there is an exogenous stream of one object per period
that the seller has available. At the beginning of the period, the seller learns
the cost of auctioning the object, a. We assume a is i.i.d. across periods with
c.d.f. F (a). This cost includes the monetary cost that sellers must pay eBay
in addition to the opportunity value of keeping the object (for future sale at
 16
      See Bar-Isaac (2002) for a related result on the endogenous selling decision.

                                              11
eBay or outside of eBay, or for personal use). The seller must then determine
whether or not to auction the object.
   Let a∗ (P, N ) be the critical value of a below which the seller will auction
the object. Let A(P, N ) be the probability (before learning
                                                           a) that  the seller
                                                            ∗
decides to auction an object. We thus have A(P, N ) = F a (P, N ) . Our first
result relates to the evolution of A(P, N ). We show that the higher the seller’s
reputation, the more he has to gain from putting an object up for auction,
and thus the more often he will do so.17

Proposition 2 Let A(P, N ) be the rate at which the seller with history (P, N )
places objects for auction. If α is sufficiently large, then A(P, 0) > A(P, 1) =
A(P, i), for all i > 1.

Proof: Before the first negative is received, the value of a∗ solves

       π(P, 0) − a∗ (P, 0) + δαV (P + 1, 0) + δ(1 − α)V (P, 1) = δV (P, 0).

If α ≈ 1, then we get
                                                                     
                 a∗ (P, 0) ≈ π(P, 0) + δ V (P + 1, 0) − V (P, 0) .                     (3)

After the first negative is received, the value of a∗ solves

       π(P, 1) − a∗ (P, 1) + δαV (P + 1, 1) + δ(1 − α)V (P, 2) = δV (P, 1).

Since V (P, 1) = V (P, 2), it follows that

                                  a∗ (P, 1) = π(P, 1).                                 (4)
Comparing (3) and (4), and noting that π(P, 0) > π(P, 1) and V (P + 1, 0) >
V (P, 0), we conclude that a∗ (P, 0) > a∗ (P, 1).


   Extension: endogenous exit.           We now consider the possibility of a
seller “exiting,” by which we mean secretly changing his identity and starting
a new reputation history.18 Intuitively, we would expect the seller’s tendency
  17
     In the following result, we make the implicit assumption that consumers do not observe
the calendar date at which previous transactions took place.
  18
     If identity changes are unobservable, than an identity change amounts to an exit in
terms of our model. A number of theoretical papers have analyzed the phenomenon of
creation and trade of names: Tadelis (1999), Cabral (2000), Friedman and Resnick (2001),
Mailath and Samuelson (2001).


                                            12
to do so to be decreasing in the seller’s reputation. In order to prove a result
along these lines, we consider the following extension of our basic model. First,
we assume that good sellers produce positive transactions with probability γ
close to one but strictly less than one. This is important as we want the value
function V (P, N ) to be strictly increasing in P when N > 0, whereas γ = 1
implies that V (P, N ) is constant for N > 0. Second, we assume that, in each
period, the seller has a cost x of changing identity (excluding the opportunity
cost of abandoning a reputation). We assume x is i.i.d. according to the c.d.f.
F (x). Our next result shows that sellers with a better reputation are less likely
to change their identity.

Proposition 3 Let X(P, N ) be the probability of identity change after history
(P, N ). Suppose that γ and µ0 are close to, but lower than, one. If N > 0,
then X(P, N ) is decreasing in P and increasing in N .

Proof: First notice that the value function, V (P, N ), is increasing in P and
decreasing in N . Following the argument in the proof of Proposition 1, we see
that, if µ0 is sufficiently close to one, then there is a unique perfect Bayesian
equilibrium. It follows that the value function is entirely determined by µ.
Bayesian updating implies that µ is increasing in P and decreasing in N .
   Second, notice that the value of starting a new history is independent of
the current history. Taken together, these facts imply that the incremental
value of changing one’s identity is decreasing in P and increasing in N .


   Extension: free-entry equilibrium. The natural next step after look-
ing at the possibility of entry and exit is to look for the existence of a free-entry
equilibrium. Suppose there is a measure of potential sellers, a fraction µ̄ of
which is of high type. Suppose also that sellers don’t know their type un-
til they pay the entry cost, which we denote by k. Finally, suppose that an
existing seller can change his name at a low cost. Given the equilibrium ef-
fort strategies described in Proposition 1 and the exit strategies described in
Proposition 3, there is an equilibrium belief µ0 that takes into account both the
equilibrium entry strategies and the equilibrium exit strategies. Furthermore,
µ0 is decreasing in the probability of entry and exit by low types, whereas the
expected value from entering is increasing in µ0 . Together, these facts imply
that there is a unique value of µ0 .
    Notice that Proposition 1 is valid for any value of µ0 . Following a suffi-
ciently long streak of P s, the first N must lead to lower sales and an increase
in the hazard rate of future N s. What happens at the initial stages, however,

                                         13
does depend on the nature of the free-entry equilibrium. In particular, rational
buyers will factor in the fact that “new” sellers can either be genuinely new
sellers, taken from the pool with a fraction of µ̄ good sellers; or they can be
bad sellers who secretely changed their identity. We would therefore expect a
particularly negative premium on new sellers: a new name partly signals low
type.19

   Extension: “buying” a reputation Tadelis (1999), Mailath and Samuel-
son (2001), and others consider the problem of buying names (and the asso-
ciated reputation). Name trades do not take place on eBay (to the best of
our knowledge). However, there is some anecdotal evidence that many sellers
started their reputations by making a series of purchases. In fact, it is easier
(and cheaper) to create a good reputation as a buyer than as a seller. In
this context, the question addressed by Mailath and Samuelson (2001), “Who
wants to buy a reputation?,” seems to apply here as well: what seller has an
incentive to start off by investing (as a buyer) on an initial reputation history?
Is it low-type sellers or high-type sellers?
    Suppose that a measure zero of sellers has the option of starting a rep-
utation by making P0 purchases and receiving a P in each transaction with
probability one.20 If V i (P, N ) (i = H, L) is the seller’s value given a history
(P, N ), then the value of an initial reputation is given by V i (P0 , 0) − V i (0, 0).
The answer to our question is then given by the difference of differences
                                                                              
           ∆(P0 ) ≡ V H (P0 , 0) − V H (0, 0) − V L (P0 , 0) − V L (0, 0) .

    In an appendix, we derive the value of ∆(P0 ). It is given by a compli-
cated expression, one we have not been able to sign analytically. However,
for reasonable values of the main parameters we find that ∆(P0 ) > 0, that
is, a good-type seller is willing to pay more for an initial reputation than a
bad-type seller.21
  19
      See Tadelis (1999), Cabral (2000). Although we do not test for this prediction, anecdotal
evidence seems broadly consistent with this prediction.
   20
      This measure-zero assumption implies that buyers take the initial record as a genuine
selling record. Although it is not a necessary assumption for the results we derive here, it
greatly simplifies the analysis.
   21                                                                                   1
      Assuming that the seller chooses high effort while N = 0, we have T (P, 0) = 1−α     and
              1
T (P, N ) = 1−β for N > 0. Table 6 (to be discussed below) suggests that T (P, 0) = 350,
whereas T (P, 0) = 175. Solving for the relevant parameters, we get α ≈ 0.997 and β ≈ 0.994.
On the other hand, Table 1 suggests a value of µ0 between 0.25 and 0.5. For these values
and for δ = .9 (which we set somewhat arbitrarily), we find that ∆(P0 ) > 0. Moreover, for
all other parameter value constellations we tried we also obtained ∆ > 0, suggesting that


                                              14
   Other extensions.         There are other possible extensions of the basic
model, two of which we mention here. First, we could consider variations
in the auction mechanism, for example, reserve prices. However, as long as
the equilibrium probability of entry, p(v), and the expected price, π(v), are
increasing in v, then the sign predictions of Corollaries 1–3 remain valid. Sec-
ond, we assumed that the seller offers one object per period. Alternatively,
and more realistically, we could assume that there is an increasing trend in the
number of objects offered per period. In this case, Corollary 1 applies to the
de-trended sales rate (or the sales growth rate, as we will consider in Section
5.1).

   The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. In Section 5, we test the empirical
implications of Proposition 1, specifically Corollaries 1, 2, and 3. We also
consider alternative explanations for the prediction in the latter result. Before
that, in the next section, we describe the data sources we used.


4      Data description
We used Perl-based “spider” programs to download data directly from eBay’s
website at monthly intervals between October 24, 2002 and March 16, 2003.
We focused our attention on auctions of (arguably) ex-ante homogenous goods
to minimize the impact of object-level heterogeneity, but we also wanted to
capture possible sources of variation across objects with different characteris-
tics. Hence we collected transaction level information on the following objects
(displayed in Figure 3):22

    1. Collectible coins. We chose this category since the collectible coin market
       is one of the most active segments on eBay and several previous studies
       of eBay auctions have looked at this market.23 We looked at two different
       kinds of coins. The first type of coin we look at are 1/16 oz. 5 dollar gold
there may be a general result for our basic model.
   In a model with more than two types, Mailath and Samuelson’s (2001) Proposition 4 sug-
gests that V (P0 , 0)−V (0, 0) is highest for the intermediate seller types. See also Proposition
3 in Tadelis (1999). Note however that these models do not quite map into our framework,
which we think is more appropriate in the eBay context.
  22
     eBay stores data on completed auctions for 30 days. We attempted to get data from all
completed auctions in the above period. Several times our spider program was stalled by
network problems. We believe that any data loss from this technical problem is independent
of the nature of the auction.
  23
     Bajari and Hortaçsu (2000,2003), Melnik and Alm (2002) and Lucking-Reiley, Prasad
and Reeves (2000).


                                               15
       coins of 2002 vintage (gold American Eagle), produced by the U.S. mint.
       The second type of coin are 2001 silver proof sets, a set of ten coins of
       different denominations, also produced by the U.S. mint. An important
       difference between these two types of coins is that, while the proof set is
       in mint condition, the gold coin may come in various grades.24 There is
       no grading in proof sets, these are all in “mint” condition, as the average
       sale price for the gold coin in our data set was $50, and the proof sets
       sold on average for $78.

   2. IBM Thinkpad T23 PIII notebook computers. We chose this category
      because, according to the FBI’s online fraud investigation unit, most
      customer complaints regarding online auction fraud arise from laptop
      auctions. We further chose this object because, while notebook comput-
      ers tend to come in many different configurations (regarding memory,
      disk space, peripherals, screen size), this particular IBM model seemed
      to have relatively minor differences in configuration compared to other
      manufacturers. The average sale price of the Thinkpad T23’s in our data
      set was $580.

   3. 1998 Holiday Teddy Beanie Babies, produced by the Ty toy company.
      Beanie babies are another hugely popular collectors’ item on eBay, and
      according to the FBI’s Internet Fraud unit comprise the second largest
      source of fraud complaints on online auctions. This is the least expensive
      item in our data set, with an average sale price of $10.7.

The Data Appendix and Table 12 present various summary statistics from the
transaction level data.
    Along with transaction-level data, we also downloaded each seller’s “feed-
back summary” page, as shown in Figure 2. We recorded the information
regarding feedback in the most recent week, month and six months. We also
recorded the seller’s entire sequence of reviews.
    We should note that the feedback record of the seller and the transaction-
level data can be linked only for the particular transactions we sampled. That
is, a seller may be selling many different kinds of laptops other than IBM
Thinkpads, or different coins and Beanie Babies; or she may be operating on
many other markets as well. However, the only transaction level informa-
tion (i.e., prices, object descriptions, number of bidders) we have are for the
  24
    In the data, we found that the gold coins came in three different “grades:” MS–70,
MS–69 and MS–67, in decreasing order of value. By contrast, the proof set is produced by
the U.S. Mint and preserved in plastic container.


                                          16
           Table 1: Distribution of feedback aggregates across sellers.

                    Number of       Number of      Number of           N/(N + P )
                     Positives       Negatives      Neutrals       (entire history)
           Mean            1,625             4.9            7.2               0.009
       Std. Dev.           3,840            25.1           33.5               0.038
            Min.               0               0              0                   0
            Max.          52,298             651            654                   1
             1%                0               0              0                   0
             5%                5               0              0                   0
            10%               18               0              0                   0
            25%               99               0              0                   0
            50%              397               1              1              0.0028
            75%            1,458               3              4              0.0092
            90%            4,361               9             13               0.021
            95%            7,134              19             29               0.034
            99%           15,005              52             86               0.068
              N              819             819            819                 795


particular categories for which we sampled this data. Unfortunately, the con-
struction of entire transaction histories for many of the sellers in our sample
is infeasible, since eBay does not allow users to access transaction level infor-
mation that is more than 30 days old, and many of the sellers in our sample
have been on eBay for much longer than that.25

   Seller characteristics. We now use the feedback summary data to re-
port some characteristics of the cross-section of sellers operating in these mar-
kets. Table 1 shows the breakdown of the distribution of total number of
reviews (positive, neutral or negative) received by each seller in our sample,
pooled over the four markets. Assuming that a constant fraction of transac-
tions are rated by bidders (reported to be about 50% by Resnick and Zeck-
hauser, 2001), the total number of feedback points is a good proxy for the total
number of transactions conducted by the seller, and hence a good measure of
size.
    The average seller in our sample had 1625 total feedback responses. The
median seller had 397. The largest seller has 52,298 feedback responses, and
  25
    In principle, one could construct forward-looking transaction and feedback histories for
a sample of “young” sellers; however, such a sample would not necessarily represent the
cross section of sellers operating in these product markets.


                                            17
the smallest had 0 (is yet to be rated, even though she sold something). We
found the distribution of seller sizes (proxied by number of feedback points
they got) to be approximately lognormal. Sellers were largest in the market
for Thinkpads, followed by teddies, gold coins and the proof sets.
     Although the mean and median seller in our sample is quite large (in terms
of transactions conducted), they seem to have gotten very few negative com-
ments. As can be seen from column (2) of Table 1, the average seller in our
sample has 4.9 negative feedback points, corresponding to 0.9% of all com-
ments. The maximum number of negative feedbacks received by a seller is
819, but this seller took part in 52298 transactions. Also observe that the
median seller in our sample has only one negative, and more than a quarter
of the sellers have no negatives.26
     One issue regarding the interpretation of comments is whether neutral
comments are closer to positives or to negatives (our model did not allow
for neutral comments). Our subjective impression, after browsing through
eBay community chatboards where users discuss issues regarding the feedback
system, is that the information contained by a neutral rating is perceived by
users to be much closer to negative feedback than positive. Indeed, observe
that in Table 1, the distributions of neutrals and negatives across sellers are
extremely similar. The average seller received 7.2 neutral comments in her
lifetime, with a median of again 1. Given this striking similarity, we will
henceforth lump negative and neutral comments together when talking about
“negative” comments.


5      Testing the model’s empirical implications
We now use our data to test the empirical predictions of the model presented
in Section 3. First, we use panel data on sellers’ feedback records to examine
the impact of negative feedback on the sales rate (cf Corollary 1 of Proposition
1, Proposition 2). Second, we use cross-section data to examine the impact of
reputation on sales price (cf Corollary 2 of Proposition 1). Third, we use panel
data to analyze the interarrival times of the first and subsequent negatives (cf
Corollary 3 of Proposition 1). Fourth, we inquire whether and how sellers in
  26
    Some negative comments for sellers have the following textual content: “THIS PERSON
RIPPED ME OFF, SENT SHODDY ITEM INSTEAD OF ITEM LISTED,” “Sold product
he didn’t have! Will not send refund! I am filing charges! No ansr,” “Overgraded junk. Does
not respond to emails. An irresponsible seller. Avoid him.” On the other hand, we found
that more than 40% of the positive comments contain the expression “A+”. Some more
colorful positive comments were: “Heaven must be missing an angel! Transaction couldn’t
be better! Thank U!!!” and “Mega cool mad phat deal nasty crazy cool even. Thanks.”


                                            18
our sample exit (cf Proposition 3). Finally, we report a series of interesting
findings on how eBay users choose between buying and selling activities (see
the concluding discussion in Section 3).

5.1     Negative feedback and sales
Corollary 1 implies that, after the first Negative is received, the fraction of ob-
jects offered by the seller that are actually sold decreases. Moreover, Propo-
sition 2 implies that the seller offers fewer objects upon the first Negative.
Together, these results imply lower sales after the first Negative. In this sec-
tion, we test this implication.
     Our typical seller receives his first negative during the early stages of his
career. During this period, sales rates are typically increasing over time. Our
theoretical results and empirical tests should therefore be adjusted to this
fact. Accordingly, we test the implications of Corollary 1 and Proposition 2
by looking at the impact of the first Negative on the seller’s growth rate.
     It is difficult to construct entire transaction histories for eBay sellers, es-
pecially those that existed before a 30 day window preceding the sampling
period.27 Moreover, since negatives are rare occurrences, this type of data
is quite costly to acquire by Web-spidering. However, one can utilize eBay’s
comprehensive feedback comments database to construct retrospective sales
histories for a cross section of sellers. As was discussed in Section 2, eBay
displays every single feedback comments received by a user over their entire
lifetime. Unfortunately, these comments do not yield price information, but
under Assumption 2 (a constant fraction of sales are accompanied by feedback
comments), we can use the number of feedback comments received by a seller
as a (lagged) measure of sales. Specifically, we constructed a proxy for weekly
sales totals by summing the total number of sales-related feedback comments
received by a seller in a given week. We then marked the weeks in which a
seller received her first, second, and third Negatives.
     Many times, when an eBay seller receives a negative comment, there is
a “war of words” between the seller and the buyer who places the negative.
During this “war of words,” the two parties can give several negatives to each
other within a period of two or three days. We did not count the negatives
that the sellers received during such episodes, and concentrated on the timing
between de novo Negatives.
     We then averaged the weekly sales rates over a four week “window” be-
  27
    This is the period during which the complete data regarding a particular transaction is
available.


                                            19
fore and after the week in which the seller got his first (or second, or third)
negative.28 We also calculated the sellers’ “before” and “after” weekly growth
rates by averaging growth rates over these two four-week windows. Finally,
we conducted paired t-tests of the null hypothesis of equality of growth rates
before and after the first Negative.
    The results, reported in Table 2, are striking: For all four object categories,
the impact of the first Negative is to slow growth by 14% a week, and this
difference is highly statistically significant. The difference in growth rates
before an after the second Negative is positive. However, except for Golden
American Eagle, the difference is not statistically significant. The impact of
the third Negative also does not appear to be statistically significant.
    Two notes are in order. First, our exercise depends crucially on the assump-
tion that the probability of feedback is the same before and after a Negative.
However, this is only a problem if buyers are somewhat reluctant to give pos-
itive comments about a seller after the seller has received her first (or second
or third) Negative. Intuition suggests that the opposite is more likely to be
true.
    Second, our strategy for collecting seller histories retrospectively may imply
a sample bias (we only have data for surviving sellers). In particular, there may
be sellers who exited after receiving the first Negative and are thus excluded
from our sample. But intuition suggests that, if anything, this reinforces the
point that the first Negative has a negative impact on sales.
    In summary, there is significant evidence that the first Negative has a strong
negative impact on the seller’s growth rate; and that subsequent Negatives
have lower or no impact on the sales rate.29

5.2     Reputation and price
The theoretical model in Section 3 implies that differences in feedback histories
lead to differences in the sale price of otherwise identical objects across sellers
with different feedback aggregates. To investigate the empirical nature of these
differences, several papers in the prior empirical literature on eBay have run
regressions of the form:30
  28
      For many sellers, longer evaluation periods would include subsequent Negatives. We
believe a four-week window is a good balance between avoiding loss of data and statistical
significance.
   29
      As Footnote 2 of Table 2 states, we computed growth rates as differences in logs. When
computed as the ratio (xt+1 − xt )/xt , we obtained different values but the same qualitative
patterns.
   30
      For surveys of these papers, see Bajari and Hortaçsu (2003), Resnick et al. (2003)



                                             20
           Table 2: Impact of negatives on sales growth (%).

         Avg. Week.                             Object
          Growth R.       Thinkpad       Proof set  G. Eagle           B. Baby
First          Before   7.12              6.85       9.04      14.19
Negat.          After −6.76              −7.51      −3.89      −4.28
           Difference −13.88 ***        −14.36 *** −12.92 *** −18.47 ***
           Std. Error   4.88              3.45       3.58       3.69
                   N      66               130         95        136
Second         Before       3.96             4.50       −0.22           7.68
Negat.          After       9.93             8.00        9.47           8.03
           Difference      +5.97            +3.50       +9.69 **       +0.36
           Std. Error       5.00             5.96        4.82           6.12
                   N          37               78          70             83
Third          Before       9.19             3.80        3.58           2.00
Negat.          After       5.28             2.48       −2.09          10.25
           Difference      −3.90            −1.32       −5.68          +8.24
           Std. Error       6.14             3.22        7.44           6.23
                   N          28               57          52             64

Notes:   1. Standard errors in parentheses. Significance levels 10, 5, 1 percent
            (one to three stars).
         2. Weekly growth rates are based on the number of sales-related
            feedbacks received by the seller.
         3. Growth rate in week t = ln(no. feedbacks in week t) - ln(no.
            feedbacks in week t − 1).
         4. Weekly growth rates are averaged over 4 week periods taken before
            and after the reception of a negative.




                                       21
          price = β(reputation measure) + γ(other demand factors) + .

Since we have data for a series of auctions across four homogeneous product
categories, we follow the literature by running similar cross-sectional regres-
sions.
    Table 3 reports our first set of results. In these regressions, the depen-
dent variable is the log of the highest bid registered in the auction.31 Hence
the coefficient estimates can be interpreted (loosely) as percentage changes in
price. The regression in column (1) allows for heteroskedasticity across object
classes and controls for object dummies. The coefficient on the percentage
of negatives in a seller’s feedback history is negative and implies that a one
point increase in this percentage (at the mean value, from 1% to 2%) leads to
a 9% decline in sale price. The coefficient on the total number of transaction
reviews (divided by 1000) received by the seller is positive (but not significant
at conventional levels), and implies that 1000 additional reviews increases sale
price by 5%.
    Observe that the magnitude of this estimate is close to the findings of
several other cross-sectional studies. In particular, the 5% price premium
implied by 1000 additional reviews is comparable to an 8% premium found
by the field experiment of Resnick et al. (2003), which compared sales prices
obtained by a seller ID with 2000 positive comments (and 1 negative), and a
seller with about 15 positive comments (and zero negatives).
    However, as first pointed out by Resnick et al. (2003), several unobservable
confounding factors may render a “causal” interpretation of the reputation
measure difficult. For example, sellers with better reputation measures may
also be much better at providing accurate and clear descriptions of the items
they are selling; hence their writing ability, and not their reputation, may be
underlying the higher prices they are receiving.
    The next set of results reported in Table 3 enable us to get a feel for the
importance of such confounding factors in cross-sectional price regressions. In
column (2), we adjust the standard errors by allowing for correlation in the
error term within a seller. This adjustment leads to the coefficient on the
percentage of negatives being no longer statistically significant (though the
coefficient on total number of reviews becomes significant). Column (3) pro-
vides even more clear evidence that unobservable factors may be at work. In
this regression, we include a dummy variable for the auctions run by hdoutlet,
 31
      According to eBay rules this is equal to the second highest bid plus the bid increment.
Table 3: Cross-sectional regressions. Dependent variable: logarithm of price.

                           (1)           (2)           (3)          (4)             (5)
  Percentage of         -9.051        -9.051         -0.346        2.835       -0.400
  negatives            (3.115)***   (10.808)        (7.415)      (7.618)      (7.419)
  Number of              0.056         0.056          0.004
  transactions         (0.040)       (0.027)**      (0.003)
  Age (in days)                                                    0.015
                                                                 (0.008)*
  eBay rating                                                                   0.012
                                                                              (0.009)
  Indicator for                                       4.598        4.698        4.482
  user hdoutlet                                     (0.543)***   (0.539)***   (0.576)***
  logarithm of           0.003         0.003          0.004        0.004        0.004
  minimum bid          (0.000)***    (0.001)***     (0.001)***   (0.001)***   (0.001)***
  Listing               -0.219        -0.219         -0.080       -0.084       -0.083
  includes photo       (0.060)**     (0.147)        (0.107)      (0.129)      (0.107)
  Refurbished           -0.415        -0.415         -2.259       -2.214       -2.263
  object               (1.135)       (1.079)        (0.736)***   (0.735)***   (0.736)***
  Paypal                 0.188         0.188         -0.049        0.034       -0.047
  accepted             (0.205)       (0.200)        (0.098)      (0.120)      (0.098)
  Credit cards           0.365         0.365          0.293        0.281        0.293
  accepted             (0.230)       (0.104)***     (0.104)***   (0.110)**    (0.104)***
  Auction duration       0.039         0.039          0.042        0.038        0.042
  (days)               (0.022)       (0.019)**      (0.017)**    (0.019)**    (0.017)**
  Peak hour              0.242         0.242          0.185        0.223        0.187
                       (0.215)       (0.168)        (0.164)      (0.182)      (0.165)
  Day of week           -0.028        -0.028         -0.030       -0.031       -0.029
                       (0.019)       (0.020)        (0.020)      (0.021)      (0.020)
  Weeks since           -0.014        -0.014         -0.004       -0.002       -0.004
  start of sample      (0.013)       (0.017)        (0.015)      (0.016)      (0.015)
  American Eagle         0.398         0.398          0.772        0.941        0.765
                       (0.070)**     (0.515)        (0.501)      (0.521)*     (0.501)
  Mint set               0.725         0.725          1.104        1.327        1.099
                       (0.058)***    (0.510)        (0.494)**    (0.503)***   (0.494)**
  Beanie Baby           -1.069        -1.069         -0.571       -0.411       -0.579
                       (0.041)***    (0.525)**      (0.497)      (0.514)      (0.498)
  Constant               3.554         3.554          2.787        2.352        2.797
                       (1.156)*      (1.203)***     (1.139)**    (1.198)*     (1.131)**
  Observations           1114           1114          1114         1003            1114
  R-squared              0.39           0.39          0.48         0.48            0.48

  Notes:     1. Significance levels: 10, 5, 1 percent (one to three stars).
             2. Robust standard errors (clustered by sellerid) in parentheses in
                columns (2)-(5).
                                               23
the dominant seller (with close to 50% market share) in the Thinkpad mar-
ket. This leads to the economic and statistical significance of the percentage
of negatives and the length of the transaction record to disappear entirely,
implying that the comparison of auctions of this seller vis-a-vis other, much
smaller sellers, drives much of the finding in column (1).
    The results in column (2) and column (3) suggest that factors other than
differences across sellers transaction histories may affect the cross-sectional
variation in prices; and it may be difficult for an econometrician to account for
these factors since the econometrician is typically not a very knowledgeable
buyer in these markets. In fact, a few of the other coefficient estimates in
Table 3 also suggest that factors other than reputation scores play a larger
role in the cross-sectional variation of prices. For example, prices were about
80% lower when the word “refurbished” was present in the auction description.
When the seller allowed payment by a credit card, prices were higher by 28%.
Finally, longer auctions appeared to fetch higher prices (one additional day
translates into 4% increase in price).
    However, it may also be the case that the weakened results in columns (2)
and (3) are due to a misspecification of how reputation measures should enter
the regression. Hence, in column (4), we include the sellers age, measured in
days (divided by 100) since her first ever feedback instead of the total number
of comments. The coefficient on age is significant, implying that a seller who
is 100 days older can command 1.5% higher prices. Finally, in column (5)
we include eBay’s official measure of reputation (number of unique positives
minus unique negatives). The coefficient estimate (which is not significant at
10%, but at 12.5%) implies that a 1000 point increase in net positives increases
prices by 1.5%.
    In summary, the results in Table 3 suggest, at best, a rather weak con-
nection between sale price and the reputation measures that eBay publishes.
The results in columns (3) through (5) suggest that variables correlated with
the length of a seller’s transaction history (total number of reviews, age, and
eBay’s rating) appear to have a more robust relationship with price than the
percentage of negatives.

   Impact of a change in website design. One way to strengthen the
case for a causal connection between cross-sectional variation in reputation
and sale price is to exploit an exogenous change in reputation measures which
is not correlated with the way sellers prepare their listings. We exploit the
following exogenous change in eBay’s website format: before March 1st, 2003,
bidders would only see the seller’s overall (net positive) feedback points next to


                                       24
the seller’s name. On March 1st, 2003, eBay began to display the percentage
of positive comments received by the seller, as well as the date when the seller
registered on eBay (see Figure 2).32
    In columns (1) and (2) of Table 4, we find that the interaction of the
percentage of negatives with a dummy variable for the format change implies
that the response of prices became more negative after the format change.33
According to the regression results, the economic effect of a 1% increase in
negative feedback was a 6% change in price before the format change (but
insignificant), and a −8% change after the format change. Furthermore, the
coefficient estimates on eBay’s own reputation rating (ebayrating), which was
the only reported reputation measure on the listing page before March 1, 2003,
and variables that are highly correlated with this rating (such as the total
number of transactions conducted by a seller, and the seller age measured in
days) are lower after the change.
    The results of these regressions suggest two things: that bidders respond to
the reputation statistics published by eBay (the March 2003 dummy is signifi-
cant), and that there might be costs to information acquisition and processing
(the same information was available before and after March 2003).

5.3     Frequency of arrival of negative feedback
To test Corollary 3 of Proposition 1, we once again utilize seller feedback
histories to construct a data set containing the timing of each negative/neutral
feedback.34 We measured “time” in two ways: number of sales transactions
and days. As mentioned above, negative comments often came in the context
of a “war of words” between seller and buyer. To prevent such incidents from
biasing our results, we excluded consecutive negative comments by the same
buyer. We also excluded any Negatives that were left within a two-day period
after another negative.35
  32
      We found out about this policy change by accident. We should point out that before
March 1st, 2003, the information shown in Figure 2 was already available to bidders. How-
ever, in order to see the fraction of seller’s negative comments, the bidder would have to
click on the seller’s highlighted username (which would take the bidder to a new “feedback
profile” page) and manually compute the ratio N/(N + P ).
   33
      This regression corrects standard errors by allowing for heteroskedasticity at the seller
level. We also added a dummy variable for a particularly large seller in the laptop market.
Omission of either of these features lead to significance of the coefficient at higher levels.
   34
      We excluded those negative/neutral comments that were received as a “buyer.” There
were only four instances of this in our sample.
   35
      We also experimented with 1 day and 5 day periods. Our results are robust to the
choice of window length.
Table 4: Impact of change in eBay’s site design. Dependent variable: logarithm
of highest bid.

                                                    (1)             (2)
           Percentage of negatives                 6.603           6.335
                                                 (8.770)         (8.827)
           Total number of transactions            0.004
                                                 (0.004)
           Age in days                             0.018           0.016
                                                 (0.011) *       (0.011)
           eBay Rating                                             0.016
                                                                 (0.012)
           Percentage of negatives              −14.764        −14.075
           after format change                   (8.238) *      (8.450) *
           Total number of transactions          −0.008
           after format change                   (0.010)
           Age in days                           −0.011          −0.010
           after format change                   (0.015)         (0.015)
           eBay rating                                           −0.018
           after format change                                   (0.018)
           Indicator for auctions                  0.003         −0.005
           after format change                   (0.379)         (0.382)
           (Other auction level
           regressors omitted)
           Observations                             1003            1003
           R-squared                                0.49            0.49

           Notes:   1. Standard errors in parentheses. Significance
                       levels: 10, 5, 1 percent (one to three stars).
                    2. Robust standard errors (clustered by seller
                       id) in parentheses.




                                         26
                Table 5: Timing of first and second Negatives.

                                                           Object
                                         Th’pad       P. set    Eagle        Beanie
Time measured          Time to first 129               441        459          399
in number of              negative (22)               (52)       (77)         (55)
sales-related          Time 1st-2nd   60               220        210          278
feedbacks                  negative (12)              (36)       (44)         (63)
(All sellers with          Difference      69 ***      221 *** 249 ***         121 **
2+ negatives)                            (19)         (52)     (85)           (66)
                                    N         57        90         83         110
Time measured            Time to 1st 117               460        296         418
in number of                negative (22)            (144)       (67)       (122)
sales-related          Time 1st-2nd   43               130         94          135
feedbacks                  negative (16)              (39)       (24)         (26)
(Sellers born after        Difference      74 ***      330 *** 201 ***   283 **
June 16, 2001)                           (19)        (135)     (53)    (113)
                                    N         28        11         17              23
Time measured            Time to 1st 300               420        407          415
in number of                negative (36)             (16)       (42)         (43)
days                   Time 1st-2nd   66               118        117          152
                           negative (13)              (16)       (16)         (24)
(All sellers with          Difference     233 ***      302 *** 302 ***         263 **
2+ negatives)                            (37)         (37)     (37)           (49)
                                    N         57        90         83         110

Notes:   1. Standard errors in parentheses. Significance levels 10, 5, 1 percent
            (one to three stars).
         2. Seller samples restricted to sellers with at least 2 negative
            feedbacks.
         3. Retaliation feedbacks are excluded from consideration using
            procedure described in Section 5.1.
         4. Sale vs. purchase nature of transactions are reported by eBay after
            June 16, 2001. Transactions preceding this period are classified by
            the algorithm described in Section 5.5.




                                         27
    Table 5 reports comparisons of the number of sales-related comments re-
ceived by a seller until her first negative comment vs. the number of comments
received between the first and second negative comments. The results are ob-
tained by a regression of interarrival times of first and second negatives on a
dummy variable that turns on for the second negative, controlling for seller
fixed effects (equivalent to a within-seller paired t test) . The results in the
first panel indicate that, for the Thinkpad, it takes on average 129 transactions
before a seller receives his first Negative, but only 60 additional transactions
before the second Negative arrives. The difference is significant at the 1%
level. Similar results are obtained for the other three objects.
    The second panel of Table 5 replicates the analysis on a subsample of sellers
born after June 16, 2001. Prior to this date, feedback comments do not specify
if the comment giver is a buyer or a seller. We used the actual textual remarks
to guess the nature of the feedback. As we describe in detail in Section 5.5,
this is not a perfectly accurate process. However, Table 5 suggests that our
results are not biased by the noise introduced by our classification.
    The third panel of Table 5 replicates the analysis with time measured in
days. The difference between the interarrival times of the first vs. the second
negative is again quite striking: in the Thinkpad market, for example, it takes
on average 300 days for the first Negative to arrive, but only 66 days for
the second one. Once again, the result is robust to restricting attention to
subsamples with smaller/younger sellers.
    In Table 6, we investigate whether the interarrival times of the third, fourth,
fifth and sixth negatives are different from the second or the first. In column
(1), we run a regression of interarrival times of negatives (measured in terms of
sales-related comments received by the seller) on dummy variables for the first
and third to sixth negative comments — i.e., the second negative is treated as
the base case of the regression. The regression indicates that the first negative
is indeed the slowest one to arrive. In fact, the interarrival times for the third
to sixth negatives are not significantly different for the interarrival time leading
to the second negative. Very similar results are obtained when we measured
interarrival times in days (second column).

   Alternative explanations. The results reported in the previous section
support Corollary 3. At the very least, it appears from these results that there
is something “special” about the first negative that a seller receives: once the
first negative arrives, the second one arrives faster. We will now investigate
three alternative explanations for this phenomenon.
    The first alternative explanation is a “scaling-up” effect: it might be pos-


                                        28
  Table 6: Timing of subsequent Negatives.

                     Number of           Number of
                     rated sales             days
                    till Negative       till Negative
1st Negative         173.44             189.46
                    (31.62) ***        (25.82) ***
3rd Negative         -17.05             -27.80
                    (31.60)            (13.24) **
4th Negative          21.72             -18.38
                    (29.96)            (12.85)
5th Negative          40.15             -15.30
                    (37.14)            (15.21)
6th Negative          19.13             -26.73
                    (30.49)            (12.67) **
                     (seller f.e.       (seller f.e.
                    not reported)      not reported)
Constant             174.89              87.24
(2nd Negative)      (20.45) ***        (10.45) ***
Observations           1014               1014
Adj. R-squared         0.38               0.27

Notes:   1. Standard errors in parentheses.
            Significance levels 10, 5, 1 percent
            (one to three stars).




                         29
sible that a seller takes longer to acquaint himself with the market, and does
not do that much business in the early days, implying that it takes a long time
for the first negative to arrive. However, our results also hold true when we
measure time in number of transactions.
    The second alternative explanation is that buyers have a threshold of dis-
satisfaction above which they give a negative; and this threshold drops after
the first negative. There are several behavioral mechanisms through which
this can happen, and we consider these in turn.
    One way in which such a “threshold decline” may occur is through a de-
crease in the cost of writing a negative comment. As we noted above, many
negative comments are followed by a “war of words” between buyer and seller.
Seller retaliation might impose an economic cost on the complaining buyer,
especially if the buyer is also a seller. Such an effect would confound our re-
sults if the probability of retaliation by a seller in reaction to her first negative
is higher than retaliation to her second negative, an explanation proposed by
several eBay users we talked to.36
    To investigate this possibility, we first checked, for every negative or neu-
tral comment-giver in our sample, whether their particular negative comment
was accompanied by a retaliatory negative left by the seller. The result was
striking: of the almost 10,000 negative/neutral instances in our data, 2462
resulted in a retaliatory comment by the seller. It is also interesting to note
that sellers were less likely to retaliate against neutral comments, as opposed
to negatives: we found that a buyer leaving a negative comment has a 40%
chance of being hit back, while a buyer leaving a neutral comment only has a
10% chance of being retaliated upon by the seller.
    However, our data indicates that sellers are not more likely to retaliate upon
their first negative, as opposed to subsequent negatives. In Table 7, we regress
an indicator for retaliation by the seller following a particular negative/neutral
comment on dummy variables for the second through sixth occurrence of such
a comment. As displayed in columns (1) and (2), the dummy variables do not
enter significantly — the seller is not more likely to retaliate against the first
negative comment, as opposed to subsequent negatives. Interestingly, in the
first regression, we find that sellers with higher ex-post percentage of negatives
are more likely to retaliate (the regression coefficient can be interpreted as
saying that a seller with 1% higher n is 4% more likely to retaliate). However, it
does not appear that “fear of retaliation” is a significant driver of the difference
  36
     We should note that it is not at all clear whether this would play out in an equilibrium
setting. However, since eBay users suggested this as an alternative explanation, we decided
to evaluate its merits.


                                             30
Table 7: Alternative explanations for differences in arrival times.

                                   Dependent variable
                    (1)             (2)            (3)            (4)
                 Retaliation     Retaliation      Profile        Profile
2nd Negative       0.016           0.025           0.011         0.011
                 (0.055)         (0.063)         (0.013)       (0.015)
3rd Negative       0.030           0.043           0.003        -0.003
                 (0.059)         (0.068)         (0.015)       (0.016)
4th Negative      -0.005           0.000           0.020         0.020
                 (0.064)         (0.069)         (0.020)       (0.021)
5th Negative       0.044           0.118           0.015         0.011
                 (0.068)         (0.074)         (0.018)       (0.018)
6th Negative       0.053           0.107           0.045         0.040
                 (0.071)         (0.073)         (0.023) *     (0.024)
Percentage of      4.664                          -0.053
Negatives        (1.907) **                      (0.372)
Number of          0.000                          -0.000
transactions     (0.000)                         (0.000)
eagle              0.100         (seller f.e.)    -0.079       (seller f.e.)
dummy            (0.120)                         (0.038) **
mint               0.000                          -0.087
dummy            (0.094)                         (0.037) **
teddy              0.091                          -0.071
dummy            (0.089)                         (0.039) *
Constant           0.115           0.239           0.105         0.038
                 (0.098)         (0.045) ***     (0.043) **    (0.012) ***
Observations          558            567             575           584
R-squared            0.03           0.38            0.06          0.38

Notes:   1. Robust standard errors in parentheses. Significance levels
            10, 5, 1 percent (one to three stars).
         2. Dependent variable Retaliation = 1 if buyer’s negative
            comment is followed by seller’s negative comment.
         3. Dependent variable Profile = frequency of negative
            comments by the buyer who gave a particular negative
            comment.
                                   31
in interarrival times of negative comments.
    A second variation on the “threshold” story is that, in addition to time
variation, there is also buyer variation in propensity to give negative feedback.
So first negatives would primarily be given by negative-prone buyers, whereas
subsequent negatives would originate in a wider set of buyers. To test this
possibility, we downloaded the string of feedbacks that were left by every
negative/neutral comment giver in our data set.37 We then computed the
percentage of negative comments that each of these reviewers left about others,
as a measure of each reviewer’s “critical attitude.” In Table 7, columns (3)
and (4), we regress the critical attitude of the reviewer leaving a particular
negative/neutral comment on dummy variables for the second through sixth
occurrence of a negative/neutral. The regression result tells us that buyers
who left the first negative were not systematically more “critical” than the
buyers who left subsequent negative feedback.38
    To conclude our test of the “threshold” story, we directly tested the hy-
pothesis that second negatives have a lower threshold than first negatives. We
constructed a series of pairs of first and second negative comments. We then
asked a third party (a student) to make a subjective evaluation as to which of
the two remarks was more negative.39 The results show that 51% of the sec-
ond negatives were considered “nastier” then the corresponding first negative,
a split that is not statistically different from 50/50.
    Finally, we consider the possibility that buyers are influenced by other
buyers’ behavior (herding, conformism, etc).40 imply that the events leading
to the first negative are different than those leading to subsequent negatives.
In particular, faced with poor performance by a seller with a perfect record,
a buyer might be inclined to think that there is no ground for a negative
feedback. For example, if there is a communication problem between buyer
and seller, the former may attribute this to a problem with him or herself, not
  37
      On eBay one can also observe what each user wrote about each other.
  38
      Interestingly, our data suggests a lower critical threshold for giving negatives in the
Beanie Babies market than in the laptop market: the average negative comment-giver in
the laptop market gave negatives 10% of the time, whereas the average complainant in the
Beanie Babies market complained only 3% of the time. We speculate that this result may
very loosely be attributed to our observation that the Beanie Babies market on eBay can be
seen as a “community of collectors” with frequent repeated interactions, where wrong doings
are less tolerated, whereas transactions in the laptop market are not typically repeated.
   39
      We randomly mixed the order of the comments so that the student could not tell which
was the first, which was the second negative. We also allowed for the following possibili-
ties: “repeat” (remarks are literally identical), “mistake” (remarks are clearly positive even
though a negative was given), and “difficult to tell.”
   40
      There is an extensive psychology literature on this, including Asch (1946), Snyder and
Canto (1979) and Hoch and Ha (1986).


                                             32
                  Table 8: Reasons for negative feedback (%).

                                                First  Second
                                             Negative Negative
                  Misrepresented item              22          16
                  Bad communication                19          20
                  Item damaged                     15          17
                  Item not received                10          13
                  Backed out                        7           4
                  Angry / upset                     7           7
                  Overcharged shipping              6           4
                  Slow shipping                     6          10
                  Bad packaging                     4           6
                  Feedback issues                   3           3
                  Bid on own item                   1           1
                  Total                           100         100


with the seller. However, if the seller has already received a negative feedback,
especially regarding the same problem that the buyer is now facing, then the
buyer may have a greater inclination to attribute this to a problem with the
seller and give negative feedback. This is especially true for aspects of the
transaction that are more subjective and difficult to input (e.g., communication
problems).
    To consider this possibility we classified the first and second negative re-
marks according to their nature. The breakdown of the reasons for negative
feedback is presented in Table 8. The buyer influence story should imply an in-
crease in the relative importance of “subjective” problems in second negatives.
However, the results suggest a very similar pattern for first and second neg-
ative (correlation greater than 0.92). Moreover, “item never sent,” arguably
the most objective reason for negative feedback, actually increases in relative
importance (though by a small amount). At the opposite extreme, “bad com-
munication,” arguably the most subjective reason for negative feedback, also
increases in importance (though by an even smaller amount).
    In sum, the empirical evidence suggests that the behavioral change from
the first to the second negative is on the seller side, not on the buyer side; i.e.,
Corollary 3 is confirmed by the data. Of course, there might be alternative
explanations we might not have taken into account, but we believe it would
be difficult to test for other behavioral hypotheses using the data available.


                                        33
5.4     Reputation and exit
In order to test Proposition 3, we supplemented our data set by revisiting our
sample of sellers in the first week of January, 2004, and checking whether they
were still in business. There was considerable attrition in our sample: of the
819 sellers originally sampled in our sweep of the transaction-level data, we
found that 152 had not conducted any transactions within the last 45 days
(pre- and post-Christmas are the busiest seasons on eBay), and 61 sellers had
not sold anything within the last 45 days, but had bought an item. We also
could not locate the feedback records for 104 sellers in our sample, since eBay’s
database claimed that these seller ID’s were no longer valid. Hence, .
     We then ran probit regressions of an “exit” outcome on seller’s observable
reputational statistics as of May 2003 (at the end of our initial sampling pe-
riod). As explanatory variables, we consider (a) the fraction of negatives and
neutrals and (b) the total number of positives.41 We ran the probit using dif-
ferent definitions of what constitutes an “exit,” and using different subsamples
of the data. In the first column of Table 9, we define an exit as any one of
the three events mentioned above (no transactions in the last 45 days, no sales
in the last 45 days, invalid ID). The second column classifies sellers who are
still making purchases as still being in the sample. The third column assumes
sellers with invalid IDs are still in the sample, and the fourth column combines
the exclusions in the second and third columns.
     The regression results, reported in Table 9 as marginal probit effects, imply
that a tenfold increase in the total number of positives (as of May 2003)
translates into a decline in exit probability (in January 2004) of between 14 to
21%. This effect is highly significant for all specifications in Table 9, and is in
concordance with the prediction in Proposition 3. Also, a 1% level increase in
the percentage of negatives in a seller’s record (i.e., from a sample average of
1% to 2%) translates into an increase in exit probability of 1.6 to 2.1%. This
effect appears economically smaller and less significant statistically; but it also
has the right sign as predicted by Proposition 3.
     In the next four columns of Table 9, we investigate whether the marginal
probit effects show any differences across the different objects (using the “exit”
definition in the first column). As can be seen, the “seller history length”
effect is quite significant for all object categories (declines in exit probabilities
between 18% and 27% for a tenfold increase in the length of the seller’s history).
Notice, however, that the correlation of percentage of negatives in May 2003
  41
    We also ran specifications with the number of negatives on the right hand side; these
did not lead to significant coefficients on this variable.



                                           34
Table 9: Can reputational variables predict seller exits? Dependent variable:
seller has exited by January 4, 2004.

                                               Subsample
                             All          Still-       Invalid       Invalid
                            exit         -sellers        ID          ID and
                           events       excluded      excluded        still-
                                                                     -sellers
                                                                    excluded
       Log. number     0.066             0.085         0.071         0.090
       negat. May 03 (0.049)           (0.046) *     (0.045)       (0.039) **
       Log. number        -0.170      -0.136      -0.181            -0.143
       posit. May 03     (0.024) *** (0.022) *** (0.021) ***       (0.018) ***
       Observations           818             818        818             818
                                               Subsample
                           Laptop        Golden        Silver        Beanie
                           sellers       sellers       sellers       sellers
       Log. number     0.026             0.131         0.037         0.157
       negat. May 03 (0.105)           (0.092)       (0.150)       (0.095) *
       Log. number        -0.164      -0.151      -0.304            -0.200
       posit. May 03     (0.049) *** (0.044) *** (0.093) ***       (0.045) ***
       Observations           199             255        115             249

       Notes:   1. Robust standard errors in parentheses. Significance
                   levels 10, 5, 1 percent (one to three stars).
                2. Probit marginal effects are reported.




                                         35
with subsequent exits is not very significant for objects other than Beanie
Babies. For Beanie Babies, the magnitude of the coefficient estimate implies
that an increase from 1% to 2% of negatives in a seller’s record translates into
12.5% higher exit probability.
    Next, we investigate whether the “exits” we see in our data set are ac-
companied by opportunistic profit-taking by sellers, and whether reputational
variables can predict such behavior.42 1 In order to do this, we collected data
on the last 25 sale transactions conducted by exiting sellers, and counted the
number of negative comments for these last 25 sale transactions. Some of
the examples were quite striking: one of the sellers in our sample, who had
22755 positives, racked up 11 negatives in her last 25 transactions; whereas
she had a total of 54 negatives in her previous transactions (the percentage
of negatives and neutrals over her overall history was 0.6%, versus 44% in the
last 25 transactions). On average, the percentage of negatives in the last 25
comments of exiting sellers (excluding those who remained as buyers and those
sellers whose ID’s became invalid, and thus we could not get data) was 4.38%,
as opposed to an average 1.61% over their entire histories. This difference is
statistically significant at the 1% level.
    To see if reputational statistics as of May 2003 have any predictive power
over such “opportunistic” exits, we ran probit regressions of an indicator vari-
able for the occurrence of an “opportunistic” exit on the reputational statistics.
We defined the indicator variable on the left-hand side to be equal to 1 if the
percentage of negatives within the last 25 transactions of a seller was more
than twice the percentage of negatives within the seller’s entire history.
    The results of these regressions, reported in Table 10, indicate that, for the
entire sample of sellers, a ten-fold increase in a seller’s count of negatives is
correlated with a 5% increase in “opportunistic” exit as defined above. The
coefficient estimate on the log number of positives is smaller: a 2% decrease
in “opportunistic” exits.
    Overall, the results are consistent with Proposition 3. Moreover, the “end-
of-life” increase in the number of negatives suggests that continuation incen-
tives play an important role in sellers’ behavior.

5.5     Who tries to buy a reputation?
Casual observation of feedback histories suggests that many sellers appear
to start out as “buyers,” completing a string of purchases before attempting
  42
   For a model of opportunistic use of reputation, see Phelan (2001). See also Gale and
Rosenthal (1994).


                                          36
Table 10: Opportunistic exits. Dependent variable: seller has exited by Jan-
uary 4, 2004 with an abnormal number of Negatives.

                           All         Laptop        Golden          Silver        Beanie
                         sellers       sellers       sellers         sellers       sellers
 Log. number     0.050       0.048                    0.072      -0.076           -0.008
 negat. May 03 (0.019) *** (0.026) *                (0.025) *** (0.076)          (0.045)
 Log. number           -0.017         -0.026         -0.024          0.030         0.018
 posit. May 03        (0.010) *      (0.013) **     (0.011) **     (0.045)       (0.022)
 Observations              818            199           255            115            250

 Notes:     1. Robust standard errors in parentheses. Significance levels 10, 5, 1
               percent (one to three stars).
            2. Probit marginal effects are reported.




their first sale. As an example, Figure 4 plots the percentage of sell vs. buy
transactions by user bearsylvania, an established Beanie Baby dealer, as a
function of the number of weeks he has been active on eBay. As can be seen,
bearsylvania started out as a buyer first, and quickly changed the pattern of
his transactions from purchases to sales.
    To estimate the prevalence of this phenomenon, we looked at the first and
last twenty comments received by each seller. We then defined a seller as
having switched from being a buyer to being a seller if more than 50% of the
first 20 comments referred to purchases, and more than 70% of the last 20
comments referred to sales.43
    An important difficulty with implementing the above coding scheme with
our data is that eBay does not report a buyer/seller classification for feedback
comments received prior to June 16, 2001. Since about two-thirds of our
sample sellers began their eBay careers prior to this date, we made our own
assignment as buyer vs. seller based on the textual content of the comments.44
  43
     To check the robustness of this definition of a “switch,” we defined a second indicator
with thresholds 40% and 80%, respectively.
  44
     We automated the classification procedure by first calculating the empirical frequencies
of word-stems like “buy,” “sell,” “pay,” “ship,” “pack” across buyer/seller categories in
a subsample of the post-June 16,2001 data. We then compared the likelihood of a given
comment to be a “buyer” or “seller” comment based on the presence of these keywords.
The accuracy of our classification of “seller” comments was remarkable: for the post-June
16,2001 data (for which we have eBay’s classifications) we were able to classify all but 117 of


                                              37
Given the assumptions that go into our classification scheme, we will report
some of our results for these two subsamples of sellers separately.
    We found that 38% of Beanie Baby sellers, 22% of laptop seller, 31% of
gold coin sellers, and 31% of proof set sellers followed the “buy first, sell later”
strategy (as defined above). We also found that, on average, 81% of a seller’s
last 20 transactions were sales, compared to 46% of the first 20 transactions. A
paired t-test of equality of the two percentages revealed a strongly statistically
significant increase in the percentage of sales (t-statistic equal to 25).45
    These results show that “buying first and selling later” is a widespread phe-
nomenon on eBay, and is somewhat more prominent in some object categories
than others. For example, eBay is widely known as one of the main trading
venues for Beanie Babies. It is conceivable that Beanie Baby enthusiasts first
start out as buyers in this market, and switch to selling once they accumulate
an inventory. On the other hand, laptop sellers are more likely to sell items
they have acquired through other channels.
    Next, to investigate the prediction of our theoretical model, we investi-
gated the correlation of the “buy first sell later” indicator variable with the
percentage of negatives in a seller’s record, and the length of the seller’s record.
Column (1) of Table 11 reports the marginal effects of a probit regression using
the sample of sellers who joined eBay after June 16, 2001 (i.e., the set of sellers
for whom we have direct data from eBay). This regression suggests that a 1%
level increase from the mean value of 0.7% of negatives to 1.7% negatives is
correlated with a 6.4% decrease in the probability that the seller “switched”
from being a buyer to a seller. The length of the seller’s record does not have
significant correlation with switching behavior.
    In column (2) of this table, we repeat the same probit regression for sellers
who started their career before eBay began to report buyer/seller classifications
of received feedback. The results appear very similar in sign and magnitude
12952 comments correctly. Our classification of “buyer” comments was less accurate, since
most of these buyer comments contain very little information (we checked to see if human
classification performed better in a subsample of comments; the improvement was marginal,
precisely due to the lack of informative content). In particular, we classified 1934 of 5035
“buyer” comments as a “seller” comment, a 60% accuracy rate. Hence, our classification
scheme is biased towards finding “sellers” as opposed to “buyers.” To address this problem,
when computing the percentage of a sales-related comments that a user gets within a given
time period, we add 17% (the average bias in the control sample) on top of the percentage
computed using our classification scheme.
  45
     To make sure that these results were not driven by the assumptions needed to construct
the buyer/seller classification for sellers with missing data, we repeated the same exercise
using the post-June 16, 2001 sample of sellers. We found that, on average, 77% of last
20 transactions were sales, as opposed to 46% of the first 20 transactions. Once again the
paired t-test strongly rejects equality.


                                            38
                     Table 11: Who tries to “buy” a reputation?


                            (1)          (2)           (3)           (4)          (5)           (6)
No. of comm./1000        -0.006       -0.008         -0.004        -0.002       -0.011         0.001
(by May 2003)           (0.034)      (0.006)        (0.005)       (0.004)      (0.005) **    (0.002)

Percent. negatives       -6.372       -6.093         -5.987        -4.774        2.803         1.582
(by May 2003)           (3.068) **   (2.967) **     (2.138) ***   (2.024) **   (1.272) **    (0.676) **

Gold coins                0.019        0.022          0.050         0.043        0.048        -0.042
                        (0.099)      (0.106)        (0.073)       (0.071)      (0.060)      (0.022)*

Silver proof sets         0.066       -0.011          0.047         0.087        0.062        -0.039
                        (0.098)      (0.103)        (0.070)       (0.070)      (0.058)       (0.024)

Beanie Babies             0.088        0.105          0.127         0.151        0.141        -0.009
                        (0.096)      (0.105)        (0.071) *     (0.071) **   (0.062) **    (0.026)

Seller switch from                                                              -0.008         0.016
buying to selling                                                              (0.032)       (0.022)

Observations                234          384           618           618          618           618

Dependent           1. Seller switched from buying to selling. Sample of sellers who joined eBay
variables:             after June 16, 2001. All transactions classified as “buy” or “sell” by eBay.
                    2. Seller switched from buying to selling. Sample of sellers who joined eBay
                       before June 16, 2001. Transactions were classified using the method
                       described in Section 5.5.
                    3. Seller switched from buying to selling: pooled sample.
                    4. Seller switched from buying to selling: stricter definition of “switch”
                       indicator.
                    5. Seller exited (according to definition in second column of Table 9).
                    6. Seller exited opportunistically (according to definition in Table 10).

Notes:              1. Robust standard errors in parentheses. Significance levels 10, 5, 1 percent
                       (one to three stars).
                    2. Probit marginal effects are reported.




                                               39
to the post-June 16, 2001 sample. In column (3), we pool the two samples
together and find once again that a 1% level increase in percentage of negatives
is correlated with a 6% decrease in “switching” probability. In column (4),
we conduct a robustness check on our dependent variable by changing the
threshold of being a “buyer” to having less than 40% of transactions as sales,
and the threshold of being a “seller” to having more than 80% of transactions
as sales. This modification does not appear to have an important effect on the
coefficient estimates.
    The coefficient estimates reported in Table 11, columns (1)-(4) suggest that
“better” sellers, i.e. the ones with a lower percentage of negatives, are more
likely to have switched from being buyers in their early career to becoming
sellers later on, a fact that is consistent with our theoretical prediction. Note,
however, that the sellers in our sample do not literally “buy” their reputations;
they purchase objects from other eBay users, and pay promptly to get positive
feedback. Some of these users may not have strategic motives in mind when
doing this — they may simply start out as collector/enthusiasts who first
buy objects, and then discover that they can make money by selling them.
Moreover, in principle, an interested buyer can freely inspect, just like we did,
whether a seller accumulated her feedback record by buying or selling. One
might think that strategic incentives for “purchasing one’s reputation” will be
curbed by this reporting activity. In fact, we suspect that eBay’s motive in
reporting this information is exactly this reason; but we haven’t been able to
confirm this suspicion. However, the comparison of the results in Column (1)
and (2) does not indicate that the reporting policy of eBay has had any effect
on who tries to buy a reputation. One would have expected the magnitude of
the coefficient estimate in Column (2) to be larger.46 A possible explanation
of this last result may be that, just like in Section 5.2, buyers may not bother
to check the details of feedback tables (and that sellers know this).
    A last sanity check on our strategic interpretation of the buying/selling
patterns is to see whether sellers who switched from buying to selling were
more or less likely to exit eBay. One might expect that if better sellers are more
likely to “switch,” they might be less likely to exit. The probit regressions in
Columns (5) and (6) use indicator variables for seller exits, and “opportunistic
exits” (as defined in Section 5.4) as dependent variables. Unfortunately, we
do not see an economic or statistically significant difference between the exit
patterns of switching sellers as opposed non-switching sellers.
  46
    We conducted a regime-shift test by conducting the pooled regression with a dummy
interaction term for the reporting policy change. We did not find a significant difference in
the coefficient estimates.


                                             40
    In sum, although we do find indisputable evidence for the existence of
“switching” behavior on eBay, our evidence for a clear economic incentive to
do so (“reputation building”) is somewhat indirect. In particular, we do find
some evidence supporting the prediction of our theoretical model, that (ex-
post) better sellers are more likely to undertake such costly reputation building
activities early in their careers. However, this evidence is not corroborated by
a clearly identified economic incentive to “purchase” a reputation. We hope
future research can improve upon our methodology to further investigate this
theoretical prediction.


6     Conclusion
Our analysis points to various empirical features of eBay seller dynamics. In
particular, we find that, upon receiving their first negative comment, the sales
growth rate drops dramatically; moreover, the arrival rate of subsequent neg-
ative comments increases considerably. We propose a theoretical model, fea-
turing adverse selection and moral hazard, that explains these facts as follows:
the arrival of the first negative comment damages the seller’s reputation to
the point that his incentives to exert effort are minimal. Lower effort and
worse reputation explain the drop in sales rate. Lower effort also explains the
increase in the hazard rate of subsequent negatives.
    We considered alternative theories of buyer behavior as explanations for
the increase in negative comment hazard rates, but none seems to do the job.
What about alternative theories of seller behavior? One possibility is a pure
adverse selection model with changing types.47 Specifically, suppose that the
seller’s type evolves according to a Markov process. After an initial period in
the high-type state, a shift to low type would increase the likelihood of the
first and subsequent negative comments, consistently with our empirical find-
ing. Fishman and Rob (2002) propose a model with these features, assuming
that bad type is an absorbing state. Their model does imply the stylized facts
described above. Note however that it is essential that good types may be-
come bad but not vice-versa. Otherwise, our evidence that the arrival rate of
subsequent negatives remains flat seems to reject the pure adverse selection
story.48
   47
      The literature on firm growth and industry evolution frequently considers the possibility
of firm efficiency evolving according to a Markov process. See Jovanovic (1982), Hopenhayn
(1992), Ericson and Pakes (1995). More recently, some reputation models have explicitly
considered the possibility of changing types. See Mailath and Samuelson (1998), Phelan
(2001).
   48
      Fishman and Rob’s (2002) model also has the implication that sales rate (and price)

                                              41
    The opposite alternative theory, pure moral hazard, is more difficult to
evaluate. In fact, for a wide range of values of the discount factor, there exist
multiple equilibria, potentially with very different patterns. In the limit when
the discount factor approaches one, “almost any” sequence of actions belongs
to some equilibrium path; that is, theory has very little bite. We may, how-
ever, consider some particular patterns suggested in the literature. Dellarocas
(2003), following earlier work on collusion by Green and Porter (1984) and
Porter (1983), suggests a stationary mechanism where poor performance is
“punished” by buyers for a period of time. However, the empirical evidence
seems at odds with the stationary prediction.
    Closer to the patterns we find in the data are the pure moral hazard models
of Klein and Leffler (1981) and Shapiro (1983).49 In these models, seller repu-
tation is part of a bootstrap equilibrium: buyers pay a high price and expect
high seller effort. If a signal of low effort is observed, then buyers “boycott”
sellers by not purchasing again. Reputation is therefore a valuable asset. To
be consistent with a free-entry equilibrium, we must impose some endogenous
cost to acquiring a reputation. Money burning in the form of advertising or
low introductory prices do the job. Advertising does not seem to play a big role
on eBay. Moreover, prices are typically set by buyers, who submit bids, not by
sellers.50 However, we can exploit the bootstrap nature of the equilibrium to
create an endogenous cost of acquiring a reputation: suppose that, for the first
t periods, sellers exert low effort and, consistently with this expectation, buyers
bid low values. We can then find a t that satisfies the zero-discounted-profit
entry condition.51 However, the empirical evidence does not seem consistent
with this: Given an equilibrium path of low effort, then high effort, then low
effort, we would expect the distribution of first negative arrival time to be
bimodal. However, a simple non-parametric analysis suggests a distribution
close to log-normal, certainly not bimodal.
    Regardless of which theoretical model best explains the data, an important
conclusion of our paper is that eBay’s reputation system gives way to notice-
able strategic responses from both buyers and sellers. That is, the mechanism
has “bite”. Obviously, this does not imply that the current structure of the
increase over time until the seller’s type becomes bad. This is consistent with eBay data.
However, it depends crucially on the assumption of word-of-mouth effects, which we believe
are not that important on eBay.
  49
     See also Friedman (1971), Telser (1980) for earlier work.
  50
     This is not entirely true. Sellers can set minimum bids and “buy now” options. In the
limit, a very low “buy now” option would essentially amount to a low posted price.
  51
     This is similar to the idea of “building trust.” See Datta (1997), Watson (1999), Watson
(2002).



                                             42
system is optimal. In fact, we believe an exciting area for future research is
precisely the design of an efficient reputation mechanism.
   To conclude, we should also mention that our analysis is based on a fun-
damental assumption, namely that buyers offer feedback in a non-strategic
way (specifically, according to Assumption 2 in Section 3). A natural next
step is thus to study the strategic motives underlying various agents’ feedback
behavior. This we plan to do in a new empirical project (Cabral, Hortaçsu
and Yin, 2003).




                                      43
Appendix: Derivation of ∆(P0)
From the text,
                                                                                     
           ∆(P0 ) ≡ V H (P0 , 0) − V H (0, 0) − V L (P0 , 0) − V L (0, 0) .
   In order to compute ∆(P0 ), we must first compute the value functions. For
a good seller, the value function may determined recursively. Let v(P, N ) be
the buyers’ willingness to pay given history (P, N ).52 Then

                             V H (P, 0) = v(P, 0) + δV H (P + 1, 0),
leading to
                                                ∞
                          V H (P, 0) =                δ k v(P + k, 0)
                                                X

                                                k=0
                                                 ∞
                                                            µ0 + (1 − µ0 )α
                                                      δk
                                                X
                                            =                                  ,
                                                k=0        µ0 + (1 − µ0 )αP +k

where we use the fact that, by Bayesian updating, v(P, 0) = µµ00+(1−µ
                                                                +(1−µ0 )α
                                                                      0 )α
                                                                           P .
                                                      L
   For a bad seller, we know that, if N > 0, then V (P, N ) = β/(1 − δ).
When N = 0, we have


V L (P, 0) = v(P, 0) + (1 − α)δV L (P, 1) + αδV L (P + 1, 0)
               = v(P, 0) + (1 − α)δV L (P, 1) +
                                                                                                  
                             +αδ v(P + 1, 0) + (1 − α)δV L (P, 1) + αδV L (P + 2, 0)
               = ...
                   ∞
                                                  1−α      β
                         (αδ)k v(P + k) +
                   X
               =                                        ·
                   k=0                            1 − αδ 1 − δ
                    ∞
                                   µ0 + (1 − µ0 )α          (1 − α)β
                         (αδ)k
                   X
               =                                  P +k
                                                       +                 ,
                   k=0            µ0 + (1 − µ0 )α        (1 − αδ)(1 − β)
    Finally,
                   ∞                                                      µ0 + (1 − µ0 )α
                             (αδ)k − δ k − (αδ)P0 +k + δ P0 +k
                   X
    ∆(P0 ) =                                                                                   −
                   k=0                                                    µ0 + (1 − µ0 )αP0 +k
                                   0 −1 
                                  PX                        µ + (1 − µ )α
                                                              0        0
                              −             (αδ)k − δ k                         .
                                  k=0                        µ0 + (1 − µ0 )αk

  52
     Earlier, we introduced willingness to pay, v(µ, ρ), as a function of buyers’ believes. For
simplicity, if with some abuse of notation, we now write v(P, N ) as the willingness to pay
induced by the beliefs following history (P, N ).

                                                      44
Appendix: Data set descriptive statistics
We start with the description of the transactions data for the two types of
coins, given in the first two columns of Table 12. We found that of 216 gold
coin auctions, 90% resulted in sale; similarly, of the 298 mint set auctions,
84% ended in a sale. The average minimum bid set by the gold coin sellers
was $20, or about 40% of the average sale price; similarly, mint set sellers
started their auctions at $38, or about 50% of sale price. On average 6.8
bidders participated in gold coin auctions, whereas 7.5 bidders bid for mint
sets. The sellers of these coins appear to be quite experienced/large: the
average coin seller had 1500 to 1600 overall feedback points. The bidders seem
less experienced, with an average of 120 to 150 feedback points. This suggests
that the eBay coin market is populated by “coin dealers” on the sell side, and
“coin collectors” on the buy side.
    We also collected data on characteristics of the auction listing, as con-
structed by the seller. 78% of the gold coin sellers and 66% of the mint set
sellers wrote that they would accept credit cards for payment; similar propor-
tions (54% and 60%, respectively) indicated their willingness to use PayPal,
the popular online payment system favored by eBay users. 40% and 33% re-
spectively of the gold coin and mint set auction listings contained an image of
the coin, pointing perhaps to the larger degree of information asymmetry re-
garding the condition of the gold coin. Consistent with this, gold coin listings
contained more words than mint set listings, although what we have measured
is a rough count of the number of words within a listing, rather than making
any inferences about the content of the listing. Finally, the modal length of
the coin auctions was 7 days, ranging from 1 day to 10 days.
    The third column of Table 12 reports the summary statistics for the IBM
Thinkpad market. Of the 264 auctions, 85% of them resulted in a sale, with
one auction conspicuously resulting in a $1 sale (apparently due to a seller not
setting his minimum bid high enough — the average minimum bid was $105).
On average 21.6 bidders participated in these auctions, much higher than
for coin auctions. The average seller in these auctions was quite large, with
12 445 total feedback points, although there was a seller with 0 total feedback
points (and one with 25695!). Bidders were on average less experienced than
coin buyers, with average overall feedback rating of 68. 80% of the sellers
used PayPal and accepted credit cards, and 80% provided an image of the
computer, using on average 683 words to describe the object. These latter two
numbers are consistent with the fact that the seller feels obliged to provide
more information regarding a big ticket item like a laptop (as opposed to a $50


                                      45
              Table 12: Summary statistics of transactions data.

                                              Am’an     Mint    Think- Beanie
                                               Eagle     Set      pad   Baby
Sale Price                                      50.8     77.8     578.6      11.1
                                              (10.7)   (21.6)   (413.6)     (4.3)
Highest Bid                                     50.0     75.8     529.5      10.7
                                              (14.0)   (25.7)   (429.9)     (3.8)
newvar Percent. items sold                       .90      .84       .85       .52
                                               (.30)    (.37)     (.35)     (.49)
Minimum bid set by seller                       20.0     38.3     104.7       9.8
                                              (23.1)   (38.2)   (260.7)     (5.0)
Number of Bidders                                6.8      7.5      21.5       1.7
                                               (4.6)    (6.9)    (16.5)     (2.9)
Seller’s eBay Rating                            1596   1475   12442          2634
                                              (1639) (2250) (11628)        (4371)
Winning Bidder’s eBay Rating                     147     118        68        154
                                               (304)   (181)     (244)      (296)
Percent. sellers using PayPal                    .54      .61        .78      .76
                                               (.49)    (.49)      (.41)    (.43)
Percentage sellers accepting credit cards        .79      .66        .83      .39
                                               (.41)    (.47)      (.38)    (.49)
Percentage listings with object photo            .41      .33        .81      .38
                                               (.49)    (.47)      (.39)    (.49)
Number of words in description                   271     241       683        301
                                               (116)   (140)     (192)      (164)
Auction Length (days)                            5.9      5.5        4.6      5.3
                                               (2.2)    (2.7)      (1.8)    (2.3)
Number observations                             216      298        264      555
Number unique sellers                            72      157         62      238
Market HHI                                      342      112       2756      195

Notes:   1. Standard errors in parentheses.



                                         46
coin), but it is conceivable that since a laptop is a more complex product, it
takes more words to describe it fully. The Thinkpad auctions also appear to be
somewhat shorter than the coin auctions — especially the bigger sellers in this
market appear to be online computer stores who use eBay as a shopfront.53
    The last column of Table 12 provides a description of the Holiday Teddy
Beanie Baby market. Only 50% of these auctions end in a sale, and only
1.7 bidders on average attend these auctions (notice that there is a monotonic
relationship between sale price of the object and number of bidders, confirming
an entry cost story explored in Bajari and Hortaçsu, 2003). However, sellers
tend to set their minimum bids quite high, about $9.8 — which suggests that
these sellers have good outside options for these items.54 The average seller
once again appears to be a dealer, and the average bidder a collector. 75% of
the sellers declare that they will accept PayPal, however only 39% say they
will accept a creditcard, most likely reflecting the transaction charges of Visa
(for a $11 item, it might not be worth paying the credit card fee). 40% of the
auctions contain an image, similar to the figure for coins, and a similar number
of words, 300, are used to describe the object. The average auction appears
to be shorter than coin auctions, but longer than the Thinkpad auctions.
    There were 72 unique sellers in the golden coin market (translating into an
average 3 auctions per seller), 157 sellers in the proof set market (2 auctions
per seller), 62 sellers in the notebook market (4 auctions per seller), and 238
unique (2.4 auctions per seller) sellers in the Beanie Baby market. We should
also note that one seller conducted 133 of the total 264 auctions in the notebook
market — the other markets were much less concentrated. The HHI for the
markets were: Thinkpads, 2756, gold coins, 342, mint/proof sets, 112, teddies,
195. This large disparity in concentration across markets may be attributed
to scale effects (one of the sellers in the Thinkpad market is “ibm”), and the
relatively higher importance of quality concerns in the laptop market.55



   53
      These sellers might be interested in keeping inventory turnover high, and hence tend to
list their items on shorter auctions — in fact, the correlation between auction length and
seller size is -0.0931.
   54
      This might correspond to alternative resale venues, or just the value from keeping these
toys. Compared to coins, the value of minimun bids is rather surprising, since teddy bears
require more space to store than coins, and hence one might think that inventory consider-
ations would lead teddy sellers to want to sell their items faster.
   55
      We have not yet fully investigated the dynamic implications of the reputational mech-
anism on the equilibrium market structure, however, it is intuitively not far fetched to
think that small differences in seller performance (in terms of delivery probabilities) can be
amplified a lot in the market for Thinkpads, to result in a very concentrated market.


                                             47
References

Abbring, Japp H., Pierre-André Chiappori, and Jean Pinquet (2003),
    “Moral Hazard and Dynamic Insurance Data,” forthcoming in the Jour-
    nal of the European Economic Association.

Asch, Solomon (1946), “Forming impressions of personality,” Journal of
    Social and Abnormal Psychology 41, 258–290.

Ba, S. and P. Pavlou (2002), “Evidence of the Effect of Trust Building
    Technology in Electronic Markets: Price Premiums and Buyer Behav-
    ior,” MIS Quarterly 26, 243-268.

Bajari, Pat, and Ali Hortaçsu (2003), “Winner’s Curse, Reserve Prices
    and Endogenous Entry: Empirical Insights from eBay,” Rand Journal of
    Economics 34, 329–356.

Bajari, Pat, and Ali Hortaçsu (2004), “Economic Insight from Internet
    Auctions,” forthcoming in Journal of Economic Literature.

Bar-Isaac, Heski (2002), “Reputation and Survival: Learning in a Dynamic
    Signalling Model,” Review of Economic Studies 70, 1–21.

Cabral, Luı́s M B (2000), “Stretching Firm and Brand Reputation,” Rand
    Journal of Economics 31, 658-673.

Cabral, Luı́s M B, Ali Hortaçsu, and Pai-Ling Yin (2003), “The
    Strategic Dynamics of eBay Buyer and Seller Feedback,” Work in Progress
    (note: title is provisional).

Cohen, Adam (2002), The Perfect Store: Inside eBay, Little Brown and
    Company.

Datta, Saikat (1997), “Building Trust,” London School of Economics, April.

Dellarocas, Chrysanthos (2002), “The Digitization of Word-of-Mouth:
    Promise and Challenges of Online Reputation Mechanisms,” forthcom-
    ing in Management Science.

Dellarocas, Chrysanthos (2003), “Efficiency and Robustness of eBay-like
    Online Reputation Mechanisms in Environments with Moral Hazard,”
    MIT.


                                   48
Dewan, S. and V. Hsu (2001), “Trust in Electronic Markets: Price Discov-
    ery in Generalist Versus Specialty Online Auctions,” mimeo.

Diamond, Douglas W (1989), “Reputation Acquisition in Debt Markets,”
    Journal of Political Economy 97, 828–862.

Eaton, D. H. (2002), “Valuing Information: Evidence from Guitar Auction
    on eBay,” mimeo.

Ederington, L. H. and M. Dewally (2003), “A Comparison of Reputa-
    tion, Certification, Warranties, and Information Disclosure as Remedies
    for Information Asymmetries: Lessons from the On-Line Comic Book
    Market,” mimeo.

Ericson, Richard, and Ariel Pakes (1995), “Markov-Perfect Industry
     Dynamics: A Framework for Empirical Work,” Review of Economics
     Studies 62, 53–82.

Friedman, Eric J., and Paul Resnick (2001), “The Social Cost of Cheap
     Pseudonyms,” Journal of Economics and Management Strategy 10, 173–
     199.

Friedman, James (1971), “A Noncooperative Equilibrium for Supergames,”
     Review of Economic Studies 28, 1–12.

Gale, Douglas, and Robert W Rosenthal (1994), “Price and Quality
    Cycles for Experience Goods,” Rand Journal of Economics 25, 590–607.

Green, Ed and Robert Porter (1984), “Noncooperative Collusion Under
    Inperfect Price Information,” Econometrica 52, 87–100.

Hoch, S., and Y. Ha (1986), “Consumer learning : advertising and the
    ambiguity of product experience,” Journal of Consumer Research 13,
    221–233.

Holmström, Bengt (1999), “Managerial Incentive Problems: A Dynamic
    Perspective,” Review of Economic Studies 66, 169–182.

Hopenhayn, Hugo (1992), “Entry, Exit, and Firm Dynamics in Long Run
    Equilibrium,” Econometrica 60, 1127–1150.

Houser, D. and J. Wooders (2003), “Reputation in Auctions: Theory
    and Evidence from eBay,” University of Arizona Working Paper.


                                    49
Jin, Gin Z., and A. Kato (2004), “Blind Trust Online: Experimental Evi-
     dence from Baseball Cards,” University of Maryland Working Paper.

Jovanovic, Boyan (1982), “Selection and Evolution of Industry,” Econo-
    metrica 50, 649–670.

Kalyanam, K. and S. McIntyre (2001), “Returns to Reputation in Online
    Auction Markets,” mimeo.

Klein, B, and K Leffler (1981), “The Role of Market Forces in Assuring
    Contractual Performance,” Journal of Political Economy 89, 615–641.

Kreps, David M., Paul Milgrom, John Roberts and Robert Wil-
    son (1982), “Rational Cooperation in the Finitely Repeated Prisoners’
    Dilemma,” Journal of Economic Theory 27, 245–252.

Kreps, David M., and Robert Wilson (1982), “Reputation and Imper-
    fect Information,” Journal of Economic Theory 27, 253–279.

Levin, Dan, and James Smith (1994), “Equilibrium in Auctions with En-
     try,” American Economic Review 84, 585–599.

Livingston, J. (2002), “How Valuable is a Good Reputation? A Sample
     Selection Model of Internet Auctions,” mimeo.

Lucking-Reiley, D., D. Bryan, N. Prasad, N., and D. Reeves (2000),
    “Pennies from eBay: the Determinants of Price in Online Auctions,”
    University of Arizona Working Paper.

Mailath, George J, and Larry Samuelson (2001), “Who Wants a Good
    Reputation?,” Review of Economic Studies 68, 415–441.

Mailath, George J, and Larry Samuelson (1998), “Your Reputation
    Is Who You’re Not, Not Who You’d Like To Be,” University of Penn-
    sylvania and University of Wisconsin.

McDonald, C. G., and V. C. Slawson (2002), “Reputation in an Internet
   Auction Market,” Economic Inquiry 40, 633-650.

Melnik, M. I. and J. Alm (2002), “Does A Seller’s eCommerce Repu-
    tation Matter? Evidence from eBay Auctions,” Journal of Industrial
    Economics 50, 337-350.



                                   50
Milgrom, Paul, and John Roberts (1982), “Predation, Reputation, and
    Entry Deterrence,” Journal of Economic Theory 27, 280–312.

Ockenfels, Axel, and Alvin E. Roth (2003), “Late and Multiple Bid-
    ding in Second Price Internet Auctions: Theory and Evidence Concern-
    ing Different Rules for Ending an Auction,” forthcoming in Games and
    Economic Behavior.

Phelan, Christopher (2001), “Public Trust and Government Betrayal,”
    Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Staff Report No. 283, January.

Porter, Robert H (1983), “Optimal Cartel Trigger Price Strategies,” Jour-
    nal of Economic Theory 29, 313–338.

Resnick, Paul, and Richard Zeckhauser (2001), “Trust Among Strangers
    in Internet Transactions: Empirical Analysis of eBay’s Reputation Sys-
    tem,” Harvard Kennedy School Working Paper.

Resnick, Paul, Richard Zeckhauser, J. Swanson, and K. Lock-
    wood. (2003), “The Value of Reputation on eBay: A Controlled Ex-
    periment,” Harvard Kennedy School Working Paper.

Roth, Alvin E., and Axel Ockenfels (2002), “Last-Minute Bidding
    and the Rules for Ending Second-Price Auctions: Evidence from eBay
    and Amazon Auctions on the Internet,” American Economic Review 92,
    1093–1103.

Shapiro, Carl (1983), “Premiums for High Quality Products as Rents to
    Reputation,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 98, 659–680.

Snyder and Canto (1979), “Testing Hypotheses about other people: The
    use of historical knowledge,” in Journal of Experimental Social Psychol-
    ogy 15, 330–342.

Tadelis, S. (1999), “What’s in a Name? Reputation as a Tradeable Asset,”
    American Economic Review 89, 548–563.

Tadelis, S. (2002), “The Market for Reputations as an Incentive Mecha-
    nism,” Journal of Political Economy 92, 854–882.

Telser, L G (1980), “A Theory of Self-enforcing Agreements,” Journal of
    Business 53, 27–44.



                                    51
Watson, Joel (1999), “Starting Small and Renegotiation,” Journal of Eco-
    nomic Theory 85, 52–90.

Watson, Joel (2002), “Starting Small and Commitment,” Games and Eco-
    nomic Behavior 38, 176–199.




                                  52
Figure 2: Sample eBay Auction Listing




                       2001 US MINT SILVER PROOF SET
                                       Item # 3021093159
                             Coins:Coins: US:Proof Sets:1999-Now

   Current                                 Starting bid      US $29.95
           US $35.25
   bid
   Quantity 2                              # of bids         2 Bid history
   Time left 3 days, 16 hours +            Location          EVANS, GEORGIA
                                           Country/Region United States /Atlanta
   Started    Apr-26-03 11:16:46 PDT          Mail this auction to a friend
   Ends       May-03-03 11:16:46 PDT           Watch this item



                wsb5(127)
   Seller       Feedback rating: 127 with 99.2% positive feedback reviews (Read all reviews)
   (rating)     Member since: Jun-19-99. Registered in United States
                View seller's other items | Ask seller a question | Safe Trading Tips


   High       See winning bidders list (include e-mails)
   bidder


   Payment PayPal, or money
           order/cashiers check.
                                                 PayPal: Fast, easy, secure payment. Learn
                                                 More.
   Shipping Buyer pays for all shipping
            costs, which are provided in
            the Payment Details section
            below. Will ship to United
            States only.


   Seller
            Sell similar item
   services



                                        Description
Set has 10 coins. Five state quarters and the penny,nickle,dime,half dollar and golden
dollar.



                                 Free Counters powered by Andale!


             Payment Details                                    Payment Instructions
United States Shipping and handling US $4.00              Satisfaction Guaranteed. WILL EXCEPT
Additional shipping per item          US $2.00            MONEY ORDERS,CASHIER'S CHECKS
Shipping insurance per item (optional)US $1.30            OR PAYMENT BY PAYPAL. LET ME
                                                          KNOW HOW YOU WISH TO PAY. WILL
                                                          SHIP SAME DAY AS PAYMENT
                                                          RECEIVED. RETURNS ARE TO BE
                                                          MAILED WITHIN 7 DAYS.

                                                     Bidding


                                                                            How to Bid
        2001 US MINT SILVER PROOF SET
                      Item # 3021093159                                1. Register to bid - if you
                                                                          haven't already. It's
              Current bid:         US $35.25
                                                                          free!
           Bid increment:            US $1.00
                                                                       2. Learn about this seller
       Quantity of items                                                  - read feedback
                desired:                                                  comments left by
      Your bid per item:                                                  others.
                                                                       3. Know the details - read
              ( Minimum bid: US $36.25 )
                                                                          the item description
                                      Place Bid                           and payment &
                                                                          shipping terms closely.
                 You will confirm on the next page
                                                                       4. If you have questions -
 This is a Dutch Auction (Multiple Item Auction) - it features            contact the seller wsb5
 multiple quantities of an item. All winning bidders pay the                before you bid.
 same price - the lowest successful bid at the end of the
 auction. Dutch Auctions (Multiple Item Auctions) do not use           5. Place your bid!
 proxy bidding.
                                                                          eBay purchases are
 Your bid is a contract - Place a bid only if you're serious             covered by the Fraud
 about buying the item. If you are the winning bidder, you               Protection Program.
 will enter into a legally binding contract to purchase the
 item from the seller. Seller assumes all responsibility for
 listing this item. You should contact the seller to resolve            Need help?
 any questions before bidding. Auction currency is U.S.
 dollars ( US $ ) unless otherwise noted.                            Buyers: Bidding and buying
                                                                     tips
                                                                     Sellers: Manage your listing
                Figure 3: Sample Feedback Summary page

Feedback Summary
  218 positives. 128 are from unique users.                   ID card                           wsb5(127)
                                                   Member since: Saturday, Jun 19, 1999 Location: United States
  0 neutrals.
                                                    Summary of Most Recent Reviews
  1 negatives. 1 are from unique users.                                         Past 7 days            Past month         Past 6 mo.
                                                    Positive                             12                       51           116
                                                    Neutral                              0                        0             0
                                                    Negative                             0                        0             0
See all feedback reviews for wsb5.
                                                    Total                                12                       51           116
                                                    Bid Retractions                      0                        0             0


                                                                      View wsb5 's Items for Sale | ID History | Feedback About Others



                          Feedback Reviews for wsb5                                                  Feedback Help | FAQ
                leave feedback        If you are wsb5 :                                          wsb5 was the Seller = S
                for wsb5              Respond to comments                                        wsb5 was the Buyer = B
Left by                                      Date                                                              Item#                   S/B

rattman50(11)                                 Apr-29-03 14:05:51 PDT                                                   3019804072      S
Praise : Nice coin! Fast shipment!
silverpeacedollar(26)                      Apr-29-03 09:09:31 PDT                                                      3018674118      S
Praise : hi great job nice coin and good service thanks!!!!!!
z3forefun(351)                             Apr-29-03 06:39:59 PDT                                                      3018676358      S
Praise : very nice coin, accurately represented, fast shipping
patrag40(161)                              Apr-28-03 17:41:37 PDT                                                      3018673349      S
Praise : The coin has been cleaned but a great deal
bernardtreeman(62)                         Apr-25-03 18:11:09 PDT                                                      3014810862      S
Praise : thanks for a nice coin. ++++++++++++AAAAAAA
kucak1(114)                                Apr-25-03 06:07:31 PDT                                                      3013485158      S
Praise : HIGHLY RECOMMEND THIS GENTLEMAN!!! Thanks, Willard!!!
rdt9819 (73)                               Apr-24-03 14:37:12 PDT                                                      3018676926      S
Praise : GOOD TRANSACTION WOULD BUY AGAIN A+++++++
bfjfkman (24)                              Apr-23-03 15:03:21 PDT                                                      3018675234      S
Praise : Fast Delivery, Good Packaging, Great Deal. (Very Nice Coins, too.)
bfjfkman (24)                              Apr-23-03 15:02:00 PDT                                                      3018677589      S
Figure 3: Pictures of auctioned objects in this study.




(a) 1/16 oz 5 dollar gold coin of 2002                   (b) 2001 silver proof set.
    vintage (gold American Eagle)




(c ) IBM Thinkpad T23 PIII                        (d) 1198 Holiday Teddy Beanie Baby
                                                      Figure 4:How "bearsylvania" became a seller

                                       1.2




                                        1
% of transactions conducted as sales




                                       0.8




                                       0.6




                                       0.4




                                       0.2




                                        0
                                             0   10         20               30               40    50   60
                                                                     No. of weeks on eBay
