                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




       THE IMPACT OF NEARLY UNIVERSAL INSURANCE COVERAGE ON
     HEALTH CARE UTILIZATION AND HEALTH: EVIDENCE FROM MEDICARE

                                         David Card
                                        Carlos Dobkin
                                        Nicole Maestas

                                      Working Paper 10365
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w10365


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   March 2004




We are grateful to Elizabeth Weber and Florence Neymotin for outstanding research assistance,
and to Thomas Lemieux, Guido Imbens, and participants in the RAND Health Economics
Seminar for comments and suggestions. Funding was provided by a National Institute of Aging
Grant through the Center for the Economics and Demography of Aging at UC Berkeley, and by
the Center for Labor Economics at UC Berkeley. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2004 by David Card, Carlos Dobkin and Nicole Maestas. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Impact of Nearly Universal Insurance Coverage on Health Care Utilization and Health:
Evidence from Medicare
David Card, Carlos Dobkin, and Nicole Maestas
NBER Working Paper No. 10365
March 2004
JEL No. I12, I18

                                            ABSTRACT

       We use the increases in health insurance coverage at age 65 generated by the rules of the

Medicare program to evaluate the effects of health insurance coverage on health related behaviors

and outcomes. The rise in overall coverage at age 65 is accompanied by a narrowing of disparities

across race and education groups. Groups with bigger increases in coverage at 65 experience bigger

reductions in the probability of delaying or not receiving medical care, and bigger increases in the

probability of routine doctor visits. Hospital discharge records also show large increases in

admission rates at age 65, especially for elective procedures like bypass surgery and joint

replacement. The rises in hospitalization are bigger for whites than blacks, and for residents of areas

with higher rates of insurance coverage prior to age 65, suggesting that the gains arise because of

the relative generosity of Medicare, rather than the availability of insurance coverage. Finally, there

are small impacts of reaching age 65 on self-reported health, with the largest gains among the groups

that experience the largest gains in insurance coverage. In contrast we find no evidence of a shift in

the rate of growth of mortality rates at age 65.

David Card                     Carlos Dobkin                   Nicole Maestas
Department of Economics        Department of Economics         RAND
UC Berkeley                    UC Santa Cruz                   1700 Main Street
Berkeley, CA 94720             Santa Cruz, CA 95064            Santa Monica, CA 90407
and NBER                       cdobkin@ucsc.edu                maestas@rand.org
card@econ.berkeley.edu
         One fifth of non-elderly adults in the United States lacked health insurance in 2002.1

Insured people are healthier than the uninsured, leading many analysts to conclude that access to

health insurance is a public policy concern.2 Nevertheless, credible evidence that insurance

coverage causes better health is limited (Levy and Meltzer, 2001). Insured and uninsured people

exhibit many behavioral differences that are correlated with health, including diet, smoking,

exercise, and seatbelt use.3 Moreover, both the supply and demand for insurance depend on

health status, creating simultaneity biases that could confound any causal effect of insurance

coverage on health. Indeed, the only randomized evaluation of free health insurance – the

RAND Health Insurance Experiment of the late 1970s – found insignificant impacts of insurance

on the health status of the overall population (Newhouse et al, 1993).

         An ideal study of the causal effects of health insurance would randomly assign some

people to universal coverage and others to the current system. While no such experiments are in

progress or currently planned, in this paper we argue that the Medicare eligibility rules create a

reasonably close approximation to this ideal, with “randomization” based on whether an

individual is just under or just over age 65.4 The dramatic effects of Medicare eligibility on

health insurance coverage are illustrated in Figure 1, which shows coverage rates by quarter of

age from the 1992-2001 National Health Interview Surveys (NHIS). The solid line in the figure

1
  According to tabulations of the 2002 March Current Population Survey reported in Table 1 of Mills and Bhandari
  (2003), 19.5 percent of people between the ages of 18 and 64 had no health insurance coverage.
2
  Recent policy initiatives for expanding health insurance coverage among lower income adults are summarized in
  Krebs-Carter and Holohan (2002).
3
  For example, among 50-64 year olds in the 2002 Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System sample, 20% of
  people with insurance smoke, compared with 30% of uninsured people; 75% of the insured exercise at least once
  per month, compared with 61% of the uninsured; 82% of the insured always wear seat belts in a car, compared to
  78% of the uninsured; and 88% of the insured eat a green salad at least once a week, compared with 79% of the
  uninsured.
4
  Previous researchers have used the age 65 boundary to look at health related outcomes, including Lichtenberg
  (2001), Decker and Rapaport (2002), and McWilliams et al. (2003). Our contribution is to examine a wider
  variety of measures of access, utilization, and health, to quantify inter-group differences in responses to Medicare
  eligibility, and to focus on alternative causal channels for reaching age 65 to impact health care use and health
  outcomes.


                                                          3
represents the coverage rate for the overall population, which rises from 90 percent to 98 percent

at age 65.5 Even more striking is the impact on differences across socio-economic groups. Prior

to age 65 less-educated minorities (blacks, Asians, and Hispanics with less than 12 years of

education) have about 20 percent lower coverage rates than more-educated whites. After age 65

the gap narrows to 5 percentage points. If insurance coverage has a causal effect one would

expect discontinuous changes in the age profiles of health outcomes at age 65, and a narrowing

of inter-group disparities after age 65.

           In this paper we combine information from several sources to measure the impacts of

Medicare eligibility on health-related outcomes. We use survey data from the NHIS and the

Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System (BRFSS) to examine changes in self-reported

barriers to accessing care, and changes in the number of recent doctor visits, hospital stays, and

frequency of diagnostic testing at age 65. We use hospital discharge records from California and

Florida to examine changes in the number and characteristics of hospital admissions at age 65.

We examine the age profiles of health-related behaviors (smoking, exercise) and self-reported

health using NHIS and BRFSS data. Finally, we use micro data from the multiple cause of death

files to study trends in death rates around age 65. Throughout the paper we focus on the

differential impacts of Medicare eligibility on different subgroups, and on the question of

whether these impacts arise through changes in insurance coverage or alternative channels.

           As in other regression discontinuity studies, the key assumption in our research design is

that measures of health care access, utilization and health status would evolve smoothly with age

in the absence of the discrete change in insurance coverage at age 65. This implies that

Medicare eligibility is “as good as randomly assigned” among individuals who are just a little

5
    As we discuss below, Medicare is not universal: an individual or their spouse must have a minimum of 40 quarters
    of work to be eligible. Medicare is also available to people under 65 in the Disability Insurance program.


                                                          4
older or a little younger than 65.6 Although this assumption cannot be fully tested, it can be

evaluated by checking for discontinuities in potential confounding variables like employment,

income, and family structure. All the potential confounding variables we examine trend

smoothly through the age 65 barrier, suggesting that any discontinuities in health-related

outcomes can be attributed to Medicare eligibility.

           We reach five main conclusions. First, Medicare eligibility sharply reduces disparities in

access to medical care. Groups with large increases in insurance coverage at age 65 experience

systematic reductions in the probability of delaying or not receiving medical care. These groups

also experience increases in the probability of visiting a doctor at least once per year, and in the

frequency of routine medical checkups. It is less clear whether Medicare eligibility leads to

increases in specific preventative care procedures, such as blood cholesterol testing,

mammography, or testing for prostate cancer, though this is partly an issue of statistical power.

Second, eligibility for Medicare leads to a large (10 percent) rise in hospital stays, with the

majority of the increase in non-emergency admissions and hospitalizations for elective

procedures like joint replacements and bypass surgery. Contrary to an insurance-based causal

explanation, however, the rise in hospitalizations is larger for whites than blacks or Hispanics,

and larger for residents of areas with higher insurance coverage rates prior to age 65. Third,

reaching age 65 has no systematic effect on smoking, exercise, or obesity. Fourth, Medicare

eligibility appears to have small but discernable effects on the level of self-reported health, with

larger gains for groups whose insurance coverage rates increased the most after becoming

Medicare eligible. Fifth, we find no evidence of an immediate impact of Medicare eligibility on

mortality rates at age 65, nor of a systematic change in the growth rate of mortality after 65,


6
    Lee (2003) presents a formal framework for identification in a regression discontinuity framework.


                                                           5
though the latter finding must be interpreted cautiously in light of the difficulty in determining

mortality trends in the absence of Medicare.

I. Empirical Approach and Relation to Existing Literature

           Our empirical analysis is based on a simple causal model of the effect of health insurance

coverage on health outcomes:

(1)        yija = Xijaαj + fj(a) + Cijaδj + uija ,

where yija is a measured outcome for individual i in group j at age a, Xija represents a set of

measured characteristics with group-specific coefficients (αj), fj(a) is a smooth function

representing the age profile of the outcome y (e.g., a low order polynomial), Cija is a dummy

variable indicating whether individual i has insurance coverage, and uija is an unobserved error

component. There are a number of difficult issues underlying the specification of equation (1).

One problem is that health insurance is heterogeneous (Levy and Meltzer, 2001). This is

important because at age 65 many people who were previously covered by other forms of

insurance switch to Medicare. Since Medicare has different reimbursement rates and coverage

provisions than other insurance packages, this switch could have a causal effect even in the

absence of any change in coverage. A second and related issue is that the shape of the age

profile fj(a) may be influenced by the presence of Medicare. For example, 64 year-olds may

delay certain medical procedures until after age 65 in anticipation of Medicare coverage.7 Such

behavior will complicate inferences based on changes from before to after 65. Third, even

within groups the causal effect of health insurance may differ across people. Heterogeneity in δj

introduces the usual problem of distinguishing between average treatment effects and the effect

for those whose insurance status changes at age 65 (Angrist and Imbens, 1995).


7
    The evidence reported later in this paper shows no evidence of anticipatory behavior.


                                                           6
           Setting these issues aside for the moment, the key problem in estimating equation (1) is

that health insurance coverage is endogenous. For example, if people with pre-existing

conditions cannot obtain health insurance, the error term will be correlated with coverage,

leading to a positive bias in the estimated effect of coverage on health. Conversely, if healthy

people are more likely to go without insurance there will be an upward bias in the estimated

effect of insurance on medical care utilization and a downward bias in the estimated effect on

health.8 The age limit for Medicare eligibility at 65 provides a candidate instrumental variable

for insurance coverage. As shown in Figure 1, insurance coverage rates increase sharply as

individuals pass their 65th birthday, implying that the instrument has a powerful effect.

           Let Da denote an indicator for being 65 or older, and consider the following first stage

model for insurance coverage:

(2)        Cija = Xija βCj + gCj(a) + Da πCj + vCija ,

where βCj is a vector of group-specific coefficients, gCj(a) is the age profile in coverage for group

j and Da is a dummy for Medicare eligibility. Combining (1) and (2), the reduced form model for

the health outcome y is

(3)        yija = Xija βyj + gyj(a) + Da πyj + vyija ,

where βyj is a group-specific set of coefficients, gyj(a) is a smooth age profile, and πyj = πCj × δj

is the reduced form effect of reaching age 65 on outcome y. The (population) instrumental

variables estimate of the causal effect δj is just the ratio of the reduced form coefficient of Da to

the corresponding first stage coefficient:

(4)        δIVj = πyj / πCj      .




8
    See Bhattacharya and Vogt (2003) for a recent survey of adverse selection issues in the health insurance market.


                                                           7
           In our empirical analysis, we fit models like (2) and (3) to individual outcome data using

OLS and probit estimators. Since the age profiles and the dummy Da are the same for all

individuals in the same age cell, however, identification of πCj and πyj comes from variation

across age cells.9 Suppressing the j subscripts for different groups, let Ca and ya denote the

population means of insurance coverage and the outcome variable in age cell a. Ignoring

variation in the X’s (or assuming the age cell means have been adjusted for any variation),

equations (2) and (3) imply:

(2a)       Ca = k1 + gC(a) + Da πC ,

(3a)        ya = k2 + gy(a) + Da πy .

Standard theoretical treatments of regression discontinuity methods assume that age is measured

continuously (e.g., Hahn, Todd, and van der Klaaw, 2001). Under this assumption, as long as

the g( ) functions are continuous, πC and πy can be estimated consistently by averaging C and y

in appropriate-sized windows on either side of age 65. In our data sets, however, age is

measured in coarse intervals (either a quarter or a year), so the difference in means between

people just over 65 and those just under 65 contains a potentially non-negligible trend

component that must be estimated parametrically. An advantage of a parametric approach is that

it provides some smoothing of the estimated means of the outcome data on either side of the 65

boundary.

           The necessity of fitting a parametric model to the age profiles of C and y introduces an

important consideration for inference. If equation (2a) or (3a) is fit to cell means with a specific

functional form for the g(·) function, the error component will consist of sampling error in the

9
    It is well known that OLS estimators of the age-related parameters in models like (2) or (3) can be obtained in two
    stages, by first regressing the dependent variable on the X’s and unrestricted age dummies, and in the second stage
    using the estimated age dummies as dependent variables to fit the age functions via a generalized least squares
    procedure.


                                                            8
cell mean plus any specification error.10 Conventional standard errors obtained by estimating the

discontinuity with the cell mean data incorporate both components. If the same model is

estimated using the underlying micro data, however, any specification error will be ignored in

the calculation of the conventional standard errors. A simple remedy is to calculate the standard

errors for the micro level model allowing for a shared error component for all observations of the

same age (i.e., cluster by age). This method uses the variability in mean behavior around the

parametric age profile at other ages to estimate the sampling error of the estimated change at 65.

         As illustrated in Figure 1, a key feature of Medicare is that it reduces disparities in health

insurance coverage across groups. This provides the basis for a test that the impact of Medicare

eligibility on a specific outcome arises through the effect on coverage, rather than through other

channels. Specifically, consider a regression of πyj (the reduced form estimate of the effect of

Medicare eligibility on outcome y for subgroup j) on πCj (the first stage estimate of the effect of

Medicare eligibility on health insurance coverage for subgroup j):

(5)      πyj = d0 + d1 πCj +            ej .

If Medicare eligibility only affects y through its effect on insurance coverage, and if the causal

effect of insurance coverage (δj) is constant across groups, then d0 = 0 and d1 = δ.11 On the other

hand, if the responses of outcome y to Medicare eligibility arise because of the more generous

Medicare coverage, then one might expect a non-zero constant in equation (5) and a less

systematic correlation between πyj and πCj. Even if Medicare eligibility only matters through

10
    For example, let ma denote the observed mean of outcome y for age a, and let G(a)= k2 + gy(a) + Daπy represent
   the parametric model. Then ma=G(a) + ( ma-ya ) + (ya-G(a)). One source of specification error is unobserved
   cohort effects. In our estimation the potential for such effects is reduced by pooling several cross sections.
11
    Another way to test strict proportionality between πCj and πyj is to combine the data for different subgroups, use
   the interaction of Da and dummies for the different subgroups as instruments for insurance coverage, and perform
   an over-identification test. In an over-identified model, the conventional IV estimator can be obtained from a
   generalized least squares regression of the reduced form coefficients on the first stage coefficients. The over-
   identification test amounts to a test that the R-squared of this regression is close enough to 1, given the sampling
   errors of the coefficients.


                                                           9
coverage, the intercept in equation (5) could be non-zero if there is significant heterogeneity in δj

across groups that is correlated with the size of πCj.12

         An important concern with the use of the Medicare eligibility rules to infer the causal

effect of health insurance is that other factors may also change discretely at age 65. For

example, 65 is a relatively common retirement age (although two thirds of men and three

quarters of women have left the labor force by age 64). The potential for a variable like

employment status to confound the comparison of people on either side of age 65 can be

assessed by fitting a model like (2) for that variable, and testing for jumps at age 65. A specific

parameterization of the age profile function g(·) is “flexible enough” if there are no significant

jumps in the observed confounding variables at 65 when this age function is included in the

model.

         A final point worth noting is that although we estimate models like (2) and (3) using

repeated cross sections of data, the models could be estimated using true longitudinal data.13 The

key advantage of longitudinal data is power: most behaviors and outcomes are strongly

positively correlated over time, so changes at age 65 can be estimated more precisely with

longitudinal data than with repeated cross sections. In the absence of true panel data, we

compensate by pooling data from different survey years to increase our sample sizes.




12
    For example, let δ represent the mean value of δj , and assume that E[ δj-δ | πCj ] = λ πCj . Then E[ πyj | πCj ] = δ
   πCj + λ (πCj)2 . If λ>0, πyj is a convex function of πCj and a linear regression will have a negative intercept, while
   if λ< 0 the relationship is concave and the intercept of the linear regression will be positive.
13
    McWilliams et al. (2003) use longitudinal data from the Health and Retirement Survey (HRS) to examine
   changes in some heath related outcomes from before to after age 65. Unfortunately, the HRS is only administered
   every 2 years so it is not possible to isolate changes occurring from just before to just after age 65. Kasper et al.
   (2000) use data from the Kaiser Survey of Family Health Experiences to look at changes in health outcomes that
   occur with changes in insurance status (for non-elderly adults). Neither study tries to deal with the endogeneity of
   insurance status.


                                                           10
II. Differences Among Insured and Uninsured Near-Elderly

       To begin our empirical analysis, Table 1 shows some of the average characteristics of

near-elderly people (ages 62-64) with and without health insurance. The data in this Table are

drawn from the 1992-2001 NHIS and the 1998-2002 BRFSS. We present overall means in the

first column, means for the insured and uninsured in columns 2 and 3, and simple t-tests for the

difference in means by insurance status in the fourth column.

       As has been shown in many other studies (e.g., Mills and Bhandari, 2003) insurance

status is highly correlated with marital status, race, and education. Health care access and

utilization rates also vary with insurance status. Uninsured people are more likely to report that

they delayed medical care or did not get care in the past year for cost reasons (as was recently

noted in Ayanian et al., 2000), and also report lower rates of use of medical services, including

routine doctor visits and diagnostic exams. Interestingly, the comparisons in Table 1 show that

the uninsured are less likely to report having been diagnosed with hypertension or heart-related

problems than people with insurance. This could reflect the fact that insurance is more valuable

for people with known health problems, or lack of awareness of latent conditions among the

uninsured. Despite lower reported rates of hypertension and heart problems, the uninsured have

lower self-assessed health, a pattern that is potentially supportive of an awareness explanation.

       Some of the observed health differences between the insured and uninsured groups in

Table 1 are arguably a result of the different compositions of the two populations. Table 2

presents comparisons of some key outcomes by insurance status for four narrowly defined

subgroups, based on education (high school diploma or not) and ethnicity (white non-Hispanic or

not). For example, columns 2 and 3 of Table 2 compare the fractions of insured and uninsured

people in different subgroups who reported that they delayed receiving health care last year for



                                                11
cost reasons. The rates for insured and uninsured people in the four subgroups are quite similar,

suggesting that insurance status is more important than education or ethnicity in explaining

reported delays in health care. A similar pattern holds for the probability of seeing a doctor at

least once in the past year (columns 5 and 6). Doctor visit rates for the insured fall in a narrow

range around 85 percent while rates for the uninsured center around 65 percent. For the other

outcomes in Table 2, however, incidence rates vary more across subgroups even holding

constant insurance status. For example, the probability of a hospital stay in the past year ranges

from 10 to 15 percent among insured people in different race/education groups, and from 5 to 9

percent among uninsured people. Mammography and cholesterol testing rates also vary

substantially by education, holding constant insurance status.

III. Changes in Insurance Coverage at Age 65

            Medicare is available to people who are at least 65 years of age and who worked at least

40 quarters in covered employment (or have a spouse who qualifies for coverage).14 For those

whose meet the eligibility criteria, Medicare hospital insurance (Part A) is available free of

charge and Medicare Part B (Medicare insurance) is available for a modest monthly premium.

Normally, individuals who are approaching their 65th birthday receive notice of impending

eligibility and are informed that they have to enroll in the program and choose whether or not to

accept Medicare Part B coverage.

            Table 3 presents estimates of the effect of reaching the Medicare eligibility age on

insurance coverage, based on alternative specifications of equation (2) fit to data from the 1992-




14
     Medicare is also available to people under 65 who are receiving Disability Insurance, and those with kidney
     disease. Individuals who do not qualify on the basis of their own or their spouse’s work history may still enroll in
     Medicare at age 65 by paying monthly premiums for both Part A and Part B coverage. This option is limited to
     U.S. citizens and legal aliens with at least five years of residency in the U.S.


                                                             12
2001 NHIS.15 In all cases the age profile function (gC(a)) is assumed to be quadratic with

coefficients that are allowed to differ for those older or younger than 65. This functional form

assumes that the age profile is continuous at age 65, but allows both the first and second

derivatives to jump discretely at 65. We report estimates for the entire sample in the top row,

and for four ethnicity/education categories, three ethnicity groups, and for men and women.

         The models in the first column of Table 3 are fit to mean coverage rates by quarter of

age. As suggested by the patterns in Figure 1, the jumps in coverage at age 65 are precisely

estimated, reflecting the smoothness of the coverage profiles before and after 65 and the

sharpness of the rise at 65. The gain in coverage for the overall population is estimated to be 8.4

percentage points, while the gains by ethnicity/education group range from 5.3 to 18.8

percentage points. Interestingly, the estimated gain is about one third larger for women than

men.

         Column 2 reports estimates of the same specifications, fit by linear probability model to

the underlying micro data. Since we used a weighted estimation procedure for the cell-level

models the coefficient estimates are identical in columns 1 and 2.16 As expected, however, the

standard errors are slightly different. The standard errors in column 2 are calculated allowing

heteroskedasticity and an unrestricted correlation structure for observations from the same age

cell. These are larger than the conventional standard errors for the same micro models (which

ignore clustering by age), but about the same size as the standard errors from the cell level

models. Column 3 presents models in which we add a set of micro-level control variables,

including dummies for the survey year and for gender, ethnicity, education and region. Although
15
    We construct age in our NHIS samples from data on year and month of birth and quarter of the interview, as well
   as age (reported in years). The latter information allows us to precisely separate people on either side of their 65th
   birthday. We restrict the samples to people between 55.25 and 74.75 (79 quarters).
16
    Specifically, we weight the cell-level observations by the sum of the sampling weights for the people in each cell.
   The micro models are weighted, using the individual sampling weights.


                                                           13
the covariates are highly significant, they vary smoothly with age, and the point estimates of the

rise in coverage at age 65 are hardly affected. Finally, in column 4 we fit the micro level models

using a probit procedure to account for the dichotomous nature of the dependent variable. The

table reports derivatives of the predicted probabilities of coverage, evaluated at the mean

predicted probability. These are uniformly smaller than estimated jumps in coverage from the

linear probability models, but provide a qualitatively similar picture.

            We have experimented with a number of alternative specifications and sample choices

for estimating the effects of reaching age 65 on insurance coverage. Appendix Table 1 reports

results from models like those in Table 3 fit to the last 5 years of the NHIS data (1997-2001) and

to the 1998-2002 BRFSS sample.17 The results are qualitatively and quantitatively similar to the

results in Table 3. We have also examined different specifications of the age profiles. For

example, in some specifications we included a cubic or quartic of age rather than the quadratic

interacted with the post-65 dummy. The sizes of the estimated jumps in coverage at age 65 are

robust to all the alternatives we have tried.

            Examining changes in the probability of any health insurance coverage at age 65 ignores

potential changes in the composition of insurance coverage. Immediately upon reaching age 65,

many people drop (or lose) private insurance coverage, while others obtain multiple coverage.

Figure 2 shows the age profiles of Medicare coverage for the same groups as in Figure 1, while

column 5 of Table 3 reports estimates of the rise in Medicare coverage at 65 (based on a linear

probability model identical to the specification in column 3). Medicare coverage rates are low

but rising before age 65, reflecting the movement of non-elderly disabled people onto the Social
17
      In the BRFSS individuals are asked their current age but not their date of birth, so we use age in years rather than
     quarters. To increase the number of age cells, we use data from ages 50-80. We also used March Current
     Population Survey data to look at the age profile of insurance coverage. Results are qualitatively similar, although
     insurance coverage rates are a little different in the CPS, reflecting in part the wording of the coverage question,
     which refers to coverage at any time in the previous calendar year.


                                                             14
Security Disability Insurance (DI) program. As noted elsewhere (e.g. Autor and Duggan, 2003),

DI participation is particularly high for less-educated minorities, reaching 20 percent by age 64.

Immediately after age 65, average Medicare participation rates rise to around 85 percent, with

higher rates for highly educated whites and lower rates for less-educated blacks and Hispanics.18

The reversal of Medicare participation rankings across education/ethnicity groups at age 65

means that the groups with bigger gains in net insurance coverage at age 65 have smaller rises in

Medicare coverage.

        To what extent do changes in health insurance coverage at 65 coincide with other discrete

changes? An obvious confounder is employment. Historically, many public and private

pensions became available at 65, and 65 was widely imposed as a mandatory retirement age.19

Figure 3 shows the age profile of employment for men, along with the corresponding profile of

insurance coverage.20 Unlike insurance coverage, employment rates decline smoothly from age

55 onward, with no evidence of a discontinuous shift at age 65. The first column of Appendix

Table 2 reports estimation results for a set of employment models similar to the specifications in

column 3 of Table 3, based on pooled 1992-2001 NHIS data. The estimated jumps in

employment at age 65 are generally small in magnitude and statistically insignificant, with the

exception of a positive and significant rise for less educated minorities. Similar models fit to cell

level data on current employment status from the pooled 1996-2002 March Current Population

Surveys, reported in the second column of the table, also yield estimated jumps at 65 that are

small in magnitude and mostly statistically insignificant. Interestingly, the estimated jump in


18
    Incomplete coverage of people over 65 reflects a number of factors, including the minimum work history
   requirements for Medicare and under-reporting.
19
    See von Wachter (2002) for an analysis of retirement rates and the impact of changes in laws governing
   compulsory retirement. Over the past two decades 62 has replaced 65 as the most common retirement age.
20
    The corresponding figure for women shows the same smooth decline in employment though women start with
   significantly lower employment rates at age 55 than men.


                                                     15
employment for less educated minorities in the CPS data is negative, suggesting that the positive

estimate in NHIS data is spurious. We conclude that employment changes are relatively smooth

at age 65, and are unlikely to drive changes in health-related outcomes around age 65.

            We have also investigated the age profiles of marriage, family income, and residential

mobility using the 1996-2002 CPS data. Columns 3-6 of Appendix Table 2 show the estimated

jumps at age 65 in the fraction of people who are married and living with their spouse, the

fractions whose annual family income is under $10,000, under $15,000, and under $20,000, and

the fraction who changed houses in the past year.21 For the overall sample and for the four

education/ethnicity subgroups, none of these outcomes shows a large or statistically significant

change at age 65. These results suggest that family structure, family location, and family income

all evolve smoothly around age 65, and are unlikely to confound our analysis of the impact of

Medicare eligibility.

IV. Changes in Health Care Access and Utilization at Age 65

a. Measures of Access

            We now turn to an analysis of the effects of reaching age 65 on access to and utilization

of health care services. We begin with self-reported measures of access. Starting in 1997, the

NHIS asked two questions of all adults in the survey: (1) “during the past 12 months has medical

care been delayed for this person because of worry about the cost?” (2) “during the past 12

months was there any time when this person needed medical care but did not get it because (this

person) could not afford it?” Recent waves of the BRFSS have asked a closely related question:

“Was there a time during the past 12 months when you needed to see a doctor but could not

21
      We do not report results on the poverty rate (or on income relative to the poverty line) because the poverty line
     changes discretely at age 65. For example, the poverty line for a single individual is reduced by 8% when the
     person reaches 65. As one would expect, graphs of poverty rates by age show a small jump down at 65. The
     samples include individuals aged 50-79.


                                                             16
because of the cost?” Figure 4 shows the age profiles of responses to the first question in the

NHIS, while Figures 5a and 5b show the age profiles of responses the second question in the

NHIS and the similar question in the BRFSS. Consistent with the hypothesis that having

medical insurance increases access to medical care, all three graphs show a sharp drop in the

fraction of less-educated minorities who report delaying or not getting care after age 65.

         The first three columns of Table 4 show the estimated changes in the probability of

delaying or not receiving medical care at age 65, based on linear probability models similar to

those in column 3 of Table 3. As suggested by the patterns in Figures 4 and 5, all three access

measures show significant decreases at age 65 among less educated minorities. There is also

reasonably strong evidence of a discrete change in access for all blacks and all Hispanics. The

estimated jumps in column 3 (based on the BRFSS question) are larger than the estimates in

column 2 (based on the similar question in the NHIS), and suggest very systematic impacts of

insurance coverage on medical care access. The ratio of the coefficients in column 3 to those in

column 3 of Table 3 ranges from -0.2 to -0.6, with most of the implied IV estimates of the effect

of insurance on the probability of not receiving care in the range of -0.3 to -0.4.22 Corresponding

estimates based on the NHIS version of the question imply smaller effects, ranging from 0 to -

0.3. Given the apparent sensitivity of responses to the question based on wording and placement

in the survey, the magnitude of the effects from the BRFSS should probably be viewed

cautiously. Nevertheless, it seems clear that the incidence of cost-related access problems falls

sharply at age 65 among the groups with the largest gains in insurance coverage.23


22
    The impacts of reaching age 65 on insurance coverage using the BRFSS data tend to be a little larger than those
   in Table 3 (see Appendix Table 2), implying slightly smaller IV estimates.
23
    Because the questions on access refer to the previous year, our estimates of the effect of reaching 65 on access
   problems are potentially attenuated. Specifically, someone who turned 65 less than a year ago could have had
   problems in the months before his or her birthday. The attenuation may be mitigated by recall errors and the
   saliency of the recent past.


                                                         17
            Another measure of access to the health care system is whether an individual has a usual

place for routine preventative care. Since the late 1990s the NHIS has included a sequence of

questions that can be used to construct such a measure.24 As shown in column 4 of Table 4, there

is some indication that the probability of having a usual place for routine preventative care rises

at age 65, especially for black non-Hispanics. Unlike the measures of delaying or not receiving

care, however, this measure shows only a small effect for less educated minorities.

b. Doctor Visits and Hospitalization

            The right hand columns of Table 4 present estimation results for two key measures of

health care utilization: did the individual have at least one doctor visit in the past year? Did the

individual have one or more overnight hospital stays in the past year? (Both measures are taken

from the 1992-2001 NHIS). Since these questions refer to flows over the past year, they will not

necessarily respond instantaneously to changes in insurance coverage. To the extent that

uninsured people are delaying or not getting care, however, one might expect discrete changes at

age 65 as Medicare becomes available.

            Figure 6 shows the age profiles for the fraction of people with at least one doctor visit in

the previous year. A close look at the graph suggests that the gap in frequency of doctor visits

between less educated minorities and other groups closes between ages 65 and 66, although the

age profiles are noisy. The estimates in column 5 of Table 4 confirm that less educated whites,

less educated minorities, and non-Hispanic blacks all show significant or nearly significant rises

in the probability of visiting a doctor after age 65. These patterns are consistent with the

estimates for the access measures in columns 1-3.

24
      The survey first asks if a person has a place they usually go when sick, and if yes, whether they also get routine
     preventative care there, or somewhere else. For those who do not identify a place they usually go when sick, a
     third question asks if they have a place they usually go for routine preventative care. These questions are only
     asked of the “sample adult” in each household.


                                                             18
            Figure 7 shows the age profiles of the incidence of an overnight hospital stay. There is a

discernable jump in the hospitalization rate of the overall population, but unlike the patterns in

many of the previous graphs there is no indication that the rise is bigger for less educated

minorities. Consistent with this conclusion, the estimated changes in the probability of a hospital

stay in column 6 of Table 4 are fairly stable across groups. The point estimates center around 1-

2 percentage points – a relatively large effect, considering that the probability of a hospital stay

in the previous year for 64 year olds is around 12 percent. In the next section we use very large

samples of hospital discharge records to refine these estimates. As in the models in column 6,

the discharge data suggest that increases in hospitalization at 65 are if anything smaller for

subgroups with the larger net gains in insurance coverage.

c. Screening and Preventative Care

            One concern often raised about lack of health insurance coverage is that the uninsured

will not get preventative care, leading to long term health problems that could have been avoided

by earlier diagnosis and prophylactic treatment (e.g., Powell-Griner et al., 1999). Table 5

presents estimates of the impact of reaching age 65 on several measures of preventative care,

including influenza vaccination, blood cholesterol screening, mammography, and screening for

prostate cancer. All these models are estimated using data from the 1999-2002 BRFSS.25 As

with doctor visits and hospitalization, one issue with outcomes like mammography or prostate

screening is that people may not respond instantaneously to the availability of insurance. To

partially address this concern, we include models for whether an individual has ever had a

mammogram or either a digital rectal exam or prostate-specific antigen (PSA) test. The final


25
      A major problem with the BRFSS is that not all questions are asked in all states in all years. For example, the flu
     shot question was only asked in a minority of states in 2000, cholesterol testing was only asked in most states in
     1999 and 2001, and the prostate screening questions were only asked in most states in 2001 and 2002.


                                                             19
column of Table 5 also reports a model for the probability of ever having been diagnosed with

hypertension.

         Column 1 reports models for having a flu shot in the past year. Only the age profile of

less educated whites shows a significant jump at 65, though the standard errors for all groups are

relatively large.26 The models for recent cholesterol testing in column 2 also show a large jump

for less-educated whites at age 65, and relatively modest changes for other groups.27 The models

for the probability of having a mammogram in the past two years yield relatively imprecise

estimates, but point toward a large gain for less educated minorities. The age profiles for this

outcome are shown in Figure 8. The profile for less educated minorities rises at age 65, but the

variability of the profile at earlier and later ages suggests the need for caution in inferring too

much from the point estimates in Table 5. Although for space reasons we have not included a

graph of the age profiles for the probability of ever having a mammogram, these are flat by age

50, suggesting that there are very few women who have their first mammogram after reaching

middle age. As shown by the estimates in column 4 of Table 5 there is no indication of an

upward jump after age 65 for any of the subgroups. In fact, the probability of ever having a

mammogram among Hispanic women is estimated to drop down. Since the true response cannot

decline, we attribute this estimate to an unlucky combination of sampling errors.

         We have also fit a series of models for the probability of a clinical breast examination in

the past two years, and the probability of a pap smear test in the past two years. None of the


26
    Overall, the rate of flu shots for 64 year olds is about 50 percent, with variation across ethnic and education
   groups that follows the expected pattern. The fraction of people who have a shot is strongly increasing with age
   for groups. The 5 point rise for less-educated whites is readily discernable in a graph. The increase in flu shots
   should be interpreted with caution given that the CDC’s list of groups at risk of flu related complications includes
   adults age 65 or older.
27
    About 82 percent of 64 year olds report having had a cholesterol test in the past two years. The rate for better
   educated whites is about 86 percent while the rate for less educated whites and less educated minorities is 72
   percent.


                                                          20
estimated jumps at age 65 for the various subgroups are statistically significant for either

outcome, although this is partly a reflection of relatively large sampling errors – in the range of

1-2 percent for most subgroups, and about 3 percent for less educated minorities. Thus, we

cannot rule out effect sizes as large as 4-5 percent in most cases.

        Columns 5 and 6 refer to the incidence of tests for prostate cancer. We decided to

combine the two tests (the traditional digital rectal exam and the more recent prostate specific

antigen blood test) to focus on the possibility that older men had neither test.28 Unfortunately,

the sampling errors for this outcome are relatively large, reflecting the fact that the questions

were only asked in most states in the two most recent years of our BRFSS sample. The results in

column 5 suggest an impact of reaching age 65 on screening rates among Hispanics but not for

blacks, leading to mixed results in the two minority/education categories. The results for the

ever tested measure in column 6 are all insignificant and more narrowly centered around 0.

        A final preventative care outcome considered in Table 5 is the probability of ever being

diagnosed with hypertension. Untreated high blood pressure is an important health risk,

especially among minorities (Hyman and Pavlik, 2001), although lack of treatment does not

necessarily arise because people are unaware of their condition. Nevertheless, the estimates in

the final column of the table (which are based on the subset of “sample adults” in the 1997-2001

NHIS) suggest that there is a sizeable increase in the fraction of minorities of both higher and

lower educational attainment who are diagnosed with hypertension at age 65.29 A graph reveals

that although the age profiles for the two minority groups are noisy, they seem to jump after age




28
    The Food and Drug Administration approved the PSA test in conjunction with a digital rectal exam to help detect
   cancer (National Cancer Institute, 2001). In the data, most men report receiving both tests or neither.
29
    Overall, about 45 percent of 64 year olds report having been diagnosed with hypertension at some point. The rate
   is around 42 percent for more educated whites, and 60 percent for less educated minorities.


                                                        21
65. As with the other preventative care measures in Table 5, however, the underlying sample

sizes are not large enough to permit precise inferences.

       Our reading of the results in Table 5 is that they lend support to the hypothesis that

Medicare eligibility at age 65 leads to modest increases in the incidence of preventative

screening, and that the increase is concentrated among groups with a larger rise in net insurance

coverage. Unfortunately, our main data source for preventative screening – the BRFSS – did not

ask screening questions in all states in all years. Moreover, breast cancer and prostate cancer are

gender-specific so the sample sizes for these outcomes are cut in half. Because of these data

limitations, and the fact that people may not seek screening immediately after getting insurance,

the power of our discontinuity-based research design is limited, and we cannot reach definitive

conclusions.

V. Changes in Hospitalization - Evidence from Discharge Data

       Survey data from the NHIS and BRFSS suggest that reaching age 65 has a significant

effect on the extent and composition of insurance coverage, on self-reported access to care, and

on utilization of medical services. In particular, data from the NHIS show a surprisingly large

increase in hospitalization rates at age 65, fairly evenly distributed across subgroups. In this

section we use data from the hospital discharge records for the states of California and Florida to

examine changes in the number and characteristics of hospital admissions by age. These

administrative data sets are very large and provide detailed information on the reasons for

admission to the hospital, the procedures performed, and the cost and duration of the hospital

stay. Their main disadvantage is the absence of information on a patient’s education (a key

determinant of pre-65 insurance coverage) and the fact that we only see people who enter the

hospital. For comparison with the state data, we also make use of national samples from the



                                                 22
National Hospital Discharge Survey. While these data have the advantage of being drawn from

a nationally representative survey, they have a limited set of covariates and smaller sample sizes.

        Our approach to the problem of only observing those who enter the hospital is to assume

that the underlying population at risk for hospitalization varies smoothly with age. Specifically,

consider a simple reduced form model for pja, the probability that an individual of age a in

subgroup j is admitted to the hospital in a given time interval:

(6)     log (pja) = gpj(a) + Da πpj + vpja ,

where gpj(a) is a smooth age profile, Da is a dummy for age 65 or older, and vpja is a specification

error component. Let Nja represent the population in subgroup j of age a and let Aja represent the

number who are admitted to hospital, so the ratio Aja/Nja is an estimate of pja. Finally, assume

that the log of the population in group j at different ages follows a smooth trend:

(7)     log (Nja) = hj(a) .

Equations (6) and (7) imply that the log of the number of hospital admissions in subgroup j at

age a is given by:

(8)     log (Aja) = [ gpj(a) + hj(a) ] + Da πpj + vpja + εja ,

where

        εja = log (Aja/Nja)-log (pja)

represents sampling error in the observed admission ratio. Provided that the underlying

population varies smoothly by age, any discontinuity in hospital admissions at age 65 can be

attributed to a corresponding discontinuity in the log of the probability of admission.

        Our state-level hospital discharge data files consist of 100% of individuals who were

admitted to hospitals in California or Florida and discharged between January 1st 1995 and

December 31st 1999 (in the case of California) or between January 1st 1995 and December 31st



                                                 23
2000 (in the case of Florida).30 We focus on individuals between the ages of 50 and 75 at the

time of their admission, yielding samples of 4,069,049 discharges in California and 3,550,784 in

Florida. In the national data, we pool discharges for individuals in the same age range during

1995-1999, and obtain a sample of 413,866 observations.

         Figure 9 shows the age profiles of the overall number of admissions in California and

Florida. To make it easier to compare the two states, we have normalized each series by the log

of the average number of discharges among 60-64 year olds. In both states there is clear

evidence of a discontinuous increase in hospital admissions at age 65, equivalent to about a 5-10

percent rise. Interestingly, the rise seems to be “permanent” – the state-specific age trend in

admissions is about the same between ages 65 and 70 as between ages 60 and 64. The lack of

any relative decline from 65 to 66 suggests that the jump at 65 is primarily the result of new

admission criteria being applied once potential admittees become Medicare-eligible, rather than

to a “catch-up” for care that had been deferred prior to age 65.

         Figure 10 shows the age profiles in admissions for three major ethnic groups (white non-

Hispanics, black non-Hispanics, and Hispanics) in the two states. In both states whites

experience the largest proportional increases in hospital admissions, with slightly smaller rises

for Hispanics and virtually no rise for blacks. These patterns are potentially surprising,

considering that the rise in net insurance coverage at age 65 is largest for Hispanics, smallest for

whites, and in the middle for blacks.31

         The upper panel of Table 6 shows estimates of the jump in log hospital admissions at age

65, based on a specification of equation (8) that includes a quadratic in age, fully interacted with
30
   The data sets exclude Veteran Administration hospitals. For our analysis, we focus on patients admitted from
   home.
31
   We used the BRFSS data set (which has state identifiers) to estimate the rises in insurance coverage at age 65 for
   people in California and Florida only. Overall, the rise is a little bigger in Florida (13 points) than California (10
   points). Within either state, however, the patterns by ethnic group are very close to those reported in Table 3.


                                                           24
a dummy for age 65 or older. We also show estimates of jumps in three characteristics of the

hospital stays at each age: the mean duration of the stay (in days), the average amount charged

by the hospital for the stay, and the fraction of admittees who died in the hospital. Looking first

at the models for the number of admissions (columns 1, 5, and 9), we estimate that the number of

admissions rises by 6.0 percent at age 65 in California, 11.4 percent in Florida, and by 6.4

percent nationwide. Across the three major ethnic groups, the rise is largest for white non-

Hispanics, a little smaller for Hispanics, and negligible for black non-Hispanics. The sampling

errors are small enough that in both states we can reject the hypothesis that the rise in admissions

is the same for blacks as the other two groups, although the rises for whites and Hispanics are

insignificantly different.

        The results for length of stay and in-hospital mortality suggest that the hospital caseload

becomes less sick at age 65, consistent with the notion that the extra admittees after 65 are

relatively healthy. As we show below, this is consistent with bigger increases at age 65 in non-

life-threatening diagnoses. The patterns in the changes in duration and mortality by ethnic group

are also generally consistent with this hypothesis. Interestingly, average hospital charges do not

change much in California but show a decline in Florida.

        The lower panel of Table 6 shows estimates of the number and characteristics of hospital

stays, classified by route into the hospital (emergency room or not), and by whether the

admission was for elective, urgent, or emergency care (which is only coded in the Florida data).

In California, almost all the discontinuous growth in admissions at age 65 is driven by non-

emergency room admissions. In Florida, there is some increase in both emergency room and

non-ER admissions, but the percentage increase in non-ER admissions is nearly three times

bigger. When the data are classified by type of admission, the patterns reinforce the conclusion



                                                 25
that most of the rise in hospitalization at age 65 is attributable to an increase in discretionary

medical care: the rise in elective care admissions is 19.1 percent versus 5.6 percent for

emergency care admissions.

       As noted, the discharge files have no information on education, which is a key predictor

of insurance coverage status prior to age 65. As an alternative, we used geographic information

in the Florida files to estimate the fraction of 50-64 year old admittees who were uninsured by

zip code of residence. (This is estimated as the fraction of all dischargees who paid their own

bill, or were classified as indigent or charity care cases). We then divided all zip codes in the

state into four equally-sized groups, ranked by the fraction of 50-64 year olds without insurance.

Figure 11 shows the age profiles in the number of admissions from the four zip code groups,

while Table 7 shows estimates of the jumps at age 65 in the number and characteristics of

admissions by group. Contrary to the view that the rise in admissions at age 65 is driven by new

inflows of people who previously lacked coverage, the jump in admissions is largest for

residents of areas with highest rates of insurance before age 65, and smallest for residents of

areas with the lowest rates of insurance prior to 65 (though the difference in the jump at 65 is not

statistically significant). The shifts in duration of stay is somewhat imprecisely estimated and

not much different across the four zip code areas, while changes in in-hospital mortality rates are

only observed for the two “low insurance” groups.

       As a final step in analyzing the discharge files, we tabulated the most common ICD-9

codes assigned as reasons for admission among people ages 60-64, and the most common

primary procedures performed during the hospital stay. Figure 12 shows the age profiles for 6 of

the most common admission diagnoses in California: chronic ischemic heart disease (IHD, often

treated by bypass surgery), acute myocardial infarction (AMI or heart attack), heart failure,



                                                  26
chronic bronchitis, osteoarthrosis (degenerative joint disease, often treated by joint replacement),

and pneumonia. The figure reveals large discontinuous increases in admissions at age 65 for

IHD and osteoarthrosis, smaller increases for AMI, chronic bronchitis and pneumonia and no

increase for heart failure. The estimation results in the upper panel of Table 8 confirm these

impressions, revealing relatively large jumps at age 65 in admissions for IHD and osteoarthrosis

in both California and Florida, and much smaller jumps for AMI and pneumonia. The national

estimates are roughly consistent with the state data, but are much less precisely estimated due to

the smaller samples. The rises in admission for AMI are potentially surprising, and suggest that

a significant number of people under 65 who have heart attacks are either not treated or are

treated on an outpatient basis.32

            The results by type of procedure in the lower panel of Table 8 confirm the importance of

discrete rises in admissions related to joint replacement surgery and heart bypass surgery at age

65. Rises in the number of discharges with joint replacements of the lower extremity (hip and

knee replacements) parallel to the rises in admission for osteoarthrosis diagnoses. Similarly,

rises in removal of coronary artery obstruction and bypass anastomosis are comparable to the

rise in admissions for IHD diagnoses. Finally, it is interesting to note that the increase in

admissions for people who receive no procedures is below the overall growth in admissions in

both states (4.7% versus an overall average of 6.0% in California, 9.2% versus an overall

average of 11.4% in Florida), but is above the overall growth in admissions nationwide (8.5%

versus an overall average of 6.4%).




32
      Another possibility is that once people become eligible for Medicare, hospitals assign different diagnoses codes
     for certain symptoms to increase their billings. Some of this may arise because of a shift in caseloads across
     hospitals at age 65. In particular, people over 65 are more likely to be admitted to private hospitals and less likely
     to be admitted to county hospitals.


                                                             27
            Taken as a whole, the results from our analysis of hospital discharge records suggest that

although reaching age 65 has an important effect on utilization of inpatient hospital services, the

patterns by ethnicity, region, type of admission, and procedure all point to a causal mechanism

other than insurance coverage per se. The relatively larger increases in hospitalization after age

65 for white non-Hispanics and residents of areas with the highest rates of insurance coverage

among 50-64 year olds, and the very large rises for bypass surgery and joint replacement at 65,

suggest to us that the changes are driven by features of the Medicare system, such as relatively

generous coverage of hospital services, rather than to the fact that coverage rises at the Medicare

age limit. The effect may be more pronounced among relatively wealthy Medicare recipients

because they can afford the out-of-pocket costs of surgery or have secondary insurance

(Medigap or retiree health insurance) that reduces those costs.

            Interestingly, a recent panel of the National Institute of Health concluded that hip and

knee replacement surgeries contribute significantly to quality of life and are under-performed in

the U.S. If true, this implies that the rise in admissions for these procedures at age 65 may be

due to excessively stringent limitations in the insurance coverage available prior to age 65, rather

than to overly generous Medicare reimbursement rates for these procedures.

VI. Changes in Health-Related Behaviors

            As we noted in Table 1, insured and uninsured people differ in several important health

related behaviors, including smoking, diet, and exercise. In Table 9, we investigate whether

there are any discrete changes in the age profiles of smoking, exercise, and weight outcomes at

age 65, using data from the 1999-2002 BRFSS.33 Increased access to routine medical care after


33
      The smoking measure we use is whether an individual smokes daily. Results for smoking at all are very similar.
     The exercise measure is “During the past month, did you participate in any physical activities or exercises such as
     running, calisthenics, golf, gardening or walking for exercise?”


                                                            28
age 65 may increase awareness of the health consequences of smoking, exercise, and weight,

causing some people to change their behavior and creating a pathway for Medicare eligibility to

affect health.

        The age profiles for the probabilities of smoking, participating in exercise, and of being

overweight (body mass index in excess of 25) or obese (body mass index in excess of 30) all

follow relatively smooth downward trends between the ages of 50 and 80. The estimates in

Table 9 show that there are no large or statistically significant jumps in smoking or exercise

participation. There is some indication, however, of a rise in the probability of being overweight

or obese for less educated minorities and for blacks. These rises are noticeable in a graph, but

appear to be driven by a downward dip among 63 and 64 year olds, rather than a systematic rise

at age 65. We therefore attribute the point estimates to misspecification of the age profiles

and/or sampling error, rather than to Medicare eligibility.

        Overall, we conclude that health behaviors evolve smoothly with age, and do not change

suddenly at 65. In view of the extensive literature on habit persistence in smoking, eating, and

other lifestyle choices this is perhaps unsurprising. The implication is that health related

behaviors are unlikely to be an important channel through which Medicare eligibility affects

health or mortality at age 65.

VII. Changes in Self-Reported Health

        In this section, we turn to an analysis of trends in self-reported health before and after age

65. At the outset it should be noted that even if Medicare eligibility leads to increased use of

medical services, it is unclear how this will affect the age profiles of self-assessed health. One

possibility is that more preventative care and diagnostic testing leads to a shift in the rate of




                                                  29
change of true health status that translates to a shift in the rate of change of subjective health.34

Such a phenomenon can only be measured under stronger assumptions than the smoothness

assumptions underlying equations (2) and (3). In particular, identification of a causal effect on

the derivative of health requires an assumption that the age profile of health of uninsured people

has continuous first derivatives.35 An alternative possibility is that improved access to care after

age 65 leads to a discrete shift in self-assessed health. The shift could be positive (if certain

health problems can be resolved quickly, or if uncertainty about a chronic condition can be

resolved) or negative (if there is a “labeling effect” as people are informed about previously

unrecognized conditions, or if treatment causes serious side effects).

         Both the NHIS and the BRFSS ask individuals to give an assessment of their own health

on a 5-point scale: excellent, very good, good, fair, or poor.36 Figure 13 shows the age profiles

of the fraction of the population who report themselves to be in good, very good, or excellent

health, based on pooled 1992-2001 NHIS samples. Inspection of the graphs shows that health is

generally declining with age. The rate of decline before age 65 for less educated minorities is a

little faster than for the overall population, implying that the SES gradient in health is widening

with age (Case and Deaton, 2003). Some time in the mid-60s the profile for less educated

minorities gradually flattens, and between 65 and 75 there is some convergence in health

between less educated minorities and the overall population. While this is consistent with a

causal effect of insurance coverage on the rate of change of health, it is clearly impossible to

34
    Baker et al. (2001) analyzed data from the Health and Retirement Survey and concluded that lack of insurance
   contributed to an increased risk of health declines among 51-61 year olds.
35
    More precisely, consider two assumptions: (i) equation (1) includes an interaction between age and coverage
   status λj(a)×Cija ; (ii) the age functions fj(a) in the structural outcome equation and gCj(a) in the first stage
   coverage equation have continuous first derivatives. In this case the reduced form outcome equation includes a
   term like λj(a)Da (an interaction of an age function with the dummy for age 65 or older), and any discrete change
   in the first derivative of the reduced form profile at age 65 is interpretable as a causal effect of coverage.
36
    There is an extensive literature on the reliability and interpretation of self-reported health, including Bound
   (1991), Waidman et al. (1995), and Crossley and Kennedy (2002).


                                                         30
pinpoint the precise turning point in the rate of change of health of less educated minorities.

Given the quarter-to-quarter variability in the age profiles, it is also hard to discern whether there

is a discrete shift in the level of self-assessed health at 65. Similar features are evident in a graph

of the age profiles of the assessment of health (assigning 1 to poor health and 5 to excellent).

            Table 10 presents a series of estimates of the jump in self-assessed health at age 65. The

first column presents estimates from linear probability models for the event that people report

their health as good or better. The second and third columns presents estimates from models for

the mean assessment of health (rated 1 to 5): column 2 reports estimates from a simple linear

regression, while column 3 presents estimates from an ordered probit model.37 Although the

estimates are somewhat imprecise, the pattern across subgroups is similar across specifications

and consistent with a causal link from insurance coverage to self-assessed health. For example,

the jumps are relatively large for less educated minorities and Hispanics and relatively small for

whites and better educated subgroups. The estimated effects from the ordered probit model, for

example, suggest that the mean assessment of less educated minorities and Hispanics increases

by about one-tenth of a category at age 65 – equivalent to closing about 15% of the gap in mean

assessments between the overall population and either subgroup.

VIII. Trends in Mortality

            In this section, we analyze trends in mortality before and after age 65. The previous

sections have documented that Medicare eligibility leads to significant increases in access to and

use of medical services. This could change the probability of dying in two ways. For acute, life

threatening conditions, it is possible that improved access to hospital care reduces the probability

of dying immediately after becoming eligible for Medicare at age 65. For non-acute conditions,

37
      The estimates in columns 2 and 3 are multiplied by 100. A coefficient of 10 implies that the mean assessment
     rises by .1 (or one tenth of a category).


                                                           31
improved access to care might increase the life expectancy of individuals who would not have

died immediately in the absence of Medicare.

            We begin by testing for a discrete change in mortality rates at age 65 using a regression

discontinuity design. We then tackle the more complicated problem of testing for less immediate

changes in mortality rates resulting from Medicare coverage. We implement two approaches to

estimating the long-term effects of Medicare coverage. First, we compare projected mortality

rates among 66 and 67 year olds with the actual rates. Second, we look for comparison groups

not exposed to Medicare whose mortality rates may serve as a plausible counterfactual. In our

first comparison, we consider mortality rates in the five years before and after Medicare was

implemented in 1966.38 The second comparison we make is between Canada and the United

States during the time period 1990-1995. While informative, these two comparisons suffer from

several limitations that are detailed below.

            To test for the possibility of a discrete reduction in mortality at age 65, we construct age-

specific death rates by gender, race and ethnicity.39 In the numerator, we use the number of

deaths at each age listed in the Multiple Cause of Death file from the US Department of Health

Services National Center for Health Statistics. In the denominator, we use postcensal estimates

of the mid-year resident population of the United States by single year of age. Although the

denominator is a simple characterization of the population’s exposure to the risk of dying (i.e.,

period person-years lived), we have experimented with more sophisticated estimates of exposure

based on different assumptions about the timing of deaths and found these to make little




38
      Although Medicare was enacted on July 30, 1965, it was not implemented until July 1, 1966.
39
      We depart from our earlier approach of looking at race-education groups. Although educational attainment has
     been reported on the death certificate since 1989, there is evidence of severe misreporting of education, especially
     at older ages (Sorlie, 1996).


                                                            32
difference. In order to get more precise estimates, we pool deaths over the period 1989-1998 and

sum mid-year population estimates over the same period.

            In Figure 14, we plot the age profiles of death rates by gender and race/ethnicity. There

is no evidence of a discontinuous change in mortality at age 65 for any of the six subgroups. In

the first row of Table 11 we present the corresponding regression discontinuity estimates, based

on a specification that includes a cubic polynomial in age, fully interacted with an age 65

dummy. Consistent with the patterns in Figure 14, there is no evidence of a shift in mortality at

age 65 for any of the groups. All of the point estimates are insignificant and all but one are

positive -- the opposite of what would be expected if insurance coverage causes an

instantaneous reduction in mortality.40

            For most conditions, if Medicare has an impact on 65 year olds, it will increase the life

expectancy of those not at immediate risk of dying. This is much harder to detect than an

immediate, discrete change in mortality because death rates will change slowly over time as

deaths are shifted from earlier to later ages throughout the age distribution. We begin by

examining the possibility that Medicare may slow the rate of increase in mortality rates by

comparing the actual mortality rates among 66 and 67 year olds with those predicted by fitting a

cubic polynomial to the mortality rates of 50 to 64 year olds. The actual and predicted mortality

experience of 66 year olds is presented in rows 3 and 4 of Table 11. For all but one sub sample,

the actual mortality rate of 66 year olds is slightly higher than the predicted rate (consistent with

small but positive estimates of the jump in mortality rates at age 65). As can be seen in the

bottom two rows of the table, the same is true for 67 year olds, though the gap between actual

40
      We ran similar regression for the 6 most common causes of death and found no evidence of a discontinuous
     reduction in mortality rates for any of the 6 causes. The top 6 causes and their associated three digit ICD-9 CM
     codes (in parentheses) are: ischemic heart disease (410-414), lung cancer (162), chronic obstructive pulmonary
     disease (490-496), cerebrovascular disease (430-438), diabetes (250), and pneumonia (480-496).


                                                            33
and predicted mortality is typically a little larger.41 These results provide no evidence that

Medicare coverage leads to a discrete reduction in mortality at ages 66 and 67, and point instead

toward the difficulty of predicting the age profiles of mortality from the death rates of younger

people.42

        As an alternate and perhaps more straightforward way of examining the changes in

mortality rates, we examine the age profile in the year-to-year percent changes in the mortality

rate. In Figure 15, we see that there is no evidence of a deceleration in the mortality rate at age

65. This result stands in sharp contrast to findings reported by Lichtenberg (2001), who uses

life-table death probabilities constructed by the Social Security Administration and finds a short-

term reduction in the growth rate of mortality between ages 65 and 69. The SSA life tables are

primarily intended for use in projecting the long-term survival rates of the US population and are

generally not suitable for examining changes in the derivative of mortality rates. In particular,

two methodological issues make the SSA life tables unsuitable for this type of analysis. First,

SSA uses Vital Statistics and Census data to construct death probabilities before age 65, but

switches to using death data from the Medicare program after age 65.43 If the slope of the

mortality profile at 65 happens to differ somewhat between the two data series, then splicing

them together will lead to a spurious change in the first derivative at exactly age 65. Second,

SSA uses osculatory interpolation to produce smoothly trending estimates within five-year age

groups. In order to prevent discontinuities at the seams between age groups, this method forces

the first derivatives of the interpolated series to be equal at the seams between age groups (seams



41
    The differences between actual and predicted mortality rates become more pronounced at older ages as we project
   further out-of-sample from age 64. Basing the projections on higher order polynomials does not solve this
   problem.
42
    One obvious issue is the presence of cohort effects, which would confound the extrapolation exercise.
43
    The methodology used by SSA is described, in detail, in Bell et al. (1992).


                                                        34
occur at 60, 65, 70, etc.), making it appear as if the derivative changes smoothly across the

seams, and thus obscuring any spurious changes in the derivative caused by the change of data

series.44 More generally, interpolated data pose a problem for research designs based on the

occurrence of discontinuities since interpolation is designed to smooth out such irregularities,

even when they are real.

            Due to the difficulties in estimating mortality rates for older people from the age profiles

for younger people, we turn to an alternative based on plausible comparison groups. In Figure

16, we compare mortality rates for 50-to-80 year olds in the five years before and after Medicare

was implemented in 1966. We do not see a discernable pre-post difference in mortality for men.

For women we see a significant reduction in mortality rates in the later period. However, the

reductions occur for women as young as 62, suggesting that the declining mortality rates are the

result of technological improvements or cohort differences rather than Medicare. There are two

obvious limitations with the simple comparisons in Figure 16. First, since the mortality rates are

typically decreasing over time it is possible that small improvements due to Medicare may be

hidden by the greater improvements due to other causes. Second, this particular comparison is

limited in its ability to pick up the impact of Medicare because older people in the post-1965

sample have only been exposed to a few years of Medicare coverage.

            To sidestep this problem we compare mortality rates in the United States and Canada.

Canada is a plausible counterfactual since although the two countries are generally similar,

Canadians have universal health insurance coverage at all ages. Canadian death rates are lower

than those in the U.S., however, so some adjustment is needed to predict the profile of U.S. rates

in the absence of Medicare. After some experimentation, we found that U.S. death rates before

44
     For an overview of osculatory interpolation, see Shyrock and Siegel (1980), pp. 694-702 or Smith (1992), pp. 27-
     34.


                                                          35
65 are quite similar to those of Canadians 2 years older. Figure 17 therefore shows U.S.

mortality rates by gender, along with Canadian rates that have been shifted left by 2 years.45 Use

of the adjusted Canadian death rates as a counterfactual shows no evidence of a discrete change

in US death rates at age 65 for either men or women, although it should be noted that age-

adjusted Canadian profiles do not perfectly track the US profiles between the ages of 50 and 64,

so this comparison is unlikely to reveal small changes in mortality rates associated with

Medicare eligibility.

         Although our results suggest that Medicare has little impact on mortality rates, either at

age 65 or over the longer run, we believe they should be interpreted with caution. The mortality

rates we have examined are for large groups, and it is quite possible that there are effects for

subgroups that are masked by the aggregation. This is a particular problem because the increases

in access to care documented earlier in the paper affect only a small fraction of the population.

The precision of our comparisons is limited by the difficulty of obtaining precise estimates of

mortality patterns in the absence of Medicare. It is thus unlikely that our methods could detect

anything other than a very large effect.

IX. Summary of Patterns Across Groups

         To summarize our findings, Table 12 presents estimates of equation (5), relating the

estimated reduced form effects of reaching age 65 across different subgroups to the estimated

rise in net health insurance coverage at age 65 for each subgroup. We estimate the models

across 7 subgroups: 3 ethnicity groups and 4 ethnicity/education groups.46 Each row of the table

corresponds to a different outcome. For example, row 1 shows the relationship between the
45
    The death rates for these comparisons come from the Human Mortality Database at UC Berkeley. We also tried
   raising the Canadian mortality rates at each age so that the rates among 60-64 year olds matched, but this resulted
   in a very poor fit among 50-60 year olds.
46
    The groups are not mutually exclusive so the standard errors are understated. The model should be estimated by
   generalized least squares using the inverse covariance matrix between the 7 estimates as a weighting matrix.


                                                          36
changes in the probability of delaying medical care at any time in the past year to the changes in

insurance coverage. The coefficient estimates reported in column 1 correspond to estimates of

the coefficient d1 in equation (5). Under the assumption of a constant causal effect of coverage,

this is an estimate of δ (the causal effect of insurance coverage). Column 2 reports the R-squared

coefficients for the equations. As noted in our earlier discussion, these should be relatively high

if the discontinuity of the outcome variable at age 65 is solely attributable to the rise in insurance

coverage. Column 3 shows the mean gap in the outcome at ages 63-64 between more educated

whites and less educated minorities: this is a simple summary of the SES gradient for the

outcome among the near-elderly population. Finally column 4 shows the estimated fraction of

this gap that is closed after the availability of Medicare, estimated by multiplying the estimate of

d1 by 13.54% (the estimated relative jump in coverage from column 3 of Table 3).

       Looking first at the three self-reported measures of access, the relative sizes of the jumps

in access across subgroups are systematically correlated with the jumps in coverage. Reaching

the Medicare eligibility age is estimated to close 40-80 percent of the inter-group disparity in the

three measures. The same conclusion holds with respect to the probability of a doctor visit in the

past year: 84 percent of the variation across groups is attributable to differential rises in

insurance coverage, and over 100% of the inter-group gap among 63-64 year olds is closed after

65. This contrasts sharply with the estimated changes in the probability of a hospital stay, which

are essentially unrelated to the increase in insurance coverage.

       Results for the four preventative care outcomes – flu shot in the past year, cholesterol test

in the past 2 years, mammogram in the past 2 years, and prostate test in the past 2 years – are

weaker. Variation in the size of the discontinuities in these outcomes at age 65 is not very highly

correlated with the discontinuities in insurance coverage, but the point estimates of the



                                                  37
coefficients in column 1 suggest eligibility for Medicare would be expected to close 15-30

percent of the SES gradient in preventative care.

       Finally, the last row of the table looks at self-reported health. The estimated jumps in

health at age 65 (from the ordered probit specification in Table 9) are reasonably highly

correlated with the corresponding jumps in insurance coverage, with an R-squared coefficient of

0.66. Although Medicare eligibility is estimated to have a narrowing effect on inter-group

disparities in health, the predicted effect is to close only about 12 percent of the gap among the

near-elderly.

X. Conclusions

       In this paper, we use the discrete changes in health insurance coverage at age 65

generated by the rules of the Medicare program to identify the impact of health insurance

coverage on health related behaviors and health outcomes. Medicare eligibility is associated

with a sharp increase in average coverage rates at age 65 and a narrowing in coverage disparities

across different groups in the U.S. population. Variation in the relative impact of the program

provides a way to test that it is health insurance coverage per se that is responsible for the

changes in health care utilization and health that occur at age 65, rather than other features such

as the relative generosity of Medicare reimbursement schedules.

       Our estimates show that insurance coverage has a significant causal effect on self-

reported access to health care and on health care utilization. Race and education groups that

experience the largest gains in insurance coverage at age 65 experience large reductions in the

probability of delaying or not receiving medical care, and relative increases in the probability of

an annual doctor visit. Evidence for an impact of insurance coverage on medical screenings and

preventive care is less clear-cut, although this is partly a reflection of data limitations. We also



                                                 38
find large and precisely estimated increases in hospital admissions at age 65, with the biggest

increases for discretionary procedures like hip and knee replacements and bypass surgeries.

Unlike doctor visits, the rise in hospital admissions tends to be larger for groups with higher

insurance coverage prior to age 65. Thus, the roughly 10 percent rise in hospitalization rates

between 64 and 65 year olds appears to be a result of differences between Medicare and private

insurance coverage, rather than of the rise in insurance coverage at age 65.

       The impact of Medicare eligibility on health outcomes is harder to assess, both because

of difficulties in measuring health, and because health is less likely to change discretely in

response to insurance coverage. Perhaps surprisingly, we find a statistically significant impact

of reaching age 65 on self-reported health, with the largest gains among the education and race

groups that experience the largest increases in insurance coverage at age 65. On the other hand,

we find no evidence of a discrete change in mortality rates at 65, nor do we see any shift in the

rate of growth of mortality after 65. These findings have to interpreted cautiously since it is

difficult to identify a plausible comparison group for post-65 mortality rates in the absence of

Medicare. Taken as a whole, we believe our findings point to a significant but relatively modest

impact of health insurance coverage on health.




                                                 39
                                      REFERENCES


Angrist, Joshua and Guido Imbens. “Two Stage Least Squares Estimation of Average Causal
   Effects in Models with Variable Treatment Intensity.” Journal of the American Statistical
   Association 90 (1995): 431-442.
Autor, David H. and Mark G. Duggan “The Rise in the Disability Rolls and the Decline in
   Unemployment” Quarterly Journal of Economics, (February, 2003): 157-206
Bhattacharya, Jayanta and William B. Vogt. “Uninsurance and Adverse Selection in Health
   Insurance and Labor Markets.” ERIU Working Paper 17. Ann Arbor, MI: Economic
   Research Initiative on the Uninsured, July 2003.
Yoshikawa A, Bhattacharya J, Vogt WB eds. Health Economics of Japan: Patients, Doctors, and
Hospitals Under a Universal Health Insurance System, Tokyo: University of Tokyo Press,
(1996).
Ayanian, John Z., Joel Weissman, Eric Schneider, Jack Ginsburg, and Alan Zaslavsky. “Unmet
   Health Needs of Uninsured Adults in the United States.” Journal of the American Medical
   Association 284 (October 25, 2000): 2061-2069.
Baker, David W. Joseph Sudano, Jeffrey Albert, Elaine Borawski, and Avi Dor. “Lack of
   Health Insurance and Decline in Overall Health in Late Middle Age”. New England Journal
   of Medicine 345 (October 11, 2001): 1106-1112.
Bell, Felicitie C. Alice H. Wade, and Stephen C. Goss. Life Tables for the United States Social
   Security Area. Actuarial Study No. 107, SSA Pub. No. 11-11536, 1992.
Bound, John. “Self Reported versus Objective Measures of Health in Retirement Models.”
   Journal of Human Resources 26 (1991): 106-138.
Case, Anne C. and Angus Deaton. “Broken Down by Work and Sex: How Our Health Declines.”
   NBER Working Paper 9821. Cambridge, MA: NBER, July 2003.
Crossley, Thomas and S. Kennedy. “The Reliability of Self-Assessed Health Status.” Journal of
   Health Economics 18 (2002): 173-193.
Decker, Sandra and Carol Rapaport. “Medicare and Disparities in Women’s Health.” NBER
   Working Paper 8761. Cambridge, MA: NBER, February 2002.
Hahn, J., Petra Todd and Wilber van de Klaauw. “Identification and Estimation of Treatment
   Effects with a Regression Discontinuity Design.” Econometrica 69 (January 2001): 201-
   209.
Human Mortality Database. University of California, Berkeley (USA), and Max Planck Institute
  for Demographic Research (Germany). Available at www.mortality.org or
  www.humanmortality.de (data downloaded on December 16, 2003).
Hyman, David J. and Valory N. Pavlik “Characteristics of Patients with Uncontrolled
  Hypertension in the United States” in New England Journal Medicine Volume 345 (August
  16, 2001): 479-486.



                                               40
Institute of Medicine.
Kaspar, Judith, Terence Giovannini, and Catherine Hoffman. “Gaining and Losing Health
   Insurance: Strengthening the Evidence for Effects on Access to Care and Health Outcomes.”
   Medical Care Research Review 57 (September 2000): 298-318.
Krebs-Carter, Melora and John Holahan. “State Strategies for Covering Uninsured Adults”.
   Assessing the New Federalism Working Paper 00-02. Washington DC: The Urban Institute,
   Feburary 2002.
Lee, David S. “Randomized Experiments from Non-Random Selection in U.S. House
   Elections.” University of California Berkeley Department of Economics Unpublished
   Working Paper, September 2003.
Levy, Helen and David Meltzer. “What Do We Really Know About Whether Health Insurance
   Affects Health?” University of Chicago Harris School of Public Policy, Unpublished
   Working Paper, December 2001.
Lichtenberg, Frank R. “The Effects of Medicare on Health Care Utilization and Outcomes” in
   Frontiers in Health Policy Research, Volume 5. Alan M. Garber, Ed. Cambridge and
   London: MIT Press for the National Bureau of Economic Research, 2002.
McWilliams, J. Michael, Alan Zaslavsky, Ellen Meara, and John Ayanian. “Impact of Medicare
  Coverage on Basic Clinical Services for Previously Uninsured Adults.” Journal of the
  American Medical Association 290 (August 13, 2003): 757-764.
Mills, Robert J. and Shailesh Bhandari. “Health Insurance Coverage in the United States: 2000".
   United States Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census, Current Population Reports
   P60-233. Washington DC: GPO, September 2003.
National Cancer Institute. “Cancer Facts: Questions and Answers and the Prostate-Specific
   Antigen (PSA) Test.” Dated January 11, 2001. Accessed November 18, 2003 at
   http://cis.nci.nih.gov/fact/5_29.htm .
Newhouse, Joseph P. Free for All? Lessons from the RAND Health Insurance Experiment.
  Cambridge and London: Harvard University Press, 1993.
Powell-Griner, Eve, Julie Bolen, and Shayne Bland. “Health Care Coverage and Use of
   Preventative Services Among the Near Elderly in the United States.” American Journal of
   Public Health 89 (June 1999): 882-886.
Shyrock, Henry S. and Jacob S. Siegel. “The Methods and Materials of Demography, Volume
   2.” Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census, June 1980.
Smith, David P. Formal Demography. New York: Plenum Press, 1992.
Sorlie, PD and NJ Johnson. “Validity of Education Information on the Death Certificate.”
   Epidemiology 7(4): 437-439. 1996.
Waidman, Timothy, John Bound and M. Schoenbaum. “The Illusion of Failure: Trends in Self-
  Reported Health of the U.S. Elderly.” NBER Working Paper 5017. Cambridge, MA:
  NBER, 1995.




                                              41
Figure 1: Health Insurance Coverage Rates by Age, 1992-2001 NHIS



            100




            90
  Percent




            80
                                                                                         All
                                                                                         More Educated Whites
                                                                                         Less Educated Minorities
            70




            60
                  55   56   57   58   59   60   61   62   63   64   65   66    67   68    69   70   71   72   73    74
                                                           Age (In quarters)
Figure 2: Medicare Coverage Rates by Age, 1992-2001 NHIS


            100

            90

            80

            70

            60
  Percent




            50

            40                                                                           All
                                                                                         More Educated Whites
            30                                                                           Less Educated Minorities

            20

             10

             0
                  55   56   57   58   59   60   61   62   63   64   65   66    67   68    69   70   71   72   73    74
                                                           Age (In quarters)
Figure 3: Health Insurance Coverage and Employment Rates of Men by Age


                                                                                                                                                90
                                     100
                                                                                                                                                80
 Insurance Coverage Rate (Percent)




                                     98
                                                                                                                                                70




                                                                                                                                                     Employment Rate (Percent)
                                     96                                                                                                         60
                                                                                                         Health Insurance Coverage (left
                                                                                                         scale)
                                     94                                                                                                         50
                                                                                                         Employment Rate (right scale)
                                                                                                                                                40
                                     92
                                                                                                                                                30
                                     90
                                                                                                                                                20

                                     88
                                                                                                                                                10

                                     86                                                                                                         0
                                           55   56   57   58   59   60   61   62   63   64   65   66    67   68   69   70   71   72   73   74
                                                                                    Age (In quarters)
Figure 4: Percent Who Delayed Medical Care Last Year for Cost Reasons


           16

           14

           12

           10
 Percent




           8

           6

           4                 All
                             More Educated Whites
           2                 Less Educated Minorities


           0
                55   56 57   58   59 60   61   62   63   64 65   66   67 68   69 70   71   72 73   74
                                                    Age (In Quarters)
Figure 5a: Percent Who Did Not Get Medical Care Last Year for Cost Reasons (NHIS)


           16

           14                                                            All
                                                                         More Educated Whites
           12                                                            Less Educated Minorities


           10
 Percent




           8

           6

           4

           2

           0
                55   56 57   58 59   60   61   62   63 64 65 66 67       68 69   70   71   72 73    74
                                                     Age (In Quarters)
    Figure 5b: Percent Who Did Not Get Care for Cost Reasons (BRFSS)


          30


                                                                        All
          25
                                                                        More Educated Whites
                                                                        Less Educated Minorities
          20
Percent




          15


          10


           5


           0
               50 51 52 53 54 55 56 57 58 59 60 61 62 63 64 65 66 67 68 69 70 71 72 73 74 75 76 77 78 79 80
                                                           Age
Figure 6: Percent with At Least One Doctor Visit in Past Year by Age, 1992-2001 NHIS


            95

                                All
            90                  More Educated Whites
                                Less Educated Minorities


            85
  Percent




            80



            75



            70
                 55   56   57   58   59   60   61   62   63   64   65   66     67   68   69   70   71   72   73   74
                                                           Age (In quarters)
Figure 7: Percent with One or More Hopital Stays in Past Year by Age, 1992-2001 NHIS


            21
                           All
            19             More Educated Whites
                           Less Educated Minorities
            17

            15
  Percent




            13

            11

            9

            7

            5
                 55   56   57   58   59   60   61   62   63   64   65   66    67   68   69   70   71   72   73   74
                                                          Age (In quarters)
Figure 8: Percent of Women with Mammogram in Past 2 Years, 1999-2002 BRFSS


           85


           80


           75
 Percent




           70


           65

                                                                         All
           60                                                            More Educated Whites
                                                                         Less Educated Minorities

           55
                50 51 52 53 54 55 56 57 58 59 60 61 62 63 64 65 66 67 68 69 70 71 72 73 74 75 76 77 78 79 80
                                                            Age
Figure 9: Number of Hospital Admissions by Age in California and Florida




                                                0.7
   Log(No. Discharges) Relative to Ages 60-64




                                                0.5
                                                                      California
                                                                      Florida
                                                0.3



                                                 0.1



                                                -0.1



                                                -0.3
                                                       50 51 52 53 54 55 56 57 58 59 60 61 62 63 64 65 66 67 68 69 70 71 72 73 74 75
                                                                                       Age (In Years)
Figure 10: Age Profiles of the Number of Hospital Admissions by Ethnicity




                                                0.7
   Log(No. Discharges) Relative to Ages 60-64




                                                                     White Non-Hispanics, Florida

                                                0.5                  White Non-Hispanics, California
                                                                     Hispanics, Florida
                                                                     Hispanics, California
                                                                     Black Non-Hispanics, Florida
                                                0.3
                                                                     Black Non-Hispanics, California



                                                 0.1



                                                -0.1



                                                -0.3
                                                       50 51 52 53 54 55 56 57 58 59 60 61 62 63 64 65 66 67 68 69 70 71 72 73 74 75
                                                                                              Age (In Years)
Figure 11: Age Profiles of the Number of Hospital Admissions by Insurance Coverage


                                                0.9
   Log(No. Discharges) Relative to Ages 60-64




                                                0.7
                                                                    8.6% or Fewer Uninsured
                                                                    8.6% to 11.2% Uninsured
                                                0.5                 11.2% to 14.8% Uninsured
                                                                    14.8% or more Uninsured

                                                0.3



                                                 0.1



                                                -0.1



                                                -0.3
                                                       50 51 52 53 54 55 56 57 58 59 60 61 62 63 64 65 66 67 68 69 70 71 72 73 74 75
                                                                                        Age (In Years)
Figure 12: California Hospital Admissions for 6 Common Diagnoses (By 3 Digit ICD-9)



                       14000
                                         Chronic Ischemic Heart Disease
                                         Acute Myocardial Infarction
                       12000             Heart Failure
                                         Chronic Bronchitis
Number of Admissions




                                         Osteoarthrosis
                       10000
                                         Pneumonia

                       8000


                       6000


                       4000


                       2000


                          0
                               50 51 52 53 54 55 56 57 58 59 60 61 62 63 64 65 66 67 68 69 70 71 72 73 74 75
                                                                          Age (In Years)
Figure 13: Percent in Good, Very Good, or Excellent Health by Age, 1992-2001 NHIS


            95

            90

            85

            80

            75              All
  Percent




                            More Educated Whites
            70              Less Educated Minorities
            65

            60

            55

            50

            45
                 55   56   57   58   59   60   61   62   63   64   65   66    67   68   69   70   71   72   73   74
                                                          Age (In quarters)
Figure 14. Age-Specific Death Rates by Sex and Race


                                    6000
                                                   White Males
                                                   White Females
                                    5000           Black Males
Death Rate per 100,000 Population




                                                   Black Females
                                                   Hispanic Males
                                    4000           Hispanic Females


                                    3000


                                    2000


                                    1000


                                       0
                                           50 51 52 53 54 55 56 57 58 59 60 61 62 63 64 65 66 67 68 69 70 71 72 73 74 75
                                                                           Age (in Years)
Figure 15. Percent Change in Age-Specific Death Rates by Sex


           18.0
                                                                                  Men
           16.0
                                                                                  Women
           14.0

           12.0

           10.0
 Percent




           8.0

           6.0

           4.0

           2.0

           -
                  50 51 52 53 54 55 56 57 58 59 60 61 62 63 64 65 66 67 68 69 70 71 72 73 74 75
                                                  Age (in Years)
Figure 16. Death Rates in the U.S. before and after 1966


                                     12,000

                                                         Males 1961-1965
                                     10,000              Females 1961-1965
Death Rates per 100,000 Population




                                                         Males 1967-1971
                                                         Females 1967-1971
                                     8,000



                                     6,000



                                     4,000



                                     2,000



                                       -
                                              50 51 52 53 54 55 56 57 58 59 60 61 62 63 64 65 66 67 68 69 70 71 72 73 74 75 76 77 78 79 80
                                                                                     Age (in years)
     Figure 17. Unadjusted Death Rates for the United States and Age-Shifted Death Rates for
     Canada, 1990-1994


                                    11,000

                                    10,000           USA Males

                                    9,000            USA Females
Death Rate per 100,000 Population




                                    8,000
                                                     Canada Males (Shift Age)
                                    7,000
                                                     Canada Females (Shift Age)
                                    6,000

                                    5,000

                                    4,000

                                    3,000

                                    2,000

                                     1,000

                                      -
                                             50 51 52 53 54 55 56 57 58 59 60 61 62 63 64 65 66 67 68 69 70 71 72 73 74 75 76 77 78 79 80
                                                                                    Age (in years)
Table 1: Characteristics of People Age 62-64 With and Without Health Insurance

                                                                                      Subsample           Subsample
                                                                   Overall                 With              Without
                                                                   Sample              Insurance           Insurance               T-ratio

Have Health Insurance                                                   90.1                 100.0                  0.0                --

Female                                                                  51.8                   51.2                58.3                4.60
Married                                                                 72.6                   74.2                58.0               10.65
Working                                                                 40.9                   41.2                38.4                1.80
Poor (Family Income<Pov. Line)                                           7.1                    5.8                19.3               11.37

White Non-Hispanic                                                      81.1                   83.1                62.6               13.94
Black Non-Hispanic                                                       8.9                    8.4                13.3                4.69
Hispanic                                                                 7.0                    5.7                19.1               11.39
Other Race Non-Hispanic                                                  3.0                    2.8                 5.0                3.30

High School Dropout                                                     24.2                   21.3                50.8               19.26
High School, No College                                                 35.0                   35.8                28.4                5.21
Some College                                                            20.7                   21.6                13.1                7.82
4 Years College or More                                                 20.0                   21.4                 7.7               15.19

Daily Smoker                                                              14                   13.2                20.5
Any Exercise in Past 30 Days                                            70.2                   71.5                60.9                 9.49
Overweight (BMI over 25.0)                                              67.6                   67.4                69.2                 1.19
Obese (BMI over 30)                                                     25.1                   24.7                28.0                 2.13

Have a Usual Place of Preventative Care                                 94.2                   96.3                74.6               11.59
Delayed Care Last Year for Cost Reasons                                  7.1                    4.8                28.1               17.44
Saw Doctor At Least Once Last Year                                      84.4                   86.6                65.7               15.42
Had Routine Checkup Last Year                                           81.6                   84.1                62.3                8.81
Overnight Stay in Hospital Last Year                                    11.3                   11.7                 7.5                6.22

Had Flu Shot Last Year                                                  46.6                   48.7                31.4                9.88
Ever Had Pneumonia Shot                                                 28.6                   29.5                21.7                5.10
Had Cholesterol Check in Last 2 Years                                   83.1                   85.8                61.6               10.38
Had Mammogram in Last 2 Years                                           80.5                   84.1                56.6               12.09
Had Pap Smear in Last 2 Years                                           71.9                   74.5                55.1                8.34
Had Clinical Breast Exam in Last 2 Years                                78.7                   81.6                59.7                9.57
Had Prostate-Specific Antigen Test in Last 2 Yrs                        69.4                   72.0                46.9                6.64
Had Digital Rectal Prostate Exam in Last 2 Years                        69.4                   72.1                45.9                7.06

Ever Diagnosed with Hypertension                                        45.5                   46.1                40.9                 2.37
Ever Diagnosed with Diabetes                                            14.4                   14.4                15.1                 0.44
Ever Diagnosed with Heart-Related Problems                              19.0                   19.6                14.0                 3.63

In Good, Very Good, Excellent Health                                    79.4                   79.9                74.1                 4.24
Notes: Except as noted, means are based on data from pooled 1997-2001 NHIS. Percent who saw a doctor in past year and percent with a
hospital stay in past year come from pooled 1992-2001 NHIS. Percent with a routine doctor visit, cholesterol test, mammogram, pap smear,
clinical breast exam, PSA test, digital rectal test, any exercise in past month, overweight, and obese are based on data from pooled 1998-2002
BRFSS. Heart-Related Problems include coronary heart disease, angina pectoris, and "any [other] kind of heart condition or heart disease".
Table 2: Differences in Health Care Access/Utilization by Group and Insurance Status (62-64 Year Olds)

                                       Delayed Care for Cost                                                              Had Mammogram                 Had Cholesterol
                         Percent       Reasons Last Year:         Saw Doctor Last Year:       Hosp. Stay Last Year:        in Past 2 Years:           Test in Past 2 Years:
                         Insured       Ins.   Unins. T-ratio       Ins. Unins. T-ratio         Ins.   Unins. T-ratio      Ins.   Unins. T-ratio       Ins.    Unins. T-ratio
                           (1)         (2)     (3)     (4)         (5)    (6)      (7)          (8)    (9)     (10)       (11)    (12)    (13)        (14)     (15)    (16)

All                       90.1          4.8    28.1    17.4        86.6    65.7    15.4        11.7      7.5   6.2        84.1    56.6    12.1        85.8    61.6    10.4


High Education            94.4          4.1    30.1    10.2        87.3    67.6     8.9        10.6      7.7   2.5        84.8    55.2    10.7        87.3    64.9     7.8
White Nonhispanic

Low Education             83.6          7.1    30.7     7.4        84.7    61.8     7.9        15.2      7.0   5.8        74.2    47.4     6.0        78.9    45.3     6.2
 White Nonhispanic

High Education            88.1          4.2    26.0     6.4        85.6    68.5     4.8        10.7      4.7   3.9        89.8    69.1     3.4        86.3    60.7     4.0
Minority

Low Education             71.4          7.7    26.3     8.2        85.7    65.7     7.6        15.4      9.1   4.1        77.4    57.9     2.7        78.5    65.6     1.9
 Minority


Note: See note to Table 1. Entries under "Ins." columns are means for subgroup with health insurance. Entries under "Unins." column are means for subgroup without insurance.
High education refers to high school diploma or more. Minority refers to Hispanics, blacks, and members of other non-white racial groups.
Table 3: Regression Discontinuity Estimates of Change in Health Insurance Coverage at Age 65


                             Model fit to                  Models fit to Micro Data:                Linear Prob.
                             Aggregrated        Linear Prob.    Linear Prob.         Probit           Model for
                              Age Cells          no controls    w/ controls       w/ controls        Medicare
                                 (1)                 (2)               (3)              (4)              (5)

All                                   8.41              8.41             8.60             6.05             67.32
                                    (0.30)            (0.26)           (0.24)           (0.20)             (1.49)
By Ethnicity/Education:
High Education                        5.28              5.28             5.28             3.95             72.59
White Nonhispanic                   (0.34)            (0.26)           (0.27)           (0.32)             (1.41)

Low Education                       14.21             14.21            14.43            10.86              63.26
 White Nonhispanic                  (1.08)            (1.42)           (1.38)           (1.21)             (1.42)

High Education                        9.03              9.03             9.13             8.92             57.80
Minority                            (1.47)            (1.15)           (1.13)           (1.05)             (2.53)

Low Education                       18.83             18.83            19.41            15.93              48.70
 Minority                           (1.73)            (1.63)           (1.56)           (1.87)             (3.03)

By Ethnicity:
White Non-Hispanics                   7.26              7.26             7.30             5.10             70.56
                                    (0.31)            (0.28)           (0.24)           (0.27)             (1.32)

Black Non-Hispanics                 13.64             13.64            14.19            12.27              55.14
                                    (1.53)            (1.12)           (1.08)           (1.33)             (3.10)

Hispanics                           17.30             17.30            16.88            14.25              51.87
                                    (2.16)            (2.02)           (1.93)           (1.77)             (2.84)
By Gender:
Men                                   7.19              7.19             7.32             5.34             65.40
                                    (0.51)            (0.54)           (0.51)           (0.40)             (1.24)

Women                                 9.50              9.50             9.75             6.67             69.03
                                    (0.49)            (0.60)           (0.57)           (0.43)             (1.88)

Note: Table entries represent estimated coefficient of dummy for age 65 or older in models
for the probability of insurance coverage (columns 1-4) or Medicare coverage (column 5). All models include
quadratic in age (in quarters) fully interacted with dummy for age 65 or older. Models in columns (2)-(5) are
fit to micro data: standard errors are calculated assuming a cluster structure by age.
Controls in models in columns (3)-(5) include year dummies, and dummies for gender, ethnicity,
education levels, and region. Probit estimates are dummy for age 65 x density at mean. Standard errors in
parentheses.
Table 4: Regression Discontinuity Estimates of Effect of Reaching Age 65 on Health Care Access and Utilization

                                                          Needed to
                            Delayed       Did Not Get     See Dr. Last   Has Usual      Saw Doctor    Spent 1 or
                          Care Last       Care Last       Year, Didn't    Place for     at Least      More Nights
                          Year for Cost   Year for Cost   Because of     Preventative   Once Last     in Hospital
                           Reasons         Reasons           Cost           Care           Year         Last Year
                               (1)             (2)            (3)            (4)             (5)           (6)

All                             -0.56           -0.23            -2.70          1.40          0.97           1.18
                               (0.64)          (0.52)           (0.56)        (0.86)        (0.68)         (0.59)
By Ethnicity/Education:
High Education                   0.31            0.21            -1.76          0.36          0.16           1.07
White Nonhispanic              (0.83)          (0.46)           (0.47)        (1.18)        (0.93)         (0.72)

Low Education                   -1.12            0.20            -4.60          3.88          1.79           0.95
 White Nonhispanic             (1.40)          (1.65)           (1.95)        (2.46)        (1.34)         (1.58)

High Education                  -1.77           -0.60            -3.54          3.74         -0.22           2.11
Minority                       (1.61)          (1.19)           (1.36)        (1.53)        (1.91)         (1.15)

Low Education                   -5.06           -4.39            -8.90          0.99          5.63           1.09
 Minority                      (2.02)          (1.41)           (2.42)        (2.04)        (2.06)         (1.93)

By Ethnicity:
White Non-Hispanics              0.01            0.27            -2.01          1.07          0.59           1.06
                               (0.74)          (0.55)           (0.57)        (0.94)        (0.72)         (0.69)

Black Non-Hispanics             -4.17           -2.51            -5.45          4.42          2.82           1.49
                               (1.82)          (1.72)           (2.07)        (1.10)        (1.64)         (1.41)

Hispanics                       -5.02           -4.78          -10.21           3.35          6.35           2.56
                               (1.36)          (0.99)           (3.16)        (2.29)        (2.25)         (1.95)
By Gender:
Men                             -1.17           -0.90            -1.66          1.95          0.88           2.21
                               (1.03)          (0.74)           (0.63)        (1.20)        (0.85)         (0.94)

Women                            0.01            0.39            -3.42          0.93          0.97           0.29
                               (0.85)          (0.69)           (0.92)        (0.82)        (1.18)         (0.65)

Note: Table entries represent estimated coefficient of dummy for age 65 or older in models for outcome listed in column
heading. All models fit to micro data; standard errors (in paretheses) are estimated assuming a cluster structure by age.
Models include quadratic in age, fully interacted with a dummy for age 65 or older, along with sample year dummies and
dummies for gender, ethnicity, region, and education levels. Models in columns (1), (2), and (4) are fit to data from pooled
1997-2001 NHIS. Models in columns (5) and (6) are fit to data from pooled 1992-2001 NHIS. Models in column (3)
are fit to data from 1998-2002 BRFSS.
Table 5: Regression Discontinuity Estimates of Effect of Reaching Age 65 on Preventative Care


                                          Had Blood                                     Had PSA or                       Ever
                            Had Flu       Cholesterol    Mammogram                      Rectal Exam     Ever Had      Diagnosed
                           Shot in Past   Checked in       in Past        Ever Had        in Past       PSA or           with
                              Year        Past 2 Yrs        2 Yrs       Mammogram          2 Yrs       Rectal Exam    Hypertension
                                (1)            (2)            (3)            (4)             (5)           (6)            (7)

All                               1.03           1.45           1.02           -0.18           1.08           0.21            0.66
                                (1.03)         (0.64)         (0.82)          (0.58)         (1.64)         (1.07)          (1.85)
By Ethnicity/Education:
High Education                    0.74           0.40           1.86            0.58           1.00          -0.01           -1.66
White Nonhispanic               (1.23)         (0.93)         (0.97)          (0.69)         (1.42)         (1.10)          (2.42)

Low Education                     4.91           9.99           0.02           -2.72          -3.56          -3.43            2.78
 White Nonhispanic              (1.15)         (1.74)         (2.75)          (2.15)         (5.12)         (3.43)          (3.59)

High Education                   -0.32           0.57          -4.42           -2.33           4.85           3.58            9.15
Minority                        (2.70)         (2.23)         (2.30)          (1.25)         (2.26)         (1.54)          (3.96)

Low Education                     2.32           3.73           5.83            0.56           4.49           0.90            3.34
 Minority                       (3.11)         (2.31)         (2.55)          (1.43)         (5.20)         (4.37)          (5.19)

By Ethnicity:
White Non-Hispanics               1.14           1.46           1.56            0.12           0.30          -0.46           -0.78
                                (1.10)         (0.86)         (0.92)          (0.67)         (1.64)         (1.05)          (1.93)

Black Non-Hispanics              -2.04          -0.75           2.70            2.60          -0.71           0.29            7.93
                                (2.56)         (1.74)         (2.19)          (1.57)         (3.77)         (3.51)          (4.00)

Hispanics                         2.55           0.13          -3.18           -5.40         12.73            4.67            5.02
                                (3.06)         (3.14)         (3.44)          (2.02)         (4.85)         (3.37)          (1.13)
By Gender:
Men                              -0.56           2.63          --             --             --              --               0.85
                                (1.19)         (1.22)                                                                       (2.85)

Women                             2.12           0.58          --             --             --              --               0.45
                                (1.43)         (0.69)                                                                       (2.10)

Note: Table entries represent estimated coefficient of dummy for age 65 or older in models for outcome listed in column heading. All models
fit to micro data; standard errors (in parentheses) are estimated assuming a cluster structure by age. Models include quadratic in age, fully
interacted with a dummy for age 65 or older, along with sample year dummies and dummies for gender, ethnicity, region, and education
levels. Models in columns (1)-(6) are fit to data from 1998-2002 BRFSS. Models in column (7) are fit to data from 1997-2001 NHIS.
Table 6: Regression Discontinuity Estimates of Medicare Eligibility on Number and Characteristics of Hospital Discharges


                                                    California                                              Florida                                    U.S.
                          Log (No.    Days in           Total      In-Hospital   Log (No.    Days in           Total       In-Hospital   Log (No.    Days in        In-Hospital
                          Discharges) Hospital        Charges       Mortality    Discharges) Hospital        Charges        Mortality    Discharges) Hospital        Mortality
                            (x100)     (x100)          (dollars)     (x100)        (x100)     (x100)          (dollars)      (x100)        (x100)     (x100)          (x100)
                              (1)        (2)              (3)          (4)           (5)        (6)              (7)           (8)           (9)        (10)            (11)

All                              6.0         -6.5          -32.3        -0.18         11.4         -15.2         -182.8         -0.32            6.4         -4.8          0.04
                               (1.0)        (2.1)        (147.6)       (0.06)         (1.1)         (2.0)         (78.7)       (0.06)          (1.3)       (10.3)        (0.32)
By Ethnicity:
White Non-Hispanic               7.1         -3.3           59.0        -0.14         13.4         -14.3         -125.0         -0.25            5.4        -20.9         -0.28
                               (1.2)        (2.8)        (184.0)       (0.07)         (1.7)         (1.9)         (99.4)       (0.06)          (1.6)       (12.8)        (0.34)

Black Non-Hispanic              -0.7       -11.2          -131.0        -0.23          -0.3        -13.7          -64.7         -0.52            1.5         13.9          0.82
                               (2.4)        (5.6)        (308.6)       (0.20)         (2.0)         (6.8)       (265.7)        (0.19)          (3.1)       (40.1)        (0.81)

Hispanics                        5.1       -10.3          -306.2        -0.18         10.8         -17.1         -776.2         -0.43
                               (1.4)        (3.9)        (282.6)       (0.13)         (1.5)         (7.7)       (300.0)        (0.16)


By Route into Hospital:
Emergency Room (ER)              1.3       -14.5          -329.9        -0.16           6.0        -20.5         -481.0         -0.33
                               (0.1)        (2.7)        (194.9)       (0.08)         (1.3)         (2.4)       (143.4)        (0.10)

Non-ER                         10.8           2.2          132.9        -0.08         16.9          -9.3          -14.7         -0.20
                               (1.0)        (3.0)        (261.0)       (0.05)         (1.3)        (3.0)        (136.9)        (0.08)
By Type of Admission:
Elective                                                                              19.1         -15.7         -114.4         -0.12
                                                                                      (1.4)         (3.6)       (143.6)        (0.07)

Urgent                                                                                12.8          -9.6         -225.1         -0.29
                                                                                      (1.2)        (5.7)        (215.1)        (0.09)

Emergency                                                                               5.6        -15.6         -337.0         -0.30
                                                                                      (1.3)         (3.0)       (183.0)        (0.12)
Note: For California and Florida, samples include people admitted to hospitals from home, discharged between 1995 and 1999 (California) or between 1995 and
2000 (Florida). Data for the U.S. come from the 1979-1999 National Hospital Discharge Survey (NHDS) Multi-Year File and are for 1995-1999. NHDS collects data
on race, but not ethnicity. It also does not collect data about route into the hospital or type of admission. Models are fit to age cells, and include a quadratic for age (in
years) fully interacted with a dummy for age 65 and older. Standard errors in parentheses.
Table 7: Regression Discontinuity Estimates of Medicare Eligibility on Number and
         Characteristics of Hospital Discharges, By Insurance Coverage Level of
         Non-elderly Adults in Zip Code (Florida)


                                Log (No.            Days in             Total            In-Hospital
                                Discharges)         Hospital           Charges            Mortality
                                  (x100)             (x100)            (dollars)           (x100)
                                    (1)                (2)               (3)                 (4)

All                                    11.4               -15.2            -182.8              -0.32
                                       (1.1)               (2.0)            (78.7)            (0.06)

By Mean Fraction Uninsured in Zip Code
8.6% or Less Uninsured              12.4                  -18.3            -314.0              -0.12
                                    (1.8)                  (4.1)          (141.7)             (0.12)

8.6-11.2% Uninsured                    12.0               -11.4             181.7              -0.17
                                       (1.6)               (3.7)          (181.7)             (0.11)

11.2-14.8% Uninsured                   10.2               -16.6            -428.7              -0.47
                                       (1.1)               (3.3)          (157.8)             (0.10)

14.8% or More Uninsured                10.5               -21.1            -252.7              -0.44
                                       (1.1)               (6.0)          (241.0)             (0.14)



Note: Samples include people admitted to hospitals from home, discharged between 1995 and 2000.
Models are fit to age cells, and include a quadratic for age (in years) fully interacted with a dummy for
age 65 and older. Average insurance rates in zip code are computed from discharge records for
people age 50 to 64. Fraction uninsured is the fraction who are coded as paying their own bill or
covered by charity care or indigent care programs.
Table 8: Regression Discontinuity Estimates of Medicare Eligibility on Number of Hospital
         Discharges, By Admission Diagnoses and Procedures Performed in Hospital



                                                          Log (Number of Hospital Discharges) x 100:
                                            California                   Florida                     U.S.
                                                (1)                        (2)                        (3)

All                                                6.0                        11.4                      6.4
                                                 (1.0)                        (1.1)                   (1.3)

By Admission Diagnoses:
Chronic Ischemic Heart Disease                   12.5                         19.3                      6.4
                                                 (2.1)                        (2.5)                   (5.6)

Acute Myocardial Infarction                        5.4                          7.2                     5.1
                                                 (1.8)                        (2.8)                   (5.0)

Heart Failure                                      0.4                          1.4                   10.7
                                                 (2.4)                        (1.9)                   (7.8)

Chronic Bronchitis                                 7.3                        10.5                      8.5
                                                 (3.0)                        (3.2)                   (6.9)

Osteoarthrosis                                   15.3                         34.9                    14.9
                                                 (2.7)                        (3.0)                   (8.0)

Pneumonia                                          4.3                          0.8                    -2.3
                                                 (1.9)                        (1.4)                   (5.6)

By Procedure Performed in Hospital:
None                                               4.7                          9.2                     8.5
                                                 (1.3)                        (1.2)                   (1.6)

Diagnostic Procedures on Heart                     7.4                        11.3                     -0.7
                                                 (1.9)                        (2.6)                   (6.4)

Removal of Coronary Artery Obstruction           11.3                         17.7                      7.0
                                                 (2.4)                        (3.2)                   (6.0)

Bypass Anastomosis of Heart                      19.4                         19.5                    11.3
                                                 (2.1)                        (3.0)                   (7.2)

Joint Replacement of Lower Extremity             14.1                         30.3                      7.5
                                                 (2.2)                        (2.4)                   (7.1)

Diagnostic Procedures on Small Intestine           6.3                          8.2                     6.1
                                                 (2.3)                        (2.4)                   (9.1)

Cholecystectomy (gall bladder removal)           20.4                         20.7                    16.4
                                                 (2.0)                        (3.4)                   (6.5)

Note: See note to Table 6.
Table 9: Regression Discontinuity Estimates of Effect of Reaching Age 65 on Smoking, Exercise
         and Body Weight



                                                Strenuous
                                Smoke          Exercise in
                                 Daily         Past 30 Days       Overweight         Obese
                                 (1)                (2)               (3)              (4)

All                                 0.42             -0.18             -0.53              0.86
                                  (0.55)            (0.49)            (0.65)            (0.59)
By Ethnicity/Education:
High Education                      0.83             -0.51             -0.94              0.08
White Nonhispanic                 (0.63)            (0.50)            (0.89)            (0.73)

Low Education                      -3.92              2.91              0.00              2.70
White Nonhispanic                 (2.36)            (2.90)            (1.40)            (1.54)

High Education                      1.53             -0.55             -1.83              0.90
Minority                          (1.35)            (2.11)            (2.45)            (1.48)

Low Education                      -0.64              1.59              6.35              7.18
 Minority                         (1.70)            (2.60)            (2.01)            (1.69)

By Ethnicity:
White Non-Hispanics                 0.31             -0.22             -0.87              0.39
                                  (0.78)            (0.53)            (0.74)            (0.69)

Black Non-Hispanics                 0.78             -0.36              3.20              6.15
                                  (2.48)            (2.78)            (3.22)            (2.81)

Hispanics                          -1.62             -1.39             -0.53             -0.33
                                  (1.23)            (2.99)            (2.55)            (2.34)
By Gender:
Men                                 0.23              0.69             -0.09              2.09
                                  (0.86)            (1.03)            (0.56)            (0.64)

Women                               0.52             -0.98             -0.84             -0.09
                                  (0.86)            (1.13)            (0.91)            (0.77)

Note: Table entries represent estimated coefficient of dummy for age 65 or older in models for
outcome listed in column heading. See note to Table 4 for specification. Models are estimated
using data from the 1999-2002 BRFSS.
Table 10: Regression Discontinuity Estimates of Effect of Reaching Age 65 on Self-Reported
          Health


                                     Linear                  Models for Level of Health
                               Probability Model         (5 point scale 1=poor 5=excellent)
                                   for Good or              Linear                Ordered
                                  Better Health          Regression                Probit
                                       (1)                    (2)                   (3)

All                                      0.21                   2.06                   2.13
                                       (0.87)                 (1.81)                 (1.69)
By Ethnicity/Education:
High Education                          -0.34                   0.59                   0.83
White Nonhispanic                      (0.70)                 (2.07)                 (2.01)

Low Education                            1.96                   6.81                   6.17
 White Nonhispanic                     (2.04)                 (3.60)                 (3.22)

High Education                          -1.53                  -2.00                  -2.00
Minority                               (2.20)                 (7.05)                 (6.70)

Low Education                            3.97                   9.93                   9.49
 Minority                              (2.21)                 (4.92)                 (4.47)

By Ethnicity:
White Non-Hispanics                      0.10                   1.85                   1.96
                                       (0.80)                 (1.80)                 (1.70)

Black Non-Hispanics                     -0.42                   2.31                   2.49
                                       (2.50)                 (7.10)                 (6.70)

Hispanics                                4.48                 11.39                  10.63
                                       (1.95)                 (5.56)                 (5.08)
By Gender:
Men                                      0.94                   1.80                   1.66
                                       (1.11)                 (2.27)                 (2.10)

Women                                   -0.40                   2.35                   2.58
                                       (1.02)                 (2.34)                 (2.27)

Note: Table entries represent estimated coefficient of dummy for age 65 or older in models for
outcome listed in column heading. Models are estimated using data from the 1992-2001 NHIS.
Coefficients and standard errors in columns (2) and (3) are multiplied times 100.
Table 11: Regression Discontinuity Estimates of Effect of Medicare Eligibility on Death Rates (per 100,000 Pop) for Demographic Groups

                                                                                                                     White       White         Black        Black       Hispanic     Hispanic
                                     All          Men         Women         Whites        Blacks      Hispanics      Males      Females        Males       Females       Males       Females
                                     (1)          (2)          (3)           (4)            (5)          (6)          (7)         (8)           (9)          (10)         (11)         (12)

 Reg. Discontinuity Estimate

Age>=65                              8.76        11.23         11.04          7.13         -1.28        14.09        10.26         9.82         0.24         -1.73        17.83         11.2
                                   (36.82)      (53.68)       (28.58)       (34.05)      (117.42)      (24.79)      (52.46)      (25.53)      (148.50)     (102.77)      (34.63)      (25.46)


Death Rate at Age 66
Observed                             1,913         2,482         1,437         1,870         2,829       1,370        2,433         1,392        3,625        2,218        1,787        1,028
Predicted by Pre-65 Trend            1,897         2,454         1,423         1,864         2,701       1,368        2,413         1,386        3,503        2,107        1,767        1,041


Death Rate at Age 67
Observed                             2,074         2,687         1,565         2,029         3,033       1,502        2,631         1,521        4,013        2,328        1,941        1,144
Predicted by Pre-65 Trend            2,035         2,636         1,529         2,011         2,766       1,474        2,610         1,497        3,546        2,191        1,898        1,132



Note: Row labeled "Age>=65" presents estimated coefficient of dummy for age 65 or older in models for outcome listed in column heading. Models are fit to age cells and include a cubic in age
fully interacted with a dummy for age 65 or older. The numerator for age-specific death rates is the number of deaths at each age registered by NCHS in the Multiple Cause of Death Files for
1989-1998 (pooled). The denominator is the postcensal estimate of the July 1 resident population of the United States at each age for 1989-1998 (pooled). Death rates are expressed per 100,000
population.
Table 12: Summary of Intergroup Variation in Reduced Form Estimates of Medicare Eligibility Effects



                                                                                  Gap in Outcome between        Percent of Gap at Ages
                                            Estimate of Equation (5):             Low Ed Minorities and Hi Ed   63-64 Closed By
Outcome                                      d1               R2                  Whites, Ages 63-64            Medicare Eligibility

1. Percent Delayed Care in                      -0.42            0.76                          7.0                             85
Past Year for Cost Reasons                     (0.09)

2. Percent Did Not Get Care in                  -0.37            0.67                          7.5                             70
Past Year for Cost Reasons (NHIS)              (0.11)

3. Percent Did Not Get Care in Past             -0.60            0.82                        19.1                              44
Year for Cost Reasons (BRFSS)                  (0.12)

4. Percent Saw Doctor in Past Year               0.48            0.84                         -5.5                            123
                                               (0.09)

5. Percent With Hospital Stay in                 0.00            0.00                          3.3                              0
Past Year                                      (0.03)

6. Percent With Flu Shot in Past Year            0.14            0.10                        -13.8                             14
                                               (0.19)

7. Percent With Cholesterol Test                 0.21            0.08                        -11.5                             26
in Past Two Years                              (0.32)

8. Percent with Mammogram                        0.16            0.05                        -13.1                             17
in Past Two Years                              (0.31)

9. Percent With Prostate Exam                    0.35            0.11                        -14.3                             35
in Past Two Years                              (0.45)

10. Self Assessed Level of                       0.77            0.66                         -0.9                             12
Health (1-5 Scale)                             (0.25)


Notes: See text for explanation.
Appendix Table 1: Regression Discontinuity Estimates of Change in Health Insurance
                  at Age 65, Alternative Data Sources


                              NHIS: 1992-2001     NHIS: 1997-2001 BRFSS: 1998-2002

All                                     8.60                8.02              9.50
                                      (0.24)              (0.52)            (0.49)
By Ethnicity/Education:
High Education                          5.28                4.68              7.00
White Nonhispanic                     (0.27)              (0.57)            (0.46)

Low Education                         14.43               15.50             17.31
 White Nonhispanic                    (1.38)              (2.31)            (1.90)

High Education                          9.13                7.27              9.78
Minority                              (1.13)              (1.32)            (1.78)

Low Education                         19.41               19.71             24.12
 Minority                             (1.56)              (2.05)            (1.73)

By Ethnicity:
White Non-Hispanics                     7.30                6.74              8.20
                                      (0.24)              (0.51)            (0.36)

Black Non-Hispanics                   14.19               13.28             11.10
                                      (1.08)              (1.40)            (1.58)

Hispanics                             16.88               14.31             19.01
                                      (1.93)              (2.36)            (3.16)
By Gender:
Men                                     7.32                6.83              7.94
                                      (0.51)              (0.91)            (0.53)

Women                                   9.75                9.11            10.81
                                      (0.57)              (0.63)            (0.54)

Note: Table entries are estimated coefficient of dummy for age 65 or older in models
for the probability of insurance coverage. All models include quadratic in age, fully
interacted with dummy for age 65 or older. Models in columns (1) and (2) use age measured
in quarters, for people age 55-75. Models in column (3) use age measured in years for
people age 50-80. Additional controls include survey year dummies, dummies for
gender, ethnicity, education levels, and region. Standard errors (in parentheses) are
calculated assuming a cluster structure by age.
Appendix Table 2: Estimates of Discontinuities at Age 65 in Employment, Marriage, Family Income, and Mobility




                           Microdata                         Cell-Level Data From 1996-2002 March CPS:
                          from 1992-                        Married       Family        Family      Family              Moved to
                          2001 NHIS:                        Spouse        Income        Income      Income            New House
                           Employed         Employed        Present       <$10,000     <$15,000     <$20,000          in Past Year
                               (1)            (2)              (3)            (4)          (5)         (6)                 (7)

All                             -0.44            -1.27           -0.91          -0.42          -0.78          -0.10          -0.48
                               (0.96)           (1.01)          (0.70)         (0.45)         (0.63)         (0.63)         (0.33)
By Ethnicity/Education:
High Education                  -0.78            -1.08           -1.40          -0.64          -0.68          -0.09          -0.65
White Nonhispanic              (1.34)           (1.02)          (0.76)         (0.31)         (0.48)         (0.65)         (0.32)

Low Education                    0.07            -2.65            1.77           0.16          -0.35          -0.19          -0.20
 White Nonhispanic             (1.71)           (1.45)          (1.91)         (1.18)         (1.82)         (1.58)         (1.02)

High Education                  -2.05            -1.15           -0.04          -0.76          -1.06          -0.42          -0.30
Minority                       (2.64)           (2.19)          (1.78)         (1.10)         (1.39)         (1.36)         (1.38)

Low Education                    3.50            -3.89           -0.86           1.64          -1.01           0.49          -0.27
 Minority                      (1.63)           (2.22)          (2.40)         (1.73)         (1.92)         (2.07)         (1.73)

By Ethnicity:
White Non-Hispanics             -0.67            -1.14           -1.00          -0.54          -0.67          -0.06          -0.53
                               (1.15)           (0.98)          (0.72)         (0.37)         (0.58)         (0.61)         (0.33)

Black Non-Hispanics              1.53             0.42           -1.25           1.60          -0.60          -1.07           0.12
                               (2.05)           (1.90)          (2.48)         (1.67)         (1.77)         (2.00)         (1.13)

Hispanics                        0.36            -2.86            0.74          -1.85          -2.68          -1.58           1.57
                               (2.87)           (2.10)          (2.63)         (1.83)         (2.43)         (2.64)         (1.56)
By Gender:
Men                              1.12            -1.07            0.52          -1.37          -2.01          -1.19          -0.77
                               (1.42)           (1.74)          (1.13)         (0.61)         (0.76)         (0.60)         (0.55)

Women                           -1.83            -1.65           -2.25           0.44           0.30           0.88          -0.22
                               (1.14)           (0.81)          (0.83)         (0.70)         (1.00)         (0.90)         (0.50)

Note: Table entries represent estimated coefficient of dummy for age 65 or older in models for outcome listed in column
heading. Models in column (1) are fit to NHIS micro data; standard errors (in paretheses) are estimated assuming a cluster structure
by age. Models in columns (2)-(7) are estimated using cell level data for ages 50-79 from March 1996-2002 CPS.
Models include quadratic in age, fully interacted with a dummy for age 65 or older. Models in column (1) include same
controls as models in column (3) of Table 3.
