                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                             PAY OR PRAY?
      THE IMPACT OF CHARITABLE SUBSIDIES ON RELIGIOUS ATTENDANCE

                                        Jonathan Gruber

                                      Working Paper 10374
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w10374


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    March 2004




I am grateful to Elizabeth Ohltmans, Avi Ebenstein, and Brian Um for excellent research
assistance, and to Mark Chaves, Peter Diamond, Ed Glaeser, Larry Iannaccone, Daniel Olson,
Richard Steinberg, and seminar participants at the NBER for helpful comments. The views
expressed herein are those of the author and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

©2004 by Jonathan Gruber. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Pay or Pray? The Impact of Charitable Subsidies on Religious Attendance
Jonathan Gruber
NBER Working Paper No. 10374
March 2004
JEL No. H2

                                            ABSTRACT

The economic argument for subsidizing charitable giving relies on the positive externalities of

charitable activities, particularly from the religious institutions that are the largest recipients of

giving. But the net external effects of subsidies to religious giving will also depend on a potentially

important indirect effect as well: impacts on religious participation. Religious participation can be

either a complement to, or a substitute with, the level of charitable giving. Understanding these

spillover effects of charitable giving may be quite important, given the existing observational

literature that suggests that religiosity is a major determinant of well-being among Americans. In

this paper I investigate the impact of charitable subsidies on a measure of religious participation,

attendance at religious services. I do so by using data over three decades from the General Social

Survey, as well as confirming the impact of such subsidies on religious giving using the Consumer

Expenditure Survey. I find strong evidence that religious giving and religious attendance are

substitutes: larger subsidies to charitable giving lead to more religious giving, but less religious

attendance, with an implied elasticity of attendance with respect to religious giving of -0.92. These

results have important implications for the debate over charitable subsidies. They also serve to

validate economic models of religious participation.


Jonathan Gruber
MIT, Department of Economics
E52-355
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
gruberj@mit.edu
         One of the largest tax expenditures of the United States government is the itemized

deduction for charitable giving. In 2001, the federal government had $37 billion in foregone

revenue arising from the ability of individuals who itemize their taxes to deduct their charitable

giving from their taxable income (Joint Committee on Taxation, 2002). This deduction is a very

popular one, and most current debate in this area is around proposals to expand the availability

of charitable subsidies. For example, President Bush recently proposed allowing married

couples who do not itemize their taxes to deduct up to $800 in charitable giving (Bumiller,

2002).

         The economic argument for subsidizing charitable giving is clear. To the extent that

charitable giving has positive externalities, it will be underprovided by the private sector.

Subsidizing its provision through the tax code can mitigate this problem. Moreover, there is a

large econometric literature which shows that charitable giving is very responsive to these tax

subsidies. While the magnitudes vary, most estimates suggest that the overall elasticity of

charitable giving with respect to its after-tax price is in the range of minus one or larger (in

absolute value).

         One source of perceived positive externalities from increased charitable giving is through

giving to religious institutions. Such giving can expand the access to religious worship and

education, and religious institutions also provide valuable social and welfare services to the

community as well. But the net external effects of subsidies to religious giving will also depend

on a potentially important indirect effect as well: impacts on religious participation.

         Religious participation can be either a complement to, or a substitute with, the level of

charitable giving. On the one hand, if giving can only occur in a religious setting (“passing the
                                                  2

plate”), if individuals wish to monitor the impact of increased levels of giving, or if the “warm

glow” of giving is only operative when participating, then religious participation and religious

giving could be complementary; therefore, higher subsidies to charitable giving would lead to

more religious attendance. On the other hand, in the standard economic model of religiosity

(e.g. Azzi and Ehrenberg, 1975), giving and religiosity are substitutes. In this model, individuals

tradeoff the costs of religious devotion against the perceived gains of being more devoted. These

costs include both the money contributed to religious causes and the time spent on those causes,

so that cash giving is viewed as a substitute for time spent on religious endeavors.

       If religious participation is either a complement to or a substitute with religious giving,

then charitable subsidies to giving can have spillover effects on participation. Understanding

these spillover effects may be quite important, given the existing observational literature that

suggests that religiosity is a major determinant of well-being among Americans. Of course,

disentangling true effects of religiosity from other factors correlated with both religiosity and

outcomes is a daunting task; but this literature is at least suggestive of the importance of

understanding the determinants of religious participation.

       In this paper I investigate the impact of charitable subsidies on religious participation by

using the longest running survey continuous survey on religiosity in the U.S.: the General Social

Survey. In every year since 1972, this survey has asked a sample of 1500 to 2500 respondents

about their frequency of religious attendance. This long time frame, in a nationally

representative sample, allows me to exploit the dramatic variation in the subsidization of

charitable giving in the U.S. over time, across income groups, and across states. I also use this

same variation to confirm that charitable subsidies affect religious giving in the Consumer
                                                   3

Expenditure Survey (CEX), which since 1980 has collected data for a nationally representative

sample on their giving activity.

       I find very strong evidence in these data that religious giving and religious attendance are

substitutes. Larger subsidies to charitable giving increase religious donations in the CEX data,

although religious giving is less elastic than overall charity. But they also lead to a highly

significant reduction in frequency of religious attendance. These GSS attendance results are

very robust to a wide variety of specification checks. Taken together, these two sets of results

for an implicit instrumental variables estimate that suggests that there is very strong

substitutability between giving and attending. Thus, proposals to expand the subsidy to

charitable giving may spur religious giving, but that they will also result in a decline in religious

attendance in the U.S.

       The paper proceeds as follows. Part I provides background on: the theoretical

determinants of religiosity, and existing evidence on the relationship between giving and

religious participation; the theory of charitable deductions, and the normative implications of

substitutability or complementarity between giving and religious participation; and existing

evidence on the impact of the charitable deduction on giving. Part II discusses my data sources,

the GSS and CEX, and my empirical strategy. Part III presents the results, and Part IV presents

a set of specification checks. Part V concludes.



                                       Part I: Background

Charitable Subsidies and Religiosity

       There is a sizeable literature on the determinants of religiosity which inform the analysis
                                                 4

of this paper. The canonical model is Azzi and Ehrenberg’s (1975) household production model

of religiosity, as summarized by Iannaccone (1998). In this model, individuals allocate their

time and goods among religious and secular commodities so as to maximize lifetime and

“afterlife” utility.. As individuals allocate more of their time and money to religious endeavors,

it lowers consumption today, but increases consumption in the afterlife.

       In its standard form, as Iannaccone notes, this models predicts substitution between time

and money devoted to religion. This is because afterlife consumption is jointly produced by time

and money, so as more money is contributed, the marginal utility of time falls for afterlife

consumption relative to current consumption. Substitution between giving and time could also

be generated from Iannaccone’s (1992) club model of religions, in which case money and time

would jointly produce standing within a particular religious community.

       But this model could straightforwardly be extended to generate complementarities

between time and money devoted to religion. Most simply, if religious contributions occur at the

church (through “passing the plate”), then there may be a natural link between more time spent

at church and more money contributed. Alternatively, if individuals wish to monitor the

spending of their increases in contributions, then more giving could be positive correlated with

more religious attendance. It is even possible that the “warm glow” of religious giving operates

through being in the environment to which that giving is targeted, for example through being

exposed to other congregation members who may praise the giver. Complementarities may also

be generated through the supply side. For example, religious institutions may endeavor to avoid

“financial free riding” among participants through social sanctions or other mechanisms. This

would insure at least a minimal level of giving among that those who attend, generating a
                                                 5

complementarity between giving and attending.

       There are to date only a few studies which have explicitly investigated the relationship

between giving and attendance at the individual level. Olson and Caddell (1994), Forbes and

Zampelli (1997), Iannaccone (1997) and Dahl and Ransom (1999) include religious attendance

in a religious contributions model, and find a positive association between attendance and

contributions, suggesting complementarity between giving and religiosity. But it seems likely

that there are a host of omitted factors correlated with both attendance and contributions, making

such relationships difficult to interpret. Those who are “more religious” (who, in terms of the

Azzi and Ehrenberg model, have a larger value on afterlife relative to current life consumption),

will both give and participate more. But this type of complementarity does not speak to the

marginal effect of changing incentives for giving on participation.

       Sullivan (1985) and Clain and Zech (1999) attempt to address this concern by estimating

reduced forms of simultaneous equations models which include predicted contributions in

attendance models, and vice versa. Both of these studies continue to find a strong positive

correlation between giving and religiosity. But these identification strategy are quite suspect,

since it is hard to conceive of exogenous factors (other than tax laws) which impact contributions

but not attendance, or vice versa. For example, Sullivan assumes that whether one “considers

sacramental participation necessary for salvation” affects attendance but not contributions, and

that church size and whether one “considers tithing necessary for salvation” affects contributions

but not attendance. Clain and Zech assume that the square of income, home ownership, the

square of age, and wife’s education affect contributions but not attendance, and that own

education, number of children, and religious preference affects attendance but not contributions.
                                                  6

But it is clear that all of these variables will in all likelihood impact both attendance and

contributions, so this does not provide a fruitful empirical framework for disentangling their

relationship. For example, beliefs about salvation may reflect underlying tastes for religion

which drive both giving and religiosity; similarly, education can (and does quite strongly in the

regressions below) be correlated with both outcomes.

       At a more aggregated level, two studies discussed in Olson (2002) find evidence of

substitutability between giving and religiosity. Olson and Caddell (1994) find that among

United Church of Christ congregations the congregations with the highest per capita financial

giving were the congregations that were losing members most rapidly. And Olson cites his own

unpublished analysis of data from the Yearbook of American and Canadian churches suggesting

that the denominations showing the greatest increases in per member giving (adjusted for

inflation) in the latter half of twentieth century were the same denominations that lost members

most rapidly over this same time period. These results are intriguing, but once again it is hard to

distinguish true substitutability from other omitted factors that determine congregational and

denominational growth. For example, it may be that as congregations or denominations shrink

for natural reasons, the remaining adherents are those who are most committed, and therefore

those who contribute the most; indeed, Olson and Caddell (1994) suggest that this is the most

likely explanation for their finding.



Theory of Optimal Charitable Deductions

       There is a small theoretical literature which discusses the optimal level of charitable

deductions. This literature is comprehensively reviewed and extended in Saez (2000), whose
                                                 7

analysis suggests that the optimal level of subsidies depends on four factors. The first is the size

of the external effect of the subsidized good. For goods where the government cannot directly

contribute, such as contributions to religious organizations, then the unsubsidized private

optimum may be particularly far from the social optimum, heightening the potential role of

subsidies. The second is the price elasticity of the contribution good; the optimal subsidy should

rise with the price elasticity. Third, the larger is the “crowding out” of private contributions by

public contributions, the higher should be the subsidy, since more private donations are required

to achieve a given net level of contribution. Finally, contributions which are concentrated at the

bottom of the income distribution should be subsidized more heavily than those concentrated at

the top, since contributions have some consumption value so the government can use this as a

redistributive tool.

        These considerations suggest that there is a strong argument for some subsidization of

religious giving. The fact that the government cannot directly contribute to such organizations

suggests that the unsubsidized level of contributions might be suboptimal. And religious giving

is the major source of contribution among low income groups, consistent with the final

motivation for subsidization. At the same time, past research suggests (and I confirm below) that

religious giving is less price sensitive than other forms of giving, which reduces the optimal level

of subsidization.

        But the optimal level of subsidy will also depend critically on any other responses to

charitable subsidies. One potentially important source of response is religious participation.

Over two-thirds of Americans belong to a church or other religious organization, and this has

risen substantially over time. Two-fifths of Americans attend church in a typical week
                                                  8

(Iannaccone, 1998).1 And religious participation is not confined to particular income groups,

racial groups, or locations in the U.S.: religious adherence and participation is widespread among

all demographic groups. If charitable subsidization has an additional effect on religious

participation, then this can amplify or reduce the optimal subsidy level. The key question is the

net external effect of religious giving, net of any potential impacts on religious participation.

       Measuring the externalities of giving is very difficult, and there is little work which

actually quantifies the benefits of religious giving. Presumably, a major benefit of giving is

maintaining general access to religious services for others who cannot afford to give. Casual

evidence that this is the case is found in Olson and Caddell (1994), who show that giving is

lower when churches have more income from other sources or the income of other members is

higher. There may be other externalities arising from the role of churches as a direct provider of

charity or welfare services. This is at least ostensibly the motivation for policy-makers

supporting the “faith-based initiatives” that would expand the role of religious institutions in

providing welfare-like services to low income and other populations (Buhmiller, 2002).

       On the other hand, if there are also impacts of charitable subsidies on religious

participation, then there may be very large additive or offsetting externalities through this

margin. A vast series of studies documents a strong association between religious participation,

and religiosity more generally, and “a wide range of economically important social behavior,

such as criminal activity, drug and alcohol consumption, physical and mental health, and



       1
         Chaves and Stephens (2001) argue that statistics on church attendance are significantly
inflated in surveys such as those cited by Iannaccone and used in this paper, but even at a
participation rate half as high the U.S. would remain one of the most religious nations in the
world.
                                                   9

marriage, fertility and divorce” (Iannaccone, 1998). Of course, this literature is hard to interpret

because of issues of heterogeneity, but the results are nevertheless suggestive.

        Thus, the net externalities of subsidizing charitable giving may very well depend on

spillover effects on religious participation, if those spillover effects are sizeable. The purpose of

the empirical work in this paper is to measure the size of these spillover effects.



Evidence on Charitable Deductions and Charitable Giving

        There is also a sizeable literature devoted to assessing the elasticity of charitable giving

with respect to its after-tax price. A series of cross-sectional studies in the 1970s and 1980s

estimated elasticities of charitable giving with respect to its after-tax price of greater than minus

one in absolute value; see Clotfelter (1985) and Steinberg (1990) for reviews. In the 1990s,

some began to question the size of these estimated elasticities. In particular, Randolph (1995)

and Barrett, McGuirk, and Steinberg (1997) found that much of the elasticity attributed to taxes

in the previous literature was due to transitory tax changes, and that the permanent price

elasticity was lower than previously reported. A recent study by Auten, Seig and Clotfelter

(2002) questions these conclusions, however, and in particular the parameterization of

permanent income and price effects by simple multi-year averages. Using a more sophisticated

decomposition of permanent and transitory effects, they estimate that there is in fact a very

sizeable permanent price elasticity in the range of -0.8 to -1.26, quite similar to the earlier cross-

sectional literature.

        There has been relatively little attention in this literature to the decomposition of this

elasticity into the sensitivity of different types of religious giving. Notable exceptions are
                                                 10

McClelland and Kokoski (1994) and Bradley, Holden and McClelland (1999); the former paper

models religious giving explicitly, while the latter models total and non-religions giving, so that

religious giving is a residual. Both papers find that religious giving is much less price elastic

than non-religious giving, using CEX data from the early 1980s.

       But a key issue with all of the existing literature is identification. The typical approach to

estimating “first dollar” charitable subsidies is to compute the reduction in taxes for an

individual based on their income, but assuming no existing charitable giving. But, as highlighted

by Feenberg (1987), differences in charitable subsidies across individuals therefore are

correlated with other factors that may determine tastes for giving, such as income. Feenberg

suggested using state tax rates as an instrument for charitable giving to overcome this bias, but in

a cross-section this raises the difficulty that there may be other secular differences across states

correlated with both their tax rates and giving propensities. In the empirical work below, I rely

on the extensive variation over time within income groups and within states to control for both

income levels and fixed state differences in identifying charitable subsidy effects.



                              Part II: Data and Empirical Strategy

Data

       I rely on two primary sources of data for this analysis. Data on charitable contributions

comes from the Consumer Expenditure Survey. The CEX collects data for a nationally

representative set of households on an inventory of their consumption expenditures, including

charitable contributions. Charitable contributions are divided into contributions to: religious

organizations; educational organizations; political organizations; charitable organizations (e.g.
                                                 11

the United Way); and other organizations. The CEX data are collected quarterly, but

contributions information is only collected in the last interview, and respondents are asked about

their charitable giving over the past year. I use these CEX data for the period from 1980 through

1998.

        Data on religious participation come from the General Social Survey. The GSS has,

since 1972, asked a nationally representative sample of respondents about the frequency of their

religious attendance. There are nine possible responses to this question: never; less than once

per year; about once or twice a year; several times a year; about once a month; two to three times

a month; nearly every week; every week; and several times a week. For the basic analysis

below, I simply use the linear index formed by these responses (with values 0 through 8),

thereby implicitly assuming that there are equal impacts of each unit change in the attendance

index. But I show as well the effects of alternative formulations below. I use data from the GSS

from 1977 (the first year for which the tax calculator described below includes information on

state tax rates) through 2000.

        Both the GSS and the CEX also contain information on family income and other

characteristics that are necessary to form a measure of the subsidy to charitable giving. In the

CEX, income values are directly reported. The GSS, however, only collects categorical data on

income, in fine gradations until the top of the income distribution, then in larger intervals and

finally a top code. In order to create a smooth income measure, I have used data from each

year’s Current Population Survey to impute values to each of these larger ranges and the top-

coded range.

        Charitable subsidies are computed using the NBER’s internet TAXSIM model (available
                                                12

at www.nber.org/taxsim). This model inputs information on taxpayer income, state of residence,

marital status, number of children, and itemized deductions, and it outputs tax liabilities and

marginal tax rates. Information on all of these attributes except itemized deductions, and

whether the taxpayer itemizes, is available in both the CEX and GSS.2 I imputed the odds of

itemizing, and the amount of itemized deductions (aside from charitable contributions) to each

taxpayer using data from the Statistics of Income (SOI) files for each year. These data contain

information on all of the elements of taxable income, and taxes paid, for a sample of taxpayers. I

use these data to form a predicted odds of itemizing and non-charitable amount itemized by

income level and state of residence, and impute these onto the families in the CEX and GSS.

       I then use these data to estimate tax rates and charitable subsidies twice for each family,

once as an itemizer, and once as a non-itemizer. In each case, the charitable subsidy is computed

as the difference between taxable income at the baseline imputed level of (non-charity) itemized

deductions, and taxable income when itemized deductions are incremented by $1000, divided by

1000.3 When a non-itemizer, charitable subsidies are zero except for the small numbers of years

in the early 1980s when charitable deductions were allowed for non-itemizers, and the small

number of states and years where non-itemizers can deduct charitable contributions on state



       2
        TAXSIM allows one to enter separately wage and other income; however, this
breakdown in income sources is not available in the GSS, so all income is treated as wage
income. For most years in our sample, there was little distinction in the tax treatment of these
sources of income, so this should not much affect the computations.
       3
         The average level of contributions to religious charities in the CEX is $281 in 1998
dollars. But a large increment is suggested to be used with TAXSIM to avoid strange “notches”
that can arise in effective tax rates (and in particular in effective state tax rates) when income
moves by small amounts. I have replicated all results in this paper using an increment of $100
instead, and the results are very similar.
                                                 13

taxes.4 I then compute the average charitable subsidy to an individual as a weighted average of

their subsidy as a non-itemizer and their subsidy as an itemizer, where the weights are the odds

of itemizing, imputed from the SOI data.

       The resulting charitable subsidies vary for a number of reasons. The first is income:

higher income taxpayers will have higher marginal tax rates, and thus a more sizeable reduction

in their tax burden from deductions to taxable income. But this relationship is highly nonlinear,

following the bracket structure in the tax code. The second is time. The schedule of tax rates

changes over time, and it changes differentially throughout the income distribution (e.g. the tax

reforms of the 1980s reduced tax burdens much more at the top of the income distribution than at

the bottom; the tax reform of 1993 had the opposite effect). Moreover, the treatment of

charitable contributions relative to income changes somewhat over time as well, due to factors

such as the “clawback” in itemized deductions at upper income levels that has been in place

since 1987, or the Alternative Minimum Tax (AMT) which limits the amount of charitable

deduction that can be taken. The third is state tax law. Tax subsidies to charity vary across

states because (a) some states have no state income tax system, (b) tax rates vary across the

states that do have income taxes, both on average and in terms of the progressivity of tax rate

schedules, and (c) states differ in their treatment of charitable contributions. In terms of the last

factor, a number of states follow the federal definition of income, so that charitable contributions


       4
         In 1985, non-itemizers could deduct 50% of their charitable contributions from their
federal taxes; in 1986 this rose to 100%. In addition, California, Hawaii, Idaho, Iowa, Kentucky,
and North Carolina have at some point (generally in the mid-1980s) provided charitable
deductions on state taxes for nonitemizers. In addition, in 1982-1984 there was a 25% federal
credit for giving up to $250, and some states have capped credits as well. I estimated my
subsidy rates both including and excluding these capped credits, and the results were almost
identical; I exclude the capped subsidies for the results presented here.
                                                 14

are fully deductible for itemizers; others ask the taxpayer to explicitly report (and deduct) their

federally itemized amounts from their state taxable income; and a final set of states do not allow

a deduction for charitable contributions.

       Each of these factors, income, time, and state, may be independently correlated with both

charitable contributions and with attendance. So a simple correlation of charitable subsidies and

either attendance or charitable giving may not be well identified. But the rich variation in

charitable subsidies along all of these dimensions allows me to control for each of them

independently in the regression models, so that identification is achieved only from interactions

of income, time and state. I discuss this issue further below.

       Sample means for both data sets are presented in Table 1. For the CEX, I censor total

and religious giving at the 99th percentile of the conditional giving distribution. I do so because

the linear giving regressions are very sensitive to a small number of outliers. I also report results

for log giving and the odds of giving that involve no censoring. I find that the typical household

contributes $536 (1998 dollars) to charity overall, and $392 to religious giving. Thirty-eight

percent of households contribute some money to religious causes, and the average giving is over

$1000 for those who do contribute. In the GSS, I see that there is a fairly broad distribution of

the frequency of attendance at religious institutions: 15% of the sample doesn’t attend at all, 20%

attends every week, and the other options are chosen by between 8 and 13% of the sample.

       The average tax subsidy to charitable giving, factoring in the odds of itemization by

income as described above, is 9.4% in the CEX and 10% in the GSS. The slightly higher

subsidy rates on average in the GSS reflect the higher levels of average income in that data set.

The individual demographic characteristics across the two data sets are not directly comparable,
                                                  15

as they refer to the respondent in the GSS, but to the head of household in the CEX.

Nevertheless, the characteristics are almost identical, except for gender, reflecting survey bias

towards males being labeled head of household in the CEX.



Regression Framework

       In both the CEX and the GSS, I estimate regression models of the form:

(1)    Yi = " + $1SUBSi + $2Xi + $3INCi + *j + Jt + ,

where Y is one of the dependent variables (contributions or religious attendance) for individual i;

SUBS is the subsidy rate to charitable giving; X is a set of demographic control variables; INC

is a set of 10 dummy variables for the deciles of the income distribution, to control

nonparametrically for income distribution effects on giving/religiosity; and *j and Jt are a full set

of state and year fixed effects, respectively.

       This model controls for direct effects of income, state, and year on charitable giving or on

religious attendance. Thus, the only sources of identification are interactions of income, state

and year; that is, changes in the progressivity of taxation or in state tax rates over time,

differences in the progressivity of taxation across states at a point in time, or differential changes

in state progressivity over time. These are unlikely to be correlated with attendance or charitable

giving other than through the impact on charitable subsidies. But I pursue a host of specification

checks below to confirm this identification assumption.
                                                  16

Part III: Basic Results

CEX Results

       The results for the impact of charitable subsidies on charitable giving are reported in

Table 2. The first column reports the effects on total religious giving, the second column the

effects on log religious giving (which is obviously conditional on any giving), and the third

column the effects on any religious giving at all; this last regression is estimated as a probit, and

marginal probabilities are reported. The second set of three columns reports analogous results

for total charitable giving, for comparison.

       I find that there is a large and statistically significant effect of charitable subsidies on

religious giving. Overall, the results imply that each percentage point increase in the charitable

subsidy raises religious giving by almost $2. The implied elasticity of religious giving with

respect to its after-tax price (one minus the subsidy, the common price term used in the

charitable giving literature) is -0.48. This effect is comprised of a significant impact on the log

of conditional giving, with an implied elasticity of -0.48, and a precisely estimated zero effect on

the odds of giving.

       For total charitable giving, we find that each percentage increase in the charitable subsidy

raises giving by almost $5.25. The estimated elasticity of overall giving is -0.89. This is

comprised of a significant impact on log of conditional giving, with an elasticity of -0.81, and a

small but statistically significant impact on the odds of giving, with an elasticity of -0.24. These

do not sum to the overall elasticity because the composition of the pool of givers is changing

somewhat as the charitable subsidy impacts who gives to charity.

       Thus, the results here roughly confirm the conclusions of the earlier literature on
                                                 17

charitable giving. Overall charitable giving is very sensitive to subsidization by the tax code,

although I estimate a price elasticity somewhat below previous studies, and less than one in

absolute value. Religious giving is much less price elastic, although still significantly so. These

results imply, for example, that doubling the average level of charitable subsidy from its 1998

level would lead to a rise in total charitable giving of 6.5%, and a rise in religious giving of

3.5%.

        Table 2 also shows a subset of the control variables used in the regression; the remaining

set of controls is listed in the footnote to that table. Whites and blacks are both found to

contribute more to charity relative to other racial groups, while those who are Hispanic

contribute less. Married couples also contribute less, conditional on the other included

covariates; the unconditional correlation with marital status is strongly positive. There is a

strong positive impact of both more education and more income on giving.



GSS Results

        Table 3 turns to an analysis of the impact of charitable subsidies on religious attendance

in the GSS. As the results show, there is a very significant and sizeable negative coefficient on

the charitable subsidy here, implying that giving and attendance are substitutes. The coefficient

shows that the attendance index falls by 0.023 units for each one percentage point subsidy to

charitable giving. The implied elasticity of attendance with respect to the after-tax price of

giving is 0.47.

        The impact of charitable subsidies on giving in the CEX, and on attendance in the GSS,

can be compared to compute an implicit instrumental variables estimate of the substitutability
                                                  18

between giving and religiosity. Doing so, I find that each one percent rise in charitable giving

leads to a 1.1% decline in attendance. This implies very strong substitutability between these

activities.

        It is important to note, however, that the interpretation of this implicit IV coefficient

depends on the underlying model of substitution. Under the Azzi-Ehrenberg model, it is possible

that individuals view any giving to charity as a substitute for religious participation in terms of

producing afterlife consumption, as opposed to only religious giving. If we use the overall

charitable giving elasticity to compute an IV estimate of substitutability, we find that each one

percent rise in charitable giving leads to a 0.6% decline in attendance. Under the Iannaccone

model, on the other hand, it is only giving to one’s religious group that would substitute for

attendance, so that this would imply that the substitutability should be defined relative solely to

religious giving. In the absence of evidence on the appropriate model, I can only conclude that

the degree of substitutability lies between 0.6 and 1.1.

        Table 3 also shows the coefficients on some of the other control variables in this religious

participation regression. Whites have significantly lower levels of religious participation, and

blacks significantly higher levels, relative to other racial groups. Those who are married have

more religious participation, and this effect is stronger for men than for women, consistent with

arguments that marriage promotes “more responsible” behaviors in particular among males.

There is a strong positive correlation between both education and income and religious

participation.

        Thus, these findings imply a very strong level of substitutability between charitable

giving and religious participation. Larger subsidies to charitable giving produce higher levels of
                                                 19

religious giving, as expected, but also produce almost correspondingly large declines in reported

attendance. The results imply that doubling of the current level of charitable subsidies to

religious giving would lead to a fall in religious attendance of as much as 3.6% from its 2000

level. Given this striking results, the next section runs through a battery of specification checks

designed to assess its validity.



                                   Part IV: Specification Checks

Linearity of Attendance Index

        The results in the GSS thus far have considered only an aggregated linear religious

attendance index. This linearity assumption may not be valid. In addition, a question of

particular interest is whether these findings reflect changes in behavior throughout the

distribution of attendance choices, or only at one or two particular points. That is, do we see a

shift from frequent to infrequent attendance, or from infrequent attendance to no attendance, or

both?

        I investigate this issue in the first column of Table 4. Here I show the coefficient on the

charitable subsidy rate from nine separate regressions that use as dependent variables dummies

for each of the nine possible responses to the religious attendance question. I show only the

coefficients of interest from regressions that include the full set of covariates shown in Table 3

and discussed in the footnote to that Table. Once again, these regressions are estimated as

probits, and marginal probabilities are reported.

        It is clear from these results that charitable subsidies have an impact throughout the

distribution of attendance. There is a very sizeable rise in the odds of not attending at all, and a
                                                  20

sizeable decline in the odds of frequent attendance. The impact on attending most frequently is

somewhat weaker than the impact of attending only once a week, which suggests perhaps that

there is less sensitivity among the most devoted. But, overall, there is a rise in the categories

indicating infrequent attendance, and a decline in the categories indicating frequent attendance.

       Another way to parameterize this index is to weight each value according to the actual

time associated with attendance, rather than having the index be linear in the categories.5 I do so

in the next row of column (1) of Table 4. Unsurprisingly, the results are also robust to this

transformation.6



Income Endogeneity

       One potential concern with the approach pursued above is the endogeneity of incomes to

religiosity. If the large literature which suggests positive benefits from religiosity is valid, then

more religiosity may cause higher incomes, raising the tax subsidy to charitable giving, and

imposing a positive bias to the relationship estimated in Table 3. Alternatively, if more time

spent at religious worship reduces the time available to generate income, this could reduce the

subsidy to charitable giving, imposing a negative bias to this relationship. Similarly concerns

arise from omitted variables that impact both tax rates and attendance frequency; for example,

short run fluctuations in wages would have independent effects on wage rates, and also could


       5
        That is, I convert the values as follows: no attendance = 0; less than annual attendance =
1; once or twice a year = 2; several times a year = 4; monthly = 12; two or three times per month
= 30; almost every week = 40; weekly = 52; two or three times per week = 130
       6
        I also consider an alternative functional form, using an ordered probit specification in
place of the linear specification, and the inference is unchanged; there is a very highly significant
negative effect on attendance.
                                                21

affect frequency of attendance through labor supply effects.

       To address this concern, I have reestimated the religious participation model using

predicted income to compute tax subsidies, not actual income. That is, I first predict family

income based on the exogenous characteristics included in the regression: age, sex, race, marital

status, family size, education, and parental education. I then use this predicted income to

compute tax subsidies in the same fashion as with actual income. And I control for predicted

income deciles in the regression, rather than actual income deciles.

       The results of this alternative approach are shown in the second column of Table 4; once

again, I only show the coefficient of interest. I then shows the impact of computing subsidies

based on predicted income. In fact, we find that using predicted income significantly increases

the estimated negative impacts of charitable subsidies on religiosity. The coefficient rises by

roughly 50% relative to the values in Table 3. Thus, endogeneity of incomes does not appear to

be driving the findings reported thus far.



Omitted Factors

       The other major identification concern is that there are omitted factors which are

correlated with both subsidies and religious participation. As highlighted earlier, the sources of

identifying variation for these models is interactions of income, state, and year. While these

interactions seem to be legitimately excluded from a model of religious participation, it is

possible that there could be omitted factors correlated with some of the interactions. For

example, the subsidy to charitable giving is declining more for higher income groups than for

lower income groups over the 1980s due to tax reforms which reduce income tax rates at the top
                                                  22

of the income scale. If religious participation is changing for some other reason for the rich

relative to the poor during this time period, it could bias the estimates. Similarly, if for some

reason those states that reduce tax rates (and therefore the charitable subsidy) are the ones where

religious participation is rising for other reasons, it could lead to the estimated findings.

       I address these concerns in three ways here. First, I include additional controls in the

models to account for these alternative explanations. The third column of Table 4 shows the

effects of including interactions between each of the income decile dummies and the set of year

dummies, absorbing any national changes by income group over time. I then show the effects of

including interactions between each state dummy and each year dummy, absorbing any changes

in states over time that are common to all income groups. I then show the effects of including

interactions between each state dummy and each income group dummy, capturing any

differential religious participation by income group across states.

       In fact, including these additional second order interactions does not change the key

coefficient much at all; the estimated effect of charitable subsidies on religious participation is

remarkably constant throughout this set of variations in controls. Thus, omitted variables that

vary jointly by income group and year, jointly by state and year, and jointly by state and income

group cannot explain this finding. Indeed, if I include all three second-order interactions, so that

the model is identified only by interactions of state, year, and income, the result is very similar.

       The clarity of the relationship that is estimated here is most simply illustrated graphically

by showing how changes across income groups in the subsidy over time relates to both giving

and to religiosity. To do this, I have collapsed the GSS data base into income deciles*year cells

(e.g. 10 cells for each year), computing the mean values for each cell of both religious
                                                  23

attendance and the charitable subsidy. I then regress the mean of religious attendance on a full

set of income and year dummies, so that the residual measures variation in religious participation

within income groups over time. I do the same thing with the mean of the subsidy rate. Finally,

I graph these two residuals against each other in Figure 1. The points in each figure are

weighted by the number of observations in that income group/year cell.

        This figure clearly illustrates the robust relationship estimated here. There is a strong

negative relationship between attendance and subsidies, after conditioning on income and year

effects. The fitted regression line has a coefficient of -2.25 (0.58), which is almost identical to

the result in Table 3.7 That is, the negative effect of charitable subsidies on religiosity is

remarkably robust to model specification; regardless of the variation used to estimate this

relationship, it is strongly negative.

        Finally, a particular concern is that these tax effects may operate through some other

channel. A natural candidate is labor supply: if taxes impact labor supply, then this could

indirectly affect church attendance. Of course, the natural bias would be against the findings

uncovered thus far, as lower taxes, which are associated with more churchgoing, would also be

associated with more labor supply. Nevertheless, in the next column of Table 4, we show the

effects of including hours of work per week in the model, where hours takes on a value of zero

for those who are not working. This coefficient has, as expected, a negative coefficient; those

who work more attend church less. But there is no impact on the estimated coefficient on the tax


        7
         Given that these two series are residuals from a regression on income and year dummies,
this is akin to regressing participation on subsidy rates, controlling for income and year
dummies. There are a few outlying observations in this graph with high residual subsidy rates
and low residual attendance (for the highest income group in the late 1970s and early 1980s), but
deleting these observations only lowers the coefficient by 12% and it remains highly significant.
                                                  24

subsidy variable, suggesting no bias through effects on labor supply.

       More generally, there may be a concern that this coefficient is picking up some other

response of civic behavior with respect to tax changes. Perhaps it is the case that changing

charitable subsidies impact not only religious behavior, but the nature of time spent in voluntary

activities. Such a result would be of interest, but would also change significantly the

interpretation of the findings here.

       To test this view, I use data from the GSS on membership in various organizations. I

separate out membership in church-affiliated groups (not affiliation with a church per se, but

participation in church related activities) from all other memberships. I then estimate models of

church- affiliated group membership, a dummy for membership in any other group, and the

number of non-church groups to which the person belongs, as a function of the tax subsidy and

the other variables included thus far. The next three rows in Table 4 show the findings from

using these three alternative dependent variables.

       The results of doing so are striking. There is a negative and significant impact of the

subsidy on church-affiliated group membership, which is very consistent with our findings thus

far. That is, it appears that subsidizing charitable giving crowds out not only religious

attendance, but also participation in the church in other ways. This is also consistent with the

notion of a tradeoff between money and time devoted to charitable causes.

       On the other hand, there is no effect on either the odds of belonging to another group, or

the net number of memberships in other groups. Both coefficients are actually positive,

suggesting that higher tax subsidies leads to more participation on net in other groups, but

neither is statistically significant. Thus, it does not appear that the charitable subsidy in general
                                                25

is affecting group membership; the effects that we find here appear to arise solely through

impacts on religious participation.



Interactions with Religious Preference

       One additional exercise of interest here is to assess whether the response to charitable

subsidies varies by religious denomination. Of particular interest is the question of whether

those who are more conservative, and therefore potentially more “attached” to their religion, are

less responsive to the incentives embedded in charitable subsidies. To address this issue, I

include in the GSS regressions a set of dummies to capture religious preference at age 16. The

GSS contains a very detailed categorization of religious denominations. Besides information on

major denomination (Jewish, Catholic, Protestant), there is also information on over 150

Protestant denominations. This richness of detail immediately raises the question of the most

useful way to classify religious denominations. I follow the classification suggested by Roof and

McKinney (1987), which organizes this rich set of denominational information into 8 categories:

Liberal Protestants, Moderate Protestants, Black Protestants, Conservative Protestants, Catholics,

Jews, others, and no religious preference. Including these dummies in the basic attendance

regression, I find that attendance is highest for Catholics, next highest for Conservative

Protestants, and then for Black Protestants; attendance is lowest for those with no religion and

for Jews.

       The remaining rows of Table 4, in the last column of the table, show the impacts by

religious preference category. In fact, the only noticeable impact is a much lower effect of

charitable subsidies on the religiosity measures for Conservative Protestants, and to a lesser
                                                  26

extent for Catholics. For Conservative Protestants, the attendance effect is less than one-half of

the basic result, and it is marginally significantly different than the estimate for the other groups

combined. For Catholics, the attendance effect is about two-thirds of the basic finding. There

is also a smaller attendance effect for those with no religious preference, but this is to be

expected given the low base levels of attendance for this group.

       Thus, it does appear that the impact of charitable subsidies operates least strongly for

those who in the most “conservative” or “committed” religions. Of course, this could in part

reflect less responsiveness of these groups in terms of giving as well, but unfortunately the CEX

data to not contain information on religion with which this proposition can be tested. That is, it

is impossible to place an instrumental variables interpretation on these results given the

exclusion of key variables (religion) from the CEX first stage. So these findings are simply

suggestive.



                                        Part V: Conclusions

       One of the most significant tax policies of the U.S. government is the deductibility of

charitable giving. This tax expenditure has typically been justified through the positive

externalities associated with charitable activities. Most charitable giving by individuals in the

U.S. goes to religious sources, and there is strong reason to believe that there are positive

externalities associated with the uses of these funds. But, at the same time, there may be

offsetting costs to subsidizing charity if giving to religious causes substitutes for religious

participation itself, as would be suggested by the typical economic model of religiosity.

Previous studies have not found such substitutability, but they have also been unable to control
                                                     27

for the heterogeneity bias which would tend to induce a positive correlation between giving and

religiosity.

        In this paper, I have proposed a new approach to this problem, which is to examine the

impact of tax subsidies to charitable giving on religious giving and on religiosity. Tax subsidies

have the advantage, I argue, that they vary in ways that are exogenous to both giving and

religiosity, providing an independent instrument for identifying the substitutability or

complementarity of these two behaviors. And, in fact, I find using this approach that giving and

religious participation are strong substitutes. Larger tax subsidies to charitable giving lead both

to more giving and to less religious participation. Indeed, my estimates imply that each one

percent rise in religious giving leads to as much as a 0.92% decline in religious attendance.

        These results have two implications. First, they serve to validate the economic model of

religion, and suggest the utility of further investigations into the determinants of religiosity.

Despite innovative studies by a handful of economists, the study of religion remains almost the

exclusive purview of other fields such as sociology. But, as Iannaccone (1998) forcefully

argues, the tools which have served economists so well in other “non-traditional” disciplines can

also provide real insights into the analysis of religion as well. And there is a strong case to be

made based on the available evidence that religion and religiosity may be one of the most

important aspects of individuals’ lives, and a key determinant of outcomes ranging from pursuit

of illegal activities to self-assessed well-being.

        Second, they suggest that further expansions in the subsidy to charitable giving would

increase the level of giving, but would also lower the level of religious participation in the U.S.

A key question is the welfare implications of this change in religious participation. Naively
                                                28

applying the existing literature would suggest that such a reduction in religiosity could have

large negative impacts on well-being, significantly offsetting the external benefits of more

charitable giving. But these conclusions are tempered by the lack of definitive causal evidence

on the impacts of religiosity, and by the fact that the marginal changes in religiosity measured

here may not monotonically translate to differences in religiosity that arise from other sources

(e.g. from parental influences). Future work on these topics would help further our

understanding of religiosity; in particular, methods which could causally distinguish the impacts

of religiosity on outcomes would be of tremendous value.
                                          29

                                Table 1: Sample Means
                                                   CEX             GSS
          Total contributions                   536 (1294)
           Religious giving                     392 (1076)
           Give to religion                     0.38 (0.48)
Religious giving, conditional on giving         1036 (1548)
          Attendance Index                                      3.86 (2.68)
             Don’t attend                                       0.15 (0.36)
    Attend less than once per year                              0.08 (0.27)
    Attend once or twice per year                               0.13 (0.34)
     Attend several times a year                                0.13 (0.34)
      Attend about once a month                                 0.07 (0.26)
 Attend two to three times per month                            0.09 (0.29)
      Attend nearly every week                                  0.05 (0.23)
          Attend every week                                     0.20 (0.40)
     Attend several times a week                                0.08 (0.27)
        Tax Subsidy to giving                  0.094 (0.012)    0.10 (0.11)
             Real Income                       35680 (35121)   39506 (29465)
                 Age                            47.0 (17.7)     44.7 (17.2)
               Female                           0.36 (0.48)     0.56 (0.50)
                White                           0.84 (0.37)     0.83 (0.38)
                Black                           0.12 (0.33)     0.14 (0.34)
               Married                          0.56 (0.50)     0.54 (0.50)
                                              30

                  HS Dropout                          0.21 (0.40)             0.24 (0.42)
                 HS Graduate                          0.32 (0.46)             0.32 (0.46)
                 Some College                         0.22 (0.42)             0.23 (0.42)
               College Graduate                       0.26 (0.44)             0.21 (0.41)
                Number of Obs                           79,036                   29,743

Notes: Authors tabulations from Consumer Expenditure Survey (first column) and General
Social Survey (second column). Standard deviations in parentheses. Demographic
characteristics refer to survey respondent for GSS, and to head of household for CEX. All dollar
figures in $1998
                                               31

             Table 2: Impact of Charitable Subsidies on Charitable Giving in CEX
                         Religious Giving                         Total Giving
                 Level         Log          Giving>0    Level          Log         Giving>0
 Subsidy         204           .502           .001        519          .878          .143
                 (87)         (.176)         (.042)      (102)        (.162)        (.046)
Elasticity       -0.47        -0.47            0         -0.88        -0.80         -0.24
wrt After-
Tax Price
  White          114           .296           .009       185           .253          .052
                (21.3)        (.049)         (.011)     (24.9)        (.044)        (.011)
  Black          175           .384           .067       224           .423          .051
                (23.9)        (.054)         (.012)     (28.0)        (.050)        (.012)
 Married         -249          -.146          -.056      -420          -.288         -.108
                (33.1)        (.074)         (.016)     (38.7)        (.069)        (.017)
  HS             105           .288           .049       147           .267          .077
Graduate        (11.2)        (.025)         (.006)     (13.2)        (.024)        (.006)
  Some           171           .375           .107       240           .444          .142
 College        (12.6)        (.028)         (.006)     (14.8)        (.026)        (.006)
College          274           .536           .147       446           .760          .186
Graduate        (13.2)        (.029)         (.007)     (15.5)        (.027)        (.006)
 Income          45.3          -.478          .143       30.5          -.496         .136
Category 2      (16.9)        (.046)         (.009)     (19.8)        (.044)        (.008)
 Income          26.5          -.522          .159       -5.32         -.658         .156
Category 3      (17.2)        (.046)         (.010)     (20.1)        (.044)        (.008)
 Income          62.9          -.351          .209       36.1          -.528         .222
Category 4      (16.9)        (.045)         (.009)     (19.8)        (.042)        (.007)
 Income          113           -.246          .246       92.0          -.429         .273
Category 5      (17.0)        (.044)         (.009)     (19.9)        (.041)        (.007)
 Income          172           -.134          .274       165           -.302         .312
Category 6      (17.5)        (.044)         (.009)     (20.5)        (.041)        (.006)
 Income          206           -.099          .302       208           -.240         .342
Category 7      (18.9)        (.046)         (.010)     (22.1)        (.043)        (.007)
                                               32

  Income          255            -.077        .317          264           -.183          .357
 Category 8      (21.5)         (.050)       (.011)        (25.2)        (.046)         (.007)
  Income          326            -.031        .339          356           -.086          .377
 Category 9      (26.8)         (.059)       (.013)        (31.4)        (.055)         (.008)
   Income         432            .101         .328          704           .179           .376
  Categ. 10      (32.1)         (.069)       (.015)        (37.6)        (.064)         (.010)
 Number of       79036         79036         79036         79036         79036         79036
   Obs

Notes: Standard errors in parentheses. Regressions also include controls for: age and sex of head
and spouse; education of spouse; number of children; and state, year and month fixed effects.
First three columns show results for religious contributions; second three columns show results
for total contributions. Within each set, first column shows results for dollars of giving; second
column shows results for log dollars; and third column shows results for a dummy for any
giving. First two columns are estimated by OLS; third by probit, where I show marginal
probability effects. Elasticity computed with respect to after-tax price of giving.
                                   33

Table 3: Impact of Charitable Subsidies on Religious Participation in GSS
        Subsidy                                          -2.265
                                                        (0.354)
     Elasticity wrt                                       0.52
    After-Tax Price
         White                                            -.640
                                                         (.082)
         Black                                            .206
                                                         (.091)
        Married                                           .467
                                                         (.036)
      HS Graduate                                         .508
                                                         (.043)
     Some College                                         .729
                                                         (.048)
   College Graduate                                      1.044
                                                         (.051)
   Income Category 2                                      .159
                                                         (.067)
   Income Category 3                                      .349
                                                         (.068)
   Income Category 4                                      .331
                                                         (.071)
   Income Category 5                                      .381
                                                         (.073)
   Income Category 6                                      .468
                                                         (.078)
   Income Category 7                                      .643
                                                         (.087)
   Income Category 8                                      .698
                                                         (.093)
   Income Category 9                                      .881
                                                         (.116)
                                               34

              Income Category 10                                       .856
                                                                      (.134)
                Number of Obs                                         29429

Notes: Standard errors in parentheses. Dependent variable is attendance index. Regressions also
include controls for: age and sex of respondent; education of mother and father; number of
children; and state and year fixed effects. Elasticity computed with respect to after-tax price of
giving.
                                          35

                             Table 4: Specification Checks
                          Attend    Predict      Add          Labor    Member   Interact
                         Category   Income      Other        Supply     Dep.     with
                                               Interacts     Control    Vars.   Religion
    Don’t attend          0.193
                         (0.048)
Attend less than once     0.088
      per year           (0.038)
Attend once or twice      0.055
      per year           (0.047)
Attend several times a    0.036
         year            (0.046)
 Attend about once a      0.038
       month             (0.036)
 Attend two to three      -0.110
  times per month        (0.038)
 Attend nearly every      -0.059
        week             (0.030)
 Attend every week        -0.198
                         (0.055)
Attend several times a    -0.064
        week             (0.036)
   Time-Weighted          -22.33
  Attendance Index       (4.837)
  Predicted Income                    -3.47
                                     (0.46)
   Income * Year                                 -2.56
                                                (0.45)
    State * Year                                 -2.20
                                                (0.37)
   Income * State                                -2.35
                                                (0.37)
                                               36

                             Attend       Pred.        Add        Labor     Member      Interact
                            Category     Income      Interacts   Supply      Dep.        with
                                                                 Control     Vars       Religion
      Subsidy Rate                                                 -2.26
                                                                  (0.35)
  Hours Work Per Week                                             -0.197
         (/100)                                                  (0.078)
    Church-Affiliated                                                        -0.368
     Group Member                                                           (0.104)
    Any Other Group                                                          0.051
       Member                                                               (0.102)
 Number of Other Group                                                       0.232
    Memberships                                                             (0.354)
        Subsidy*                                                                          -2.03
    Liberal Protestant                                                                   (0.52)
       Subsidy*                                                                           -2.27
   Moderate Protestant                                                                   (0.42)
        Subsidy*                                                                          -2.62
     Black Protestant                                                                    (0.61)
       Subsidy*                                                                           -0.93
 Conservative Protestant                                                                 (0.51)
        Subsidy*                                                                          -1.38
        Catholic                                                                         (0.41)
        Subsidy*                                                                          -3.07
         Jewish                                                                          (0.77)
        Subsidy*                                                                          -3.07
      Other Religion                                                                     (0.59)
        Subsidy*                                                                          -1.84
       No Religion                                                                       (0.76)
        Subsidy*                                                                          -1.26
    Religion Missing                                                                     (2.32)
     Number of Obs            29429       29429       29429      29429       14857       29429

Notes: Table shows coefficients of interest from regressions that include all covariates shown in
                                                37

Table 3, and described in notes to that table. Standard errors in parentheses. First column shows
marginal probability effect from 9 separate probit regressions of attendance categories, as well as
from linear regression with time weighted attendance index as dependent variable. Second
columns shows results from using predicted income to compute tax subsidy. Third column
shows results from including additional interactions described in table. Fourth column shows
esults from including control for hours of work per week. Fifth column shows results of
replacing attendance dependent variable with measures of: church group membership; any other
group membership; and number of other group memberships. Final column shows results from
itneracting charitable subsidy variable with dummies for categories of religious preference at age
16.
                                                  38

                                       Attendance Residual                      Fitted Values

                      .77042
Attendance Residual




                      -.71452
                            -.085088
                                                             Subsidy Residual
                         Figure 1: Attendance vs. Subsidies at Income/Year Lev
                                               39

                                          References

Auten, Gerald, Holger Sieg, and Charles Clotfelter (2002). "Charitable Giving, Income, and
       Taxes: An Analysis of Panel Data" American Economic Review, 371-382

Azzi, Corry and Ronald G. Ehrenberg (1975). “Household Allocation of Time and Church
       Attendance,” Journal of Political Economy, 96, 1066-88.

Barrett, Kevin, Anya McGuirk, and Richard Steinberg (1997). “Further Evidence on the
        Dynamic Impact of Taxes on Charitable Giving,” National Tax Journal, 50, 321-334.

Bradley, Ralph, Steven Holden, and Robert McClelland (1999). “A Robust Estimation of the
       Effects of Taxation on Charitable Contributions,” mimeo, Congressional Budget Office.

Bumiller, Elisabeth (2002). “Bush Rallies Faithful in Call for Passage of Charity Bill,” New
       York Times, April 12th, p. A20.

Chaves, Mark, and Laura Stephens (2001). “Church Attendance in the United States,” in
      Michele Dillon, ed., Handbook for the Sociology of Religion. Cambridge, UK:
      Cambridge University Press.

Clain, Suzanne, and Charles Zech (1999). “A Household Production Analysis of Religious and
        Charitable Activity,” American Journal of Economics and Sociology, 58, 924-946.

Clotfelter, Charles (1985). Federal Tax Policy and Charitable Giving. Chicago: University of
        Chicago Press.

Dahl, Gordon and Michael Ransom (1999). “Does Where You Stand Depend on Where You
       Sit? Tithing Donations and Self-Serving Beliefs,” American Economic Review, 89, 703-
       727.

Feenberg, Daniel (1987). “Are Tax Price Models Really Identified: The Case of Charitable
      Giving,” National Tax Journal, 40, 629-633.

Forbes, Kevin and Ernest Zampelli (1997). “Religious Giving by Individuals: A Cross-
       Denominational Study,” American Journal of Economics and Sociology, 56, 17-30.

Iannaccone, Laurence (1992). “Sacrifice and Stigma: Reducing Free-Riding in Cults,
       Communes, and Other Collectives,” Journal of Political Economy, 100, 271-291.

Iannaccone, Laurence (1997). “Skewness Explained: A Rational Choice Model of Religious
       Giving,” Journal for the Scientific Study of Religion, 36, 141-157.

Iannaccone, Laurence (1998). “Introduction to the Economics of Religion,” Journal of
                                             40

       Economic Literature, 36, 1465-1496.

Joint Committee on Taxation (2002). Estimates of Federal Tax Expenditures for Fiscal Years
       2002-2006. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office

McClelland, Robert, and Mary Kokoski (1994). “Econometric Issues in the Analysis of
      Charitable Giving,” Public Finance Quarterly, 22.

Olson, Daniel (2002). “Competing Notions of Religious Competition and Conflict in Theories
       of Religious Economies,” mimeo, Indiana University South Bend.

Olson, Daniel, and David Caddell (1994). “Generous Congregations, Generous Givers:
       Congregational Contexts that Stimulate Individual Giving,” Review of Religious
       Research, 36, 168-180.

Randolph, William (1995). “Dynamic Income, Progressive Taxes, and the Timing of Charitable
      Contributions,” Journal of Political Economy, 103, 709-38.

Roof, Wade Clark, and William McKinney (1987). American Mainline Religion: Its Changing
       Shape and Future. New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press

Saez, Emmanuel (2000). “The Optimal Treatment of Tax Expenditures,” NBER Working Paper
       #8037, December 2000.

Steinberg, Richard (1990). “Taxes and Giving: New Findings,” Voluntas, 1, 61-79.

Sullivan, Dennis (1985). “Simultaneous Determination of Church Contributions and Church
       Attendance,” Economic Inquiry, 23, 309-320.
