                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




             INEQUALITY, TECHNOLOGY, AND THE SOCIAL CONTRACT

                                        Roland Bénabou

                                      Working Paper 10371
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w10371


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    March 2004




This is a working draft of a chapter for the Handbook of Economic Growth (Philippe Aghion and
Steven Durlauf, eds., North-Holland). I thank for useful remarks Philippe Aghion, Omer Moav
and participants at the CEPR conference on Education and Inequality (Paris, May 2003). I am
grateful to the MacArthur Foundation for financial support and to the Institute for Advanced
Study for its hospitality over the academic year 2002-2003. The views expressed herein are
those of the author and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2004 by Roland Bénabou. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Inequality, Technology, and the Social Contract
Roland Bénabou
NBER Working Paper No. 10371
March 2004
JEL No. D31, O33, J3, H10

                                                ABSTRACT
        The distribution of human capital and income lies at the center of a nexus of forces that shape
a country's economic, institutional and technological structure. I develop here a unified model to
analyze these interactions and their growth consequences. Five main issues are addressed. First, I
identify the key factors that make both European-style "welfare state" and US-style "laissez-faire"
social contracts sustainable.; I also compare the growth rates of these two politico-economic steady
states, which are no Pareto-rankable. Second, I examine how technological evolutions affect the set
of redistributive institutions that can be durably sustained, showing in particular how skill-biased
technical change may cause the welfare state to unravel. Third, I model the endogenous
determination of technology or organizational form that results from firms' tailoring the flexibility
of their production processes to the distribution of workers' skills. The greater is human capital
heterogeneity, the more flexible and wage-disequalizing is the equilibrium technology. Moreover,
firms' choices tend to generate excessive flexibility, resulting in suboptimal growth or even self-
sustaining technology-inequality traps. Fourth, I examine how institutions also shape the course of
technology; thus, a world-wide shift in the technology frontier results in different evolutions of
production processes and skill premia across countries with different social contracts. Finally, I ask
what joint configurations of technology, inequality and redistributive policy are feasible in the long
run, when all three are endogenous. I show in particular how the diffusion of technology leads to
the "exporting" of inequality across borders; and how this, in turn, generates spillovers between
social contracts that make it more difficult for nations to maintain distinct institutions and social structures.




Roland Bénabou
Woodrow Wilson School and Department of Economics
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544
rbenabou@princeton.edu
    Introduction
    The distribution of human capital and income lies at the center of a nexus of forces that shape a country’s
economic, institutional and technological structure. This paper develops a unified model to analyze these
interactions and their implications for growth, emphasizing in particular the mechanisms that allow diﬀerent
socioeconomic structures to perpetuate themselves, and those pushing toward convergence.1 The analysis
centers around five main questions.

   1. Why do countries at similar levels of development choose widely diﬀerent social contracts? Redis-
       tribution —through taxes and transfers, unemployment and health insurance, education finance and
       labor market regulation— displays remarkable variations even among countries with similar economic
       and political fundamentals. I thus ask what makes both European-type welfare states and US-type,
       more laissez-faire social contracts sustainable in the long run, together with their respective levels of
       inequality.2 I then examine the eﬃciency and growth properties of these two regimes (which cannot
       be Pareto ranked) and ask what shocks might cause each one to unravel. The model also sheds light
       on the contrasting historical development paths of North and South America, and on the more recent
       experience of East Asia versus Latin America.

   2. How does skill-biased technical and organizational change impact the viability of redistributive institu-
       tions? Over the last twenty-five years, most industrialized countries experienced a considerable rise
       in wage inequality.3 This trend is generally attributed to three main factors: skill-biased technical
       change, international trade (which lies outside the scope of this paper), and institutional change, such
       as the erosion of the minimum wage and the decline of unions. But minimum wages, labor market
       legislation and union power are endogenous outcomes, to the same extent as social insurance and
       education policy; and indeed, they evolved quite diﬀerently in Continental Europe or Canada and
       in the United States.4 Analyzing redistributive institutions as a whole, I show how skill-biased tech-
       nical change can cause the welfare state to unravel, and examine more generally how technological
       evolutions aﬀect the set of social contracts that can be sustained in the long run.

    The previous questions aim to explain diﬀerences in redistributive policies (together with their economic
implications) and the role of technology in their evolution. The next two take the reverse perspective.

   1 The main channels through which inequality and redistributive institutions can in turn aﬀect growth were exposited in

Bénabou (1996).
   2 I shall limit my scope here to politico-economic persistence mechanisms that reflect diﬀerences in agents’ economic interests

and political power (Bénabou (2000), Saint Paul (2001), Hassler et al. (2003), Alesina, Glaeser and Sacerdote (2002)) rather
than social norms (Lindbeck (1995)) or diﬀerences in beliefs about the mobility process and the determinants of individual
income (Piketty (1995), Bénabou and Tirole (2002), Alesina and Angeletos (2003)).
   3 See, e.g. Autor, Katz and Krueger (1997) or Berman, Bound and Machin (1997).
   4 See, e.g., Freeman (1995), Fortin and Lemieux (1997), Lee (1999), or Acemoglu, Aghion and Violante (2001).




                                                                1
   3. What determines the types of technologies and organizational forms used by firms?                       Production
      processes —and in particular their degree of skill bias— are themselves endogenous, adapting over
      time to the skills of the labor force.5 I develop here a new and very tractable model of technology
      choice, based on the idea that firms tailor the flexibility of their production processes (substitutability
      between diﬀerent labor inputs) to the distribution of human capital in the workforce. The main pre-
      diction is that the more heterogenous are workers’ skill levels, the more flexible and wage-disequalizing
      the equilibrium technology will be. In a country like Japan, by contrast, production will involve much
      tighter complementarity between workers’ tasks. Integrating this model with the previous analysis
      of human capital dynamics, I also show that firms’ choices involve externalities that tend to result
      in excessive flexibility and a suboptimal growth rate, or even in self-sustaining technology-inequality
      traps.

   4. What types of societies and institutions are most conducive to the emergence of skill-biased technolo-
      gies and organizational forms? Through their influence on the distribution of human capital, public
      policies in the fiscal, labor market and especially educational arenas are important determinants of
      what innovations can be profitably developed and adopted; the same is true for immigration. One
      notes, for instance, that skill-biased technical change and reorganization occurred first, and to a
      greater extent, in the United States compared to Europe —and within the latter, more so in England
      than on the Continent. Combining the technology and policy components of the model, I show how
      a world-wide shift in the technological frontier leads to diﬀerent evolutions of production processes
      and skill premia across countries with diﬀerent social contracts.

    Two extensive but essentially disconnected literatures have examined the economic determinants and
consequences of redistributive policies on the one hand, those of biased technical change on the other.6 Yet
in reality both are endogenous, and jointly determined. The ability to conduct a unified analysis of human
capital dynamics, technology and institutions is a novel and key feature of the framework developed in this
paper. It makes it possible to address important questions such as the second, fourth and especially fifth
ones on the list:

   5. What “societal models” —joint configurations of technology, inequality, and policy— are feasible in the
      long run? In particular, how does the diﬀusion of technology aﬀect nations’ ability to maintain their
      own redistributive institutions and social structures?             Analyzing the case of two countries linked
      by the (endogenous) diﬀusion of their domestically developed technologies, I show how inequality

   5 See, e.g., Kremer and Maskin (1996), Acemoglu (1998), Kiley (1999), Lloyd-Ellis (1999), and Vindigni (1992). Relatedly,

Grossman and Maggi (2000) show how the skill distribution matters for international specialization, and Legros and Newman
(1996) how the wealth distribution aﬀects the organization of firms.
   6 See the previously cited references, as well as the other ones given throughout the paper.




                                                             2
      tends to be “exported” to the less heterogeneous one. This mechanism, in turn, generates spillovers
      between the social contracts of diﬀerent nations, transmitting even purely political shocks and po-
      tentially triggering “chain reactions” that can cause major shifts towards a common, and generally
      inegalitarian, outcome.


                              Redistributive                                        Technology,
                               Institutions                                         Organization

                                                                    Returns to
                                               Policy outcome
                                                                    human capital
                            Investment in                                                Technological
                            human capital                                                adaptation




                                                    Human Capital and
                                                    Income Inequality



              Figure 1: The links between inequality, technology and redistributive institutions



   The paper is organized in two main parts, corresponding respectively to the left- and right-hand sides
of Figure 1.7 The first of these two feedback loops centers on political-economy interactions. I thus present
in Sections I and II a model of inequality, growth and redistributive policy in a context of imperfect credit
and insurance markets (based on Bénabou (2000)). I first analyze how macro and distributional dynamics
are aﬀected by redistributive policies, then how the latter are themselves determined from the preferences
and political power of diﬀerent social classes. Finally, I identify the conditions under which a single or
multiple politico-economic steady states arise.
   The second and most novel part of the paper incorporates the role of technology and its interactions
with redistributive institutions. I first consider in Section III the impact of exogenous skill-biased technical
change on inequality and the political equilibrium. I then study how technology responds to the composition
of the labor force, through firms’ choice of their degree of flexibility. In Section IV both sides of Figure I are
brought together to analyze the long-run determination of institutions, technologies and the distribution of
human capital. In Section V, finally, I show how technology diﬀusion leads to the “exporting” of inequality
and international spillovers between social contracts. Section VI concludes. All proofs are gathered in the
appendix.




   7 Each arrow on the diagram actually corresponds to a specific equation or proposition in the model. From left to right,

these are (11), Proposition 3, (1) or later (28), and Proposition 8.


                                                                3
                      Redistribution
                              τ



                         1


                                   S                                               τ =T (∆)



                                             U                    S’

                                                                                 ∆= D(τ )
                          0
                                                                                                ∆
                                                          ∆
                                                                                            Inequality




                 Figure 2: The two key relationships between inequality and redistribution.


I    Inequality, Redistribution, and Growth

The model presented in this section (drawing on Bénabou (2000)) can be summarized by two key relation-
ships between inequality and redistribution; both arise from imperfections in credit and insurance markets,
and are illustrated on Figure 2.
    The first locus summarizes the political mechanism: in each period, the equilibrium rate of redistribution
chosen by voters is a U-shaped function τ = T (∆) of inequality in human capital, measured here as the
variance of a lognormal distribution. The downward-sloping part of this curve, which is the crucial one,
reflects a very general intuition: while asset market imperfections create a scope for eﬃcient redistributive
institutions (to provide social insurance and relax credit constraints), these institutions command much
less support in an unequal society than in a relatively homogeneous one. Thus, starting from ∆ = 0, where
there is unanimous support for the ex-ante eﬃcient degree of redistribution, growing inequality increases
the fraction of agents rich enough to lose from, and therefore oppose, all but relatively low levels of τ . The
upward-sloping part of the curve, in contrast, is shaped by the standard skewness eﬀect, which eventually
dominates: rising numbers of poor will eventually impose more redistribution, well beyond the point where
it ceases to be eﬃcient.8
    The second curve on Figure 2 represents the accumulation mechanism: since redistribution relaxes
the credit constraints bearing on the poor’s human capital investments, long-run inequality is a declining

   8 See, e.g., Alesina and Rodrik (1994) or Persson and Tabellini (1994) for models leading to such a positive slope. The

empirical evidence (discussed at the end of this section) for both countries and US states provides little support for the
standard view of a positive relationship between inequality and redistribution.


                                                              4
function ∆ = T (τ ) of the rate of redistribution. When the two curves have several intersections, as
illustrated on the figure, these correspond to multiple politico-economic steady states that are sustainable
under the same fundamentals. One, with low inequality and high redistribution, corresponds to a European-
type welfare state; the other, with the reverse configuration, to a US-type, more laissez-faire society.
    In this and the next section I will derive the two loci from an explicit dynamic model, and identify
the configurations of economic and political parameters under which alternative social models can coexist.
In later sections I shall investigate how the two curves, and therefore the equilibrium set, are aﬀected by
exogenous technical change, then ultimately extend the analysis to the case where technology itself adapts
endogenously to the distribution of skills in the population.


A    Production, Preferences and Policy

The economy is populated by overlapping-generations families, i ∈ [0, 1]. In generation t, adult i combines
his human capital kti with eﬀort lti to produce output, subject to a productivity shock zti :

                                                           ¡ ¢γ ¡ i ¢δ
                                                  yti = zti kti  lt .                                        (1)

At this point the technology is exogenous and does not explicitly involve interactions among workers.
Later on I will introduce a richer production structure, where agents with diﬀerent skill levels perform
complementary tasks and the degree of substitutability between them is optimally chosen by firms. The
return to human capital γ and the mean of the productivity shocks zti will then be endogenous functions of
the current distribution of human capital. From the point of view of an individual worker-voter, however,
this richer structure will retain an earnings function very similar to (1), so all the results obtained with
this unconstrained reduced form will remain directly applicable.
    Public policy or labor market institutions redistribute income through taxes and transfers, or a wage-
equalization scheme, that transform each agent’s gross earnings (or marginal revenue product) yti into a
disposable income ŷti , as specified further below. These resources finance both the adult’s consumption, cit ,
and his investment or educational bequest, eit :

                                           ŷti     = cit + eit                                              (2)
                                          i
                                         kt+1       = κ ξ it+1 (kti )α (eit )β ,                             (3)


where ξ it+1 represents the child’s unpredictable ability, or simply luck, and α+βγ ≤ 1. There is thus no loan
market for financing individual investments (e.g., children cannot be held responsible for the debts of their
parents), and no insurance or securities market where the idiosyncratic risks zti and ξ it+1 could be diversified




                                                             5
away.9 Both shocks are i.i.d. and lognormal with mean one, and initial endowments are also lognormally
distributed across families: thus ln zti ∼ N (−v 2 /2, v 2 ), ln ξ it ∼ N (−w2 /2, w2 ) and ln k0i ∼ N (m0 , ∆20 ).
    Agents’ preferences over their own consumption, eﬀort, and child’s human capital are defined recursively
over their lifetime. Once he has learned his productivity zti , agent i chooses his eﬀort and consumption to
maximize:
                                               ©                                            ª
                                  ln Vti ≡ max
                                           i i
                                                (1 − ρ)[ln cit − (lti )η ] + ρ ln Et [kt+1
                                                                                       i
                                                                                           ] .                                (4)
                                            lt , ct


The disutility of eﬀort is measured by η > 1, which corresponds to an intertemporal elasticity of labor
supply of 1/(η − 1). The discount factor ρ defines the relative weights of the adult’s own felicity and of his
bequest motive.10
    At the beginning of period t, however, when evaluating and voting over redistributive policies, the agent
does not yet know his lifetime productivity zti . The resulting uncertainty over his ex—post utility level Vti
is reflected in his ex—ante preferences, with a risk—aversion coeﬃcient of a :
                                                    ³                            ´
                                            Uti ≡ ln Et [(Vti )1−a | kti ]1/(1−a) ,                                           (5)

 This recursive specification allows a to parametrize the insurance value of redistributive policies, just as
the labor supply elasticity 1/(η − 1) parametrizes the eﬀort distortions.11
    The redistributive policies over which agents vote are represented by simple, progressive schemes that
map a market income yti (marginal revenue product) into a disposable income ŷti , according to:


                                                              ŷti ≡ (yti )1−τ t (ỹt )τ t .                                  (6)


The break—even level ỹt is determined by the balanced-budget constraint, which requires that net transfers
sum to zero. Thus, denoting per capita income by yt , it must be that:
                                                      Z       1
                                                                  (yti )1−τ t (ỹt )τ t di = yt .                             (7)
                                                          0


The elasticity τ t measures the degree of progressivity, or equalization, of redistributive institutions.12

    9 The absence of any intertemporal trade is clearly an oversimplified (but quite common) representation of asset market

incompleteness, making the model analytically tractable. Zhang (2001) extends a simplified version of the present model
(with a zero-one policy variable and no political-economy mechanism) to allow for physical capital and financial bequests. He
obtains similar results for the eﬀects of inequality, plus new ones on convergence speeds to the steady-state.
  1 0 His (relative) risk—aversion with respect to the child’s endowment ki
                                                                           t+1 at that stage is normalized to zero, but this plays
no role in any of the results. A dynastic specification of preferences (Bénabou (2002)) also leads to similar aggregate and
distributional dynamics, but is less simple to work with.
  1 1 When a 6= 1 these recursive preferences are not time-separable (see, e.g., Kreps and Porteus (1979)), as risk-aversion

diﬀers from the inverse of the intertemporal elasticity of substitution in consumption, which by (4) remains fixed at one. This
last assumption, common to many papers in the literature, helps make the model analytically solvable.
  1 2 When τ > 0 the marginal rate rises with pretax income, and agents with average income are made better oﬀ: ỹ > y .
               t                                                                                                           t    t
The elasticity of aftertax to pretax income is indeed the “right” measure of equalization: the posttax distribution induced by
a fiscal scheme Lorenz—dominates the one induced by another (for all pretax distributions), if and only if the first scheme’s
elasticity is everywhere smaller (Fellman (1976)).



                                                                              6
Three types of redistributive mechanisms can be considered here, being close to formally equivalent in this
model. The first one, on which the exposition will generally focus, is that of fiscal policy, which equalizes
disposable incomes through taxes and transfers. A second is wage or earnings compression through labor
market institutions and policies favorable to workers with relatively low skills: minimum wage laws, union-
friendly or right-to-strike regulations, firing costs, public sector pay and employment, etc.13 The third
one is education finance, where τ t now applies only to human capital expenditures eit , as opposed to all of
income yti . This may be achieved through a policy of school funding equalization across local communities,
the presence of a centrally financed public-education system, or more generally by subsidizing diﬀerentially
the education of rich and poor students.14 Under either of the three above interpretations of τ t , incentive
compatibility requires that τ t ≤ 1; on the other hand a regressive policy τ t < 0 cannot be ruled out a
priori, and indeed one does observe such policies, typically in countries characterized by high inequality
and a powerful ruling class.


B     Distributional Dynamics and Aggregate Growth

Taking policy as parametrically given for the moment, I first consider the resulting economic decisions of
individual agents, then the economy-wide dynamics of human capital and income.

Proposition 1 Given a rate of redistribution τ t , agents in generation t choose a common labor supply and
savings rate: lt = χ (1−τ t )1/η and eit = s ŷti , where χη ≡ (δ/η)(1−ρ+ρβ)/(1−ρ) and s ≡ ρβ/(1−ρ+ρβ).

    The fact that savings are unaﬀected is due to the imperfect-altruism assumption made regarding prefer-
ences.15 Labor supply, on the other hand, declines in τ t with an elasticity of 1/η, and this single distortion
will suﬃce to demonstrate how the eﬃciency costs and benefits of redistributive institutions shape the set
of politico-economic equilibria.
    Given Proposition 1, and substituting (6) into (3), the law of motion for human wealth is loglinear:


                            i
                        ln kt+1   = ln ξ it+1 + β(1 − τ t ) ln zti + ln κ + β ln s                                       (8)

                                       +(α + βγ(1 − τ t )) ln kti + βδ(1 − τ t ) ln lt + βτ t ln ỹt .

   1 3 With the “autarkic” production function (1) the equivalence between the wage-income-equalization and the fiscal-

redistribution interpretations of τ t is immediate. It continues to hold when we move in Section III.B to a richer production
structure with interacting agents.
   1 4 See Bénabou (2000) for this version of the model. Some of the formulas change slightly from those presented here for

fiscal policy, but without aﬀecting the qualitative nature of any of the results. There are, on the other hand, important
quantitative diﬀerences between the growth and welfare implications of the two policies; see Bénabou (2002) and Sheshadri
and Yuki (2000) for comparative analyzes. Previous models of redistribution centering on education finance include Becker
(1964), Loury (1981), Glomm and Ravilkumar (1992), Saint-Paul and Verdier (1993), Bénabou (1996b) and Fernandez and
Rogerson (1996). On the empirical side, see Krueger (2002) for a comprehensive summary and discussion of the evidence on
targeted education and training policy interventions, from preschool to the college level.
   1 5 In Bénabou (2002) I develop and calibrate a version of the present model with dynastic preferences, where τ does aﬀect
                                                                                                                  t
the savings rate. On the other hand, agents are then able (and will indeed want) to use additional policy instruments, such
as consumption taxes and investment subsidies, to alleviate this distortion.


                                                             7
This linearity reflects the absence of any non-convexities in the model, making clear that the multiplicity
of equilibria will arise solely through the general-equilibrium feedback from the income distribution onto
the political determination of τ t .16 These simple conditional dynamics also imply that human capital and
income always remain lognormally distributed across agents:

                                   ln kti   ∼ N (mt , ∆2t ),                                                               (9)

                                   ln yti   ∼ N (γmt + δ ln lt − v 2 /2, γ 2 ∆2t + v 2 ),                                 (10)


where mt and ∆2t evolve according to two simple linear diﬀerence equations obtained by taking means and
variances in (8), and given in the appendix. Since the growth of mean income yt is of more direct economic
interest than that of mean log-income mt , I present here the equivalent characterization of the economy’s
dynamic path in terms of two linear diﬀerence equations in ∆2t and ln yt = mt + ∆2t /2.

Proposition 2 The distributions of human capital and income at time t are given by (9)-(10), where
lt = χ(1 − τ t )1/η . The evolution of inequality across generations is governed by


                                ∆2t+1 = (α + βγ(1 − τ t ))2 ∆2t + β 2 (1 − τ t )2 v 2 + w2 ,                              (11)


and the growth rate of aggregate income by:

     ln(yt+1 /yt ) = ln κ̃ − (1 − α − βγ) ln yt + δ(ln lt+1 − α ln lt ) − Lv (τ t )v 2 /2 − L∆ (τ t )γ 2 ∆2t /2,          (12)


where ln κ̃ ≡ γ(ln κ + β ln s) − γ(1 − γ)w2 /2 is a constant and

                                Lv (τ ) ≡ βγ(1 − βγ)(1 − τ )2 ≥ 0,

                                L∆ (τ ) ≡ α + βγ(1 − τ )2 − (α + βγ(1 − τ ))2 ≥ 0.


Equation (11) shows how inequality in the next generation stems from three sources: the varying abilities of
children (w2 ), shocks to family income (v 2 ), and diﬀerences in parental human capital (∆2t ), which matter
both through family income and at-home transmission. Redistribution equalizes the disposable resources
available to finance educational investments (but not social backgrounds), thus limiting both cross-sectional
inequality and the persistence of family wealth, α + βγ(1 − τ t ); conversely, it increases social mobility.
    Equation (12) makes apparent the growth losses from inequality due to credit constraints, and how
redistribution’s impact on growth involves a tradeoﬀ between incentive and investment-allocation eﬀects.17

  1 6 Or / and a feedback from the distribution onto the technology γ, once it is endogenized later on. By contrast, nearly all

models in the literature that feature multiple equilibria rely on investment thresholds (e.g., Galor and Zeira (1993), Banerjee
and Newman (1993)), indivisibilities in eﬀort (Piketty (1997)), or non-homotheticity in preferences (e.g., Moav (2002)). For
a discussion of indivisibilities, see also Mookerjee and Ray (2003).
  1 7 See Bénabou (1996b) for an overview of the literature on the relationship between inequality and growth, which is not

the main focus of the present paper. In particular, inequality can also have positive eﬀects on growth when there are non-


                                                               8
The eﬀort distortion corresponds to the term in δ, which declines with parallel increases in τ t and τ t+1 . The
reallocation of human capital investments across diﬀerentially wealth-constrained agents is captured by the
terms in Lv (τ t ) and L∆ (τ t ). When α = 0 both are equal, and proportional to the concavity βγ(1−βγ) of the
common accumulation technology facing all families: diﬀerences in parental human capital and productivity
                                                                     ¡             ¢
shocks simply combine into variations in disposable income, (1−τ t )2 γ 2 ∆2t + v 2 , which credit constraints
then translate into ineﬃcient variations in investment, reducing overall growth proportionately. When
α > 0, however, disparate family backgrounds kti represent complementary inputs that generate diﬀerential
returns to investment, thus reducing the desirability of equalizing resources. Thus L∆ (τ ) now diﬀers from
Lv (τ ), and is minimized for τ = (1 − α − βγ)/(1 − βγ), which decreases with α.
    The term in − ln yt in the growth equation, finally, reflects the standard convergence eﬀect. It disappears
under constant aggregate returns, namely when α + βγ = 1, or when the constant κ in (3) is replaced by
a knowledge spillover such as
                                                     µZ     i             ¶(1−α−βγ)/γ
                                              κt ≡              (kti )γ                 .                                 (13)
                                                        0

This last variant yields an endogenous-growth version of the model, where all the predictions obtained
with a constant κ in (12) now directly transpose from short-run growth and long-run per capita income to
long-term growth rates.
    Are the potential growth-enhancing eﬀects of redistributive policies in the presence of credit constraints
significant, or trivial compared to the standard deadweight losses? While the answer must ultimately
come from empirical studies of specific policy programs or experiments, recent quantitative models suggest
very important long-run eﬀects, ranging from several percentage points of steady-state GDP to several
percentage points of long-run growth, depending on the presence of accumulated factors, such as physical
capital or knowledge spillovers, that complement individual human capital. Calibrating to US data a
model with neither eﬀort distortions nor complementarities, Fernandez and Rogerson (1998) find that
complete school finance equalization raises long-run GDP by 3.2 %. In a model with both educational
and financial bequests, Sheshadri and Yuki (2000) find that a mix of fiscal and educational redistribution
that approximates current US policies raises long-run income by 13.5%, relative to laissez-faire. This more
substantial impact primarily reflects the induced adjustment of physical capital, but it remains a level
eﬀect due to decreasing returns to the two types of capital together. In a dynastic-utility version of the
present model with endogenous growth (Bénabou (2002)) I find that the growth-maximizing value for
fiscal redistribution is τ f isc = 21%, which corresponds to a share of redistributive transfers in GDP of
6%; in spite of reduced labor supply this raises the long-run growth rate by 0.5 percentage points. Under

convexities in either the investment technology (e.g., Galor and Zeira (1993)) or in preferences (e.g., Galor and Moav (1999)).
For recent contributions to the empirical debate, see Forbes (2000) and Banerjee and Duflo (2003).




                                                                     9
the alternative policy of progressive education finance, the growth-maximizing equalization rate for school
expenditures is τ educ = 62%, which raises long-run growth by 2.4 percentage points. In both cases, the
eﬃcient policy involves the top 30% of families subsidizing the bottom 70%, whether through the fiscal or
the education system.


C     Voter Preferences, Political Power, and Equilibrium Policy

I now turn to the determination of policy, which reflects both individual citizens’ preferences and the
allocation of power in the political system. In each generation, before the productivity shocks zti are
realized, agents vote on the rate of redistribution τ t to which they will be subject; again, this could be
through the fiscal system, labor market regulation, or education finance. Applying Propositions 1 and 2
to equations (4)-(5), an individual i’s intertemporal welfare Uti can be computed from (5) as a function of
the proposed policy τ t , his endowment kti , and the overall distribution of human capital (mt , ∆t ), which is
the system’s state variable.18 Defining the composite eﬃciency parameter

                                               B ≡ a + ρ(1 − a)(1 − β) ≥ 0,                                                 (14)


whose interpretation is is given below, the resulting first-order condition for agent i’s ideal tax rate takes
the form:
                                    ·                   µ   ¶                       ¸
                 ∂Uti                           i     δ   τ               2 2     2
                      = (1 − ρ + ρβ) γ(mt − ln kt ) −         + (1 − τ )(γ ∆t + Bv ) = 0.                                   (15)
                 ∂τ t                                 η 1−τ

The first term inside the brackets, which disappears when summing across agents, reflects the basic re-
distributive conflict: since τ t reallocates resources (spent on both consumption and children’s education)
from rich to poor households, the latter want it to be high, and the former, low. The next two terms
represent the aggregate welfare cost and aggregate welfare benefit of a marginal increase in τ t . First, there
is the deadweight loss due to the distortion in eﬀort: it is proportional to the labor supply elasticity 1/η,
and vanishes at τ = 0. Second, the term (1 − τ t )(γ 2 ∆2t + Bv 2 ), which is maximized for τ t = 1, embodies
the (marginal) eﬃciency gains that arise from better insurance and the redistribution of resources towards
more severely credit-constrained investments. Indeed it is clear from (14) that the composite parameter B
multiplying the variance of adults’ income shocks v 2 is monotonically related to both risk—aversion a and
to the extent of decreasing returns in human-capital investment, 1 − β.19 As to initial income inequality,

  1 8 See the appendix. Note that due to the model’s overlapping—generations structure, voting involves no intertemporal

strategic considerations.
  1 9 More specifically, under constant returns (β = 1) the term (1 − ρ + ρβ)Bv 2 reduces to a(1 − τ )v 2 , which is the insurance

value of a marginal reduction in the lifetime resource risk (1 − τ )2 v2 /2 faced by agents. Conversely, for risk—neutral agents
who care only about their oﬀspring (a = 0, ρ = 1) that same term becomes β(1 − β)(1 − τ )v 2 , which is the gain in expected
(and aggregate) human capital growth resulting from a marginal decrease in the variability of post-tax resources (1 − τ )2 v2 /2,
given the concavity of the investment technology.




                                                               10
the term γ 2 ∆2t reflects two motives for redistribution.20 First, relaxing preexisting credit constraints tends
to increase overall growth (see the last term in (12)), and therefore also average welfare. Second, with
concave (logarithmic) utility functions, average welfare increases whenever individual consumptions (of cit
     i
and kt+1 ) are distributed more equally. Equivalently here, this captures the eﬀect of skewness: given mt ,
a higher ∆2t implies a higher per capita income ln yt = mt + ∆2t /2, making redistribution more attractive
for the median voter, and more generally at any given level of kti .
       From this analysis it easily follows that agent i’s preferred tax rate, obtained as the unique solution
τ it
  < 1 to the quadratic equation (15), decreases with his endowment kti and increases with the ex-ante
                                               ¯ ¯
benefits from redistribution Bv 2 . Similarly, ¯τ it ¯ decreases with 1/η, as a more elastic labor supply magnifies
the distortions that result from redistributive policies —whether progressive, τ > 0, or regressive, τ < 0.
       I now turn from the preferences of diﬀerent classes of voters to their political power or influence over the
process that determines the actual τ t . Even in advanced democracies, poor and less educated individuals
have a lower propensity to register, turn out to vote and give political contributions, than better-oﬀ ones.
For voting itself the tendency is relatively moderate, whereas for contributing to campaigns it is drastic.
Even for political activities that are time- rather than money-intensive, such as writing to Congress,
attending meetings, trying to convince others, etc., the propensity to participate rises sharply with income
and education. These facts are documented for instance in Rosenstone and Hansen (1993), while Bartels
(2002) provides a striking study of how they translate into disproportionate political influence. Studying
the roll calls of US senators in three Congresses he finds that their votes are more responsive, by a factor
ranging from 3 to 15, to the views of their constituents located the 75th income percentile than to those
of the 25th ; and again more responsive, by a factor of 2 to 3, to the views of the 99th percentile than to
those of the 75th . In less developed countries there is also extensive vote-buying, clientelism, intimidation
and the like, which are likely to result in even more bias.
       To summarize this political influence of human and financial wealth in a simple manner I shall assume
that the pivotal voter is located at the 100 × p∗ -th percentile of the distribution, where the critical level
p∗ can be any number in [0, 1]. A perfect democracy corresponds to p∗ = 1/2, while an imperfect one
where participation or influence rises with social status corresponds to p∗ > 1/2.21 Given that kti is here
log-normally distributed, an equivalent but more convenient measure of the political system’s departure
from the democratic ideal is

   2 0 See
         Bénabou (2000) for the exact decomposition.
   2 1 Since
           individual preferences are single-peaked and the preferred policy is monotonic in kti , it is easy to show that such
a critical p∗ is a suﬃcient statistic for any
                                          U ordinal weighing scheme where each agent’s opinion is aﬀected by a weight, or
relative probability of voting, ωi (with 01 ω j dj = 1), that increases with his rank in the distribution of human capital or
income. Alternatively, political influence may depend on individuals’ income levels. Thus, with ω i proportional to (yi )λ it
can be shown that the pivotal voter has rank p∗ = Φ(λ∆), so that λ in (16) is simply replaced by λ∆. As intuition suggests,
this alternative formulation only reinforces the key result that eﬃcient redistributions may decline with inequality, since it
implies that the political system tends to becomes more biased towards the wealthy as inequality rises.



                                                              11
                                                       λ ≡ Φ−1 (p∗ ),                                                    (16)

where Φ(·) denotes the c.d.f. of a standard normal. I shall refer to λ as the degree of wealth bias in
the political system, and focus on the empirically relevant case where λ > 0.22 Given the location of the
pivotal voter, the policy outcome is simply obtained by setting ln kti − mt = λ∆t in the first-order condition
∂Uti /∂τ = 0. This yields the quadratic equation:

                                               ·                                 ¸
                                      1      1 γ 2 ∆2t + Bv 2         τt
                                           =                  −                    .                                     (17)
                                    1 − τt   λ      γ∆t         ηγ∆t (1 − τ t )2


When labor supply is inelastic (1/η = 0), it is immediately apparent that this equilibrium tax rate is
U —shaped in ∆t , and minimized where γ 2 ∆2 = Bv 2 . This is true more generally.

Proposition 3 The rate of redistribution τ t = T (∆t ) chosen in generation t is such that:
    1) τ t increases with the ex—ante eﬃciency gain from redistribution Bv 2 , and decreases with the political
influence of wealth, λ.
    2) |τ t | decreases with the elasticity of labor supply 1/η.
    3) τ t is U-shaped with respect to inequality ∆t . It starts at the ex—ante optimal rate T (0) > 0, declines
to a minimum at some ∆ > 0, then rises back towards T (∞) = 1. The larger Bv 2 , the wider the range
[0, ∆) where ∂τ t /∂∆t < 0.

    The first two results show that equilibrium policy depends on the costs and benefits of redistribution
and on the allocation of political influence in a sensible manner. The third one confirms the key insight
that eﬃcient redistributions may decrease with inequality; more specifically, it yields the U-shaped function
τ = T (∆) shown on Figure 2. The underlying intuition is simple, and very general: a) when distributional
conflict γ∆ is small enough relative to the ex-ante eﬃciency gains Bv 2 , there is widespread support for
the redistributive policy, so its equilibrium level is high; b) as inequality rises, so does the proportion of
agents rich enough to be net losers from the policy, who will block all but relatively low levels of τ t ; c) at
still higher levels of inequality, the standard skewness eﬀect eventually dominates: there are so many poor
that they impose high redistribution, even when it is very ineﬃcient.23
    It is now well-recognized that the standard median-voter model’s prediction of a positive eﬀect of
inequality on redistribution fails to explain the empirical patterns actually observed, both across countries
(see, e.g., Perotti (1996), Bénabou (1996a, 2000), Alesina et al. (2002)) and within them (see Rodriguez

  2 2 Recent papers that aim to endogenously explain the allocation of political power in a country (corresponding here to the

parameter λ) include Bourguignon and Verdier (2000), Pineda and Rodriguez (2000), Acemoglu and Robinson (2000), and
Baland and Robinson (2003).
  2 3 A similar form of non-monotonicity (U-shape, or even declining throughout for λ high enough) is obtained with a Pareto

distribution by Lee and Romer (1998).



                                                             12
(1999) for panel-data tests on US states). Among developed countries, in particular, the relationship is
in fact negative (Pineda and Rodriguez (2000). The present framework explains how and when greater
inequality will indeed reduce redistribution, or even result in regressive policies —both in the short run
(Proposition 3) and in the long-run, when both are endogenous (Proposition 4 below). Furthermore, the
distinctive non—monotonic relationship predicted by the model turns out to have empirical support: in
tests using cross-country data, Figini (1999) finds in a significant U-shaped eﬀect of income inequality on
the shares of tax revenues and government expenditures in GDP; De Mello and Tiongson (2003) find a
similar pattern for government transfers.



II      Sustainable Social Contracts

A     Dynamics and Steady States

The joint evolution of inequality and policy is described by the recursive dynamical system:
                                        
                                         τt        = T (∆t )
                                                                                                                       (18)
                                         ∆
                                              t+1 = D( ∆t , τ t )



where T (∆t ) is given by Proposition 3 and D( ∆t , τ t ) by (11). Under a time—invariant policy, in particular,
long—run inequality decreases with redistribution:

                                                 w2 + β 2 (1 − τ )2 v 2
                                       ∆2∞ =                            ≡ D2 (τ ).                                     (19)
                                                1 − (α + βγ(1 − τ ))2

A steady-state equilibrium is an intersection of this downward-sloping locus, ∆ = D(τ ), with the U-shaped
curve τ = T (∆), as illustrated in Figure 2. The following key proposition identifies the conditions under
which multiple intersections occur.

Proposition 4 Let 1 − α < 2βγ. When the normalized eﬃciency gain B is below some critical value B
there is a unique, stable, steady—state. When B > B, on the other hand, there exist λ and λ̄ with 0 < λ < λ̄,
such that:
1) For each λ in [λ, λ̄] there are (at least) two stable steady states.24
2) For λ < λ or λ > λ̄ the steady—state is unique.

     These results can shed light on a number of important issues and puzzles raised in the introduction.
     First, they explain how countries with similar economic and political fundamentals can nonetheless
sustain very diﬀerent redistributive institutions, such as a European-style welfare state and a US-style

  2 4 See Bénabou (2000) for additional results on the number of stable steady-states (n ≤ 4), including conditions ensuring

that n = 2.


                                                            13
laissez-faire social contract. Notably, these two societies cannot be Pareto ranked. Recall also that τ t
can be equally interpreted as describing tax-and-transfer policy, labor market regulation, or (with some
minor changes) education finance policy. Moreover, it is clear that the model’s key mechanism makes these
multiple dimensions of policy complementary, so that they will tend to covary positively across countries,
as indeed they do empirically. A more egalitarian education system, for instance, tends to reduce income
inequality, which in turn increases political support for fiscal redistribution or labor-earnings compression
—and vice-versa. Summarizing a large collective research project on Sweden, Freeman (1995) emphasizes
the presence of such complementarities, describing “a highly interrelated welfare state and economy in
which many parts fit together (be they subsidies, taxes, wage compression etc.)”.
    Second, the two conditions required for multiplicity embody very general intuitions that are easily
understood in the context of Figure 2. To start with, the ex-ante welfare benefits of redistribution must
be high enough, relative to the costs.25 Otherwise the T curve will be upward-sloping except over a very
narrow initial range, and consequently have a unique intersection with the D curve; economically speaking,
we would be close to the standard, complete-markets case. In addition, the political power of the wealthy
must lie in some intermediate range, otherwise the T curve will lie too high or too low relative to the
D curve, and again there will be a unique intersection, with high inequality and low redistribution, or
vice-versa.
    Third, while in the short-run the relationship is non-monotonic, there emerges in the long—run a negative
correlation between inequality and redistribution, as indeed one observes between the United States and
Europe, or among advanced countries in general (Pineda and Rodriguez (2000)).
    Fourth, history matters in an important and plausible way: temporary shocks to the distribution of
wealth (immigration, educational discrimination, demand shifts) as well as to the political system (slavery,
voting rights restrictions) can permanently move society from one equilibrium to the other, or more gen-
erally have long-lasting eﬀects on inequality, growth, and institutions. In particular, the model provides
a formalization of Engerman and Sokoloﬀ’s (1998) thesis about the historical origins of South and North
America’s very diﬀerent development paths, which they trace back to the former set of New World colonies
having had much higher initial inequality ∆0 , and a much more concentrated power structure λ0 , than the
latter.26
    Finally, the model also shows that diﬀerent sources of inequality have diﬀerent eﬀects on redistributive
institutions —which, in particular, sheds doubt on the possibility of empirically estimating a catch-all rela-
tionship between inequality and redistribution, or inequality and growth. Indeed, one can show (provided

  2 5 The claim with respect to the benefits is clear from Proposition 4; with respect to the costs one can show, under additional

technical assumptions, that the threshold B shifts up as the labor supply elasticity 1/η rises.
  2 6 This, in turn, was due to reasons linked to the technologies required for the diﬀerent goods these colonies were producing

—a point I shall come back to in Section III.A.



                                                               14
1/η is not too large) that the threshold for multiplicity B is a decreasing function of the variance ratio
v 2 /w2 , with limv/w→0 (B) = +∞ and limv/w→+∞ (B) = 0. Quite intuitively, income uncertainty interacts
with the incompleteness in insurance and credit markets in generating ex ante eﬃciency gains from redis-
tribution, as reflected by the term Bv 2 in (17). By contrast, a greater variance w2 of the endowments that
agents receive prior to choosing policy increases the distributional conflict between identifiable losers and
gainers from the policy. Thus, whereas an increase in the variability of sectoral shocks (similar to v 2 ) will
lead to an expansion of the welfare state, a surge in immigration that results in a greater heterogeneity of
the population (similar to a rise in w2 ) can easily lead to cutbacks, or even a large—scale dismantling. We
shall observe similar eﬀects when studying the political implications of skill-biased technical change.


B     Which Societies Grow Faster?

As mentioned earlier, the steady states corresponding to diﬀerent social contracts are not Pareto—rankable:
rich enough agents always prefer a more laissez-faire society, while those who are poor enough always want
more of a welfare state. One may still ask, however, how these two social models compare in terms of
aggregate growth. This question is important first for its policy content, and second to know whether
one should expect any empirical relationship between inequality and growth, when account is taken of the
fact that both are endogenous. The answer hinges on the basic tradeoﬀ, discussed earlier, between the
distortions induced by redistribution and its beneficial eﬀect on credit—constraints (magnified, in the long
run, by the fact that it also reduces income inequality γ∆∞ ). This is made clear by the following results,
which apply equally in the short and in the long run.27

Proposition 5 Compared to a more laissez-faire alternative τ 0 , a more redistributive social contract τ > τ 0
is associated with lower inequality, and
    1) has higher growth when tax distortions are small (1/η ≈ 0) relative to those induced by credit
constraints on the accumulation of human capital (βγ < 1);
    2) has lower growth when tax distortions are high (1/η > 0) and the credit—constraint eﬀect is weak
(βγ ≈ 1).

    The first scenario, of “growth-enhancing redistributions”, seems most relevant for developing countries,
where capital markets are less well-functioning, and for redistribution through public investments in hu-
man capital and health. One may contrast here the paths followed by East Asia and Latin America in
those respects. The result may also help understand why regression estimates of the eﬀects of social and
educational transfers on growth are often significantly positive, or at least rarely significantly negative.

 2 7 See Section I.B for the simple correspondence between the stationary and the endogenous-growth versions of the model,

where policy aﬀects growth in the short and the long-run respectively.


                                                           15
    The second, Eurosclerosis” scenario can account for why Europeans consistently choose more social
insurance than Americans —at the cost of higher unemployment and slower growth —even though they are
not necessarily more risk-averse. The intuition is that, in more homogenous societies, there is less erosion
of the consensus over social insurance mechanisms which, ex—ante, would be valued enough to compensate
for lesser growth prospects.28

    Putting the two cases together, finally, Proposition 5 can also be related to the empirical findings of
Barro (2000) that inequality tends to be negatively associated with subsequent growth in poor countries,
but positively associated with it in richer ones. To the extent that poor countries are also those where
credit markets are least developed, Proposition 5 predicts that inequality-reducing policies will give rise to
just such a dichotomy.



III      Technology and the Social Contract

I shall now extend the model to analyze how technology and redistributive institutions both aﬀect inequality
and respond to it, and consequently how they influence each other —as described on Figure 1. Of particular
interest are the following questions. First, how does technical change impact the sustainability of welfare-
state and laissez-faire social contracts? Second, what types of societies are likely to be leaders or early
adopters in developing or implementing flexible, skill-biased technologies or organizational forms? More
generally, how do the skill distribution among workers and the production side of the economy shape each
other, through human capital investments and technology choices? Finally, what happens in the long run
when technological and institutional factors evolve interdependently —within a country, and possibly even
across countries?


A     Exogenous Technical Change and the Viability of the Welfare State

I first examine here how technical or organizational change that increases the return to human capital
aﬀects redistributive institutions. This policy response represents an additional channel through which
technological evolutions aﬀect the income distribution, in addition to their direct impact via the wage
structure.
    Figure 3 illustrates the eﬀects of an increase in γ, the coeﬃcient on human capital in the production
and earnings function (1). As will from now on be made explicit in the notation, this aﬀects both of the
key curves describing the inequality-redistribution nexus:

  2 8 For the specific case of unemployment insurance, Hassler et al. (1999) provide a complementary explanation, based on

interactions with workers’ specialization (or lack thereof) that can result in multiple equilibria.




                                                           16
                    Redistribution
                            τ


                       1




                                                                                             τ =T (∆)
                                S


                                                                   S ''



                                                                                             ∆= D(τ )
                                                                   S'
                                                                                                           ∆
                        0
                                                               ∆
                                                                                                       Inequality



             Figure 3: The eﬀects of an increase in the returns to human capital, γ = (σ − 1)/σ.


    i) The intergenerational-transmission locus ∆ = D(τ ; γ) shifts up, and becomes less steep: for given
human capital inequality ∆t and policy τ there is more inequality in incomes γ∆t , hence also in investments,
and consequently more inequality of human capital (and of course income) in all subsequent periods.29

    ii) The policy locus τ = T (γ∆) shifts down over [0, ∆), and up over (∆, +∞) : since what matters for
the political outcome is income inequality γ∆ (see (17), an increase in γ for given ∆ has the same U-shaped
eﬀect on redistribution as an increase in ∆ for given γ —initially lowering τ , then raising it.
    Figure 3 directly yields a local analysis of the more egalitarian, welfare-state equilibrium —and more
generally, of any steady state that occurs along the declining portion of the T locus.30

Proposition 6 Let (∆, τ , γ) be such that (∆, τ ) is a stable steady state under the technology γ, with
∆ < ∆(Bv 2 ; γ). A marginal increase in γ results in higher long run human capital and income inequality,
as well as in less redistribution.

   2 9 Recall that a worker’s human capital reflects his individual ability, family background, and parental investment in educa-

tion: kti = κ ξ it (kt−1
                     i   )α (eit−1 )β . The kind of technical change considered here raises the return to all three components of kti
equally. In Galor and Tsiddon (1997) by contrast, major innovations raise the relative return to pure ability, while subsequent
learning-by-doing innovations raise the relative return to inherited human capital. In Galor and Moav (2000) human capital
is also sector-specific, and therefore eroded by new technologies, to an extent that decreases with individual ability. In these
models technological innovations can thus raise as well as lower integenerational mobility.
   3 0 For steady-states that occur on the rising part, local comparative statics are ambiguous. Note, however, that in versions

of the model where power inequality rises with income or human wealth inequality —meaning that λ increases with ∆ (see
footnote 21)— the declining portion of the locus is wider and the increasing portion reduced, making it easier to rule out such
equilibria. For instance, if political power ωi is proportional to (yi )λ —e.g., “one dollar, one vote” for λ = 1− then λ is simply
replaced by λ∆ everywhere. As seen from (17), for 1/η = 0 the T (γ∆) curve is then decreasing throughout.




                                                                 17
     The policy response thus amplifies the direct eﬀect of skill-biased technical progress on disposable
incomes —and, over time, on the distributions of human capital and earnings. Figure 3 also suggests that it
can have, in the long run, much more drastic consequences for redistributive institutions: starting from a
situation with multiple steady states, an increase in γ tends to undermine the sustainability of the “Welfare
State” equilibrium. Similarly, we shall see that starting from a configuration with a single “Welfare-State”
it can make a second, “Laissez-Faire” equilibrium appear. Such a global analysis is potentially quite
complicated, however, since in general there may be more than two stable equilibria, and some may also
occur in the upward-sloping portion of the τ = T (γ∆) locus, where the policy response has a dampening
rather than an amplifying eﬀect on inequality. To demonstrate the most interesting insights, I shall therefore
impose some simplifying assumptions. First, I restrict voters to a choice between only two policies:

     • A generous “Welfare State” social contract, corresponding to a relatively high rate of redistribution

τ̄ ∈ (0, 1);
     • A more “Laissez Faire” social contract, corresponding to a relatively low rate of redistribution τ ∈
(0, τ̄ ).
     Once again, τ can be interpreted as corresponding to either fiscal redistribution, wage compression
through labor market regulation, or education finance progressivity. To further simplify the problem I
abstract from labor supply distortions (1/η = 0) and assume that B is large enough that both potential
steady states are always on the downward-sloping part of the τ = T (∆γ) curve, which is the one of most
interest.31
     Given an initial distribution of human capital ∆t , the more redistributive policy τ t = τ̄ is adopted over
τ t = τ if Uti (τ̄ ) > Uti (τ ) for at least a critical fraction p∗ ≡ Φ(λ) of the population. Note from (15) that
with 1/η = 0 , ∂Uti /∂τ t is linear in τ t , so the preceding inequality evaluated at ln kti = mt + λ∆t takes the
form:
                             £               ¡               ¢¤            ¡            ¢
                    (τ̄ − τ ) γλ∆t + (1 − τ ) γ 2 ∆2t + Bv 2 < (τ̄ − τ )2 γ 2 ∆2t + Bv 2 /2, or:
                                             µ              ¶µ             ¶
                                                     τ̄ + τ           Bv 2
                                        λ< 1−                   γ∆t +        .                                              (20)
                                                        2             γ∆t

We first see that the political influence of wealth must not be too large, compared to the aggregate welfare
gain from redistribution relative to laissez faire (net of the deadweight loss, which I am here abstracting
from). Second, preexisting income inequality raises the hurdle that public policy must overcome, as the
ex-ante benefit term Bv 2 is divided by γ∆t . This eﬀect impedes the adoption of more redistributive

  3 1 The required condition appears in Proposition 7. It is thus not inevitably the case that skill-biased technical progress

leads to a retrenchment of redistributive institutions; the model allows for the reverse case, for steady-states that occur on
the rising part of the T locus. The case on which I focus, however, appears to be the most relevant for recent trends, and in
any case is the more robust, since: i) when multiple steady-states exist, there is always at least one the declining part; ii) in
simple and plausible variants of the model, the T locus is decreasing throughout (see footnote 30).




                                                               18
institutions (τ = τ̄ ) where they had not previously been in place, because of the greater divergence of
interests that results over time from a more laissez-faire system (τ = τ ). Pushing in the other direction —
namely, intensifying the demand for redistribution as inequality rises— are the eﬀects of skewness and initial
credit-constraints, reflected in the additive term γ∆t . As a result of these oﬀsetting forces, the right-hand
side of (20) is U-shaped in γ∆t . To focus on the long—run, let us now replace human capital inequality ∆t
with its asymptotic value under a technology γ and a constant policy τ —namely, by (11):

                                                           s
                                                                w2 + β 2 (1 − τ )2 v 2
                                             D(τ , γ) ≡                                ,                                      (21)
                                                               1 − (α + βγ(1 − τ ))2

which is the long-run inequality in human capital resulting from a constant policy τ and technology γ.
Given γ, the policy-inequality pair (τ̄ , D(τ , γ)) is thus a politico-economic steady state if:

                                      µ                 ¶µ                           ¶
                                             τ̄ + τ                       Bv 2
                                λ<        1−              γD(τ , γ) +                    ≡ λ̄(γ; B).                          (22)
                                                2                        γD(τ , γ)

Conversely, the laissez-faire configuration (τ , D(τ , γ)) is a politico-economic steady state given γ if:

                                      µ                 ¶µ                           ¶
                                               τ̄ + τ                      Bv 2
                                λ>        1−              γD(τ , γ) +                    ≡ λ(γ; B).                           (23)
                                                  2                      γD(τ , γ)

The two regimes coexist if and only if λ(γ; B) < λ̄(γ; B), or:

                                                          µ          ¶µ                         ¶
                           λ̄(γ; B) − λ(γ; B)                 τ̄ + τ             Bv 2
                                                 =         1−                                 −1 .                            (24)
                          γD(τ , γ) − γD(τ̄ , γ)                 2      γ 2 D(τ̄ , γ)D(τ , γ)

We thus obtain here the analogue, for a discrete policy choice, of Proposition 4: multiplicity requires that
B be large enough compared to income inequality (and, in general, to 1/η),

                                             ¡        ¢
                                          B > γ 2 /v 2 · D(τ̄ , γ) · D(τ , γ) ≡ B(γ),                                         (25)

                                                                                        £     ¤
and that the wealth bias λ be neither too high nor too low, given the technology γ : λ ∈ λ, λ̄ , defined by
(22)-(23).32 Now, furthermore, we shall see that (under appropriate conditions) the skill bias γ must also
be neither too high nor too low, given λ. This result is illustrated in Figure 4.

Proposition 7 Let 1/η = 0 and Bv 2 > γ max · D(τ , γ max ), where γ max ≡ (1 − α)/β. There exist two
skill-bias thresholds γ(λ; B) < γ̄(λ; B), both decreasing in λ and increasing in B, such that:

  3 2 Note also that as B increases both λ and λ̄ rise, but (24) shows that the interval [λ, λ̄] widens. When (25) does not hold,

on the other hand, we have λ̄ < λ. For λ ∈ / [λ̄, λ] there is a unique steady—state, but for λ ∈ [λ̄, λ] the economy can instead be
shown to cycle between the two regimes, as in Gradstein and Justman (1997). This feature reflects the restriction of policy
to a binary choice.



                                                                  19
                        Wealth bias
                              λ




                                             E = {τ }




                                            E = {τ ,τ }

                                                                                    γ


                                             E = {τ }                               γ

                                                                                          γ   Skill bias
                          0                                                     1



                              Technology, political influence, and the social contract. E denotes the set
              Figure 4:
                              of stable steady-states, with τ̄ = “Welfare State” and τ = “Laissez Faire”.


    i) for γ < γ(λ; B), the unique steady state corresponds to the welfare-state outcome (τ̄ , D(τ̄ , γ));
               £                 ¤
    ii) for γ ∈ γ(λ; B), γ̄(λ; B) , both (τ̄ , D(τ̄ , γ)) and (τ , D(τ , γ)) are stable steady states;
    iii) for γ ∈ [γ̄(λ; B), γ max ], the unique steady state is laissez-faire, (τ , D(τ , γ)).

    These results have a number of important implications.
    First, they confirm that the Welfare State becomes unsustainable when technology becomes too skill-
biased; and, conversely, that multiple social contracts can coexist only when γ is in some intermediate
range.33 We see here again at work the general insight that sources of heterogeneity that are predictable
on the basis of of initial endowments —a greater variance of abilities, w2 , as discussed earlier, or greater
skill bias γ, as here— push equilibrium institutions towards less redistribution.
    Second, Proposition 7 also reveals interesting interactions between the production and political “tech-
nologies”. As seen on Figure 4, in a country with relatively little wealth bias the welfare state is —for better
of for worse— much more “immune” to skill-biased technical change than in one where λ is high. Similarly,
a given change in the political system will have very diﬀerent eﬀects on redistributive institutions, depend-
ing on how skill-biased the technology is. Finally, the “surest way” to set out on a course of persistently
high inequality and ineﬃciently regressive (or insuﬃciently progressive) institutions is to start out with

  3 3 Hassler et al. (2003) also show that the “welfare-state” equilibrium in their model no longer exists above a certain level

of skill bias. The mechanism is quite diﬀerent, however: it is the anticipation of a higher skill premium that causes more
agents to invest in education —to the point where, ex-post, a majority of them end up with high incomes (the distribution is
negatively skewed), and therefore oppose redistribution.



                                                              20
both a production structure that generates high wage inequality, and a political system marked by a high
degree of bias. As demonstrated by Engerman and Sokoloﬀ (1995), such were the initial conditions found
in the plantation-based and natural-resource based colonies of Central and South America in the 16th
and 17th centuries —in contrast to those of North America, where agriculture was not subject to significant
increasing returns to scale, and initial institutions were much less oligarchic.
    Third, our result can also be related to that of Acemoglu, Aghion and Violante (2001), who show that
skill-biased technical progress may cause a decline in unionization. While their model is quite diﬀerent, it
shares the two key features emphasized in previous sections. First, relatively rich agents —namely skilled
workers— are pivotal, in the sense that it is their willingness to leave or avoid the unionized sector that
limits the extent of wage compression. Second, in making this mobility decision —voting with their feet—
they trade oﬀ redistributive losses (unions redistribute towards unskilled workers, who are a majority in
the unionized sector) against ex-ante eﬃciency benefits: unions provide insurance through wage-sharing
and / or a safeguard against the “holdup” by firms of workers’ specific human capital investments; even
when they play no such role, leaving the unionized sector involves mobility costs. Consequently, when
skill-biased technical change makes the interests of the two classes of workers too divergent, redistributive
institutions —here, union participation— will decline. Moreover, this can happen ineﬃciently.34


B     Skills, Technology, and Income Inequality

I now turn to the reverse mechanism and examine how inequality itself feeds back onto the nature of tech-
nical change, making γ endogenous. Recognizing that individuals do not produce in isolation, I model pro-
duction interactions with a simple specialization structure where workers perform complementary tasks.35
Final output is produced by competitive firms, using a continuum of diﬀerentiated intermediate inputs:

                                              µZ       ∞                             ¶ σ−1
                                                                                        σ
                                                                             σ−1
                                  yt = At ·                zt (s) · xt (s)    σ    ds      , σ ≥ 1,                       (26)
                                                   0


where xt (s) denotes the quantity of input s, zt (s) an i.i.d. sectoral shock, and At a TFP parameter.
Workers specialize in a single good, which they produce using their human capital and labor. Since they
face downward-sloping demand curves each selects a diﬀerent task, s(i) = i, and produces xit = kti lti units,
where lti is endogenously chosen. The unit price for his output is thus:

                                                           σ−1                         1
                                              pit = At σ · zti · (kti lti /yt )− σ .                                      (27)

  3 4 Relatedly, note from Figure 4 that a minor change in γ can trigger a significant decline in redistribution from τ̄ to τ ,

and recall from Proposition 5 that the latter can easily lead to lower aggregate growth. The same is clearly true for average
welfare, e.g. when 1/η = 0.
  3 5 Building on those in Bénabou (1996) and Tamura (1992), themselves based on Romer (1987).




                                                                    21
The corresponding hourly wages are ω it = pit kti , and the resulting incomes
                                                ¡        ¢ σ−1
                                                            σ
                                                                  σ−1
                                                                            1              ¡ ¢γ
                           yti = ω it lt = zti · kti lti       × At σ (yt ) σ ≡ Ãt · zti · kti (lti )δ .                     (28)


This earnings function is exactly the same as in previous sections (see (1)), with

                                                                           σ−1
                                                              γ=δ≡             ,                                              (29)
                                                                            σ

                                                        σ−1
                                                                  1
except for the extra TFP factor Ãt ≡ At σ (yt ) σ , which acts as a shift in the mean of the productivity
shocks zti . While Ãt varies endogenously with the economy’s state variables (mt , ∆2t ), individual workers
and voters take it as given in their decisions over (lti , cit ) and their votes over τ t .36 Consequently, the
entire analysis of earlier sections still applies, with the simple substitution of Ãt · zti wherever zti previously
appeared. Conditional on γ, distributional dynamics and the political equilibrium thus remain essentially
unchanged, and so do the corresponding ∆ = D(τ , γ) and τ = T (γ∆) loci.
    I now consider firms. Recall that in equilibrium all workers supply the same eﬀort lti = lt and the
distribution of human capital remains lognormal, ln kti ∼ N (mt , ∆2t ). The output of a representative firm
is thus:
                                        µZ       1               ¶ σ−1
                                                                    σ                                   µZ   1           ¶
                                                     ¡ i ¢ σ−1                           −∆2t /2σ
                       yt = At · lt ·                 kt σ di            = At · lt · e              ·            kti   di .   (30)
                                             0                                                           0

                                                                         2
Keeping average human capital constant, the loss e−∆t /2σ makes apparent the productivity costs imposed
by (excessive) heterogeneity of the labor force: poorly educated, insuﬃciently skilled production and clerical
workers drag down the productivity of engineers, managers, scientists, etc. We also see that a production
technology with greater substitutability between the tasks performed by diﬀerent types of workers reduces
these costs of skill disparities (Bénabou (1996), Grossman and Maggi (2000)). Indeed, this greater flexibility
allows firms to more easily substitute towards the more productive workers, and conversely reduce their
dependence on low-skill labor. This may be achieved by internal retooling, reorganization, or by outsourcing
certain activities to competitive subcontractors.37 One can also think of a higher σ as a more discriminating
search technology, resulting in more assortative matching between workers —that is, in a more segregated
production structure (Kremer and Maskin (1996), (2003)).38
    Naturally, production processes with less complementarity between workers of diﬀerent skills result in
greater inequality of wages and incomes, as they have the eﬀect of uncoupling their marginal products:

   3 6 Note again the role of the overlapping-generations structure with “imperfect” altruism in simplifying the voting problem.

Observe also that τ t can now, as claimed earlier, be interpreted as the extent of wage income compression, i.e. the degree of
progressivity in the mapping (defined by (6)) from workers’ true marginal revenue products yti (given by (28)) to the labor
earning they actually receive, ŷti .
   3 7 For evidence on organizational change, see for instance Caroli and Van Reenen (1999).
   3 8 When labor supply is endogenous, 1/η > 0, a higher σ also induces workers to increase their labor supply, as they face

a less elastic demand curve: by Proposition 1, lt = χ (1 − τ t )1/η , with now γ = (σ − 1)/σ. This eﬀect is independent of any
issues of skill heterogeneity or wage inequality, however.


                                                                      22
                                                                         µ            ¶2
                                               £      ¤                      σt − 1
                                            Var ln yti =                                     ∆2t = γ 2t ∆2t .                           (31)
                                                                               σt

C      Technological Choice and Endogenous Flexibility

More flexible technologies and production processes require costly investments or reorganizations. More-
over, their benefits to an individual firm are endogenous even in the short run (i.e., given the skill compo-
sition of the labor force), as they depend on the decisions of other firms, which aﬀect the wage structure.
      I therefore now model firms’ choices of technology or organizational form, proposing a new and very
simple formulation that highlights the roles of heterogeneity and flexibility. In every period, firms have
access to a menu of potential technologies with diﬀerent elasticities of substitution σ ∈ [1, +∞) and
associated costs c(σ); the latter result in a TFP factor A(σ) = e−c(σ) , with c0 > 0 and c00 > 0.39 Given the
distribution of workers’ human capital ln kti ∼ N (m, ∆2t ) and the technology σ t used by its competitors,
each firm chooses its own technology σ̂ as a best response. This results in a marginal cost of

                                                         µZ          1                       ¶ 1−σ̂
                                                                                                1

                                                    −1
                                                                         ¡ i ¢σ̂ ¡ i ¢1−σ̂
                                            A(σ̂)                         zt      pt       di       .                                   (32)
                                                                 0


Substituting from (27) for the equilibrium input prices pit , and normalizing by the other firms’ marginal
cost (see the proof of Proposition 8), the firm’s relative marginal cost is equal to:

                                    µ             ¶ µZ       1                        ¶ 1−σ̂
                                                                                         1     µZ         1                 ¶ 1−σ
                                                                                                                               −1
                                        A(σ t )                  ¡ i ¢ 1−σ̂                                   ¡ i ¢ 1−σ t         t
                    mc(σ̂|σ t ) =                  ·              kt σt di                   ·                 kt    σt
                                                                                                                          di        ,
                                        A(σ̂)            0                                            0


or:
                                                  ·                    µ         ¶¸
                                                                    ∆2t σ t − σ̂
                                 mc(σ̂|σ t ) = exp c(σ̂) − c(σt ) +                 .                                                   (33)
                                                                    2      σ 2t

The first-order condition for this convex minimization problem is

                                                                                   ∆2t
                                                                     c0 (σ̂) =           .                                              (34)
                                                                                   2σ 2t

Intuitively, the marginal benefit of flexibility rises with the variability of skills in the labor force, but
decreases with the degree to which other firms choose technologies that allow them to more easily substitute
toward better workers, since in doing so they drive up the skill premium.




  3 9 I thus abstract here from the intertemporal (investment) aspects of innovation that would be part of a more complete

(but also more complicated) model of technological change; see, e.g., Acemoglu (1998), Kiley (1999), Lloyd-Ellis (1999), or
Aghion (2002).


                                                                              23
Proposition 8 There is a unique symmetric equilibrium in technology choice. The more heterogenous the
workforce, the more flexible and skill-biased the technology used by firms: σ t = σ ∗ (∆t ) is the solution to
c0 (σ ∗ ) = ∆2 /2(σ∗ )2 , with 0 < ∂ ln σ ∗ /∂ ln ∆ < 1.

    This result has several interesting implications.

A first one is the magnification of wage inequality: the return to human capital ∂ ln ω it /∂ ln kti = (σ t −1)/σ t is
higher where the labor force is more heterogenous, further amplifying wage diﬀerentials across educational
levels. This simple prediction could be tested empirically across countries and / or time periods.40

    A second implication is the potential for “immiserizing technological choices”. Proposition 8 states
that σ increases with ∆; conversely, because of credit constraints, human capital heterogeneity itself rises
over time with γ = (σ − 1)/σ, and in the long-run ∆ = D(τ , γ), which is increasing in γ. Could these two
mechanisms reinforce each other to the point of resulting in multiple steady states even under a fixed policy
—whether activist or laissez-faire— and even though, once again, there are no non-convexities in the model?
The idea is that a high degree of skill bias results in very low wages for unskilled workers, severely limiting
the extent to which they can invest in human capital (for themselves or their children). This, in turn, leads
firms to again choose a very flexible, skill-biased technology in the next period, and so on. Conversely, a
less skilled-biased technology and a less dispersed distribution of human wealth could be self-sustaining.
To examine this possibility, note first that:

                                                         Ã         00
                                                                           !−1
                                            ∂ ln σ ∗         1 c (σ t )
                                                     =    1+                     <1                                       (35)
                                            ∂ ln ∆           2 c0 (σ t )

by Proposition 8, while (21) yields

                                   ∂ ln D(τ , γ)   β(1 − γ)(1 − τ )(α + βγ(1 − τ ))
                                                 =                                                                        (36)
                                      ∂ ln σ            1 − (α + βγ(1 − τ ))2

where, as usual, γ = (σ − 1)/σ. If the product of these two derivatives is everywhere less than 1, there is a
unique equilibrium. If it exceeds 1 for some value of σ, on the other hand, there may be multiplicity. It is
easily verified that ∂D(τ , γ)/∂ ln σ < 1 if and only if


                                          (α + βγ(1 − τ ))(α + β(1 − τ )) < 1.                                            (37)


The first term is always less than one (or else inequality explodes; moreover, this can never occur when τ is

  4 0 Kremer and Maskin (1996) present evidence for a related intervening mechanism (similar to ∂σ ∗ /∂∆ > 0 in this model),

although not for how educational returns and wage inequality are ultimately aﬀected. They show that in US states character-
ized by greater human capital inequality, there is more segregation of workers by skills (the ratio of within- to between-plant
skill dispersion is lower).


                                                              24
endogenously chosen), but the second need not be, especially if τ < 0. We can thus conclude that the kind
of “technology-inequality trap” described above becomes a real possibility under regressive or insuﬃciently
progressive policies. In particular, education systems that result in significant resource disparities between
students, such as private financing or local (property-tax based) school funding as in the United States, are
fertile ground for the joint emergence of highly skill-biased production processes and a persistently skewed
skill distribution. Furthermore, as we shall see below, endogenizing τ only increases the likelihood of such
outcomes, since the degree of redistribution tends to fall with inequality.

    A third point is that even under the less extreme conditions where no such trap exists, firms’ decisions
involve a dynamic externality that tends to result in excessively skill-biased or flexible technologies. Indeed,
each takes the distribution of skills it faces as given but neglects the eﬀects of its own flexibility on workers’
human capital investments, and therefore on subsequent distributions. More specifically, while a marginal
change in σ t has only second-order eﬀects on the current production costs faced by firms, it has three
first-order eﬀects on growth.41 First, a lower σ t would reduce current income inequality γ t ∆t , which is
growth-enhancing given the presence of credit constraints. This would in turn lower the skill disparities
∆t+k that firms will face in the future, as well as the costs c (σ ∗ (∆t+k )) they will bear to adapt to
this heterogeneity. Although γ t = (σt − 1)/σ t also aﬀects in a somewhat complex way the concavity of
educational investment (where it interacts with α, β and τ t ), it is easy to identify cases where growth in
every period would be higher if firms collectively chose less skill-biased technologies.
    For instance, let α = 0, β = 1, and 1/η = 0 (inelastic labor supply), and fix any constant policy τ ;
the interactions of technology choice and policy decisions will be examined in the next section. In the
resulting steady state, the degree of flexibility and the dispersion in skills are given by the two equations
σ ∞ = σ ∗ (∆∞ ) and ∆∞ = D(τ , γ ∞ ), where γ ∞ ≡ (σ ∞ − 1)/σ ∞ .42 The corresponding asymptotic growth
rate is computed in the appendix, and equals:

                                                                           D(τ , γ ∞ )2
                                         g∞ = ln κ + ln s − c(σ ∞ ) −                   .                                    (38)
                                                                             2σ ∞

A marginal reduction in σ from its equilibrium value, if it were permanently implemented by all firms,
would then increase steady-state growth, since:

                ¯                                                ¯
           ∂g∞ ¯¯        0          ∆2∞    1     ∂D2 (τ , γ ∞ ) ¯¯           1      ∂D2 (τ , γ ∞ )
                     = −c  (σ   ) +      −     ·                        = −       ·                < 0.                      (39)
            ∂σ ¯σ=σ∞                                             ¯
                              ∞
                                    2σ 2∞ 2σ ∞       ∂σ           σ=σ ∞     2σ 3∞       ∂γ

In this expression the first two terms cancel out by the first-order condition (34), while the last one reflects

  4 1 As explained in footnote 38, when 1/η > 0 a higher σ also raises the return to labor supply δ = (σ − 1)/σ , inducing
                                                             t                                           t     t        t
all agents to work more.
  4 2 I assume here that (37) holds, so that this steady-state is unique (given τ ), although this is inessential to the argument.




                                                               25
the dynamic externality. The above result holds more generally for any equilibrium path that is either near
the steady state, or such that σ t converges to its long-run value from above (see the appendix).
    Ineﬃcient choices of technology or firm organization arise in a number of models where market imper-
fections create an excessive role for the distribution of financial or human wealth to shape the structure
of production, with the result of exacerbating inequality and making it more persistent. In Banerjee and
Newman (1993) and Newman and Legros (1998), for instance, the moral-hazard problem aﬀecting entrepre-
neurship combines with an unequal wealth distribution in forcing too many agents to work for low wages in
large firms, rather than setting up their own. In Vindigni (2002) an extreme example of the technology trap
studied above occurs, as firms’ decisions (choosing the arrival rate of exogenously skill-biased innovations)
can permanently confine some dynasties of workers below the fixed income threshold required to invest in
human capital.43 In Grossman (2004), a high variance of human capital in the labor force increases the
incentives of the most skilled agents to work in sectors where individual productivity is observable, rather
than in those where output is team-determined; because they fail to internalize the spillovers they would
have on team productivity, the resulting occupational segregation is ineﬃciently high.



IV       Endogenous Institutions and Endogenous Technology

Combining the main mechanisms analyzed in previous sections yields a model where the distribution of
human capital, the technologies used by firms and the policy implemented by the state are all endogenous
—as they are in reality. The dynamical system governing the economy’s evolution remains recursive:

                                             
                                             
                                                 γt     =         Γ(∆t )
                                             
                                             
                                                  τt     =        T (∆t γ t )   ,                                       (40)
                                             
                                             
                                             
                                             
                                                 ∆t+1    = D(∆t , τ t ; γ t )


where Γ(∆) ≡ (σ ∗ (∆) − 1)/σ ∗ (∆) represents the technology outcome given by Proposition 8, T (γ∆) the
policy outcome given by Proposition 3, and D(∆, τ , γ) the transmission of human capital inequality given
in Proposition 2. The resulting aggregate growth rate, ln(yt+1 /yt ) = g(τ t , ∆t , γ t ), follows from Proposition
2. Finally, steady states are solutions to the fixed-point equation


                                            ∆ = D(∆, T (∆; Γ(∆)), Γ(∆)).                                                (41)

   4 3 A more benign form of multiplicity (with greater wage inequality now going together with more, rather than less, total

human capital) occurs in Acemoglu (1998). In his model, a relative abundance of skilled workers makes it more profitable for
firms to develop skill-biased technologies; this then raises the wage premium, encouraging more workers to become skilled.




                                                             26
     This structure makes clear the presence of important multiplier eﬀects: a transitory shock aﬀecting
inequality (e.g., more idiosyncratic uncertainty v 2 ) or the political system (a higher λ) will be amplified
through technology decisions, the policy choice, and the intergenerational transmission mechanism, and may
thus have considerable long-term consequences.44 Most importantly, in accounting for changes in inequality
one can no longer treat technological and institutional factors as separate, competing explanations: both
are jointly determined, and complementary. The model thus shows how, in the words of Freeman (1995),
one needs to think of “the Welfare State as a system”.
    To demonstrate these points I shall assume from here on a piecewise-linear technological frontier.
Flexibility is free up to σ L , then has a marginal cost of M > 0, up to a maximum level σ H > σ L :

                                               
                                               
                                                        0          for      σ < σL
                                               
                                               
                                      c(σ) =       M (σ − σ L ) for σ ∈ [σL , σH ] .                               (42)
                                               
                                               
                                               
                                               
                                                       +∞           for     σ > σH


I will denote γ i = (σ i − 1)/σ i , i ∈ {L, H}. The analogue of Proposition 8 in this case is very simple, as the
first order condition in a symmetric equilibrium involves the comparison:

                                                                  ∆2t
                                                             M≷         .                                          (43)
                                                                  2σ 2t

The unique symmetric outcome is thus σ t = σ L when ∆2t /2M < σ 2L , and σ t = σ H when ∆2t /2M > σ 2H .
When ∆2t /2M ∈ (σ 2L , σ 2H ), on the other hand, firms mix between σ L and σH , in proportions such that
the resulting factor prices make each one indiﬀerent; this equilibrium will be denoted σ LH .45 Focussing
now on technology-inequality steady states, for any τ ≤ 1 and σ ≥ 1 the marginal benefit of flexibility
(right-hand-side of (43)) equals
                                                             D(τ ; (σ − 1)/σ)2
                                               R(τ , σ) ≡                      ,
                                                                    2σ 2

where D(τ , γ) is the asymptotic variance under the policy τ and return to skill γ, given by (21). Thus,
under any time-invariant policy τ , whether exogenous or endogenous:
    • For M > max {R(τ , σ L ), R(τ , σH )} , the unique technological steady state is σL ;
    • For M < min {R(τ , σL ), R(τ , σ H )}, it is σ H ;
    • If R(τ , σL ) > R(τ , σ H ), then for M ∈ [R(τ , σ H ), R(τ , σ L )] it is the mixed-strategy outcome σLH ;
    • If R(τ , σ L ) < R(τ , σ H ), then for M ∈ [R(τ , σ L ), R(τ , σ H )] there are three technological steady states:

  4 4 The long-run multiplier for any shock to the D function (e.g., a change in w2 ) is µ                        ≡
                                 −1
               ∂T
 1 − D1 − D2 ∂∆   + ∂T ∂Γ
                    ∂Γ ∂∆
                            − D  ∂Γ
                               3 ∂∆     . Similarly, the long-run eﬀects on inequality of a shock to the T function
(e.g., a change in λ) its is µ · D2 (∂T /∂λ).
  4 5 It is not necessary to provide here the full characterization of this mixed-strategy equilibrium.




                                                               27
                                               R(τ ,σ H )                R(τ ,σ H )                   R(τ ,σ L )               R(τ ,σ L )
                                                                                                                                                        M


                                   (σ H ,τ )                (σ H ,τ ,)                (σ L, H ,τ ,)                (σ L ,τ )                (σ L ,τ )

                    Inequality

                                   (σ H ,τ )                (σ H ,τ )                 (σ L, H ,τ )                 (σ LH ,τ )               (σ L ,τ )




                                 The response of technology and policy to a decline in the cost of flexibility (case (i)).
                                 Under each range of M appears the unique (σ, τ ) such that (σ, ∆ = D(τ ; 1 − 1/σ))
        Figure 5:                is a stable steady state given τ and M. The subset reached via solid lines corresponds
                                 to the stable steady-states in (σ, ∆, τ ) jointly, when policy is endogenous as well.


σ L , σ H , and σ LH ; the first two are stable, the third one unstable.

    Furthermore, since R(τ , σ) is decreasing in τ , we have:

Proposition 9 More skill-biased technologies appear first in, and less skill biased technologies disappear
first from, countries that have less redistributive fiscal, educational or labor market institutions. For any
M >0:
1) If σH is a steady state equilibrium technology under a constant redistributive policy τ , this remains true
under any less progressive policy τ 0 < τ .
2) If σ L is a steady state equilibrium technology under a constant redistributive policy τ 0 , this remains true
under any more progressive policy τ < τ 0 .

    These results are illustrated in Figures 5 and 6 for two cases where: i) R(τ , σ H ) < R(τ̄ , σ L ), implying
that for each M there is a unique technology compatible in the long-run with each policy τ ∈ {τ , τ̄ } ;46
ii) R(τ , σL ) < R(τ̄ , σ H ), implying that for either policy τ ∈ {τ , τ̄ } there is a range of M ’s where multiple
technologies are sustainable. The message is essentially the same in both cases, showing how a world-wide
shift in the set of feasible technologies can result in diﬀerent evolutions of both production processes and
the skill premium across countries. In particular, the model can help explain why skill-biased technical
change and reorganization occurred first, and to a greater extent, in the United States compared to Europe
—and within Europe, more so in England than on the Continent.47

  4 6 For instance, under condition (37), ∂ ln ∆ /∂ ln σ < 1, so R(τ , σ ) < R(τ , σ ) provided σ
                                                ∞                        H             L             H and σ L are close enough. If
τ and τ̄ are also not too diﬀerent, then R(τ̄ , σ) - R(τ , σ) for σ = σ H , σL , so the thresholds rank as illustrated on Figure 5.
  4 7 Acemoglu (2003) proposes a diﬀerent mechanism, based on imperfectly competitive labor markets, through which the

wage-compression policies of continental European countries may have caused technological progress there to be less skill-
biased than in the United States. In his model, a binding minimum wage makes low-skill workers’ compensation a fixed price,
whereas for high-skill workers the binding constraint for the firm is rent-sharing (due to search market frictions), which acts
as a tax on productivity improvements. As a result, firms in high minimum-wage countries have greater incentives to invest
in technologies that are complementary to low-skill labor than high-skill labor. In both Acemoglu’s and the present model,
the eﬀects of policy on technology are indirect, operating through either the distribution of skills or equilibrium wages. In



                                                                                          28
                                              R(τ ,σ L )                R(τ ,σ L )               R(τ ,σ H )               R(τ ,σ H )
                                                                                                                                                   M


                                                           (σ L ,τ )                 (σ L ,τ )                (σ L ,τ )                (σ L ,τ )

                   Inequality     (σ H ,τ )                (σ H ,τ )                 (σ H ,τ )

                                                                                     (σ L ,τ )                (σ L ,τ )                (σ L ,τ )
                                  (σ H ,τ )                (σ H ,τ )                 (σ H ,τ )                (σ H ,τ )



                                The response of technology and policy to a decline in the cost of flexibility (case (ii)).
                                Under each range of M appear the values of (σ, τ ) such that (σ, ∆ = D(τ ; 1 − 1/σ))
       Figure 6:                is a stable steady state given τ and M. The subset reached via solid lines corresponds
                                to the stable steady-states in (σ, ∆, τ ) jointly, when policy is endogenous as well.


    Indeed, consider two countries, C1 and C2 , that are initially identical in all respects, including both
using the technology σ L , except that one is in a laissez-faire equilibrium, τ = τ , and the other in a welfare
state, τ = τ̄ . Suppose now that the technological frontier gradually flattens (M declines), meaning that
flexibility becomes cheaper to achieve. As shown on Figures 5-6, the more skill-biased technology σ H
becomes (all or part of) another feasible equilibrium in C1 before it does in C2 ; similarly, σL first ceases to
be viable (by itself or as part of a mixed equilibrium) in the laissez-faire country, while it is still sustainable
in the more redistributive one.
    Going further, there are in fact reciprocal interactions between the economy’s technology response and
policy response to shocks. Proposition 9 and Figures 5-6 show that feasible new technologies are not
implemented unless institutions are suﬃciently inegalitarian. But, conversely, the occurrence of technical
change alters these same institutions, as seen in Proposition 7. Indeed, suppose that:


                                                                       λ(γ L ; B) < λ < λ̄(γ L ; B),                                                   (44)


where λ̄ and λ were defined in (22)-(23). These inequalities imply that: i) under the technology σ L , both
social contracts τ and τ̄ are political steady states; ii) under σ H , τ̄ is a political steady state, while τ is one
if and only if we also have λ < λ̄(γ H ; B).
    When this last inequality holds, the set of stable politico-economico-technological steady states (with
endogenous τ , ∆ and σ) is the same as described on Figures 5-6. When λ > λ̄(γ H ; B), however, the more
redistributive social contract τ̄ is not politically sustainable under the amount of inequality that results,
in the long run, from the technology σ H . Therefore one must remove from the set of steady states on
each figure the “branches” corresponding to this outcome; these are indicated by the dashed lines. The

Krusell and Rios-Rull (1996), by contrast, agents with diﬀerent vintages of human capital vote directly on whether or not to
allow the adoption of new technologies by firms.


                                                                                       29
                         Country 1                                                          Country 2
                                                              Diffusion,
      Redistributive                        Technology,                     Technology,                        Redistributive
       Institutions                         Organization                    Organization                        Institutions
                                                              Imitation

                        Policy    Returns                                                  Returns   Investment
                        outcome   to H.C.                                                  to H.C.   in H.C.
          Investment                          Technological                Technological                              Policy
          in H.C.                             adaptation                   adaptation                                 outcome

                                                                                           Human Capital and
                       Human Capital and                                                   Income Inequality
                       Income Inequality




                             Figure 7: International spillovers between social contracts


remaining solid lines then indicate that only certain politico-technological configurations can be observed
in the long run: a) for low values of M, e.g. for M < R(τ̄ , σ L ) on the first figure, the only feasible social
contract is τ , together with the technology σ H ; b) on the second figure, for M ∈ (R(τ̄ , σ L ), R(τ , σL ))
only the egalitarian social contract and the egalitarian technology, or the inegalitarian social contract and
inegalitarian technology, are mutually compatible.



V         Exporting Inequality: Spillovers Between Social Contracts

The model also allows us to think about spillovers between national policies or institutions, operating via
technological and organizational diﬀusion. The basic idea is illustrated in Figure 7, which shows how the
social contract in Country 2 can, over time, be aﬀected by technological or even purely political shifts in
Country 1, propagated along the channels indicated by the solid lines on the diagram.
    As seen in the previous section, firms operating in countries with more laissez-faire fiscal, educational
or labor market policies have greater incentives to develop and adopt low-complementarity production
processes. Suppose now that the cost of imitating, adapting or copying a more flexible technology or
organizational form, once it has been developed and implemented elsewhere, is lower than the cost of
innovation; in terms of the model, it is m < M. This lower marginal cost may for instance reflect, as in
Acemoglu (1998), an imperfect international enforcement of property rights over technological or organi-
zational innovations. As we shall see, redistributive institutions in one country will then be significantly
aﬀected, perhaps even completely undermined, by technological or political changes occurring in another.48

 4 8 Asmentioned earlier I abstract here from international trade, which could be yet another channel of transmission. See
Grossman and Maggi (2000), Grossman (2004) or Thoenig and Verdier (2003) for papers that study the eﬀects of trade
openness on technical and organizational change, although not their political economy implications.




                                                                   30
A     A Shift in One Country’s Technological Frontier

I shall focus here on parameter configurations that satisfy the following conditions:
                    ©                       ª
                 max λ(γ L ; B), λ̄(γ H ; B)  < λ < λ̄(γ L ; B),                                                     (45)

                 max {R(τ , σ L ), R(τ , σH )} < M,                                                                  (46)

                                            m < R(τ̄ , σ L ) < M 0 < min {R(τ , σ L ), R(τ , σ H )} ,                (47)


which imply in particular that M > M 0 > m. As shown as part of Proposition 10 below, these conditions
also ensure that the technology σ L allows for both social contracts τ and τ̄ , and conversely that σ L is an
equilibrium technology under both social contracts (no firm wants to switch to σ H ).

Proposition 10 Assume that conditions (45)—(47) are satisfied, and consider two countries, C1 and C2 ,
that both start in steady state, with the same technology σ L . Suppose now that the cost of flexibility in
country C1 declines from M to M 0 .
1) If both C1 and C2 were initially in the more egalitarian of the two regimes compatible with σ L nothing
happens, in the sense that (τ̄ , γ L , D(τ̄ , γ L )) remains a stable steady state for both countries.
2) If C1 was initially in the more inegalitarian regime (τ , γ L , D(τ , γ L )), the unique long run outcome is
for both countries to switch to the technology σ H , and for country C2 to also adopt the more unequal social
contract τ : the unique steady state for the two countries is now (τ , γ H , D(τ , γ H )).

    The intuition is as follows. Even as M declines to M 0 , firms faced with the skill distribution D(τ̄ , γ L )
resulting from τ̄ do not find it profitable to switch technology. Given the higher dispersion D(τ , γ L ) that
prevails under τ , however, if country C1 starts in this regime all firms there will eventually switch to
technology σ H .49 Next, given the lower cost of flexibility m to which firms in C2 now have access through
imitation, σ L is no longer viable there even under τ̄ . And, in turn, with the higher income inequality that
results in the long run from technology σ H , the only politically sustainable social contract is τ .
    These results make clear how technological change (a shift in the frontier) has significant eﬀects only
when it is mediated through specific institutions —namely, which social contract C1 had adopted; and,
conversely, how under such conditions it will then aﬀect institutions in other countries, namely here in C2.


B     A Shift in One Country’s Political Institutions

I consider now a second scenario, namely the transmission of a political shock. Having seen earlier how
the mere fact of being in diﬀerent institutional steady states (say, for historical reasons) can lead to

  4 9 I leave aside the dynamics here, but they are straightforward: since (45) implies that (25) holds for γ = γ , γ , we
                                                                                                                 L   H
always operate on the portion of the T (γ∆) curve where increases in inequality imply decreases in the tax rate.



                                                           31
very diﬀerent technological trajectories, I shall assume here that C1 and C2 both start in the egalitarian
steady state, (τ̄ , γ L , D(τ̄ , γ L )), with the same technology σ L . Let C1 now experience an increase in the
political influence of wealth, from λ to λ0 . This may reflect a rising importance of lobbying and campaign
contributions, an exogenous decline in unionization, or a lower electoral turnout by the poor. It may even
simply represent the political outcome during a particular period in which the electorate stochastically
shifted to the right.50 I shall assume here the following conditions:

                            λ̄(γ H ; B) < λ < λ̄(γ L ; B) < λ0 ,                                                      (48)

                                        m < R(τ̄ , σ L ) < M < min {R(τ , σ L ), R(τ , σ H )} .                       (49)


Proposition 11 Assume that conditions (48)—(49) are satisfied. Consider two countries, C1 and C2 , that
both start in the egalitarian steady state, (τ̄ , γ L , D(τ̄ , γ L )), with the same technology σL . Suppose now that
the political influence of wealth in country C1 rises from λ to λ0 . The unique long run outcome is for both
countries to switch to the technology σ H and the more unequal social contract τ , thus ending up at the
steady state (τ , γ H , D(τ , γ H )).

    As a result of the initial political shift, redistribution τ 1 (fiscal, educational, or via labor-market insti-
tutions) in country C1 declines. This leads over time to a rise in human capital inequality ∆1 , to which
firms respond by adopting more flexible, wage-disequalizing technologies, switching from σ L to σH and
further precipitating the shift from τ̄ to τ . Their counterparts in C2 , which would not have developed such
technologies by themselves, now find it profitable to copy them from C1 . This results in a rise in income
inequality γ 2 ∆2 in C2 (and, over time, in human-capital inequality ∆2 itself) that ultimately leads to the
unravelling of the Welfare State in that country as well.


VI       Concluding Comments

This paper oﬀers a new, unified model to analyze the reciprocal interactions between the distribution of hu-
man wealth, technology, and redistributive institutions. It identifies in particular certain core mechanisms
that allow alternative societal models to persist, as well as powerful forces pushing towards uniformization.
Key among the former is the interplay of imperfections in asset markets and in the political system that
can lead to multiple steady states where inequality and redistribution are negatively correlated. Among the
latter is skill-biased technical change, which can potentially lead to the unravelling of the Welfare State.
When technological or organizational form is endogenous, moreover, firms respond to greater human cap-
ital heterogeneity with more flexible technologies, further exacerbating income inequality. The possibility

  5 0 Indeed, the political shock need not be permanent, provided the speed at which λ reverts to its previous value is low

enough, relative to those of human capital adjustment and technological or organizational evolution.



                                                              32
for firms in diﬀerent countries to thus choose technologies adapted to the local labor force can also make
it easier to sustain multiple social models. The international diﬀusion of technology, however, implies
that the more flexible, skill-biased technologies profitably developed in nations with greater inequality
and less redistributive institutions may then be imitated by firms in other countries, thereby triggering
a “chain reaction” that moves the whole system towards a common outcome that is more inegalitarian
—technologically, economically, and politically speaking. Such international spillovers between national
social contracts are important concerns in the debate over globalization, and warrant further research.




                                                    33
                                                             Appendix

Proofs of Propositions 1-5. See Bénabou (2000); I shall only provide here:

(i) the formula for the break-even income level ỹt where ŷti = yti ,

                                ln ỹt = γmt + δ ln lt + (2 − τ t )γ 2 ∆2t /2 + (1 − τ t )v 2 /2;                    (A.1)


(ii) the laws of motion for (mt , ∆2t ) that underlie Proposition 2,

                                                                                          ¡   ¢
            mt+1       = (α + βγ) mt + βδ ln lt + β τ t (2 − τ t ) (γ 2 ∆2t + v 2 )/2 + ln κsβ − (w2 + βv 2 )/2 (A.2)

            ∆2t+1      = (α + βγ(1 − τ t ))2 ∆2t + β 2 (1 − τ t )2 v 2 + w2 ;                                        (A.3)


(iii) and the formula for each agent’s intertemporal welfare that underlies Proposition 3: under a rate of
redistribution τ t ,
                                                                                      ¡              ¢
                 Uti = ūt + A(τ t )(ln kti − mt ) + C(τ t ) − (1 − ρ + ρβ)(1 − τ t )2 γ 2 ∆2t + Bv 2 /2,            (A.4)


where ūt is independent of the policy τ t , B ≡ a + ρ(1 − a)(1 − β) was defined in (14) and:


                                   A(τ ) ≡ ρα + (1 − ρ + ρβ)γ(1 − τ ),                                               (A.5)

                                   C(τ ) ≡ (1 − ρ)(δ ln l(τ ) − l(τ )η ) + ρβδ ln l(τ ),                             (A.6)


The first-order condition (15) readily follows. ¥

Proof of Proposition 7. Because D(τ , γ) is increasing in γ for all τ the functions λ̄(γ; B) and λ(γ; B)
                                                                         √
are both U-shaped in γ, and minimized at the point where γD(τ , γ) = v B, for τ = τ̄ , τ respectively.
Furthermore, the minimum of λ̄(γ; B) occurs to the right of that of λ(γ; B). Under the assumption that
 √                                                          √
v B > γ max D(τ , γ max ) we have γD(τ̄ , γ) < γD(τ , γ) < v B for all γ ≤ γ max , implying that both λ̄(γ; B)
and λ(γ; B) are decreasing in γ over [0, γ max ]; they are obviously increasing in B. Inverting these functions
with respect to γ yields the claimed properties of γ(λ; B) and γ̄(λ; B). ¥

Proof of Proposition 8. Consider a firm ı̂ ∈ [0, 1] with technology σ̂ and associated productivity factor
Â ≡ A(σ̂). Its marginal cost is:
                                                                                                               
                                            Z                     ¯      µZ                           ¶ σ̂−1
                                                                                                           σ̂
                                                                                                                
                                                     1             ¯           1       ¡ ¢    σ̂−1
                       M C(σ̂|σt ) ≡ min                  i i      ¯
                                                         pt x̂t di ¯ Â ·          zti x̂it     σ̂
                                                                                                     ds       =1 .   (A.7)
                                     {x̂it }    0                         0                                    


The first-order condition for cost-minimization is:



                                                                    34
                                                                     µZ                                   ¶ σ̂−1
                                                                                                              1
                                              ¡ i ¢ −1                             1         ¡ i ¢ σ̂−1                       ¡ ¢ −1 ³ ´− σ̂1
           pit    = µ̂t Â           zti       x̂t σ̂ ·                                zti    x̂t    σ̂
                                                                                                        ds       = µ̂t Â zti x̂it σ̂ · Â    , or:
                                                                               0
                                           µ         ¶−σ̂
                                               pit
          x̂it    = µ̂σ̂t Âσ̂−1                                     .
                                               zti

Therefore:
                                                   Z         1                                             µZ       1                        ¶
                                                                                                                           ¡         ¢1−σ̂
                                  µ̂t      =                     pit x̂it di = µ̂σ̂t Âσ̂−1                             zti pit /zti       di , or:
                                                         0                                                      0
                                                                     µZ           1                        ¶ 1−σ̂
                                                                                                              1
                                                                                       ¡ i ¢σ̂ ¡ i ¢1−σ̂
                                  µ̂t      =         Â−1                               zt      pt       di       ,                                                   (A.8)
                                                                              0


which establishes (32). Now, replacing the equilibrium prices from equation (27) yields:

                                 µ        ¶ σ1 µZ                    1                      ¶ 1−σ̂
                                                                                               1                 µ ¶ σ1 µZ 1              ¶ 1−σ̂
                                                                                                                                             1

                 −1
                       σ t −1
                                     yt        t                               ¡ i ¢ σ̂−1                 σ t −1
                                                                                                                  yt t       ¡ i ¢ σ̂−1
     µ̂t = Â         At σt
                                                                         zti    kt    σt
                                                                                          di           −1
                                                                                                   = Â At  σt
                                                                                                                              kt    σt
                                                                                                                                        di       ,
                                     lt                          0                                                lt      0


since the zti ’s and kti ’s are independent. We now eliminate the terms common to all firms by computing
firm ı̂’s relative marginal cost:

                                                                 µ             ¶ µZ              1                ¶ 1−σ̂
                                                                                                                     1     µZ         1                 ¶ 1−σ
                                                                                                                                                           −1
                                    µ̂                                   At                          ¡ i ¢ σ̂−1                           ¡ i ¢ σtσ−1         t
                       mc(σ̂|σ t ) ≡ t =                                        ·                     kt    σt
                                                                                                                di       ·                 kt t di                .
                                    µt                                   Â                  0                                    0

                                                   R1                    £               ¤
Finally, using the fact that ln                      0
                                                         (kti )χ di = exp χmt + χ2 ∆2t /2 for all χ, this yields:

                           µ              ¶          ·                   µ                                 ¶       ¸ µ         ¶     · 2µ         ¶¸
                               A(σ t )            ∆2t                         1 − σ̂ 1 − σ t                   ∆2t     A(σ t )        ∆t σ t − σ̂
      mc(σ̂|σt ) =                            exp                                    −                              =            exp                 .                (A.9)
                               A(σ̂)              2                             σ 2t   σ 2t                    2       A(σ̂)           2    σ 2t

The (necessary and suﬃcient) first-order condition for firm ı̂ is therefore: c0 (σ̂) = ∆2t /2σ 2t . Evaluating it
at σ̂ = σ t yields the technology-equilibrium condition σ 2t c0 (σt ) = ∆2t /2, which by convexity of c(·) has a
unique solution σ ∗ (∆t ), increasing in ∆t . Finally, the result that ∂ ln σ ∗ /∂ ln ∆ ∈ (0, 1) is established in
equation (35). ¥

Proof of Section III.C’s claims concerning growth with endogenous technology. In the general
growth formula (12), δ ln lt is now replaced everywhere (according to (28)) by

                                                µ σt −1         ¶
                                                    σt        1
                 ln Ãt + δ t ln lt = ln lt + ln At     (yt ) t = δ t ln lt + γ t ln A(σt ) + (1 − γ t ) ln yt .
                                                             σ




This leads to:




                                                                                                         35
              γ t ln(yt+1 /yt ) = γ t [ln κ + β ln s + δ t+1 ln lt+1 − αδ t ln lt + ln A (σ t+1 ) − α ln A (σt )]

                                      −γ t (1 − γ t )w2 /2 − βγ t (1 − βγ t )(1 − τ t )2 v 2 /2
                                       £                                                ¤
                                      − α + βγ t (1 − τ t )2 − (α + βγ t (1 − τ t ))2 γ 2t ∆2t /2.                  (A.10)


For α = 0 and β = 1, this simplifies to:


                    γ t ln(yt+1 /yt ) = γ t [ln κ + ln s + δ t+1 ln lt+1 + ln A (σ t+1 )]
                                                       £                                                    ¤
                                        −γ t (1 − γ t ) w2 /2 + (1 − τ t )2 v 2 /2 + (1 − τ t )2 γ 2t ∆2t /2

                                       = γ t [ln κ + ln s + ln lt+1 + ln A (σt+1 )]
                                                        £                                                    ¤
                                         −γ t (1 − γ t ) w2 /2 + (1 − τ t )2 v 2 /2 + (1 − τ t )2 γ 2t ∆2t /2 ,     (A.11)


or, finally, since ∆2t+1 = γ 2 (1 − τ t )2 ∆2t + (1 − τ t )2 v 2 + w2 :


                    ln(yt+1 /yt ) = ln κ + ln s + δ t+1 ln lt+1 + ln A (σ t+1 ) − (1 − γ t )∆2t+1 /2
                                                                        ∆2
                                  = ln κ + ln s + ln lt+1 − c(σt+1 ) − t+1 .                                        (A.12)
                                                                         2σ t

Substituting for ∆2t+1 from (11), the growth rate between t and t + 1 is thus:

                                                                                  D(∆t , τ t ; γ t )2
                           gt = ln κ + ln s + δ t+1 ln l(τ t+1 ) − c(σt+1 ) −                         .
                                                                                      2σ t

Therefore, with fixed labor supply (1/η = 0), if all firms are forced to use technology σt − dσ instead of σ t
in every period the impact on growth will be dσ times

                                ¯
                           ∂gt ¯¯                            ∆2t+1   Γ0 (σ t ) ∂D2 (∆t , τ t ; γ t )
                                        = −c0 (σ t+1 ) +           −           ·
                           ∂σ ¯σ=σt                          2σ 2t     2σ t          ∂γ
                                                       µ 2      ¶
                                               ∆2t+1    σt            0          2
                                                                     Γ (σ t ) ∂D (∆t , τ t ; γ t )
                                        = −                  −1 −             ·                     ,
                                                 2      σ 2t          2σt           ∂γ

where we have used the condition for equilibrium technology choice in Proposition (8). The growth impact
is thus positive in all periods provided that either σ 2t+1 ≈ σ2t (we start in or near the steady state), or
σ 2t+1 ≤ σ 2t (we start with “excessive” heterogeneity with respect to the steady state). ¥


Proof of Proposition 10. We begin with some preliminaries. Given a technology σ and associated γ =
(σ − 1)/σ, recall from (22)-(23) that the tax rate τ̄ is a steady-state political equilibrium, which we shall
denote as τ̄ ∈ P(σ; λ), if and only if λ ≤ λ̄(γ, B). Similarly, τ ∈ P(σ; λ) if and only if λ ≥ λ(γ, B).




                                                              36
    Conversely, given a tax rate τ we see from (43) that the technology σ L and associated γ L = (σ L −1)/σ L
is a technological steady state when the slope of the technology frontier is M, which we denote as σ L ∈
T (τ ; M ), if and only if:
                                                 D(τ ; γ L )2
                                          M≥                  ≡ R(τ , σ L ).                                (A.13)
                                                   2σ 2L

Conversely, the technology σ H and associated γ H = (σ H − 1)/σ H is a technological steady state, which we
denote as σ H ∈ T (τ ; M ), if and only if:

                                                D(τ ; γ H )2
                                          M≤                 ≡ R(τ , σ H ).                                 (A.14)
                                                  2σ 2H

    A policy-technology combination (τ , σ) ∈ {τ̄ , τ } × {σ L , σ H } is then a full steady-state if and only if
τ ∈ P (σ; λ) and σ ∈ T (τ ; M ). Clearly, there are at most four stable steady-states (we restrict attention
here to cases where the technology equilibrium is in pure strategies). We now proceed through a sequence
of three claims, which together establish the proposition.

    Claim 1: for a country facing the technological frontier M, the only steady states are (τ̄ , σ L ) and
(τ , σ L ). Indeed, the first inequality in (45) states that σL ∈ T (τ ; M ) and this is easily seen to imply that
σ L ∈ T (τ̄ ; M ). Conversely, the second inequality states that σ H ∈
                                                                     / T (τ ; M ) and this is easily seen to imply
that σ L ∈ T (τ̄ ; M ). Finally, the fact that λ(γ L ; B) < λ < λ̄(γ L ; B) due to (45) means that τ ∈ P (σL ; λ)
and τ̄ ∈ P (σ 0L ; λ).

    Claim 2: for a country facing the technological frontier M 0 , the only steady states are (τ̄ , σL ) and
(τ , σ H ). Indeed, note first from (47) that R(τ̄ , σ L ) < M 0 means that we still have σ L ∈ T (τ̄ ; M 0 ); by
contrast, M 0 < min {R(τ , σ L ), R(τ , σ H )} means that σ H ∈ T (τ ; M ) but σL ∈
                                                                                  / T (τ̄ ; M ). The only possible
equilibria are thus (τ̄ , σ L ), (τ , σH ) and (τ , σ H ). Turning now to (45), the fact that λ < λ̄(γ L ; B) means
that τ̄ ∈ P (σ 0L ; λ); the fact that that λ̄(γ H ; B) < λ, on the other hand, means that τ ∈ P (σ H ; λ) but
τ∈
 / P (σH ; λ). So only the first two of the three preceding configurations are full equilibria.

    Claim 3: for a country facing the technological frontier m, the only steady state is (τ , σH ). Observe from
(47) that m satisfies all the same inequalities as M 0 , except that m < R(τ̄ , σ L ) whereas R(τ̄ , σ L ) < M 0 .
This means that whereas we had σ L ∈ T (τ̄ ; M 0 ), we now have σ L ∈
                                                                    / T (τ̄ ; M 0 ). This rules out the equilibrium
(τ̄ , σ L ), leaving only (τ , σH ). ¥

Proof of Proposition 11.

    Claim 1: in the initial parameter configuration, (τ̄ , σ L ) is a steady state (and even the only steady-
state with policy τ̄ ). Indeed, the fact that λ̄(γ H ; B) < λ < λ̄(γ L ; B) means that τ̄ ∈ P(σ L ; λ), whereas
   / P(σ H ; λ). The rest of the claim follows from the fact σ L ∈ T (τ̄ ; M ), since M > R(τ̄ , σ L ).
τ̄ ∈




                                                         37
    Claim 2: After the political shift in C1 , (τ , σ H ) is the only steady-state for that country. First, since
λ0 > λ̄(γ L ; B) > λ̄(γ H ; B) we now have τ̄ ∈
                                              / P(σ L ; λ0 ) and τ̄ ∈
                                                                    / P(σ H ; λ0 ), so there is no steady-state with
policy τ̄ . Moreover, since M < R(τ , σ L ) we have σ L ∈
                                                        / T (τ ; M ), so the only possible equilibrium is (τ , σH ).
It is indeed an equilibrium, as M < R(τ , σ H ) means that σ H ∈ T (τ ; M ), while λ̄(γ H ; B) < λ0 means that
τ ∈ P(σ H ; λ0 ).

    Claim 3: After C1 has switched to the technology σ H , so that C2 faces the technology frontier m, the only
steady-state for C2 is (τ , σ H ). First the fact m < R(τ̄ , σ L ) < R(τ , σ L ) implies that (τ̄ , σ L ) is no longer a
technological equilibrium, and a fortiori neither is (τ , σ L ). Second, the fact m < min {R(τ , σ L ), R(τ , σH )}
means that the only technological equilibrium under policy τ is σ H . Finally, since λ > λ̄(γ H ; B), τ ∈
                      / P(σH ; λ), which concludes the proof. ¥
P(σ H ; λ) whereas τ̄ ∈




                                                          38
                                             References

   Acemoglu, D. (1998) ”Why Do New Technologies Complement Skills? Directed Technical Change and
Inequality,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 113(4), 1055-1090.
   Acemoglu, D. (2003) “Cross-Country Inequality Trends,” Economic Journal, 113, 121-149.
   Acemoglu, D., Aghion P. and Violante G.L. (2001) “Deunionization, Technological Change and In-
equality,” Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, 55, 229-264.
   Aghion, P. (2002) “Schumpeterian Growth Theory and the Dynamics of Income Inequality,” Econo-
metrica, 70(3), 855-882.
   Alesina, A., Glaeser, E. and Sacerdote, B. (2002) “Why Doesn’t the US Have a European-Type Welfare
State?” Brookings Papers on Economic Aﬀairs, Issue 2, 187-277.
   Alesina, A. and Rodrik, D. (1994) “Distributive Politics and Economic Growth.” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 109(2), 465-490.
   Alesina, A. and Angeletos, G.M. (2003) “Fairness and Redistribution: US vs. Europe,” NBER Working
Paper 9502, February.
   Autor, D., L. Katz and A. Krueger (1997) ”Computing Inequality: Have Computers Changed the Labor
Market?”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 113(4), 1169-1214.
   Baland, J.M. and Robinson, J. (2003) “Land and Power,” University of California Berkeley, mimeo.
   Banerjee, A. and Duflo, E. (2000) "Inequality and Growth: What Can the Data Say?", Journal of
Economic Growth, 8(3), 267-299.
   Banerjee, A. and Newman, A. (1993) “Occupational Choice and the Process of Development,” Journal
of Political Economy, 274-278.
   Barro R. (2000) “Inequality and Growth in a Panel of Countries,” Journal of Economic Growth, 5,
5-32.
   Bartels, L. (2002) “Economic Inequality and Political Representation,” Princeton University mimeo.
   Becker (1964) Human Capital. Columbia University Press, New York.
   Bénabou, R. (1996a) “Heterogeneity, Stratification, and Growth: Macroeconomic Implications of Com-
munity Structure and School Finance.” American Economic Review, 86(3), 584—609.
   Bénabou, R. (1996b) “Inequality and Growth,” in Ben S. Bernanke and Julio J. Rotemberg eds.,
National Bureau of Economic Research Macro Annual, vol. 11, 11-74. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
   Bénabou, R. (2000) “Unequal Societies: Income Distribution and the Social Contract,” American
Economic Review, 90, 96-129.
   Bénabou, R. (2002) “Tax and Education Policy in a Heterogenous Agent Economy: What Levels of
Redistribution Maximize Growth and Eﬃciency?”, Econometrica, 70, 481-517.




                                                   39
   Bénabou, R. and Tirole, J. (2002) “Belief in a Just World and Redistributive Politics”. Institute for
Advanced Study mimeo, October.
   Berman, E., J. Bound and S. Machin (1997) “Implications of Skill-Biased Technological Change: Inter-
national Evidence”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 113(4), 1245-1280.
   Bisin, A. and Verdier, T. (1999) “Work Ethic and Redistribution: A Cultural Transmission Model of
the Welfare State,” DELTA mimeo, December.
   Bourguignon, F. and Verdier, T. (2000) “Oligarchy, Democracy, Inequality and Growth,” Journal of
Development Economics, 62(2), 285-314.
   Caroli, E. and Van Reenen, J. (1999) “Skill Biased Organizational Change? Evidence from a Panel of
British and French Establishments,” CEPREMAP Working Paper No. 9917.
   De Mello, L. and Tiongson, E. (2003) “Income Inequality and Redistributive Government Spending,”
IMF Working Paper 314.
   Engerman, S. and Sokoloﬀ, K. (1997) “Factor Endowments, Institutions, and Diﬀerential Growth Paths
among New World Economies,” in S. Haber ed. “How Latin America Fell Behind: Essays on the Economic
Histories of Brazil and Mexico, 1800-1914,” Stanford University Press, 260-304.
Fellman, J. (1976) “The Eﬀect of Transformations on Lorenz Curves,” Econometrica, 44 (4), 823-24.
   Fernandez, R. and Rogerson, R. (1998) “Public Education and the Dynamics of Income Distribution:
A Quantitative Evaluation of Education Finance Reform.” American Economic Review, 88(4), 813—833.
   Figini, P. (1999) “Inequality and Growth Revisited,” Trinity College Economic Papers, Dublin, No.
2/99, September.
   Forbes, Kristen. (2000) “A Reassessment of the Relationship Between Inequality and Growth", Amer-
ican Economic Review, 90(4), 869-887.
   Fortin, N. and Lemieux, T. (1997) “Institutional Changes and Rising Wage Inequality: Is There A
Linkage?, Journal of Economic Perspectives, 11(2), Spring, 75-97.
   Freeman, R. (1995) “The Large Welfare State as a System,” American Economic Review Papers and
Proceedings, 85(2), 16-21.
   Freeman, R. (1996) “Labor Market Institutions and Earnings Inequality,” New England Economic
Review, May/June, 169-172.
   Galor, O. and Tsiddon, D. (1997) “Technological Progress, Mobility, and Growth,” American Economic
Review, 87 (June), 363-382.
   Galor, O. and Moav, O. (2000) “Ability Biased Technological Transition, Wage Inequality, and Eco-
nomic Growth,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 113(4), 1055-1090.
   Galor, O. and Moav, O. (1999) “From Physical to Human Capital: Inequality in the Process of Devel-
opment,” CEPR Discussion Paper No. 2307, December.



                                                   40
   Galor, O. and Zeira, J. (1993) “Income Distribution and Macroeconomics.” Review of Economic Studies,
60(1), 35-52.
   Glomm, G. and Ravikumar, B. (1992) “Public vs. Private Investment in Human Capital: Endogenous
Growth and Income Inequality,” Journal of Political Economy, 100, 818-834.
   Gradstein, M. and Justman, M. (1997) “Democratic Choice of an Education System: Implications for
Growth and Income Distribution,” Journal of Economic Growth, 2(2), 169—184.
   Grossman, G. (2004) “The Distribution of Talent and the Pattern and Consequences of International
Trade,” Journal of Political Economy, forthcoming.
   Grossman, G. and Maggi, G. (2000). “Diversity and Trade,” American Economic Review, 90(5), 1255-
1275.
   Hassler J., and Rodriguez—Mora, J. (1999) “Employment Turnover and the Public Allocation of Unem-
ployment Insurance,” Journal of Public Economics, 73(1), 55-83.
   Hassler J., Rodriguez—Mora, J., Storesletten, K., and Zillibotti, F. (2003) “The Survival of the Welfare
State,” American Economic Review, 93(1), 87-112.
   Kiley, M. (1999) “The Supply of Skilled Labor and Skill-Biased Technological Progress,” Economic
Journal, 109, October, 08-724.
   Kremer, M., and Maskin, E. (1996) “Wage Inequality and Segregation by Skill,” NBER Working Paper
No. 5718.
   Kremer, M., and Maskin, E. (2003) “Globalization and Inequality,” Harvard University mimeo.
   Kreps, D. and Porteus, E. (1979) “Dynamic Choice Theory and Dynamic Programming,” Econometrica,
47(1), 91—100.
   Krueger, A. (2002) “Inequality, Too Much of a Good Thing?”, Princeton University mimeo, April.
   Krusell, P. and Rios-Rull, J.V. (1996) “Vested Interests In a Positive Theory of Stagnation and Growth,”
Review of Economic Studies, 63, 301-329.
   Lee, D. (1999) “Wage Inequality in the United States During the 1980s: Rising Dispersion or Falling
Minimum Wage?”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 114(3), 977—1023.
   Lee, W. and Roemer, J. (1998) “Income Distribution, Redistributive Politics, and Economic Growth,”
Journal of Economic Growth, 3, 217-240.
   Legros, P. and Newman A. (1996) “Wealth Eﬀects, Distribution, and the Theory of Organization,”
Journal of Economic Theory, 70(2), 312-341.
   Lindbeck, A. (1995) “Welfare-State Disincentives with Endogenous Habits and Norms,” Scandinavian
Journal of Economics, 97(4), 477-494.
   Lloyd-Ellis, H. (1999) “Endogenous Technological Change and Inequality,” American Economic Review,
89(1), 47-77.



                                                     41
   Loury, G. (1981) “Intergenerational Transfers and the Distribution of Earnings,” Econometrica, 49,
843-867.
   Moav, O. (2002) “Income Distribution and Macroeconomics: the Persistence of Inequality in a Convex
Technology Framework,” Economics Letters, 75(2), 147-287.
   Mookherjee, D. and Ray, D. (2003) “Persistent Inequality,” Review of Economic Studies, 70, 369—393.
   Perotti, R. (1996) “Growth, Income Distribution and Democracy: What the Data Say,” Journal of
Economic Growth, 1(2), 149—187.
   Persson, T. and Tabellini, G. (1991) “Is Inequality Harmful for Growth? Theory and Evidence,”
American Economic Review, 84(3), 600-621.
   Pineda, J. and Rodriguez, F. (2000) “The Political Economy of Human Capital Accumulation,” Uni-
versity of Maryland at College Park mimeo, February.
   Piketty, T. (1995) “Social Mobility and Redistributive Politics,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
110(3), 551—442.
   Piketty, T. (1997) “The Dynamics of the Wealth Distribution and Interest Rate with Credit-Rationing,”
Review of Economic Studies, 64(2), 173—190.
   Rodriguez, F. (1999) “Does Inequality Lead to Redistribution? Evidence from the United States,”
Economics & Politics, 11(2), 171-199.
   Romer, P. (1987) “Growth Based on Increasing Returns Due to Specialization,” American Economic
Review 77, May, 56-62.
   Rosenstone, S. and Hansen, J. (1993) Mobilization, Participation and Democracy in America. New
York: MacMillan Publishing Company.
   Saint-Paul, G. (2001) “The Dynamics of Exclusion and Fiscal Conservatism,” Review of Economic
Dynamics, 4, 275-302.
   Saint-Paul, G., and Verdier, T. (1993) “Education, Democracy and Growth,” Journal of Development
Economics, 42(2), 399-407.
   Sheshadri, A. and K. Yuki (2000) “Equity and Eﬃciency Eﬀects of Redistributive Policies,” Rochester
University mimeo, March.
   Tamura, R. (1992) “Eﬃcient Equilibrium Convergence: Heterogeneity and Growth,” Journal of Eco-
nomic Theory, 58(2), 55-76.
   Thesmar, D. and Thoenig, M. (2000) “Creative Destruction and Firm Organizational Choice,” Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 115(4), 1201-1239.
   Thoenig, M. and Verdier, T. (2003) “A Theory of Defensive Skill-Biased Innovation and Globalization,”
American Economic Review, 93(3), 709-728




                                                  42
   Vindigni, A. (2002a) “Income Distribution and Skilled-Biased Technical Change,” Université de Toulouse
mimeo, June.
   Zhang, J. (2001) “Income Ranking, Convergence Speeds, and Growth Eﬀects of Inequality with Two-
Dimensional Adjustment,” University of Queensland mimeo, November.




                                                  43
