                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                               CONSUMER DEMAND FOR HEALTH
                               INFORMATION ON THE INTERNET

                                            M. Kate Bundorf
                                            Laurence Baker
                                              Sara Singer
                                             Todd Wagner

                                         Working Paper 10386
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w10386


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      March 2004




The views expressed herein are those of the author and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research, the Board of Governors or the Federal Reserve System.

©2004 by M. Kate Bundorf, Laurence Baker, Sara Singer, and Todd Wagner. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Consumer Demand for Health Information on the Internet
M. Kate Bundorf, Laurence Baker, Sara Singer, and Todd Wagner
NBER Working Paper No. 10386
March 2004
JEL No. I1, D83
                                         ABSTRACT
The challenges consumers face in acquiring and using information are a defining feature of health

care markets. In this paper, we examine demand for health information on the Internet. We find that

individuals in poor health are more likely than those in better health to use the Internet to search for

health information and to communicate with others about health and health care. We also find that

individuals facing a higher price to obtain information from health care professionals are more likely

to turn to the Internet for health information. Our findings indicate that demand for consumer health

information depends on the expected benefits of information and the price of information substitutes.

M. Kate Bundorf
Stanford University School of Medicine
HRP Redwood Building
Room 257
Stanford, CA 94305-5405
and NBER
bundorf@stanford.edu

Laurence Baker
Stanford University School of Medicine
HRP Redwood Building
Room T-110
Stanford, CA 94305-5405
and NBER
laurence.baker@stanford.edu

Sara Singer
Center for Health Policy and
Center for Primary Care and Outcomes Research
Stanford University
singer@healthpolicy.stanford.edu

Todd Wagner
VA Palo Alto Health Care System
twagner@stanford.edu
I.      Introduction

        The challenges consumers face in acquiring and using health information is a defining

feature of health care markets. In his seminal article, Arrow (1963) identified two characteristics

of health information that affect the functioning of health care markets. First, because the

production and transmission of health information is costly, differences in the value of health

information among consumers results in an unequal distribution of information or knowledge

about health and medical care. Second, difficulties consumers have in valuing information, “if

[the consumer] knew enough to value the information, he would know the information itself (pg.

946)”, lead to problems of the marketability of consumer health information.

        A number of subsequent studies have examined the implications of these features of

consumer demand for health information. Arrow’s observations regarding the existence of

unequally informed consumers underlie studies of the relationship between information or

knowledge and demand for inputs into the production of health. Either measuring consumer

knowledge about health and health care directly or using education as a proxy for knowledge,

these studies have found that more informed individuals use more health care than those who are

less informed (Kenkel 1990; Kenkel 1994; Hsieh and Lin 1997), suggesting that less informed

individuals potentially underestimating the productivity of medical care (Kenkel 1990). In a

study of the relationship between technological change and health disparities, Goldman and

Lakdawalla (2001) demonstrate that innovations that reduce the amount of time necessary to

improve health may reduce health disparities while innovations that require greater time

investments to improve health may increase health disparities. Their results are based on the

assumption that the strong, positive empirical relationship between education and heath

represents greater efficiency among those with higher levels of education in producing health.

Finally, a study of the expansion of coverage for preventive services in the U.S. Medicare




                                                                                                  1
program demonstrates that consumer knowledge about health insurance coverage for preventive

services is associated with greater demand for these services (Parente, Salkever et al. 2003).

        The information asymmetry between physicians and patients identified by Arrow has led

to a large and unresolved literature examining the extent to which physicians “induce demand” on

the part of patients, exploiting their information advantage to make patients consume more

services than they otherwise would (McGuire 2000). Kenkel (1990) links variation in

information or knowledge across consumers to information asymmetries by proposing that more

informed consumers are less likely to experience demand inducement, although the empirical

findings of his study do not support this hypothesis.

        Finally, based on the work of Stigler (1961), studies of the relationship between

consumer search for price information and health care prices have generally demonstrated that

increased search by more informed consumers lowers the level of and reduces the variation in

health care prices (Pauly and Satterthwaite 1981; Haas-Wilson 1990; Sorensen 2000).

        Although the literature demonstrates the importance of information seeking behavior for

the functioning of health care markets, surprisingly few studies have examined Arrow’s

underlying proposition regarding differences among consumers in their demand for health

information. Marquis (1985) tests the hypothesis that consumers facing higher cost sharing are

more likely to search for lower cost providers, but finds minimal supporting empirical evidence.

In their analysis of a community-wide informational intervention, Wagner and colleagues (2001)

find that the distribution of free health information increased demand for self-care resources and

reduced demand for information from health professionals. Consistent with the proposition that

those that benefit most from health information are more likely to use it, they find that poor health

status and the presence of children in the household were positively associated with the use of self

care resources. They also find that those facing higher costs of accessing information from

physicians, as measured by travel time to usual source of care, were also more likely to use self-




                                                                                                     2
care resources, although they do not find evidence that the price of physician services as

measured by insurance status has a positive effect on the use of self-care resources.

        The emerging role of the Internet as a source of health information provides new impetus

to study the determinants of demand for health information. One of the primary uses of the

Internet by consumers is to obtain information about health and health care. In a 2001 survey,

40% of Internet users indicated that they had used the Internet within the last year to obtain

information about health and medical care (Baker, Wagner et al. 2003). In addition, a number of

studies from health care as well as other industries suggest that the availability of Internet

shopping has reduced consumer prices (Brown and Goolsbee 2000; Zettelmeyer, Morton et al.

2001; Pauly, Herring et al. 2002), although exceptions exist (Clay, Krishan et al. 2001). In

general, these types of studies suggest that the availability of health information on the Internet

may have major implications for consumer behavior and market efficiency.

        In this paper, we examine differences among consumers in their demand for health

information, focusing on information from the Internet. We find that, consistent with the

underlying economic theory of demand for information, those who potentially benefit the most

from health information and those who face higher costs of obtaining information from other

sources are more likely to turn to the Internet as a source of health information.



II.     Theoretical Framework

Demand for Health Information

        Our theoretical framework is based on a human capital model of demand for health

(Grossman 1972). Demand for health information is derived from demand for health, and

individuals gain utility either directly from being healthy or indirectly from the greater

productivity in both labor and leisure associated with better health. Although many possible

inputs for the production of health exist, including healthy behaviors, medical care from health

care professionals, and self-care products, consumers are often poorly informed about the


                                                                                                      3
available alternatives. In addition, uncertainty exists in the effectiveness of any particular

treatment or input for a given individual. The lack of knowledge on the part of consumers about

the potential alternatives in the production of health and their likely effectiveness creates demand

for health information. In summary, consumers seek information to improve their knowledge

about the production of health. They use this knowledge, in turn, to choose among different

potential inputs into the production of health.

        Demand for health information is affected by the expected costs and benefits to

consumers of acquiring that information. In particular, individuals in poor health or those who

are likely to experience poor health are more likely to benefit from knowledge about the

production of health than those in better health. Thus, we would expect those in poor health to

have greater demand for health information. More highly educated individuals are also likely to

have greater demand for health information. This is because schooling may enhance allocative

efficiency in the production of health, increasing demand for the inputs into the production of

health. This is particularly likely to be true for information regarding self-care (Goldman and

Lakdawalla 2001). In addition, higher levels of education may be associated with lower costs of

acquiring health information, particularly when acquiring information requires identifying,

accessing and processing information from multiple sources.

Sources of Health Information

        Although health information is available from a variety of sources, traditionally

physicians and health care professionals have been the primary source for consumers. Physicians

have superior information about the production of health due to both their extensive training and

their experience in treating patients. Because health production is highly customized based on the

characteristics of individual patients, both sources of information create a gap between physicians

and patients in their ability to obtain, understand, and make recommendations based on health

information. This asymmetry in information between physicians and consumers creates a market

for health information from physicians.


                                                                                                    4
        Physicians, however, also provide health care services for which they are more likely to

be reimbursed than for the information itself. This has created concern over the extent to which

physicians act as objective agents for their patients in choosing inputs into the production of

health given their financial incentives and superior knowledge. However, asymmetries in

information between physicians and patients in the opposite direction may also exist. Patients

often have greater information than physicians about their individual characteristics, such as their

symptoms, medical history, likely adherence to treatment, and preferences among alternatives

that may affect the optimal choice of inputs into the production of health (Haas-Wilson 2001).

        Consumers may also obtain health information through non-physician channels. For

example, consumer medical guides, the popular press, and recommendations from family and

friends all serve as alternative sources of health information. Other sources include professional

journals or publications by health plans or not for profit organizations. In 2001, 38% of

Americans looked for or obtained information about a personal health concern from a source

other than their doctor (Tu and Hargraves 2003).

        Non-physician information may serve as either a substitute for or a complement to health

information from a physician. Consumers may forego contacts with physicians in response to the

availability of information from alternative sources depending on the value they place on these

alternative sources. This is more likely to be the case for consumers for whom the opportunity

costs of obtaining information from a physician are high either due to a lack of health insurance

coverage for physician services or greater time costs associated with physician visits. Consumers

facing these costs may turn to consumer health information as a substitute for health information

provided by a physician.

        Non-physician information may also complement that provided by a physician. For

example, a physician may recommend a particular type of diet or treatment and a patient may

seek out other patients on the same regime for more detailed advice on how to incorporate these

instructions into their daily living. Consumers may also search for information to evaluate the


                                                                                                     5
quality of either the information or the services they receive from a physician, effectively

attempting to address information asymmetry in favor of the physician. Consumer health

information may also address information asymmetries in the other direction. For example,

patients learning more about a particular condition may identify alternative treatments that better

match their underlying preferences than those recommended by a physician. The ability of

patients to gain information from alternative channels, including second opinions from other

physicians, limits the extent to which physician behavior can deviate from that desired by the

patient. Finally, consumers, particularly those facing high out-of-pocket costs for health care

services, may search for information on the prices of health care providers.

        The emergence of the Internet as a channel to distribute health information has placed

greater importance on understanding consumer demand for health information from non-

physician sources. Electronic dissemination may increase the supply of consumer health

information both by dramatically reducing the costs of distributing information and by addressing

public good problems that reduce the supply of information through website sponsorships,

advertising, or requiring consumer payments for information, particularly when it is customized.

Although the number of websites providing consumer health information is difficult to quantify

due to both definitional issues and difficulty tracking sites in the face of turnover and

consolidation, high estimates suggest that thousands of on-line health-related sites exist (Danzon

and Furukawa 2001).

        The extent of demand for Internet-based health information, its effect on demand for

information from other sources, and its ultimate impact on the productivity of health care,

however, are less clear. One possibility is that the availability of Internet-based information may

dramatically reduce consumer search costs, increasing demand for consumer health information.

If consumers are able to locate valuable information on the Internet, this potentially has the effect

of reducing the information asymmetries that characterize the relationship between physician and

patients and, thereby, reducing the value and the overall demand for physician information.


                                                                                                      6
Valuable health information from the Internet may also complement demand for physician

services. Not only will consumers be better able to evaluate the quality of physician services,

they will also be able to be more effective participants in managing their care, ultimately

increasing the productivity of medical care. Alternatively, if patients read low quality

information and delay seeking needed care or bring the bad information to physicians, then this

may actually reduce the production of health and/or productivity of medical care.

        Consumer demand for health information from the Internet, however, may be limited.

Electronic information sources are unlikely to be of much assistance to patients in acute settings.

In addition, individuals seeking health information on the Internet may, in reality, face substantial

search costs given the large number of potential sources of information available and the

difficulty they face in evaluating the quality of the information available from any single source.

Consistent with these potential difficulties in accessing Internet-based health information,

although 38% of consumers in a national survey conducted in 2002 looked for or obtained health

information from a source other than their doctor, only 16% identified the Internet as a source of

information (Tu and Hargraves 2003). Consumers were more likely to report seeking information

from books or magazines or friends or relatives.

        In this paper, we examine consumer demand for health information from non-physician

sources, focusing on the Internet. The discussion above suggests that characteristics of

individuals that affect both demand for health information overall and demand for information

from the non-physician sources will affect demand for information from the Internet. In

particular, those currently in poor health or those whose higher expectations of future poor health

are more likely to benefit from health information and thus have greater demand for health

information than those in better health. Education is expected to be positively associated with

both demand for any health information and demand for health information from non-physician

sources due to both the greater allocative efficiency of more highly educated individuals in

producing health, the lower cost to these individuals of accessing information without the


                                                                                                      7
assistance of a health professional, and their greater ability to self manage their care. Finally, the

price of substitutes for consumer health information is also a determinant of demand for health

information on the Internet. Individuals facing higher costs, either out of pocket or opportunity

costs, in accessing physicians and health care providers are more likely to search for health

information on the Internet.



III.    Empirical Methods

a.      Data

        The data source for this analysis was a survey of consumer use of the Internet for health

conducted during December 2001 and January 2002. Respondents were selected from an

Internet-enabled panel of over 60,000 households created and maintained by a survey research

firm. The panel was created by randomly selecting individuals to be offered free Internet access

via Web-TV in exchange for answering occasional surveys administered through the Web-TV.

At the time of our survey, the panel recruitment response rate was 50.6% and the household

connection rate was 70.2%.1 Our survey was sent to 12,878 panel members, including a random

sample of adults over age 21 and over-samples of individuals over age 50 and veterans. The

survey completion rate was 69.4%. In our analyses, we use post-stratification weights, which

correct the distribution of respondents to match the known distribution of the U.S. population on

age, sex, race, education, region, metropolitan residence, and veteran status, to account for the

over-sampling and non-response. Comparisons between the study sample and other nationally

representative data sources along a number of dimensions of demographic, socioeconomic, and

health status indicate that the survey panel is representative of the U.S. population along these

dimensions (Baker, Bundorf et al. 2003).




1
  The household connection rate is the percentage of recruited households for which an adult completed the
initial demographic profile survey.


                                                                                                         8
        Our study sample is unique in that all members have at least a minimum level of Internet

access through the WebTV, although some respondents also have access through a computer they

obtained independent of panel membership. This has two important implications for our study.

First, the cost of Internet access in terms of out-of-pocket payments for basic Internet service is

identical among survey respondents. Thus, access to health information on the Internet among

the study sample is not affected by the monetary cost of Internet access. Second, our results are

not restricted to the population currently with Internet access. Because our sample is comprised

of a random sample of individuals offered free Internet access, our findings apply to a broader

population than current Internet users. Of course, some of those randomly selected to receive

Internet access declined the offer, so that our sample is representative of the population of

individuals responding to free Internet access rather than the general population.

        In this study, we restrict our analysis to adults 21-64 years of age, excluding older adults

because health insurance status is a key study variable and individuals over 64 in the U.S. are

nearly universally covered by the Medicare program. The characteristics of our study sample are

presented in Table 1.

b.      Empirical Models

        Our objective in the empirical analysis is to test models of consumer demand for health

information on the Internet, and we test two hypotheses. First, individuals who obtain greater

benefits from health information in general are more likely to turn to the Internet for health

information. Second, individuals facing higher costs in accessing health information from health

care providers in traditional settings are more likely to use the Internet for health information.

For the first hypothesis, we use a measure of health status as a proxy for demand for health

information. We propose that those with chronic conditions are more likely to benefit from

health information. For the second hypothesis, we use two proxies for the costs of accessing

information from providers in traditional settings, including health insurance status and distance

from an individual’s usual source of care. Individuals without health insurance coverage face


                                                                                                       9
higher out-of-pocket payments for both physician visits and physician services. Travel time to

the individual’s regular source of care serves as a measure of the opportunity cost of visits to

providers in traditional settings (Acton 1975; Cauley 1987; Currie and Reagan 2003).

         The probability of a consumer searching for health information on the Internet, however,

is the product of two components:



Pr(Search Internet for health information)= Pr(Search for consumer health information)*

         Pr(Use the Internet|Search for consumer health information)                          (1)



         A subset of the population will search for any consumer health information and a subset

of those searching will use the Internet in their search. Demand for health information on the

Internet will be affected by individual characteristics that affect both probabilities. This is

important to note in the context of this analysis since we measure and student the frequency of

using the Internet for health information (the left hand side of equation 1), but do not have data

that allows us to measure separately the two components on the right hand side. Specifically, we

do not observe the frequency of searching for health information from other sources. As a result,

our estimates should not be construed as estimates of the frequency of searching for any

information. In addition, we are not able to disentangle the effects of individual characteristics on

the probability of searching for any consumer health information and the probability of using the

Internet conditional on searching.

         The basic empirical model for our analysis is:

        Yi = α + β1 H i + β 2 Pi + δX i + ε i
                                S                                                                 (2)

where

         Yi is an indicator of use of the Internet for consumer health information,

         Hi is a binary indicator of health needs,

         Pis is the price of substitutes for consumer health information


                                                                                                        10
        Xi is a vector of control variables that affect individual demand for health information,

                 and

        εi is the error term.

        One potential issue in estimating this model is that the error term may contain

information about unobserved preferences for health and health care that are correlated with both

Pis , health insurance status in particular, and demand for health information on the Internet. For

example, if Pis is an indicator that the survey respondent has no health insurance coverage, it will

be negatively correlated with unobserved preferences for health and health information in

general. This will create a downward bias in the estimates of the effects of the price of

information substitutes on demand for health information on the Internet. To address this, we

estimate the following alternative version of the empirical model:

        Yi = α + β 1 H i + β 2 Pi + β 3 H i * Pi + δX i + ε i                                    (3)
                                S              S




        By interacting the indicators of health and insurance status, we use a differences-in-

differences approach to identifying the effect of price of the substitutes for health information, as

measured by health insurance status, on demand for health information on the Internet. β1 , which

measures the effect of no health insurance coverage on demand for health information on the

Internet, captures the effect of unobserved preferences for health and medical care that affect both

demand for health information and health insurance. The coefficient on the interaction term (β3),

in contrast, measures the incremental effect of the price of information substitutes among those

expected to have greater demand for health information.

        We perform additional analyses on the subset of the study sample indicating they used

the Internet for consumer health information in the last year intended to provide additional tests

for our main findings. In these models, we examine the types of applications for which

consumers turn to the Internet and the self-reported effects on the utilization of physician




                                                                                                    11
services. Although the empirical models used in these analyses are similar to Models 1 and 2, the

models are estimated on the subsample of Internet users.

c.      Study Variables

        The dependent variables in our analysis are measures of use of the Internet and e-mail for

health and health care. We asked survey respondents, “Within the past year, how often did you

look on the Internet for information or advice about health or health care?” From this question,

we constructed two measures of utilization of the Internet for health information based on the

frequency with which they turned to the Internet. Individuals who “ever searched for information

on the Internet” are those who indicated they had done so at least once within the last year.

Individuals who “sometimes searched for information on the Internet” are those who indicated

they had done so every few months or more frequently. We also asked individuals, “In the past

year, about how often did you use email or the Internet to a) communicate with a doctor or other

health care provider; b) communicate with a family member or friend about health or health care;

or c) communicate with other people who have health conditions or concerns like mine. For each

of these questions, we identify users as those indicating they did this at least once in the past year.

        For those indicating they had looked on the Internet for information or advice about

health or health care at least once in the past year, we followed up with questions about for whom

they were looking for health information (myself, child, parent, someone else) during the most

recent time they used the Internet and the type of information for which they were looking. For

those looking for information for themselves, the mutually exclusive choices for individuals not

indicating a self-reported chronic condition were: 1) Information about symptoms you were

experiencing or a condition you thought you had; 2) Information about diseases you are at risk of

getting or that you want to prevent; 3) Information about doctors or hospitals; 4) Information

about healthy lifestyles, fitness, or nutrition; and 5) Other information. Individuals with at least

one chronic condition were provided with these choices as well as information about {condition},

where condition was customized based on the health conditions the respondent had reported


                                                                                                    12
earlier in the survey. In cases in which a respondent reported more than one chronic health

condition, the condition to which this question referred was randomly chosen. Among those who

indicated having a chronic condition, we collapsed the responses indicating search for

information about symptoms or conditions the individuals thought they had and search for

information about a particular condition into a single measure of searching for information about

a health condition.

        These questions about the type of information individuals were seeking provide

additional evidence on whether health information from the Internet serves as a complement to or

a substitute for information from a health care professional. In particular, evidence that uninsured

individuals are more likely to search for the types of information that health care professionals

generally provide, such as information about symptoms or a condition that an individual has, is

consistent with information from the Internet serving as a substitute for information from a health

professional for individuals facing higher costs to access health care providers. If those with

insurance are more likely to search for particular types of information on the Internet, this

provides evidence of complementary relationships between the sources of information.

        The key independent variables in our analysis are measures of the costs and benefits of

consumer health information on the Internet. These include a measure of health needs, which is

an indicator of at least one of five self-reported chronic conditions including high blood pressure

or hypertension; diabetes or high blood sugar; cancer; a heart attack, coronary heart disease,

angina, heart failure, or other heart problems; and depression. For the first four conditions,

survey respondents were asked whether a doctor or other health care provider had ever told them

they had the condition. For depression, respondents were asked whether they ever had or a doctor

told them they ever had the condition.

        The study includes two measures of the price of information from providers in traditional

settings. The first is health insurance status. We asked individuals about their current health

insurance status using a hierarchical question format intended to assign individuals to a single


                                                                                                    13
category. We also asked a follow-up question to those not indicating any source of coverage to

verify that they were uninsured. The categories we use in our analysis are uninsured, any private

(including employer-sponsored and individually purchased), and public coverage (which includes

individuals indicating an unknown source of coverage as well as public programs). We focus on

the comparison between the uninsured and the privately insured, given that the third group is

potentially heterogeneous in the characteristics of their coverage. We also use travel time to the

individual’s usual source of care as a measure of the opportunity cost of obtaining information in

traditional provider settings. The categories for this variable are less than 15 minutes, 15-29

minutes, and 30 minutes or more each way.

        We include variables in our model intended to control for individual characteristics that

affect demand for health information overall and demand for information on the Internet. These

include education (<12 years, 12+ years), income (<35,000, 35-75,000, >$75,000), sex (binary

indicator of male), and age (21-30, 31-40, 41-50, 51-64). We also include an indicator of whether

the individual had used the Internet prior to obtaining access through the survey research firm to

control for general familiarity with the Internet. This also controls for mode effects – some

respondents may use the Web TV to access the internet while others may use computers.

d.      Model Estimation

        We estimate maximum likelihood logistic regression models for questions regarding the

use of Internet and e-mail for health information and communication since the dependent

variables are binary indicators of use. These models are estimated using the entire study sample.

We present the coefficients as well as the marginal probabilities for key study variables. The

marginal probabilities are the difference of the average predicted probability of the study sample

holding the independent variable constant at the indicated value. For models of the type of use,

conditional on any use in the last year and the last visit was for oneself, we use multinomial logit

models since the dependent variables are a mutually exclusive set of choices. For these models,

we present only the marginal effects. All results are weighted to be nationally representative.


                                                                                                  14
IV.     Results

a.      Descriptive statistics for dependent variables

        Although 34% of the study sample had used the Internet in the last year to search for

health information, only 13% were frequent users of the Internet for this purpose (Table 2).

Individuals with chronic conditions were more likely to use the Internet for health information

and the uninsured were less likely to use it for this purpose. Fewer survey respondents used the

Internet or e-mail for communication about health matters than searching for information and

they were more likely to use it to communicate with family members or friends (23%) than with

health care providers (6%) or with other people with similar health conditions or concerns (11%).

The uninsured were less likely to use the Internet for each type of communication than the

insured and those with chronic conditions were more likely than those without to use it for

communication. Both individuals with and without chronic conditions who used the Internet for

health information were most likely to use it to obtain information about symptoms they were

experiencing and the uninsured were more likely than the average respondent to use it for this

purpose.



b.      Search for health information and communication with health providers

        Those with chronic conditions were more likely to use the Internet to search for health

information than those without chronic conditions, consistent with the hypothesis that those with

greater underlying health needs have greater demand for health information (Table 3). The

effects of the indicators for a chronic condition are statistically significant in both the model of

ever searching for information in the past year and for searching more frequently. In the models

with only the main effects of insurance status, we find that the uninsured were less likely to use

the Internet as a source of health information, although the effects were not statistically

significant. Including the interaction of health insurance status with the indicator of a chronic


                                                                                                       15
condition demonstrates that the effect of insurance status depends on health needs. Although the

uninsured without chronic conditions were less likely than the insured without chronic conditions

to search for health information, among those with chronic conditions, the uninsured were more

likely than the insured to turn to the Internet for health information. Because the uninsured face

higher prices for accessing providers, these findings are consistent with the existence of positive

cross-price elasticities with respect to the price of obtaining information in traditional provider

settings. Although travel time to usual source of care is positively associated with searching for

health information on the Internet, the effects are not statistically significant.

        We also found that more highly educated individuals are more likely to turn to the

Internet for health information than those with less education, consistent with education being

correlated with greater marginal productivity from self-care (Table 3). Men are less likely than

women to turn to the Internet for health information.

        The results for communication about health and health care using the Internet or e-mail

with family members or friends and people with similar types of health conditions are similar to

those for search for health information (Table 4). For these purposes, individuals with chronic

conditions were more likely to use the Internet or e-mail. In addition, the uninsured without

chronic conditions were less likely than the insured without chronic conditions to use the Internet

or e-mail for health care communication, while the uninsured with chronic conditions were more

likely than the privately insured with chronic conditions to use the Internet for these types of

communication. The interaction effect of the uninsured indicator and the chronic condition

indicator, however, is only statistically significant in the case of communication with family

members or friends. In the case of communication with health care providers, although the

directions of the effects of health needs, insurance status, and their interaction are similar to those

for the other dependent variables, they are not statistically significant.

        The most striking finding with respect to health-related electronic communication is the

effect of travel time, which had a positive and statistically significant effect on each of the forms


                                                                                                      16
of Internet and e-mail communication we examined (Table 4). These results are consistent with

they hypothesis that individuals who face higher opportunity costs of accessing health care

providers in traditional settings are more likely to use the Internet and e-mail for communication

about health care.

        In Table 5, we demonstrate that the magnitudes of many of the effects we find are

relatively large. Privately insured individuals with a chronic condition were 6 percentage points

more likely to have ever looked for health information on the Internet and 4 percentage points

more likely to be frequent users of the Internet for health information (Table 5a). The uninsured

without chronic conditions were 8 percentage points less likely to have ever used the Internet in

the last year to search for information and 4 percentage points less likely to be frequent users of

the Internet for health information than the privately insured without chronic conditions. The

magnitude of the interaction effect was 7 percentage points both for ever searching for

information and for more frequent use of the Internet.

        In the case of communication with health care providers, individuals with the greatest

distance to their usual source of care (>30 minutes) were 3 percentage points more likely to report

use of the internet or e-mail for this purpose and this represents a 67% increase (Table 5b).

Individuals characterized by longer travel times to their usual source of care were also more

likely to report using the Internet for communication with family members or friends (8

percentage points) as well as others with similar health conditions (6 percentage points).



c.      The types of health information individuals access on the Internet

        We find that insurance status affects the type of health information for which individuals

search using the Internet and the effects are similar for individuals with and without chronic

conditions. In particular, among both individuals with (Table 6) and without (Table 5) chronic

conditions, the uninsured were more likely to look for information about diagnosing symptoms

(or information about their condition in the case of those with an identified chronic condition) and


                                                                                                  17
less likely to look for information about health care providers than to look for other types of

information. Travel time to a usual source of care has statistically significant effect on the type of

information sought for those with chronic conditions (Table 6), but not for those without chronic

conditions (Table 5). In particular, individuals with longer travel times to their usual source of

care were less likely to have sought information about symptoms they were experiencing or their

chronic condition than other, unspecified types of information.



V.      Conclusions

        The Internet is an important source of information for individuals likely to seek health

information. We find that individuals in poor health, defined as having at least one of five self-

reported chronic conditions, are more likely than those without a chronic condition to use the

Internet to search for health information and to communicate with others about health and health

care. These results support the use of indicators of the presence of chronic conditions as proxies

for the benefits of health information as well as our hypothesis that demand for health

information on the Internet is higher among those likely to benefit most from health information

in general. The alternative result was possible. Individuals with chronic conditions may already

have had access to adequate information through alternative sources such as physicians and other

health care providers. Our findings, in contrast, suggest that the Internet is an important source of

health information even among those who may be highly informed about their health status

through other sources.

        Individuals facing a higher price to obtain information from health care professionals are

more likely to turn to the Internet for health information. Our findings for insurance status

provide evidence that a higher out-of-pocket price for physician services increases demand for

health information from alternative sources. Among those with one of five common chronic

conditions, the uninsured were more likely to turn to the Internet for health information than the

insured. Among individuals without chronic conditions, in contrast, the uninsured were less


                                                                                                     18
likely to seek health information on the Internet. We interpret this as evidence of a positive cross

price elasticity of demand for health information on the Internet, with the uninsured without

chronic conditions serving as controls for unobserved preferences for health and health care

among the uninsured. We also found that the price as measured by the opportunity cost of time in

visiting providers in traditional settings affects demand for health information on the Internet,

primarily in the form of communication with others. Those reporting longer travel times to their

usual source of care were more likely to report using the Internet or e-mail to communication

with provider, family and friends, and other patients. This is consistent with past research that

analyzed at self-care books, telephones advice nurses and computerized self-care information

(Wagner, Hu and Hibbard, 2001).

        Differences between the insured and the uninsured in the types of information they seek

provide further support for the proposition that the price of information alternatives affects

information seeking behavior. Among those using the Internet for health information, the

uninsured, both with and without chronic conditions, were more likely to turn to the Internet to

diagnose symptoms they were experiencing or to obtain information about their chronic

condition. This indicates that the uninsured use the Internet to obtain information that those with

insurance would generally seek from a physician, consistent with the existence of positive cross

price elasticities for information from a physician and self-care information. Those facing high

costs of information from providers in traditional settings are likely to turn to the Internet for

important health care needs.

        Our study had some limitations that could affect the results. First, we asked about five

common chronic illnesses, but the non-chronically ill group could have another chronic illness

that we did not identify. This suggests that our results may be conservative, as misclassification

would attenuate the findings. In addition, our study is based on a sample of individuals randomly

chosen to receive Internet access in exchange for periodically filling out surveys. While this

design reduces the likelihood that our findings with respect to information seeking behavior are


                                                                                                     19
driven by the price of Internet access, it does introduce the possibility that our sample is not

nationally representative due to selection into the survey research panel. If this is the case, we

anticipate that these individuals are more likely to be interested in obtaining information from the

Internet. The implication is that our findings may overestimate the extent of Internet use for

health information among the general population but underestimate the extent among those

obtaining Internet access on their own.

        The results of our study generally support economic models of information seeking

behavior on the part of consumers. Consumers consider the costs and benefits of information

when making decisions about information seeking. Demand for health information is higher

among those more likely to benefit from it and the price of alternative sources of information,

including both out-of-pocket costs and the opportunity costs of time, affects individual choice of

information sources. Based on these findings, we would expect that a shift toward increased

patient cost sharing at the point of service would result in greater demand among plan enrollees

for self-care information. Our findings also imply that Internet-based resources may be most

attractive to individuals facing high opportunity costs, such those in remote areas or high-income

individuals.

        Our findings also indicate that Internet is an important source of information for the

chronically ill and the uninsured, suggesting that the Internet serves populations with serious

health needs facing significant barriers to accessing health care in traditional settings. Although

this creates an opportunity to provide resources to previously underserved populations, it also

points to the potential importance of tools to evaluate and monitor the quality of health

information on the Internet and to direct consumers to reliable sources of information.




                                                                                                     20
Acknowledgement: The authors gratefully acknowledge funding from the Department of

Veterans Affairs, Stanford University Office of Technology and Licensing, and the National

Institute on Aging, Grant # AG17253. Bundorf was also supported by grant KO2-HS11668-01

from the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality. A preliminary version of this paper was

presented at the 2003 International Health Economics Conference, the 2003 International Society

for Technology Assessment in Healthcare, the 2003 meeting of the American Association of

Public Health.




                                                                                             21
References:

Acton, J. P., 1975. Nonmonetary factors in the demand for medical services-some empirical
         evidence. Journal of Political Economy 83(3): 595-614.
Arrow, K. J., 1963. Uncertainty of the Welfare Economics of Medical Care. American Economic
         Review 53(5): 941-73.
Baker, L., M. Bundorf, et al. 2003. Validity of the Survey of Health and Internet and Knowledge
         Network's Panel and Sampling. Stanford, CA, Stanford University: 1-13.
Baker, L., T. H. Wagner, et al., 2003. Use of the Internet and E-mail for Health Care Information:
         Results from a National Survey. JAMA 289(18): 2400-2406.
Brown, J. R. and A. Goolsbee, 2000. Does the Internet Make Markets More Competitive?,
         National Bureau of Economic Research: 1-29.
Cauley, S. D., 1987. The Time Price of Medical Care. The Review of Economics and Statistics
         69(1): 59-66.
Clay, K., R. Krishan, et al., 2001. Prices and Price Dispersion on the Web: Evidence from the
         Online Book Industry, National Bureau of Economic Research: 1-42.
Currie, J. and P. B. Reagan, 2003. Distance to Hospital and Children's Use of Preventive Care: Is
         Being Closer Better and for Whom? Economic Inquiry 41(3): 378-391.
Danzon, P. M. and M. F. Furukawa, 2001. Health Care: Competition and Productivity. The
         Economic Payoff from the Internet Revolution. R. E. Litan. Washington D.C., Brookings
         Institution Press: 189-234.
Goldman, D. and D. Lakdawalla, 2001. Understanding Health Disparities across Education
         Groups, National Bureau of Economic Research: 1-57.
Grossman, M., 1972. On the Concept of Health Capital and the Demand for Health. Jounal of
         Political Economy 80(2): 223-243.
Haas-Wilson, D., 1990. Consumer Information and Providers' Reputations: An Empirical Test in
         the Market for Psychotherapy. Journal of Health Economics 9: 321-333.
Haas-Wilson, D., 2001. Arrow and the Information Market Failure in Health Care: The
         Changing Content and Sources of Health Care Information. Journal of Health Politics,
         Policy, and Law 26(5): 1031-1042.
Hsieh, C.-R. and S.-J. Lin, 1997. Health information and the demand for preventive care among
         the elderly in Taiwan. Journal of Human Resources 32(2): 308-333.
Kenkel, D. S., 1990. Consumer Health Information and Demand for Medical Care. The Review
         of Economics and Statistics 72(4): 587-595.
Kenkel, D. S., 1994. The demand for preventive medical care. Applied Economics 26: 313-325.
Marquis, M. S., 1985. Cost-Sharing and Provider Choice. Journal of Health Economics 4: 137-
         157.
McGuire, T. G., 2000. Physician Agency. Handbook of Health Economics. A. J. Culyer and J. P.
         Newhouse. Amsterdam, Elsevier Science, B.V. 1A: 461-528.
Parente, S. T., D. Salkever, et al., 2003. The role of consumer knowledge of insurance benefits in
         the demand for preventive health, National Bureau of Economic Research: 1-32.
Pauly, M. V., B. J. Herring, et al., 2002. Health Insurance on the Internet and the Economics of
         Search, National Bureau of Economic Research: 1-27.
Pauly, M. V. and M. A. Satterthwaite, 1981. The Pricing of Primary Care Physicians' Services: A
         Test of the Role of Consumer Information. Bell Journal of Economics 12(2): 488-506.
Sorensen, A., 2000. Equilibrium Price Dispersion in Retail Markets for Prescription Drugs.
         Journal of Political Economy 108(4).
Stigler, G., 1961. The Economics of Information. The Journal of Political Economy: 213-225.
Tu, H. T. and J. L. Hargraves ,2003. Seeking Health Care Information: Most Consumers still on
         the Sidelines, Center for Studying Health System Change: 1-4.



                                                                                               22
Wagner, T. H., T.-W. Hu, et al., 2001. The demand for consumer health information. Journal of
       Health Economics 20: 1059-1075.
Zettelmeyer, F., F. S. Morton, et al., 2001. Cowboys or Coward: Why are Internet Car Prices
       Lower?, National Bureau of Economic Research: 1-33.




                                                                                            23
Table 1: Sample Characteristics

N=6,289
Variable                     Mean
Public or other insurance     0.155
Private Insurance             0.677
Uninsured                     0.167
Prior Internet Access         0.580
Travel time < 15 minutes      0.500
Travel Time 15-29             0.354
Travel Time 30+               0.146
Rural                         0.225
Chronic Condition             0.461
Education < 12 years          0.556
Education>=12 years           0.444
Income <35K                   0.377
Income 35-75K                 0.391
Income 75+K                   0.135
Income Missing                0.096
Male                          0.475
Age 21-30                     0.201
Age 31-40                     0.240
Age 41-50                     0.285
Age 51-64                     0.273




                                      24
Table 2: Descriptive Statistics - Dependent Variables
                                                                                         Full Sample    Chronics Uninsured
                                                                                         N       %         %        %
Use of the Internet for Health Information within the past year
      Ever Search for Information on the Internet                                        6289   0.340     0.379      0.273
      Sometimes Search for Information on the Internet                                   6289   0.131     0.163      0.111
Use of the Internet or E-mail ever within the last year to:
      Communicate with a doctor or other health care provider                            6262   0.056     0.060      0.046
      Communicate with a family member or friend about health or health care             6261   0.229     0.274      0.195
      Communicate with other people who have health conditions or concerns like mine     6253   0.105     0.133      0.105
Among those who ever searched within the last year and most recent search was for self
Non-chronics
      Information about symptoms                                                          560   0.389                0.597
      Information about prevention                                                        560   0.077                0.067
      Information about doctors or hospitals                                              560   0.045                0.004
      Information about healthy lifestyles, fitness, or nutrition                         560   0.286                0.242
      Other information                                                                   560   0.203                0.089
Chronics
      Information about {condition} or symptoms                                           776             0.469      0.651
      Information about prevention                                                        776             0.051      0.061
      Information about doctors or hospitals                                              776             0.028      0.004
      Information about healthy lifestyles, fitness, or nutrition                         776             0.179      0.126
      Other information                                                                   776             0.273      0.158
Table 3: Search for information on the internet

                                             Ever                             Sometimes
                                 Main Effects     Interaction       Main Effects     Interaction
Uninsured                            -0.218        -0.399**              -0.04          -0.444
                                    [0.134]         [0.182]            [0.183]         [0.278]
Public                                0.024           0.033           0.428***        0.442***
                                    [0.129]         [0.129]            [0.157]         [0.157]
Chronic Condition                  0.342***        0.285***           0.454***        0.352***
                                    [0.086]         [0.090]            [0.118]         [0.126]
Uninsured*Chronic Condition                           0.373                            0.703**
                                                    [0.255]                            [0.352]
Travel Time 15-29                     0.072           0.072             -0.054          -0.054
                                    [0.089]         [0.089]            [0.123]         [0.123]
Travel Time 30+                       0.185            0.18              0.162           0.154
                                    [0.129]         [0.129]            [0.163]         [0.163]
Rural Indicator                      -0.091          -0.093             -0.252          -0.258
                                    [0.115]         [0.115]            [0.160]         [0.161]
Previous Use of Internet           0.530***        0.528***            0.325**        0.322**
                                    [0.093]         [0.093]            [0.126]         [0.127]
Education 12+ years                0.571***        0.572***           0.450***        0.451***
                                    [0.087]         [0.087]            [0.119]         [0.120]
Income 35-75K                      -0.244**       -0.246***          -0.404***       -0.409***
                                    [0.095]         [0.095]            [0.133]         [0.133]
Income 75+K                          -0.045           -0.05             -0.205          -0.214
                                    [0.120]         [0.120]            [0.167]         [0.167]
Male                              -0.664***       -0.661***          -0.502***       -0.497***
                                    [0.082]         [0.082]            [0.114]         [0.114]
age3140                               0.045           0.039              0.079           0.069
                                    [0.135]         [0.136]            [0.185]         [0.185]
age4150                               0.183           0.177              0.174           0.165
                                    [0.130]         [0.130]            [0.179]         [0.179]
age5164                               0.113           0.115              0.187           0.192
                                    [0.125]         [0.125]            [0.168]         [0.168]
Constant                          -1.116***       -1.085***          -2.297***       -2.236***
                                    [0.153]         [0.154]            [0.207]         [0.210]
Observations                          6289            6289               6289            6289
Logistic Regression - coefficients shown
Standard errors in brackets
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%
Table 4: Communication using internet or e-mail

                                            Doctor or other HCP         Family Member or Friend     People w/ HC condition
                                      Main Effects       Interaction   Main Effects Interaction   Main Effects   Interaction
Uninsured                                  -0.268           -0.457         -0.196     -0.536**         0.065        -0.057
                                          [0.296]          [0.420]        [0.154]      [0.222]       [0.209]       [0.318]
Public                                      0.334           0.343          0.062         0.076     0.569***       0.574***
                                          [0.249]          [0.250]        [0.142]      [0.142]       [0.183]       [0.183]
Chronic Condition                           0.150            0.094       0.487***     0.392***     0.518***       0.479***
                                          [0.189]          [0.193]        [0.097]      [0.101]       [0.146]       [0.156]
Uninsured*Chronic Condition                                 0.388                      0.632**                      0.222
                                                           [0.558]                     [0.294]                     [0.387]
Travel Time 15-29                        0.413**          0.414**        0.278***     0.278***        0.253*        0.253*
                                          [0.188]          [0.188]        [0.099]      [0.099]       [0.150]       [0.150]
Travel Time 30+                          0.552**          0.545**        0.453***     0.445***     0.624***       0.621***
                                          [0.246]          [0.246]        [0.142]      [0.142]       [0.178]       [0.178]
Rural Indicator                             0.098            0.095          0.110        0.108         0.052         0.051
                                          [0.220]          [0.220]        [0.123]      [0.123]       [0.177]       [0.178]
Previous Use of Internet                    0.169           0.167        0.304***     0.301***       0.317**       0.316**
                                          [0.204]          [0.205]        [0.106]      [0.106]       [0.159]       [0.159]
Education 12+ years                         0.051           0.050        0.217**       0.218**        0.026         0.026
                                          [0.178]          [0.178]        [0.098]      [0.098]       [0.147]       [0.147]
Income 35-75K                            -0.397*           -0.398*         -0.168       -0.171       -0.282*       -0.283*
                                          [0.206]          [0.206]        [0.109]      [0.109]       [0.164]       [0.164]
Income 75+K                                -0.057           -0.060          0.037        0.030       -0.385*       -0.387*
                                          [0.250]          [0.250]        [0.137]      [0.137]       [0.215]       [0.215]
Male                                        0.105            0.108      -0.493***    -0.488***     -0.410***     -0.408***
                                          [0.176]          [0.176]        [0.093]      [0.093]       [0.136]       [0.135]
age3140                                  -0.529*           -0.533*      -0.511***    -0.523***        -0.316        -0.319
                                          [0.296]          [0.297]        [0.158]      [0.159]       [0.220]       [0.221]
age4150                                    -0.323           -0.325       -0.345**     -0.356**        -0.240        -0.242
                                          [0.258]          [0.258]        [0.146]      [0.147]       [0.208]       [0.208]
age5164                                  -0.512*           -0.507*       -0.336**     -0.333**      -0.434**      -0.431**
                                          [0.269]          [0.266]        [0.142]      [0.141]       [0.204]       [0.204]
Constant                                -2.870***        -2.843***      -1.339***    -1.284***     -2.369***     -2.347***
                                          [0.328]          [0.332]        [0.180]      [0.181]       [0.252]       [0.259]
Observations                                6262             6262           6261         6261          6253          6253
Logistic Regression - Coefficients shown
Standard errors in parentheses
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%
Table 5a: Magnitude of the Effects of Insurance Status and Health Status

                                                                                                              Insurance Status by Health Status
                                                                                         No Chronic                   Chronic
                                                                                                                                                            Interaction
                                                                                                                                         Uninsured Chronic     Effect
                                                                                     Uninsured   Insured          Uninsured   Insured     Effect Effect C1- (C0-C1)-
                                                                                       NC0         NC1               C0         C1       NC0-NC1    NC1    (NC0-NC1)
Use of the Internet for Health Information within the past year
    Ever Search for Information on the Internet                                          0.243      0.319             0.373      0.379         -0.076     0.060   0.070
    Sometimes Search for Information on the Internet                                     0.076      0.113             0.188      0.153         -0.037     0.039   0.072
Use of the Internet or E-mail ever within the last year to:
    Communicate with a doctor or other health care provider                              0.037      0.056             0.058      0.061         -0.020     0.005   0.016
    Communicate with a family member or friend about health or health care               0.131      0.203             0.289      0.271         -0.072     0.068   0.090
    Communicate with other people who have health conditions or concerns like mine       0.080      0.084             0.146      0.127         -0.004     0.044   0.023



Table 5b: Magnitude of the Effects of Travel Time

                                                                                                                          Travel Time


                                                                                                                                                  difference
                                                                                                            low        medium           high      high to low
Use of the Internet for Health Information within the past year
   Ever Search for Information on the Internet                                                               0.329        0.344          0.367          0.038
   Sometimes Search for Information on the Internet                                                          0.131        0.125          0.148          0.018
Use of the Internet or E-mail ever within the last year to:
   Communicate with a doctor or other health care provider                                                   0.045        0.066          0.074          0.030
   Communicate with a family member or friend about health or health care                                    0.201        0.247          0.278          0.077
   Communicate with other people who have health conditions or concerns like mine                            0.088        0.110          0.150          0.062
Table 6: Type of Use during last Visit Conditional on Any Use - Non-chronics

                              Symptoms    Prevention Providers   Lifestyle
Uninsured                        0.228 **    0.008     -0.041 *** -0.043
                               (0.104)     (0.043)    (0.012)     (0.089)
Public                          -0.015       0.036      0.001       0.117
                               (0.116)     (0.060)    (0.027)     (0.125)
Travel Time 15-29                0.033       0.009      0.018      -0.031
                               (0.063)     (0.032)    (0.019)     (0.061)
Travel Time 30+                  0.103       0.036     -0.006      -0.083
                               (0.091)     (0.045)    (0.021)     (0.086)
Previous Use of Internet        -0.005       0.021     -0.018      -0.031
                               (0.078)     (0.031)    (0.020)     (0.075)
Education 12+ years              0.066      -0.061 *    0.007       0.045
                               (0.066)     (0.033)    (0.013)     (0.069)
Income 35-75K                   -0.092       0.082 ** -0.012        0.030
                               (0.067)     (0.042)    (0.016)     (0.069)
Income 75+K                     -0.050       0.115 *    0.014       0.002
                               (0.083)     (0.069)    (0.021)     (0.081)
Male                            -0.142 **    0.029      0.032 *     0.059
                               (0.057)     (0.029)    (0.019)     (0.059)
age4150                          0.048       0.018     -0.009       0.029
                               (0.071)     (0.036)    (0.017)     (0.069)
age5164                         -0.042       0.069      0.000       0.045
                               (0.071)     (0.045)    (0.018)     (0.070)
Observations
Multinomial logistic regression - Marginal probabilities shown
Other types of information is the reference group
Standard errors in brackets
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%
Table 7: Type of Use during last Visit Conditional on Any Use - Chronics

                           Condition or
                            Symptom        Prevention        Providers      Lifestyle
Uninsured                     0.167     **    0.029            -0.012    ** -0.069
                             (0.083)        (0.044)           (0.005)        (0.053)
Public                        -0.129 *        0.055            -0.002         -0.092 *
                             (0.072)        (0.036)           (0.006)        (0.048)
Travel Time 15-29             -0.056          0.005             0.018    *     0.085 *
                             (0.059)        (0.021)           (0.010)        (0.051)
Travel Time 30+               -0.257 *** 0.050                  0.018          0.009
                             (0.069)        (0.044)           (0.018)        (0.067)
Rural                         -0.043         -0.009            -0.005         -0.049
                             (0.075)        (0.025)           (0.009)        (0.051)
Previous Use of Internet      0.030          -0.039             0.012    *    -0.055
                             (0.066)        (0.030)           (0.007)        (0.057)
Education 12+ years           -0.112 *        0.030            -0.007          0.069
                             (0.059)        (0.019)           (0.008)        (0.046)
Income 35-75K                  0.002          0.010             0.030    ** -0.068
                             (0.062)        (0.019)           (0.014)        (0.045)
Income 75+K                   -0.033         -0.003             0.063    *    -0.004
                             (0.078)        (0.024)           (0.038)        (0.064)
Male                          0.068          -0.015             0.008          0.080 *
                             (0.056)        (0.020)           (0.007)        (0.046)
age4150                       -0.021          0.017            -0.006         -0.031
                             (0.078)        (0.039)           (0.007)        (0.052)
age5164                       -0.018          0.016             0.006         -0.074
                             (0.066)        (0.027)           (0.011)        (0.048)
Observations
Multinomial logistic regression - Marginal probabilities shown
Other types of information is the reference group
Standard errors in brackets
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




                                                                                         1
