                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  AN EMPIRICAL ANALYSIS OF THE ECONOMIC IMPACT
                       OF FEDERAL TERRORISM REINSURANCE

                                            Jeffrey R. Brown
                                           J. David Cummins
                                          Christopher M. Lewis
                                                 Ran Wei

                                          Working Paper 10388
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w10388


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      March 2004




The views expressed herein are those of the author and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

©2004 by Jeffrey R. Brown, J. David Cummins, Christopher M. Lewis, and Ran Wei. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that
full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
An Empirical Analysis of the Economic Impact of Federal Terrorism Reinsurance
Jeffrey R. Brown, J. David Cummins, Christopher M. Lewis, and Ran Wei
NBER Working Paper No. 10388
March 2004
JEL No. G14, G22, G28
                                           ABSTRACT
This paper examines the role of the federal government in the market for terrorism reinsurance. We

investigate the stock price response of affected industries to a sequence of thirteen events

culminating in the enactment of the Terrorism Risk Insurance Act (TRIA) of 2002. In the industries

most likely to be affected by TRIA n banking, construction, insurance, real estate investment trusts,

transportation, and public utilities n the stock price effect was primarily negative. The Act was at

best value-neutral for property-casualty insurers because it eliminated the option not to offer

terrorism insurance. The negative response of the other industries may be attributable to the Act’s

impeding more efficient private market solutions, failing to address nuclear, chemical, and biological

hazards, and reducing market expectations of federal assistance following future terrorist attacks.

Jeffrey R. Brown                                      Christopher M. Lewis
Department of Finance                                 The Hartford
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign            55 Farmington Avenue, Suite 700
340 Wohlers Hall, MC-706                              Hartford, CT 06105
1206 South Sixth Street                               chris.lewis@thehartford.com
Champaign, IL 61820-9080
and NBER                                              Ran Wei
brownjr@uiuc.edu                                      University of Pennsylvania
                                                      The Wharton School
J. David Cummins                                      3641 Locust Walk
University of Pennsylvania                            Philadelphia, PA 19104-6365
The Wharton School                                    rwei@wharton.upenn.edu
3641 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6365
cummins@wharton.upenn.edu
1. Introduction

        What are the effects of insurance, or the lack thereof, on the economy? This question was posed

with particular urgency with the virtual collapse of the market for terrorism insurance and reinsurance

following the September 11, 2001 terrorist attacks. Congress responded to predictions of dire economic

consequences by passing the Terrorism Risk Insurance Act (TRIA) in November 2002. The objective of

the Act is to restore the market for terrorism insurance in the U.S. by providing a federal reinsurance

backstop for U.S. commercial property-liability insurers. On signing the bill, President Bush remarked

that it would “strengthen America's economy, build confidence with America's investors, and create jobs

for America's workers.” He attributed billions of dollars of cancelled or postponed construction projects,

downgraded financial ratings for mortgage-backed securities, and other severe economic consequences to

the inability of businesses to secure insurance against terrorism risk. 1

        The objective of this paper is to provide empirical evidence on whether TRIA has had the

intended economic effects by studying the stock price reaction of firms in the industries most affected by

the Act – banking, construction, insurance, real estate investment trusts (REITs), transportation, and

public utilities.2 We examine the stock price response of affected industries to a sequence of thirteen key

legislative events beginning with the initial proposals for a federal reinsurance role in October 2001 and

culminating in the signing of the Act into law on November 26, 2002.

        Based on the characteristics of TRIA and theoretical considerations, we formulate hypotheses

about the anticipated impact of the Act on affected industries. We argue that TRIA was at best value-

neutral for the property-casualty industry, the industry most directly impacted by the Act. In the months

following September 11, 2001, insurers eliminated terrorism coverage from most large commercial

insurance policies. By nullifying these exclusions and requiring insurers to offer terrorism coverage,

TRIA increased the potential exposure of the industry to terrorism losses. Moreover, the Act had little

1
  George W. Bush, “Remarks on signing the Terrorism Risk Insurance Act of 2002,” Weekly Compilation of
Presidential Documents, Proquest Information and Learning, December 2, 2002.
2
  We recognize that the effect of an event on stock prices does not necessarily measure the effect of an event on
economic welfare. For example, government action to prevent collusive behavior could have an adverse stock price
effect on the colluding firms but have a beneficial effect on economic welfare more generally. However, because
TRIA was designed to benefit the economy by making terrorism insurance available to the affected industries,
measuring the stock price impact of the Act provides a meaningful indication of its success.
impact on the international reinsurance market, which is dominated by foreign reinsurers. By providing

“free” government reinsurance, the Act may have actually delayed or prevented the reemergence of

private sector reinsurance for terrorism losses. U.S. insurers are now required to cover terrorism but are

unable in most cases to purchase adequate private reinsurance to cover the deductible and co-payment

loss exposure created by TRIA. Although the Act created a layer of federal terrorism reinsurance, to the

extent that insurance markets are competitive it is unlikely that insurers will be able to earn economic

rents by pricing the federal coverage layer into insurance policies.

        The predicted effects of TRIA on the other affected industries are also ambiguous. To the extent

that the Act resulted in an increase in the supply of available insurance coverage, affected industries such

as banking and construction could be expected to benefit from passage of the Act. Although TRIA

requires insurers to offer terrorism insurance to their commercial clients, there is no requirement that

businesses purchase, nor are prices regulated by the legislation. If, as appears to be the case, many

businesses decide to not to insure even with TRIA in place, then the potential benefits of the Act will be

blunted. To the extent that the existence of TRIA has impeded the emergence of more efficient private

market mechanisms for financing terrorism losses, the net impact of the Act may well have been negative.

Moreover, the Act does not provide coverage for nuclear, chemical, or biological hazards, which may be

the most serious threats from future terrorism. Finally, the Act may have lowered the market’s

expectations regarding federal assistance to industries affected by future terrorist attacks by substituting a

carefully circumscribed reinsurance program for more open-ended federal disaster assistance, a type of

Samaritan’s dilemma effect.

        To investigate these effects empirically, we analyze the largest possible sample of firms in the

affected industries that are traded on the New York Stock Exchange, the American Exchange, and Nasdaq

for which sufficient data were available to conduct the analysis. Because the events analyzed in the study

affect all sample firms simultaneously, it would not be appropriate to utilize the standard event study

methodology, which assumes that random errors are independent and homoskedastic across observations.

Accordingly, we adopt the multivariate regression model (MVRM) approach, which allows for cross-


                                                                                                             2
sectional heteroskedasticity and potential dependence among residuals. The regression models have

individual firm stock returns as dependent variables and market returns and event dummy variables as

regressors. Separate regression models are estimated for each industry and each event. Because

legislative events are not always as sharply defined as most other news events affecting stock prices, we

analyze several event windows surrounding each event. The impact of each event is measured as the

cumulative abnormal return on each stock over the event windows, and the average cumulative abnormal

returns are tested for statistical significance to measure the effect of the events on each industry.

        To provide an economic context for the event study results, we also present data on some

additional economic time series surrounding the World Trade Center and TRIA events. These data are of

two primary types – economic time series showing aggregate trends in relevant variables such as

construction expenditures and construction lending, and data on developments in property-casualty

insurance markets. By analyzing the stock price effect of TRIA and modeling the relevant economic time

series, we attempt to provide a comprehensive evaluation of the TRIA’s economic impact.

        By way of preview, we find that the stock price effect of TRIA on affected industries was

primarily negative. For example, for the two final events – Senate passage of the Act (November 20,

2002) and the signing of the bill into law (November 26, 2002) – the stock price effect was significantly

negative in most event windows for insurance companies, REITs, transportation firms, and banks. There

was a significant positive stock price effect for utilities in the days preceding passage of the Act, but the

utilities industry responded negatively to the signing of the bill into law. There were no significant effects

for the construction industry for the two ultimate events. These findings cast doubt on the efficacy of

TRIA in improving the economic environment of the affected industries.

        The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In section 2, we provide a conceptual

framework for the federal role in the market for terrorism insurance by discussing the market failure that

led to the government response, theories of government intervention, and policy options. Section 3

describes the events leading up to the passage of TRIA and outlines the provisions of TRIA. Section 4

discusses the hypotheses, study design, methodology, and results; and section 5 concludes.


                                                                                                                3
2. A Framework for Government Intervention in the Terrorism Insurance Market

        In the months following the terrorist attacks on September 11th, 2001, members of the property-

casualty insurance industry and other sectors began calling for the federal government to assume a role in

providing financial protection against future terrorism losses. In many ways, these calls for federal

intervention in the insurance markets were reminiscent of industry reactions following Hurricane Andrew

and the Northridge earthquake. However, because the merits of government intervention in the market

for terrorism insurance are still being debated, it is useful to examine the principal theories that have been

advanced concerning the appropriate government role in responding to private market failures generally.

We can then examine the nature of possible “failures” in the market for terrorism insurance in more detail

to provide the important context for understanding the development and potential effects of TRIA.

        There are three primary theories of public policy concerning the appropriate role of government

in addressing market failures in the insurance industry: laissez faire, public interest theory, and market-

enhancing policies. The fundamental premises – and policy prescriptions – associated with each of these

policy camps are quite different. Laissez-faire public policy maintains that any market-based equilibrium,

however imperfect, still provides a more efficient allocation of resources within the economy than an

equilibrium involving government intervention. In the absence of distortion-inducing government

intervention, the outcome of decentralized private sector activity will remain more efficient, even in a

second-best sense, than a market equilibrium with government intervention. From this perspective,

government intervention in markets results primarily from rent-seeking behavior of special interest groups

seeking to bolster their allocation of societal wealth (e.g., Stigler, 1971; Peltzman, 1989). From this

perspective, industry calls for government protection against terrorism risk may be viewed as

opportunistic attempts to secure an ex ante wealth transfer from taxpayers.

        The public interest theory of regulation contests this view (Musgrave and Musgrave, 1984).

Public interest theory suggests that the existence of market failures (e.g., moral hazard, economies of

scale, externalities) can lead to a sub-optimal allocation of resources and that government intervention

targeted at addressing these market failures can improve welfare. Whereas laissez faire policy suggests


                                                                                                              4
that private sector coordination is optimal, public interest theory suggests that, in specific instances, the

government can improve upon the market equilibrium by substituting for private sector coordination. The

challenge for public interest theory is to narrowly define the market failure and devise a minimalist policy

to correct this failure without creating additional distortions in the allocation of market resources.

Proponents of public interest theory, therefore, may maintain that the information asymmetries and

bankruptcy costs associated with the market for terrorism insurance may necessitate the role of the

government in “completing” the market for terrorism insurance.

         The third view of public policy intervention, the market-enhancing view, takes a middle position

(Lewis and Murdock, 1996, 1999). The market-enhancing view recognizes that market failures can create

sub-optimal allocations of wealth and that private-sector coordination is not always effective. This view

holds that public policy should facilitate the development of the private market, such as by improving

information flows, but should not create new federal institutions to substitute for private solutions. As an

example, the market-enhancing view would suggest that the federal government’s flood mapping program

may have provided valuable information to the market on flood zone risks, but that the provision of flood

insurance should be left to private institutions. At the same time, market-enhancing policy recognizes

that federal regulation can help facilitate the creation or enhancement of private institutions for solving

market failures such as the federal role in facilitating mortgage securitization markets in the U.S.3

         In evaluating the role of the federal government in the terrorism insurance market, it is useful to

compare the terrorism insurance debate with the calls for government intervention in the market for

natural disaster risk – another low frequency and high severity catastrophe risk. Beginning with

Hurricane Andrew in 1992, market expectations with regard to the frequency and severity of catastrophic

property events increased dramatically.4 Such low frequency, high severity events are particularly

challenging financing problems for private insurance markets. Insurance works best for smaller, more

frequent events, where it is possible to gather sufficient statistical data to support actuarial pricing
3
  The flip side of this argument is that a government-sponsored enterprises’ special privileges may remain fully in
place years later, even if the market failures no longer exist.
4
  Andrew was the largest disaster prior to the World Trade Center attacks, with insured losses of about $20 billion.
The Northridge earthquake in 1994 caused an additional $17 billion in insured losses, further increasing
expectations regarding potential catastrophic claims.
                                                                                                                       5
estimates and provide for risk diversification. Projected natural catastrophes, such as a $100 billion

California earthquake or Florida hurricane, also are large relative to the resources of the insurance

industry. Holding additional equity capital in the industry to shield against highly infrequent events

would be costly, due to regulatory, tax, and accounting constraints as well as transactions and agency

costs (Jaffee and Russell, 1997). Raising capital to pay losses following a large loss event also is difficult

because informational asymmetries between capital markets and insurers regarding loss exposure and

reserve adequacy would raise the cost of capital to potentially prohibitive levels. Private insurance

markets tend to be much more efficient at cross-sectional rather than cross-time diversification.

         Unlike the private insurance industry, the federal government may be better positioned to

accomplish cross-time diversification because it can raise money following a disaster by borrowing at the

risk-free rate of interest and then repay the loans out of tax revenues.5 The government’s ability to time-

diversify led to a Clinton administration proposal for government intervention in the market for

catastrophic property insurance during the 1990s (Lewis and Murdock, 1996, 1999), whereby the federal

government would hold periodic auctions of catastrophic excess of loss (XOL) reinsurance contracts to

insurers and reinsurers. The auctions would be conducted subject to a reservation price sufficient to

support the expected loss and expense costs under the contracts as well as a risk premium to encourage

private market “crowding-out” of the federal reinsurance. If a catastrophe were to occur that triggered

payment under the contracts, the federal government would finance the loss payments by issuing bonds.

Although the proposal was never adopted, it could provide a model for a different type of federal

involvement in the terrorism insurance market consistent with the market enhancing view of regulation.

         The market response to the increasing frequency and severity of catastrophe insurance losses in

the 1990s has potentially quite significant implications for the terrorism insurance issue. In spite of the

lack of federal government intervention in the market for natural catastrophe insurance, the private market

for natural catastrophe insurance did not collapse. Although insurance and reinsurance prices rose



5
 The assertion that the government has superior ability to time diversify may be challenged on the grounds that it
places risks on taxpayers regardless of their willingness to bear them. Further discussion of the consideration of the
costs of compensating taxpayers for the burden of supplying capital can be found in Braun, et al, 1998.
                                                                                                                     6
following Hurricane Andrew and the Northridge earthquake, significant amounts of new equity capital

flowed into the industry and reinsurance prices eventually declined (Guy Carpenter, 2003). For the most

part, insurance continued to be available in disaster prone areas such as Florida, and private insurers

eventually reentered the market for California earthquake insurance. 6 There is evidence of continuing

market anomalies, however, such as the skewness of reinsurance towards the coverage of relatively small

catastrophes and the apparent continuing thinness of reinsurance coverage for mega-catastrophes (Froot,

2001). Nevertheless, it is clear that private markets for natural catastrophe insurance have continued to

function with reasonable efficiency in the absence of federal support.

        The private market’s success in offering insurance and reinsurance against natural catastrophes

raises the question as to whether the terrorism insurance market would have rebounded in the absence of

TRIA and perhaps might have provided a more efficient solution to the market collapse that followed the

World Trade Center attacks. Another way of asking this question is to inquire as to whether terrorism

risk is different in some fundamental way from the risk of natural catastrophes. Many of the same

elements that make terrorism insurance a difficult problem for private insurance markets are also present

in the case of natural catastrophes, namely, the low frequency, high severity nature of the events and their

magnitude relative to the resources of the insurance industry. Like terrorism, estimating the frequency

and severity of the potential losses for natural disasters initially proved to be a difficult problem for

private insurers. However, the market responded in the form of catastrophe modeling firms such as

Applied Insurance Research (AIR) and Risk Management Solutions (RMS), which have developed

sophisticated models of hurricane and earthquake risks. Such modeling might also be feasible for

terrorism risk, and indeed the modeling firms have already begun studying the problem (Woo, 2003).

        Among the potentially important differences between terrorism risk and other types of natural and

man-made catastrophes are the following: (1) the potential magnitude of the losses may be significantly

larger, (2) the frequency and severity of loss may be more difficult to estimate, and (3) the expected loss
6
 State government solutions to catastrophe insurance availability problems have tended to involve the creation of
pools that are government mandated but privately financed, usually through the insurance industry. E.g., Hawaii
and Florida both established state pools to insure hurricane losses following Hurricanes Andrew and Iniki in 1992.
In 1996, the California legislature created the California Earthquake Authority, which is a privately financed but
publicly managed organization that provides earthquake insurance to California homeowners.
                                                                                                                     7
costs and the information needed to estimate costs interacts with government homeland security and

defense policies. Regarding magnitude, although a major California or Tokyo earthquake or a major

Florida hurricane could cause significant damage, e.g., $100 billion or more, the potential losses from

terrorist attacks are arguably far larger. For example, the detonation of a nuclear device in a major urban

center such as New York could cause significantly higher losses, possibly running into trillions of dollars.

        Although earthquakes and the storm tracks followed a given season’s hurricanes are nearly

impossible to predict in advance, science has made considerable progress in modeling these events.

Likewise, there is sufficient data on oil spills and other non-terrorist man-made disasters to permit

insurers to estimate loss costs. Terrorist attacks, on the other hand, are based on deliberate human acts,

undertaken with the intent of avoiding detection and causing as much damage as possible. Such actions

are inherently more difficult to predict and are outside the realm of traditional actuarial and scientific

modeling. Moreover, the past statistical loss experience with major attacks is insufficient to permit the use

of conventional empirical techniques. Although multi-disciplinary modeling approaches can be developed

that will aid in estimating terrorism losses, such modeling clearly poses unique challenges.

        The third major difference between terrorism and other types of catastrophes is that the frequency

and severity of terrorist attacks are also affected by U.S. governmental policy. U.S. foreign policy

directly impacts the motivation and likelihood of terrorist attacks from different militant factions. U.S.

domestic policy and the success of governmental homeland security programs also affects the mitigation

of terrorist attacks – both in preventing such attacks and mitigating the magnitude of any attack that does

occur. Moreover, much of the information required to predict terrorist events is likely to remain highly

classified and unavailable to those outside of agencies such as the FBI and CIA. In fact, one of the

arguments proffered in support of a federal role in the provision of terrorism insurance was that terrorism

events represent a negative externality of the national security policies of the sovereign government.

        Thus, there are a number of reasons to believe that the private market will have difficulty in

solving the terrorism risk insurance problem, at least for the largest and least frequent events, arguing for

some type of federal role. Nevertheless, there is evidence that some terrorism insurance was becoming


                                                                                                                8
available even prior to the passage of TRIA, indicating that a private market solution may have been

emerging. Moreover, even if terrorism represents a negative externality of government foreign policy, the

most efficient mechanism for financing terrorism losses may still reside within the private sector,

especially given the prominent role of property-specific loss mitigation in managing terrorism exposure.

Thus, the private market still might be able to provide a more efficient solution for terrorist events,

especially in the relatively low coverage layers. By examining the market reaction to the development of

federal legislation for terrorism insurance within key industries, we can obtain a glimpse at how the

market perceives the role of the government in the provision of terrorism insurance.

           As the empirical results will show, the government’s reaction to the calls for federal assistance in

the terrorism insurance market sends a mixed message with regard to the underlying theory of

intervention. On the one hand, an insurance industry proposal for a more or less permanent federal

reinsurance program was quickly dismissed by policymakers, and TRIA as enacted contains a stringent

sunset provision. This response could be interpreted as an indication that policymakers viewed industry

demands for government intervention as “opportunistic rent-seeking” by industries looking for societal

cross-subsidization in the management of terrorism risk. On the other hand, the program design adopted

under TRIA inserted the government somewhat more intrusively into the market for terrorism reinsurance

than might have been considered desirable under a purely market-enhancing rationale for intervention.

This relatively aggressive government intervention may have led to expectations that inefficiencies and

other downside risks would adversely impact the industries most dependent on terrorism insurance.

3. The Terrorism Risk Insurance Act of 2002

3.1 The Initial Push for Federal Intervention

       Despite insured losses that were estimated at the time to be between $30 billion and $70 billion,7

leaders in the U.S. insurance industry announced in the weeks immediately following 9/11/2001 that they

would not invoke the “acts of war” exclusions in their policies that might have allowed them to avoid




7
    Congressional Budget Office “Federal Reinsurance for Terrorism Risks,” October 2001, page 3.
                                                                                                              9
paying claims stemming from terrorist losses. 8 However, the industry also made it clear that it was not in

a position to continue to insure additional large terrorism losses going forward, and that some form of

federal assistance was needed. Maurice “Hank” Greenberg, CEO of the American International Group

(AIG), stated “The industry is going to pay its loss in the World Trade Center events. What we’re saying

is that if terrorist events continue, this is an industry with finite capital.”9

         At a meeting at the White House on September 21, 2001, several insurance industry executives

floated the idea of setting up a national terrorism insurance pool similar to the “Pool Re” program set up

by the U.K. in 1993 in response to IRA bombings (Barnes, 2002). The U.K. program established a

mutual terrorism reinsurer, Pool Re, funded by the insurers themselves, but with the government agreeing

to cover any losses that exceed the reserve. Arrangements between Pool Re and the U.K. government are

designed such that the net cost to the taxpayers is zero over a period of years. Like the U.K. plan, the

U.S. proposal would have established a terrorism insurer, the Homeland Security Mutual Reinsurance

Company, with federal reinsurance backstop for terrorism losses. Unlike the U.K. program, however, the

U.S. proposal made the government the “insurer of last resort,” i.e., insurers would not have been

required to reimburse the federal treasury for reinsurance payments received under the program

(Reinsurance Association of America, 2002).

         For a number of reasons, the insurance industry proposal did not gain much traction with the

Administration or Congress. Concerns were raised that the mechanism for funding the pool through

insurance company contributions was inadequate, and that the government would effectively have to step

in at a very low level of any future loss. In addition, many officials were concerned that the insurance

pool would turn into a permanent fixture in the insurance industry, leading to a permanent intrusion of the

federal government into a traditionally state-regulated industry. Also, concerns were raised about the

potential for market power that could develop with only a single, industry-controlled pool. As a result of

these and other concerns, it became clear that the insurance industry’s reinsurance pool proposal was not

8
  The Associated Press State & Local Wire, “Insurance industry leaders reassure White House,” September 23,
2001.
9
  Hamburger, Tom and Christopher Oster, “Insurance Industry Backs U.S. Terrorism Fund,” Wall Street Journal,
October 9, 2001, p. A.3.
                                                                                                               10
going to proceed successfully to legislation. However, the industry’s efforts did move the debate about

possible federal intervention onto center stage. By mid-October, the Bush Administration announced that

it was prepared to support a proposal for federal intervention in the market for terrorism insurance.

3.2 The Bush Administration Proposal

        The White House proposal, unveiled on October 15, 2001, called for the federal government to

assume responsibility for 80 percent of the first $20 billion of insured losses arising from a future terrorist

attack, and 90 percent of insured losses in excess of $20 billion. This coverage was to have been

provided for the rest of 2001 and all of calendar year 2002. For 2003 and 2004, the government’s share

of losses would decline, both through the use of industry deductibles and through a declining marginal

contribution, in an attempt to gradually return responsibility for terrorism coverage to the private sector.

        The Administration’s proposal was clearly designed to be temporary, with a declining federal role

that explicitly sunset after three years. This approach was consistent with the belief that the primary

rationale for federal intervention in this market was to provide a temporary transition period during which

the private market could rebuild capacity and learn how to model and price insurance (Brown, Kroszner,

and Jenn, 2002). The program also capped the combined liability of insurers and the federal government

at $100 billion. The absolute cap on insurer losses was designed to eliminate the extreme right tail of the

loss distribution for insurers, thus reducing exposure and mis-pricing risk, and also was intended to

provide Congress with flexibility to respond in the event of a truly catastrophic terrorist strike.

        Among economists, one of the most controversial features of the Administration plan was that the

federal insurance was being provided for “free” to the industry (although not to the federal treasury).

Two arguments were put forth to justify this. The first was simply that setting up a premium structure

would lead to the creation of a potentially inefficient and otherwise unnecessary bureaucracy, perhaps

making it more difficult for the program to sunset down the road. The second was that the government

was not in a position to determine an appropriate price for the insurance, so a price of zero was an implicit

fallback. Naturally, there are problems arising from the provision of federal insurance at no cost on the

margin. Perhaps the most important is that profit maximizing firms can be expected to optimally divide


                                                                                                            11
their resources on the margin between insuring losses and investing in risk mitigation. A zero price

artificially lowers the cost of insurance, potentially leading to sub-optimal investment in risk mitigation

activities. In addition, a zero price provides a severe and probably insurmountable impediment to the

reemergence of private terrorism reinsurance.

        The Administration plan also contained new limitations on civil actions arising from terrorist

activities, i.e., mass tort liability reform. These limitations, which included, for example, the assignment

of jurisdiction to a federal court, limits on non-economic damages, and a prohibition on punitive damages,

set the stage for rancorous debate with Congress in the months that followed.

3.3 House and Senate Proposals

    The White House proposal was a clear signal that the Administration was prepared to intervene in

the market for terrorism risk insurance. Among the critics of the approach were Republican members of

the House, who believed that the Administration proposal would place too great a potential fiscal burden

on the U.S. Treasury. Thus, in November 2001, the House introduced and quickly passed a complex

piece of legislation to provide for a federal reinsurance program. The proposal differed from the

Administration proposal in several ways. First, the House proposal would have sunset federal

involvement at the end of December 2002, providing only one year of federal intervention. Second, the

House bill included a mechanism whereby Treasury would recoup federal payments ex post by levying

premium surcharges on the industry. In other words, the Treasury would step in to help pay for losses

arising from a terrorist loss, but planned to recoup at least some of this revenue in the years following.

Such ex post cost recoupment, however, would not successfully provide the incentives for risk mitigation

that ex ante premiums would. Furthermore, in the aftermath of another terrorist event, the premium

surcharges would further distort private sector prices. It seems clear that this mechanism was designed

solely to limit the contingent liability facing the Treasury, not to address concerns about incentives.

    During November and December 2001, a number of alternative plans were also being debated on the

Senate side. The Senate plans generally provided for two years of coverage, with an option to extend for

a third year. The federal government would begin covering a share of losses only after the industry


                                                                                                              12
absorbed the first $10 billion in losses. Further details on the Administration proposal, the House

proposal, and the leading Senate plan can be found in Table 1.

     In addition to differences about how to structure and pay for the insurance element of the program,

the House and Senate plans differed significantly with regard to the limitations on mass tort liability

claims. The House version contained numerous provisions, including caps on non-economic damages

and a prohibition on punitive damages, which many Senate Democrats would not support. Largely as a

result of this tort dispute, the Senate adjourned in late December 2001 without an agreement.

3.4 Terrorism Coverage in the Absence of a Federal Program

     As a result of the breakdown of negotiations in the Senate, 2002 began with no legislation in place to

provide for a federal role in the market for terrorism insurance. After the September 11th terrorist attacks,

reinsurers began writing terrorism exclusions into their policies. A majority of those contracts renewed at

the beginning of January 2002,10 leaving U.S. primary insurers with virtually no opportunity to reinsure

their exposure. As a result, the primary insurers’ exposure to terrorism risk increased, at least until

insurers were able, in turn, to write terrorism exclusions into their own policies. Recognizing that

substantial exposure to terrorism risk without adequate opportunities for reinsurance could pose

substantial solvency risks, state insurance regulators were rapidly approving terrorism exclusions. By

early 2002, insurance regulators in 45 states had approved the use of terrorism exclusions. These

exclusions meant that insurers in those states were permitted to exclude from their standard commercial

insurance coverage any losses arising due to a terrorist event, meaning that business and property owners

would no longer be able to count on an insurance payoff in the event of a loss due to terrorist activity.11

     Unlike reinsurance contracts, the renewal dates of which are heavily concentrated in January,

renewals of primary insurance contracts are spread more uniformly through the year. Thus, the extent of

risk shifting from primary insurers and onto business and property owners increased as the year

progressed. In February 2002, the GAO gave Congressional testimony providing “examples of large
10
   GAO-02-472T, “Terrorism Insurance: Rising Uninsured Exposure to Attacks Heightens Potential Economic
Vulnerabilities.”
11
   An exception to the general exclusion of terrorism from commercial insurance policies following 9/11 is coverage
for workers’ compensation insurance. Workers’ compensation is mandated by state law to cover work injuries from
all causes, and the states did not revise the workers’ compensation laws to allow terrorism exclusions.
                                                                                                                13
projects canceling or experiencing delays have surfaced, with the lack of terrorism coverage being cited

as the principal contributing factor.”12 According to a survey by Council of Insurance Agents and

Brokers, in the first quarter of 2002, the market for property-casualty insurance experienced “sharply

higher premiums, higher deductibles, lower limits and restricted capacity from coast to coast and across

the major lines of commercial insurance.”13 By October, 2002, President Bush claimed that over $15.5

billion worth of construction projects were “not going forward because they can’t get insurance on their

projects, can’t insure the buildings or the project.”14 These anecdotal statistics are quoted here to

exemplify the type of information that motivated passage of the Act.

3.5 The Terrorism Risk Insurance Act of 2002 (TRIA)

     In the summer of 2002, after many months of inaction, the Senate reinitiated its efforts to pass

terrorism insurance legislation. The Senate passed a bill in June that differed substantially from the

House bill. The months that followed were focused on negotiations between the House and the Senate

over how to create a bill that both houses could support. This debate proved rancorous, and once again

the debate over tort reform threatened to derail the process. It was not until after the mid-term elections in

November 2002 that agreement was finally reached during an all-night marathon negotiation session.

The Terrorism Risk Insurance Act of 2002 was signed into law by President Bush on November 26, 2002,

more than 14 months after the terrorist attacks that precipitated its creation.

        TRIA established the Terrorism Insurance Program within the Department of the Treasury. The

program, which expires on December 31, 2005, covers commercial property-casualty insurance, and all

insurers operating in the U.S. are required to participate. Through the end of 2004, insurers are required

to “make available property and casualty insurance coverage for insured losses that does not differ

materially from the terms, amounts, and other coverage limitations applicable to losses arising from

events other than terrorism.”15 The Secretary of the Treasury has the authority to extend the “make

available” provision one additional year, through the end of the three-year program. In short, this

12
   GAO testimony page 9
13
   CIAB press release 4/16/2002
14
   President Bush remarks October 1, 2002
15
   Page 7 of TRIA legislation
                                                                                                           14
legislation nullified the state terrorism exclusions, and requires that insurers offer terrorism coverage.16

The wording of the Act implicitly omits coverage of nuclear, chemical, and biological hazards, which are

not covered by commercial property-casualty policies.

         For the federal government to provide payment under this Act, the Secretary of the Treasury must

certify that a loss was due to an act of terrorism, defined as a violent act or an act that is dangerous to

human life, property or infrastructure, and to have “been committed by an individual or individuals acting

on behalf of any foreign person or foreign interest, as part of an effort to coerce the civilian population of

the United States or to influence the policy . . . of the United States Government by coercion.”17 Acts of

war are excluded, and losses from any terrorist act must exceed $5 million before the Act takes effect.

         If a loss meets these requirements, the loss is shared by the insurance industry and the federal

government under the deductible, copayment, and recoupment provisions of the Act. The coverage

structure of the Act is diagrammed in Figure 1. In 2003, for example, each individual insurer has a

terrorism insurance deductible of 7 percent of its direct earned premiums from the prior calendar year.18

Above this amount, the federal government pays for 90 percent of all insured losses. However, law

provides for mandatory recoupment of the federal share of losses up to the level of the “insurance

marketplace aggregate retention limit,” set at $10 billion in the first year of the program.19 This

recoupment is to occur through “terrorism loss risk-spreading premiums,” a premium surcharge on

property-casualty insurance policies in force after the event with a maximum surcharge of 3% of

premiums per year. In addition, the Treasury Secretary has the discretion to demand additional

recoupment, taking into account the cost to taxpayers, the economic conditions of the commercial

marketplace, the affordability of insurance, and “such other factors as the Secretary considers

appropriate.” In other words, the Treasury Secretary could choose to recoup 100 percent of federal

outlays under this program through ex post premium surcharges. As with the earliest proposals, the total,



16
   In this paper we use the term “terrorism coverage” as shorthand for a policy that does not contain a specific
terrorism exclusion.
17
   Page 3 of TRIA legislation
18
   This insurer deductible rises to 10 percent in 2004 and 15 percent in 2005.
19
   This “Insurance Market Aggregate Retention” rises to $12.5 billion in 2004, and $15 billion if extended to 2005.
                                                                                                                  15
combined liability of both the government and private insurers is capped at $100 billion.20

4. Financial Market Response to TRIA 2002

         We analyze the effects of TRIA by studying the stock prices of firms in the industries most likely

to be affected by the Act. The use of market value data is more powerful than other approaches in

studying the effects of events such as the passage of new legislation because market prices immediately

reflect the market’s assessment of new information on the affected firms and industries (Schwert, 1981).

Because the value of any asset is determined by the expected value of its future cash flows, developing

hypotheses about TRIA requires an analysis of the potential effects of the Act on the cash flows of firms

participating in the market for terrorism insurance. The objective of this section is to formulate

hypotheses about the likely effects of TRIA. We begin with a general discussion of the industries most

likely to be affected by the Act and then turn to a more conceptual discussion of the potential effects of

the Act on securities market expectations.

4.1. Potential Effects of TRIA

4.1.1 Industries Most Likely To Be Affected

         The industry most likely to be affected by the Act is the property-casualty (P&C) insurance

industry. P&C insurers were the primary advocates of federal intervention in months following 9/11/01.

Thus, it might seem natural to presume that industry leaders believed that federal legislation would be

good for the industry, suggesting that favorable news about that legislation would positively impact P&C

insurer stocks. By restoring the market for terrorism insurance and reinsurance, TRIA provided an

opportunity for insurers to increase their revenues. Furthermore, by capping industry losses, the Act

limits insurer losses from terrorism. On the other hand, the reinsurance coverage under TRIA is

structured very differently from the industry’s initial “Homeland Mutual” proposal, and it is difficult to

construe the deductible, co-payment, and recoupment provisions of the Act as benefiting the industry.

Moreover, TRIA had little impact on the international reinsurance market, which is dominated by foreign

20
  The final legislation included a limited amount of “litigation management” features, including the exclusion of
punitive damages from coverage under the program, and federal, rather than state, jurisdiction in cases arising from
the terrorist act.

                                                                                                                  16
insurers. Thus, U.S. insurers are required to offer terrorism coverage, but they are unable in most cases to

purchase private reinsurance to cover their deductible and co-payment losses.

        Even if TRIA were found to have a non-positive effect on P&C insurers, however, this would not

mean that the market viewed TRIA negatively overall. After all, supporters of TRIA were always careful

to argue that this legislation was not simply a “bailout” of the insurance industry, and most of the debate

focused on the broader economic implications of legislation for other industries. Indeed, on signing the

bill into law, President Bush cited billions of dollars of cancelled or postponed construction projects,

downgraded financial ratings for mortgage-backed securities, and other adverse economic

consequences.21 The idea that this legislation was needed to support numerous industries was

summarized by a spokesperson for the Financial Service Roundtable this way: “The issue is about the

economy. If you can’t get insurance, you can’t get loans. If you can’t get loans, you can’t construct new

buildings. If you can’t construct buildings, people cannot go to work. It affects everybody.”22

        The following sectors were often singled out as likely beneficiaries of the legislation:

        1. Real Estate: There were two primary concerns raised for property owners. The first was that,
           in the absence of a functioning insurance market, property owners would be required to bear
           the risk of terrorism losses themselves. Second, lenders typically require businesses to insure
           any property that is used to secure a loan. As such, in the absence of insurance, existing
           commercial properties might be more difficult to sell, thus creating liquidity problems.

        2. Construction: Because lenders typically require insurance, concerns were voiced that new
           construction projects might not be able to secure financing, leading to delays or cancellations
           of projects.

        3. Banking: Because most banks require proof of insurance on properties as an on-going
           covenant on a loan, the absence of insurance against terrorism risk would cause “technical
           defaults” on loans. As a result, the unavailability of terrorism insurance would force banks to
           either waive these technical defaults and bear some of the terrorism risk themselves, or start
           accelerating payments and calling in loans.

        4. Transportation: Especially due to the nature of the terrorist attacks of 9/11/01, there was
           great apprehension that, in the absence of insurance, railroads, trucking companies, and ships
           would be unable to transport many types of cargo or face limitations on their destinations.

        5. Utilities: In the aftermath of 9/11/01, serious concerns were raised about the vulnerability of
           power plants, particularly nuclear plants. The primary concern was that, absent insurance

21
   President George W. Bush, “Remarks on signing the Terrorism Risk Insurance Act of 2002,” Weekly Compilation
of Presidential Documents, Proquest Information and Learning, December 2, 2002.
22
   Remarks by Lisa McGreevy of Financial Services Roundtable, November 7, 2001
                                                                                                           17
            coverage, utilities would have to bear this risk, pass it along to consumers through higher
            prices, or scale back operations at vulnerable plants.

        The clear message of the political rhetoric supporting a federal insurance program was that these

affected industries would be the primary beneficiaries. Thus, if TRIA were to provide a net benefit to the

economy, it would be reasonable to predict that positive news about likelihood of enacting a federal

program result in positive equity price movements for companies in the affected industries. Likewise, if

the program is viewed by securities markets as adversely affecting the economy, the effects would be

expected to be most pronounced in P&C insurance and the other industries identified above.

        Two other potentially interesting industries to consider are life insurance and insurance agents

and brokers. The shock to the life insurance industry from September 11 was about $3 billion, not nearly

as large as that to P&C insurers.23 Because life insurers did not suffer the same capital shock as P&C

insurers, and because life insurers were less active in lobbying for a federal role, they were generally “left

out” of the federal terrorism legislative process. In some respects, therefore, they represent an interesting

control group for studying the effects of TRIA on insurers. Agents and brokers represent another

interesting control group because they are generally compensated as a percentage of premium revenues

but typically take no underwriting risk. Thus, any legislation leading to an increase in insurance

premiums would seem to benefit agents and brokers, without subjecting them to significant risk of

incurring losses under the Act’s deductible and co-payment provisions.

4.1.2. Hypothesized Effects of TRIA

        In general, TRIA could be expected to have both direct and indirect effects on the cash flows of

P&C insurers. The direct effects would include the impact on premium and loss cash flows for losses

arising from terrorist events. To the extent that the Act resulted in additional insurance coverage being

issued, the P&C insurance industry would receive additional revenues and would be liable for losses

covered by the insurance. Part of these losses would be borne by the industry in the form of deductibles

and copayments, and part would be borne by the federal government to the extent that the Treasury’s

23
 Insurance Information Institute, 2002, “The Long Shadow of September 11 - Impacts & Implications for Insurers
and Reinsurers,” PowerPoint presentation, New York.

                                                                                                             18
discretionary recoupment option is not fully exercised following future terrorist attacks. In a competitive

market, it would be anticipated that the premiums collected by insurers would be sufficient to cover their

expected losses under the program, including a fair profit provision. Losses priced into the policies would

include any expected costs arising out of the Treasury’s recoupment option as well as potential costs

arising from coverage disputes and delays in payment by the Treasury. Because insurance markets are

generally competitive, insurers would not be expected to be able to earn rents by pricing the expected

value of unrecouped federal reinsurance payments into terrorism insurance policies. Thus, to the extent

that markets are rational and competitive, TRIA might be expected to have little or no net effect on the

P&C industry, i.e., terrorism insurance could be expected to be priced as a zero net present value project.

         However, there are also reasons to believe that TRIA could have a net negative effect on the P&C

insurance industry. The unambiguous and almost immediate insurance market response to the 9/11

terrorist attacks was the disappearance of terrorism insurance and reinsurance coverage. If insurance

markets are rational and competitive, this response revealed that insurers did not believe that terrorism

insurance could be written at a break even profit rate, i.e., the industry reacted as if writing terrorism

insurance would reduce shareholder market value. This response is most likely attributable to the

increased parameter uncertainty regarding terrorist events as well as the potential magnitude of such

events relative to industry capital.24 As noted earlier, state regulators, concerned about insolvency risk,

allowed insurers to eliminate terrorism coverage from commercial insurance policies by early 2002. By

nullifying these exclusions and requiring insurers to offer terrorism coverage, TRIA effectively reversed

the state-endorsed competitive market response to 9/11. In effect, insurers had the option, prior to

November 2002, of offering or not offering terrorism coverage; and the Act eliminated the option not to

offer. The indirect effects of TRIA on insurers also are likely to be mostly adverse. These effects include

anticipated transactions costs generated by government regulatory and reporting requirements under the

Act, to the extent that such costs cannot be recovered from policyholders, as well as market inefficiencies



24
  Thus, the industry response to the 9/11 terrorist attack parallels developments following the commercial liability
insurance crisis of the 1980s as well as natural catastrophes such as Hurricane Andrew and the Northridge
earthquake. See Cummins, Harrington, and Klein (1991) and Froot and O’Connell (1999).
                                                                                                                   19
arising from governmental intervention in the insurance and reinsurance markets. Thus, at best, TRIA

appears to be value-neutral for P&C insurers and a net negative effect would not be surprising.

        The possibility also exists that TRIA had more general indirect effects on the economy. Such

effects could include a type of “Samaritan’s dilemma” problem (e.g., Buchanan, 1975). That is, prior to

the Act, there may have been some expectation that the government would intervene to compensate

uncovered terrorism losses and/or to shelter firms from insolvency arising from such losses. The

assistance to the airline industry following the World Trade Center attacks undoubtedly fueled such

expectations, at least for some industries. It is also possible that the markets in general may have been

expecting some degree of explicit “socialization” of the losses from nuclear, chemical, or biological

attacks. Although the existence and nature of such effects are highly uncertain, it is possible that the

government’s provision of carefully prescribed terrorism reinsurance protection lowered overall market

expectations about future governmental cash flows to industries affected by terrorist events.

        Another potentially adverse indirect effect of the legislation is its potential for preventing or

delaying the development of efficient private market mechanisms for financing terrorism losses. The

private market arguably would provide a much more efficient mechanism for covering terrorism losses

than a piece of federal legislation that came into existence through political compromise rather than the

operation of the market. Not only does the existence of TRIA potentially discourage market innovation,

but its pricing of federal reinsurance coverage at zero virtually guarantees that private reinsurance will not

reemerge during the existence of the program. Hence, to the extent that securities markets anticipated the

reemergence of efficient private market alternatives, the Act might be expected to have an adverse effect

on firms exposed to terrorism losses.

        A final comment has to do with the role of terrorism insurance in some of the potentially affected

industries. Terrorism can be viewed as a low probability, high severity event. As such, firms facing

potential terrorism losses could benefit from a well-functioning terrorism insurance market. Nevertheless,

terrorism remains only one of many events, some insurable and some not insurable, that affect the value

of the industries analyzed in this paper. To the extent that exposed properties, such as large office


                                                                                                            20
buildings, are held by well-diversified investors owning securities such as mortgage-backed bonds and

shares in REITs, investors benefit because the number of properties likely to be affected by an attack will

be small relative to the total number of properties in their portfolios. Thus, holding a diversified portfolio

creates “homemade insurance” which may be as effective in some respects as formal coverage purchased

in insurance markets. Moreover, to the extent that a major terrorist attack has systematic market effects

on portfolio credit quality and asset values more generally, such market-wide effects are not covered by

insurance in any event. Therefore, although terrorism clearly has the potential to impose major costs on

specific investors and specific businesses operating in affected industries, to some extent diversified

investing may provide a more efficient mechanism for financing terrorism losses.

        On net, our prediction regarding industries other than P&C insurance is ambiguous. By

potentially creating a large transfer payment from taxpayers to affected industries and by restoring, at

least to a limited extent, the market for terrorism insurance, the Act could be expected to have a positive

market value impact for the affected industries. However, to the extent that the Act led to a net reduction

in expected future governmental transfer payments to industries affected by terrorism, impeded the

development of more efficient private market solutions, and created transactions costs and other

inefficiencies, the net effect of TRIA on industries other than P&C insurance may be adverse.

4.2 Event Study Analysis of Key TRIA Legislative Events

        We next investigate how the financial markets perceived federal intervention into the market for

terrorism insurance. To do this, we utilize an event study methodology, thus relying on rationality of the

market to reflect the value of TRIA in the asset prices of the affected industries.

4.2.1 Event definitions

        In an ideal event study, the release of information occurs within a very well-defined event

window, so that there is little ambiguity about the timing of the information release. In examining the

evolution of legislative initiatives, however, the timing of information release can be more problematic

and require greater care in defining the event windows being examined. However, there is a long history

of research investigating the impact of legislative events on stock prices, ranging from the effect of the


                                                                                                             21
1986 federal tax reform act (Cutler, 1988), to financial services deregulation (e.g., James, 1983; Cornett

and Tehranian, 1990), and legislation directed at regulating the market for corporate takeovers (e.g.,

Schumann, 1988).25 As indicated above, identifying a “clean” event window is more difficult with

legislative events, as the information is often muddled, and tends to “trickle out” over time as the

legislation goes through multiple iterations, negotiations, and debates. The legislative path to the passage

of TRIA was unquestionably a circuitous one. In the last quarter of 2001, competing proposals were

unveiled by the White House, the House Financial Services Committee, and various combinations of

Senators. Disputes over tort reform “killed” the legislation in late December, but it was then reborn in

June 2002. Only after a series of stops and starts did the legislation ultimately pass.

        While such a muddled path makes event studies more difficult, we are fortunate that on several

key dates, there was a clear release of information that should have led to a definite revision of prior

expectations about the probability that TRIA would become law. These particularly “clean” event dates

provide the best opportunity to learn about the market’s reaction to TRIA, and for these dates, we can

confidently use fairly narrow event windows to measure the market effect. We also examine other

important event dates in the life of TRIA, for which the exact timing of the information release was

somewhat less clear. In these cases, we are careful to examine slightly broader event windows in order to

capture any potential “leakage” of information in the days prior to the event.

        We have selected 13 key event dates with which to test for market value changes in response to

developments in the drafting and passage of TRIA. The first 6 dates are from the fourth quarter of 2001.

These dates trace the initial negative reaction to the insurance industry proposal, the unveiling of the

White House’s proposal, actions leading to passage of H.R. 3210 in the House, and the final collapse of

agreement that led the Senate to adjourn in 2001 with no legislation. The second set of 7 events begins in

June 2002, when the legislation suddenly came back to life and passed the Senate. These events trace key

developments in the House-Senate conference process, ultimately leading to final passage of the revised

legislation by both the House and Senate in late November 2002. The last event date is the signing of the

25
  For a review of event studies of the impact of laws and regulations on corporations, see Bhagat and Romano
(2002).
                                                                                                               22
bill into law by President Bush on November 26, 2002. Although it could be argued that the signing of

the bill was a virtual certainty following passage by Congress, in view of the President’s strong

statements supporting terrorism insurance legislation, there was perhaps some residual uncertainty

attributable to the tort reform issue and other provisions of the compromise bill. Accordingly, for

completeness, we include the signing of the bill as the last event. The 13 events are summarized in Table

2. Column (1) denotes the number that we assign to each event. Column (2) is the calendar date that we

denote as date 0 in event time. This corresponds to the calendar date that we have identified as the date of

key information release. Below this date, we report the preferred event window that we use in our

calculation of cumulative abnormal returns, selected based on our analysis of the legislative process

surrounding each announcement date. Column (3) of Table 2 provides a brief description of each event.

4.2.2 Event Study Methodology

        For each of the 13 event dates detailed in Table 2, we calculate the abnormal returns

separately for each of the following industries: P&C insurers, life insurers, insurance agents and

brokers, the overall insurance industry (including P&C insurers, life insurers, and agents and

brokers), banks, REITs, construction, utilities, and transportation. In general, all firms traded on

the New York Stock Exchange, the American Stock Exchange, and NASDAQ with adequate

data to conduct the analysis were included in each industry sample. More details on sample

selection criteria are presented in an Appendix available from the authors.

        The standard approach in event-studies is to estimate abnormal returns on potentially affected

stocks using the market model, whereby returns on a given stock are regressed on the return on the market

portfolio and the abnormal return on day t in the event window for security is calculated as the estimated

disturbance term of the market model calculated out-of-sample (see, for example, MacKinlay, 1997).

Relying on the standard approach in analyzing the effects of TRIA, however, would not be appropriate

because this approach relies on the assumption that the residuals of the market model equation are

independent and identically distributed. In this case, both the expected returns and residual variances are

likely to differ across firms. Moreover, the residuals will not be independent if the event affects all firms
                                                                                                           23
at the same time, especially if the firms are in the same or related industries (Schipper and Thompson,

1983; Binder, 1985;). To allow for cross-sectional heteroskedasticity and potential dependence among

residuals, we adopt the multivariate regression model (MVRM) approach. The MVRM approach utilizes

joint generalized least squares (GLS) to estimate a system of equations to explain the returns of the stocks

in a given sample. The system of equations is specified as follows:

                                                            w2
                                  R1t = α1 + β1 R mt +      ∑γ
                                                         a =− w1
                                                                      1a   Dat + ε1t

                                                              w2
                                  R 2t = α 2 + β 2 R mt +    ∑γ
                                                            a =− w1
                                                                       2a   Dat + ε 2t
                                                                                                           (1)
                                  ...
                                                              w2
                                  R nt = α n + β n R mt +    ∑γ
                                                            a =− w1
                                                                       na   Dat + ε nt


where Rit is the total holding period return (including dividends) on security i on day t, Rmt is the market

return on day t, αi, βi, and the γia are parameters to be estimated, and Dat are dummy variables set equal to

1 on the a-th announcement day for a given event and to zero otherwise. Stock return data are from the

Center for Research in Security Prices (CRSP), with the CRSP equally weighted market return

representing Rmt. Event windows for a given event are denoted (-w1,+w2), which stands for a window

beginning w1 days prior to the event announcement, including the announcement day (day 0), and

extending w2 days after the announcement.

        The disturbance terms, εit, are assumed to be independent and identically distributed over-time for

a given firm but are allowed to have different variances across equations (heteroskedasticity), i.e., E(εit2)

= σi2 ≠ E(εjt2) = σj2. Moreover, the disturbance terms across equations are allowed to be correlated

contemporaneously, i.e., E(εitεjt) ≠ 0, but the non-contemporaneous covariances are assumed to be zero,

E(εitεj,t-k) = 0, k > 0. These are standard assumptions in the literature using the MVRM approach.

        The abnormal returns in the MVRM are given by the estimated γia parameters. The cumulative

abnormal return for firm i in the (-w1,+w2) event window is the estimate γi given by:




                                                                                                            24
                                                         w2
                                                γi =    ∑γ
                                                       a =− w1
                                                                 i,a                                         (2)


and the cumulative average abnormal return is the estimate γ , given by

                                                       1 N
                                                γ =      ∑γi
                                                       N i =1
                                                                                                             (3)


The primary null hypothesis tested is the following:

        Hypothesis: The cumulative average abnormal return is equal to zero: γ = 0

        The system of equations (1) is estimated separately for each of the industries analyzed in this

study. Although this approach implicitly assumes that the residuals are contemporaneously uncorrelated

across industries, estimating the models for all industries simultaneously would be infeasible because of

inadequate degrees of freedom. Moreover, the industries in the study are expected to react somewhat

differently to the passage of TRIA.

        Since our hypotheses tests are joint across all firms in the sample, efficient use of the data

involves taking into account the cross-sectional covariances among the N firms through the estimated

covariance matrix of residuals (Schipper and Thompson, 1983). Thus, the covariance matrix must be

inverted in order to obtain test statistics. Although inversion is possible as long as the number of time-

series observations exceeds the number of firms, Schipper and Thompson (1983) show that the inverted

matrix estimate has an inverted Wishart distribution “which has undesirable properties when the number

of time-series observations is not greater than twice one plus the number of firms,” i.e., the number of

time series observations should be: T > 2*(N+1). The number of firms in our industry samples ranges

from 28 in construction to nearly 400 in banking. However, we did not consider it advisable to use

lengthy estimation periods for our models because of the likelihood that the parameter estimates (αi and

βi) might not be stable over relatively long periods of time. Accordingly, we decided to limit the total

number of firm-level observations in any given sample to 200 firms. This resulted in a reduced sample

only for the banking industry. Because larger banks are more likely to be involved in financing high

value commercial and industrial loans, which arguably are the ones most likely to be affected by

                                                                                                             25
terrorism-related issues, we restricted the banking sample to the 200 largest banks in terms of market

capitalization. This gave us a maximum estimation period (days prior to the event) of 400 market trading

days, or approximately 1.6 years. For industries where 2*(N+1) was less than or equal to 250, we adopted

the standard event study estimation period of 250 trading days, or approximately one year.26

4.3 Empirical Results

        The analysis was conducted for a series of event windows for each event listed in Table 2. The

windows include our preferred event window for each event (except event 1, where there are two

preferred windows) as well as three “standard” windows utilized for each event: (-1,+1), (-5,+5), and (-

10,+10). In some cases, the preferred window is the same as one of the standard windows, so only three

rather than four event windows are reported. As mentioned, the wider windows are designed to allow for

information leakage prior to the event as well as further Congressional negotiations and other information

that might be released following the event. For example, the wider windows surrounding the passage of

the bill and its signing into law by the President are included because it is likely that the precise meaning

of various provisions of the bill and hence their impact on expected future cash flows may not have been

known immediately but rather may have emerged after further information was released by government

officials. Among other things, regulations from Treasury specifying how the coverage under the Act is to

be administered were not forthcoming for several weeks following passage. In interpreting the results, it

should be remembered that event 6, which is focused on the collapse in negotiations and the temporary

“death” of the legislation, ought to have a different sign from most of the other events in which

information had either an ambiguous or a positive effect on the probability that legislation would pass.

        The results of the analysis are provided in Table 3. The table gives the cumulative average

abnormal returns (CAAR) for each event and event window covered by the study as well as the p-value

for the F-tests of statistical significance and the significance level for each F-test. We also computed the

median average abnormal return, which supports the same conclusions as the average.

        We first discuss the effect of the passage of TRIA on all of the industries analyzed. This is event

26
  The estimation period is 400 days for the overall insurance industry, REITS, and banking, and 250 days for the
other industries.
                                                                                                                   26
number 12, centered on November 20, 2002. The wider windows for this event also capture the passage

of the legislation in the House four business days earlier (November 14). The results for event 12 are

summarized in Figure 2, which shows the CAAR results for the (-1,+1), (-5,+5), and (-10,+10) event

windows. The results indicate a statistically significant negative response for all event windows for all

segments of the insurance industry – P&C insurers, life insurers, agents and brokers, and the insurance

industry total. For example, for the (-5,+5) window P&C insurer stocks on average lost 2.95% of their

value, life insurer stocks lost 4.68%, and agent and broker stocks lost 5.03%. It is somewhat surprising

that the impact on life insurers and agents and brokers is stronger than for P&C insurers, the industry

segment most directly affected by the Act. This suggests that the market may have been reacting to the

general implications of the Act for insurance market efficiency rather than to the specific implications for

terrorism insurance coverage. The agent and broker response is especially noteworthy because agents and

brokers primarily make their money from commissions on insurance premiums and generally take no

underwriting risk. Consequently, the negative response could indicate that the market anticipated lower

revenues for agents and brokers following passage of the Act, i.e., that premium revenues for terrorism

coverage would have been higher had the government not intervened in the private insurance market.

        The average cumulative abnormal returns are also statistically significant and negative in all three

event windows shown in Figure 2 for REITs and transportation firms. The CAARs are also negative and

statistically significant in the (-5,+5) and (-10,+10) windows for banks. The negative stock price impact

for REITs is generally less than for insurers, and the negative reaction for banks is smaller than for

insurers in the (-5,+5) window but larger in the (-10,+10) window. Thus, passage of the Act was bad

news for REITs, transportation firms, and banks. None of the CAARs is statistically significant for

construction firms in any of the windows surrounding 11/20/2002. The only statistically significant

positive CAAR for any of the industries included in the analysis is for utilities in the (-4,0) window.

        There was an additional negative stock price effect for most of the industries included in the study

associated with the signing of the bill into law on 11/26/02. A negative and significant reaction was

registered in all three event windows life insurers, the insurance sector as a whole, REITS, transportation


                                                                                                            27
firms, and banks, and the reaction was negative and significant in two of three windows for utilities. The

P&C industry returns were negative but not statistically significant, and the returns for construction firms

were not statistically significant. Thus, the results for both the passage of the Act and the signing of the

bill into law provide strong evidence that TRIA was not viewed favorably by securities markets.

        We next consider the impact of the other events on specific industries. The stock price reaction

for P&C insurers in the (-1,+1), (-5,+5), and (-10,+10) windows for all thirteen events is shown in Figure

3. P&C stock prices reacted negatively to the majority of news events involving TRIA, and the reaction

is statistically significant for at least one of the three windows for events 1, 2, 4, 5, 11, and 12.

Significant positive CAARs were recorded only in the (-2,+2) window for event 7 and the (-1,+1) window

for event 10. Event 7 on June 6, 2002, involved the announcement that a new insurance plan sponsored

by Senators Dodd and Schumer “may end Senate stalemate,” and thus could be interpreted as a favorable

response to forward movement towards passage of the legislation. However, event 10, on October 7,

2002, was a negative announcement regarding the legislation, indicating continuing disagreement

between Democrats and Republicans on the tort liability issue. Thus, there again appears to be very little

evidence that any news concerning the passage of terrorism legislation was viewed favorably by the

market with respect to P&C insurers.

        The results for life insurers are similar to those for P&C insurers for most of the events,

paralleling the results for event number 12 shown in Figure 2. Life insurers had a positive stock price

response in the (-5,+5) and (-10,+10) windows for event 9, but the response is significant only for the

latter window, which overlaps event 10. Life insurers had a significant positive stock price response in all

three windows for event 10. Because news events for event 9 (10/02/02) mention a major lobbying push

by life insurers to extend the legislation to cover them, the significant positive response to event 10 may

indicate that the life insurers’ hopes were still alive in the period surrounding this event (10/07/02). If so,

this would provide one of the few indications of a positive stock price response to the bill in the insurance

sector. This interpretation is somewhat doubtful, however, in view of fact that the news announcements

in connection with event 10 primarily concerned disagreements over tort reform. Insurance agents and


                                                                                                             28
brokers had a statistically significant negative stock price response in at least one window for events 1, 2,

4, 5, 9, and 12 and had no significant positive stock price response in any of the event windows studied.

        The results for the REITs generally parallel those for P&C and life insurers. The REITS had

statistically significant negative stock price responses in at least one window for all events except 6, 7,

and 8 and had statistically significant negative responses for at least three windows for events 1, 2, 9, 10,

11, 12, and 13. REITs registered statistically significant positive returns in all windows for event 6,

12/20/01, the date when negotiations over the bill collapsed due to the tort liability features, and the effort

to enact the legislation in 2001 ended. Thus, movements toward a federal role in terrorism insurance

generally were bad news for the REITs. This could reflect the view that federal efforts would impede a

more efficient private market solution to the problem or a Samaritan’s dilemma effect.

        Bank stocks registered statistically significant negative CAARs in at least one window for events

1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 9, 11, 12, and 13. Banks had significant positive CAARs in response to the event 6

announcement on 12/20/01 that agreement on the bill had collapsed and also had a significant positive

response in all three windows for event 10. These results are consistent with TRIA being generally bad

news for banks. The banks’ significant positive stock price response to events 7 and 8, both of which

involved favorable news about the passage of a Senate bill, is perhaps inconsistent with this

interpretation, but on balance the legislation appears to have been viewed as generally adverse for banks.

        Utilities generally had a more mixed response to TRIA events than did the financial institutions

covered by the study. In the preferred event window for the passage of the Act (-4,0), utilities had a

significant positive CAAR of 2.39%, although the (-1,+1) and (-5,+5) responses to the signing of the bill

into law were significant and negative (-1.90 and -2.32%, respectively). Utilities also had significant

positive CAARs for at least one window in response to events 3, 4, 6, 11, and 12 but had significant

negative CAARs in response to events 5, 7, 9, 10, and 13. Thus, it is difficult to draw any firm

conclusions about the overall response of the utilities to the TRIA events, especially in view of the

seemingly contradictory response to the passage of the Act and the signing of the bill by the President.

        The results with the transportation stocks are also somewhat puzzling, although for this industry


                                                                                                              29
the response to the passage of the legislation and the Presidential signing were both consistently negative

and significant. Nevertheless, the transportation stocks had significant positive responses to several

events, including 1, 3, 4, 5, 7, 8, and 9. Thus, the results for this industry also are somewhat inconclusive,

although the negative reaction to the bill’s passage and Presidential signing appears unambiguous.

        The construction industry showed by far the weakest response to the TRIA events, perhaps

reflecting the fact that construction had the smallest sample size for all industries included in the study,

ranging from 21 to 28 firms. There are very few statistically significant CAARs for the construction

industry for any of the TRIA events, although the majority of the CAARs for construction are positive.

Construction firms registered a significant positive CAAR in the (-10,+10) window for event 6, a negative

news event for TRIA, but also registered significant positive CAARS for events 7 and 9, which were

generally favorable events for TRIA. Thus, it is difficult to draw conclusions about the effect of TRIA on

the construction industry, except perhaps that the strong positive response predicted by the President’s

remarks at the bill-signing ceremony is not evident.

4.4. Economic Indicators in the Periods Preceding and Following 9/11 and TRIA

        In this section, we look at some other economic indicators during the periods preceding and

following the World Trade Center attacks on 9/11/2001 and the passage of TRIA in November 2002.

Because there are many factors that drive macro-economic time series and we cannot measure the precise

response to specific daily events as in the case of stock prices, the purpose of this analysis is primarily to

provide an economic context for the period when TRIA was being considered and eventually enacted.

        Information on terrorism insurance pricing and take-up rates under TRIA is mostly anecdotal at

this stage. However, the consensus of opinion seems to be that prices are quite variable across the

industry and take-up rates are generally low, perhaps in the range of 20%. In a survey of insurance

brokers released in March 2003, the Council of Insurance Agents and Brokers (CIAB) (2003) reported

that 19% of small brokerage customers, 22% of medium size firms, and 29% of large firms were

purchasing terrorism insurance. A report by Moody’s Investors Service indicated that “five months after

its passage, the Terrorism Risk Insurance Act (TRIA) has begun to have its intended effect. Rates for


                                                                                                               30
terrorism coverage have clearly abated . . . Even for office properties in Manhattan, there has been an

improvement in the availability and affordability of terrorism insurance” (Philipp, 2003). Of course,

prices may have fallen to some degree even in the absence of TRIA due to new capital entering the

industry, insurer learning about pricing terrorism coverage, or just due to competition. Such price

reductions would be consistent with experience following earlier catastrophes such as Hurricane Andrew.

         Information on commercial P&C insurance prices is available from quarterly surveys conducted

by the CIAB (e.g., CIAB 2003a). The surveys ask the agents and brokers who are members of CIAB to

indicate the average price increases for their commercial clients for a variety of P&C coverages. The

CIAB survey responses from the fourth quarter of 1999 through the third quarter of 2003 are summarized

in Figure 4. The figure shows the average price increases reported by CIAB respondents for five

commercial lines P&C coverages – commercial auto, workers’ compensation, commercial property,

general liability, and umbrella insurance coverage. Terrorism insurance price increases are shown for the

more recent quarters when this coverage was included in the survey. Of the lines shown in the figure,

commercial auto is least likely to be affected by terrorism risk and terrorism, and the commercial property

and umbrella coverages are most likely to be affected. The figure shows that commercial P&C prices

were generally trending upwards during 2000 and 2001, even prior to the WTC attacks, as part of a

general “hard market” phase of the P&C underwriting cycle.27 Prices rose sharply following the WTC

attacks, with the increases being especially pronounced for the commercial property and umbrella

coverages. The price hikes began to taper off sharply beginning in the third quarter of 2002, which is

before TRIA, suggesting that the market forces were already beginning to work, and the average price

increase for commercial property was nearly zero in the third quarter of 2003. Terrorism insurance price

increases closely track those for commercial property during the most recent four quarters.


27
  Property-casualty insurance is subject to an “underwriting cycle,” characterized by alternating periods of “hard”
and “soft” markets. During hard markets, coverage availability is restricted and prices increase, while during a soft
market phase coverage is readily available and prices decline. Several theories have been advanced to explain the
existence of underwriting cycles. A common theme is that informational asymmetries between insurers and capital
markets make it difficult for insurers to raise capital following a loss shock. Thus, insurers tend to hoard capital
during profitable periods, creating excess capacity that puts downward pressure on prices. Following a loss or
investment shock, when capital is depleted, prices tend to increase as buyers compete for scarce capacity. For a
review of underwriting cycle theory, see Harrington and Niehaus (2001).
                                                                                                                   31
        The sharply lower rates of price increase from the third quarter of 2002 through the present

shown in Figure 4 coincide with the enactment and implementation of TRIA and may indicate that the

Act had a favorable impact on insurance markets. However, the observed trends also would be consistent

with most of the increased loss expectations arising from 9/11 having already been priced into

commercial P&C policies by the middle of 2002, such that the need for further price increases abated in

the absence of new information about terrorism risk.

        To investigate macro-economic changes in sectors potentially affected by terrorism insurance, we

analyze two construction series – the value of new private commercial construction put in place and total

non-farm private sector construction employment. These series are shown in Figures 5 and 6,

respectively. The value of new office and manufacturing construction put in place trended mostly

downward during the period January 2001 through August 2003, but retail and health care construction

did considerably better. There is little evidence of a rebound in office construction following the

enactment of TRIA, although retail construction accelerated during the last three months shown in Figure.

Total non-farm private sector construction employment increased steadily throughout most of the 1990s

before leveling off in early 2001. This series declined during most of 2002 and did not rebound following

the enactment of TRIA. We also looked at commercial construction loans of large commercial banks,

which remained relatively constant during the fourth quarter of 2002 and the first quarter of 2003, before

declining in the second quarter of 2003 and perhaps beginning a modest upward trend in recent months.

        We also looked at two market value series from sectors that may have been affected by TRIA, the

national commercial property total return series compiled by National Council of Real Estate Investment

Fiduciaries (NCREIF) and the NAREIT monthly return series for equity REITs specializing in the office

sector. The NCREIF Property Index is one of the most widely used performance measures for

institutionally held private real estate in the U.S., including most major types of commercial real estate

such as offices, malls, and warehouses. We analyzed total returns on both the overall NCREIF index and

the component index for office properties. Both of the NCREIF return series declined significantly

following 9/11 but then rebounded somewhat beginning in the second quarter of 2002. Office sector


                                                                                                             32
returns actually declined in the quarter following the enactment of TRIA but then rebounded later in

2003. The NAREIT office sector total return index showed significantly better performance, post TRIA,

increasing steadily for most of 2003. Therefore, we find some evidence of a recovery in the commercial

real estate sector during recent periods. However, an official at NAREIT indicated that the recovery in

the real estate market was primarily due to factors other than TRIA.28 Thus, the macro data provide very

little evidence of a surge in economic activity associated with the passage of TRIA.

5. Conclusions

            This paper investigates the effects of the Terrorism Risk Insurance Act of 2002 (TRIA) on the

industries most likely to be affected by the Act – property-casualty insurance, life insurance, insurance

agents and brokers, banking, construction, real estate investment trusts, transportation, and utilities. We

conduct an event study analysis which analyzes the stock price reaction of firms in the affected industries

to news announcements concerning the events leading up to and including passage of the legislation and

its signing into law by the President. We also investigate several macro-economic time series to provide

an economic context for the consideration and enactment of TRIA.

            The event study results indicate that the stock price effect of TRIA on the affected industries was

predominantly negative. For the two final events – Senate passage of the Act (November 20, 2002) and

the signing of the bill into law (November 26, 2002) – the stock price effect was significantly negative in

most event windows for insurance companies, REITs, transportation firms, and banks. There was a

significant positive stock price effect for utilities in the days preceding passage of the Act, but the utilities

industry responded negatively to the signing of the bill into law. There were no significant effects for the

construction industry for the two ultimate events. Stock prices in the affected industries also responded

negatively to most of the other events included in the analysis. Hence, the evidence clearly does not

support the view that TRIA was good news in the market value sense for the affected industries.

            We offer three primary explanations for the generally negative impact of TRIA. The first, which

primarily concerns the property-casualty insurance industry, is that the primary effect of the Act on


28
     Conversation with Steven Wechsler, National Association of Real Estate Investment Trusts, December 2003.
                                                                                                                33
insurers was to eliminate the option not to offer terrorism insurance and to expose insurers to potential

liability under the Act’s deductible and copayment provisions. Because insurance markets are generally

competitive, the price of terrorism coverage sold under the Act would be expected to cover the present

value of loss and expense cash flows plus a fair profit. Insurers would not be expected to be able to earn

rents by pricing the expected value of anticipated federal reinsurance payments into terrorism insurance

premiums. Thus, terrorism insurance under TRIA could be expected to be at best a zero net present value

project for the property-casualty industry and could create a net negative impact to the extent that federal

intervention reduces insurance market efficiency.

        A second possible explanation for the generally adverse effects of TRIA on affected stocks is a

type of “Samaritan’s dilemma” problem. That is, the Act may have reduced market expectations with

respect to future federal assistance for firms and industries affected by terrorist events. The market thus

may have viewed the program as the substitution in whole or in part of a carefully circumscribed federal

reinsurance program for a potentially more open-ended implicit government commitment.

        The third explanation for the negative effects of TRIA on stock prices is that the legislation may

have created insurance market inefficiencies by preventing or delaying the development of more efficient

private market mechanisms for financing terrorism losses. Experience with natural catastrophes has

shown that insurance markets tend to rebound following catastrophic loss events as new capital enters the

industry and insurers gain experience with pricing large loss events. By potentially impeding such private

market developments, TRIA may in fact have worsened conditions in insurance markets. Such an effect is

probably attributable to the design of TRIA, which resulted in more intrusive government intervention in

the insurance market than might have been desirable under a purely market-enhancing theory of

government involvement. Thus, to the extent that policymakers conclude that future government

intervention in the terrorism insurance market is necessary, any such program should be designed to assist

rather than hinder private market efforts to solve the terrorism insurance problem.




                                                                                                            34
References

Barnes, L., 2002, A closer look at Britain’s Pool Re, Risk Management 49, 18-23.

Bhagat, S. and R. Romano, 2002, Event studies and the law, part II: empirical studies of corporate law,
American Law and Economics Review 4, 380-423.

Binder, J.J., 1985, On the use of the multivariate regression model in event studies, Journal of Accounting
Research 23, 370-383.

Braun, A., R.M. Todd, and N. Wallace, 1998, The role of damage-contingent contracts in allocating the
risks of natural catastrophes, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Working Paper No. 586D.

Brown, J.R., R.S. Kroszner, and B.H. Jenn, 2002, Federal terrorism risk insurance, National Tax Journal
55, 647-657.

Brown, S. and J.B. Warner, 1985, Using daily stock returns: The case of event studies, Journal of
Financial Economics 14, 3-33.

Buchanan, J.M., 1975, The Samaritan’s dilemma, in: Edmund S. Phelps, ed., Altruism, morality, and
economic theory (Russell Sage Foundation, New York).

Cornett, M.M. and H. Tehranian, 1990, An examination of the impact of the Garn-St. Germain depository
institutions act of 1982 on commercial banks and savings and loans, Journal of Finance 45, 95-111.

Council of Insurance Agents & Brokers, 2003, 2003 terrorism insurance survey (Washington, DC).

Cowan, A.R., 2002, Eventus 7 user’s guide, revised edition (Cowan Research, Ames, IA).

Cummins, J.D., S.E. Harrington, and R.W. Klein, 1991, Cycles and crises in property/casualty insurance:
causes and implications for public policy (National Association of Insurance Commissioners, Kansas
City, MO).

Cummins, J.D., and C.M. Lewis, 2003, Catastrophic events, parameter uncertainty and the breakdown of
implicit long term contracting: The case of terrorism insurance, Journal of Risk and Uncertainty 26, 153-
178.

Cutler, D.M., 1988, Tax reform and the stock market: An asset price approach, American Economic
Review 78, 1107-1117.

Doherty, N.A., J. Lamm-Tennant, and L.T. Starks, 2003, Insuring September 11th: Market recovery and
transparency, Journal of Risk and Uncertainty 26, 179-199.

Froot, K.A., 2001, The market for catastrophe risk: A clinical examination, Journal of Financial
Economics 60, 529-571.

Froot, K.A. and P.G.J. O’Connell, 1999, The pricing of U.S. catastrophe reinsurance, in: Kenneth Froot,
ed., The financing of catastrophe risk (University of Chicago Press, Chicago), 195-227.

Guy Carpenter, Inc., 2003, The world catastrophe reinsurance market: 2003 (New York).

Harrington, S.E. and G. Niehaus, 2001, Volatility and underwriting cycles, in: G. Dionne, ed., Handbook

                                                                                                          35
of insurance (Kluwer Academic Publishers, Boston), 657-686.

Jaffee, D. and T. Russell, 1997, Catastrophe insurance, capital markets, and uninsurable risks, Journal of
Risk and Insurance 64, 205-230.

James, C., 1983, An analysis of intra-industry differences in the effect of regulation: The case of deposit
rate ceilings, Journal of Monetary Economics 12, 417-432.

Joskow, P.L., and L. McLaughlin, 1991, McCarran-Ferguson act reform: More competition or more
regulation? Journal of Risk and Uncertainty 4, 373-401.

Lewis, C.M. and K.C. Murdock, 1999, Alternative means of redistributing catastrophic risk in a national
risk management system, in: Kenneth Froot, ed., The financing of catastrophe risk (University of Chicago
Press, Chicago), 51-88.

Lewis, C.M. and K.C. Murdock, 1996, The role of government contracts in discretionary reinsurance
markets for natural disasters, Journal of Risk and Insurance 63, 567-597.

MacKinlay, A.C., 1997, Event studies in economics and finance, Journal of Economic Literature 35, 12-
39.

Musgrave, R.A. and P.B. Musgrave, 1984, Public finance in theory and practice, 4th ed. (McGraw-Hill,
New York).

National Association of Insurance Commissioners, 1994, Monitoring competition: A means of regulating
the property and liability insurance business (Kansas City, MO).

National Association of Real Estate Investment Trusts, 2003, Insurance survey (Washington, DC).

Peltzman, S., 1989, The economic theory of regulation after a decade of deregulation, Brookings Papers
on Economic Activity: Microeconomics, 1-41.

Philipp, T., 2003, Up and down credit signals in cmbs, Mortgage Banking 63, 48-52.

Reinsurance Association of America, 2002, Summary of HR 3210, Senate compromise draft legislation
and insurance industry draft legislation on federal terrorism, Washington, DC.

Schipper, K. and R. Thompson, 1983, The impact of merger-related regulations on the shareholders of
acquiring firms, Journal of Accounting Research 21, 184-221.

Schumann, L., 1988, State regulation of takeovers and shareholder wealth: The case of New York’s 1985
takeover statutes, Rand Journal of Economics 19, 557-567.

Schwert, G.W., 1981, Using Financial data to measure the effects of regulation, Journal of Law and
Economics 25, 121-145.

Stigler, G., 1971, The theory of economic regulation, Bell Journal 2, 3-21.

Woo, G., 2003, Quantifying insurance terrorism risk, paper presented at National Bureau of Economic
Research Insurance Project Meeting, Cambridge, MA.



                                                                                                          36
                                                       Table 1
                                Summary of Key Provisions of Terrorism Insurance Proposals
                       Administration               House                       Senate                                         TRIA 2002
                     Proposed 10/15/01         Passed 11/29/01              Passed 6/18/02                                   Signed 11/26/02
  Duration       •   Through 2004                 •   Through 2002, with              •   Terminate after one year,     •   Through 2005
                                                      extension through 2004 at           with one year extension at
                                                      discretion of Treasury              discretion of Treasury
Government’s     •   2002: 80% of first $20       •   For industry wide trigger,      •   80% above individual          •   90% above insurer
 share of risk       bil., 90% of excess              90% of losses after first $5        company deductible but            deductible
                 •   2003: 50% of losses from         million                             below industry deductible
                     $10-20 bil., 90% of excess   •   For individual insurer          •   90% of losses above
                 •   2004: 50% of losses from         trigger, 90% of losses after        industry deductible
                     $20-40 bil., 90% of excess       10% of written premiums
  Industry       •   None through 2002            •   $5 million for industry         •   $10 billion in first year     •   $10 billion in 2003
 Deductible      •   $10 billion in 2003                                              •   $15 billion if extended for   •   $12.5 billion in 2004
                 •   $20 billion in 2004                                                  one additional year           •   $15 billion in 2005
 Individual      •   None                         •   10% of premiums for             •   Market share of direct        •   7% of direct earned
   Insurer                                            individual insurer                  written premiums times            premiums in 2003
                                                                                          $industry deductible          •   10% in 2004
 Deductible
                                                                                                                        •   15% in 2005
Aggregate Cap    •   $100 billion                 •   $100 billion                    •   $100 billion                  •   $100 billion
Recoupment:      •   None                         •   Up to $5 bil of first $20 bil   •   None                          •   Mandatory recoupment of
   Ex-post                                            repaid via industry-wide                                              insurer assistance until
                                                      assessments (not exceeding                                            industry deductible is
 Assessments                                          3% of annual premiums)                                                reached
                                                  •   Assistance beyond $20 bil                                         •   Treasury has discretion to
                                                      repaid via premium                                                    impose additional policy
                                                      surcharges                                                            surcharges
  Liability      •   No punitive damages          •   No punitive damages             •   Federal cause of action       •   Punitive damages not
 Provisions      •   Proportional non-economic    •   Proportional non-economic       •   Punitive damages not              treated by TRIA as insured
                     damages                          damages                             treated by TRIA as insured        losses
                 •   Consolidation of claims      •   Consolidation of claims             losses                        •   Federal jurisdiction
                     into single federal              into single federal
                     jurisdiction                     jurisdiction




                                                                                                                                                  37
                                                   Table 2
                                             Event Study Dates
Event     Central Event Date       Description of Event
           (Event Window)
    1          Wednesday           News reports that AIA proposal is receiving little support from key
                10/10/01           lawmakers. Chmn. Oxley “unenthusiastic,” Sen. Gramm “would not
                 (-2,+2)           support,” Treasury sources float the idea of a backstop with a $10
                                   billion trigger point, which industry thinks is too high.1
    2           Monday             “The White House today weighed in with its own proposal
                10/15/01           guaranteeing reinsurance coverage.” Senior White House officials
                 (0,+1)            said the administration will “push for passage of legislation this year
                                   to authorize the new program.”2 Lays out specific program of
                                   government/industry cost-sharing to end in 2005.
    3           Thursday           House and Senate legislators engaged “in a race over terrorism
                11/01/01           insurance coverage.”3 In the House, Financial Services Cmte Chair
                 (-1,+1)           Oxley introduces bill including recoupment of costs. Details emerge
                                   about an hour later on a Senate Banking Cmte bill that had been
                                   worked “extensively” with the Treasury Department.4 House and
                                   Senate bills differ substantially, but both are moving ahead.
    4           Thursday           After a “less than promising start”5 on the markup of legislation the
                 11/8/01           day before, the House Financial Service Cmte overwhelmingly
                 (-1,+1)           approves HR 3210.6 But it is also becoming increasingly clear that the
                                   House and Senate bill are “light years apart,”7 suggesting potential
                                   difficulties ahead.
    5           Thursday           House bill (HR 3210) passes 227-193. Three Senate bills introduced
                11/29/01           by Senate Commerce Chmn Hollings, Banking ranking member
                 (-1,+2)           Gramm, and Commerce ranking member McCain. Industry appears to
                                   line up behind Gramm bill.
    6           Thursday           As late as Wednesday, 12/19, prospects for Senate passage of
                12/20/01           terrorism bill looked strong.8 Reports during the day on 12/20 suggest
                 (0,+1)            that all sides were making strong attempt to work through
                                   disagreements. Late in the day, agreement collapses due to
                                   differences over tort liability features, and it becomes clear that the
                                   legislation is dead. The Senate adjourns the next day with no action
                                   on the bill.
    7            Friday            On Thursday 6/6/02, reports surface that a new insurance plan, to be
                 6/7/02            offered by Senators Dodd & Schumer, may “end Senate stalemate.”9
                 (-2,+2)           Legislation formally introduced on June 7. The bill placed on Senate
                                   calendar and rules invoked to allow it to “bypass the committee circuit
                                   and be brought directly to the floor.”10
    8           Thursday           After several days of pointed debate that started on 6/13, the Senate
                 6/19/02           invoked cloture to close debate on the bill and set for a final vote. By
                 (-5,+2)           the end of the day on 6/18, the Senate approved the bill 84-14.


1
  Congress Daily, 10-10-2001: “GOP Wary of Federal Terrorist Reinsurance Proposal” by Pamela Barnett
2
  Congress Daily, 10-15-2001: “Administration Unveils Details of Reinsurance Proposal” by Keith Koffler
3
  Congress Daily, 11-01-2001: “House, Senate Panels Compete over Terrorism Insurance Bill” by Pamela Barnett
4
  Congress Daily, 11-02-2001: “Tough House-Senate Negotiations Seen on Reinsurance Bill” by Pamela Barnett
5
  Congress Daily, 11-07-2001: “Reinsurance Markup Of to Shaky Start in House Panel” by Pamela Barnett
6
  Congress Daily, 11-08-2001: “House, Senate Dems Work on Reinsurance Differences” by Pamela Barnett
7
  Ibid
8
  Congress Daily, 12-19-2001: “Daschle Expects Terrorism Insurance Bill by End of Week”
9
  Congress Daily, 6-06-2002: “New Terrorism Insurance Plan May End Stalemate”
10
   Congress Daily, 6-07-2002: “Dodd, Schumer Introduce Measure on Terrorism Insurance”


                                                                                                              38
     9         Wednesday          This week was comprised of a major push by the White House and
                10/02/02          supporters of the legislation to move it along. Events included a major
                 (-1,+1)          Presidential media event, public letters from business groups, etc.
                                  News events also included major push by life insurance companies to
                                  extend the legislation to cover them. Reports indicate that “optimism
                                  high for agreement” and key legislative leaders suggest that a deal will
                                  be reached.11
     10         Monday            Key Republican negotiators rejected Senate Democrat’s “final offer”
                10/07/02          on the liability provisions. White House also indicates desire for
                 (-1,+1)          stronger tort provisions.
     11         Thursday          As late as Tuesday 10/15, terrorism talks remained “stalled over
                10/17/02          liability.”12 After all-night “marathon” negotiations, final agreement
                 (-1,+1)          was finally reached between House and Senate conferees. House
                                  adjourns for November elections, so further movement delayed until
                                  November.
     12        Wednesday          On 11/14, the reinsurance bill “snapped to life.”13 House conferees
               11/20/02           signed conference report, full House approved legislation. Senate
                (-4,0)            action was expected soon, and Senate passage came late in the
                                  evening (after the close of the markets) on Tuesday November 19 with
                                  an 86-11 vote.14
     13         Tuesday           President George W. Bush signs the Terrorism Risk Insurance Act
                11/26/02          into law, making strong remarks about its projected favorable
                                  economic impact at the signing ceremony.




11
   Congress Daily, 10-03-2002: “Optimism High for Agreement on Terrorism Insurance Bill” by Pamela Barnett.
12
   Congress Daily, 10-15-2002: “Terrorism Insurance Talks Remain Stalled over Liability” by Pamela Barnett
13
   Congress Daily, 11-14-2002: “Reinsurance, Bankruptcy Snap To Life” by Pamela Barnett.
14
   Congress Daily, 11-20-2002: “Senate Ends 107th Odyssey with Homeland, Reinsurance Votes” by Brody Mullins
and Pamela Barnett.


                                                                                                             39
                                                           Table 3: Results of Multivariate Regression Model Analysis
                                                                    P&C                      Life                   Agents&Brokers           InsuranceTotal
                        No. Windows Hypotheses             N CAAR       Prob>F      N CAAR          Prob>F      N   CAAR     Prob>F     N    CAAR      Prob>F
                        1   (-2, +2)  CAAR=0               78 -2.41%    0.0232*     39 -3.51%       0.0007***    26 -3.47%   0.0439*     192 -4.08%    0.0001***
                            (-5,+1)   CAAR=0                  -3.75%    0.0049**       -4.64%       0.0006***       -0.26%   0.9027          -5.29%    0.0001***
                            (-1,+1)   CAAR=0                  -0.99%    0.2242         -1.37%       0.0812$         -1.95%   0.1422          -2.10%    0.0003***
                            (-5,+5)   CAAR=0                  -4.40%    0.0104*        -8.20%       0.0001***       -2.14%   0.4311          -7.83%    0.0001***
                            (-10,+10) CAAR=0                  -1.07%    0.6751         -8.21%       0.0033**        1.82%    0.6488          -6.97%    0.0007***
                        2   (0,+1)    CAAR=0               78 -0.05%    0.9319      39 -1.81%       0.0037**     26 -0.50%   0.6394      192 -1.07%    0.0144*
                            (-1,+1)   CAAR=0                  -0.84%    0.289          -3.11%       0.0001***       -1.38%   0.293           -2.31%    0.0001***
                            (-5,+5)   CAAR=0                  -4.15%    0.0131*        -7.34%       0.0001***       -5.88%   0.0291*         -8.08%    0.0001***
                            (-10,+10) CAAR=0                  -8.51%    0.0008***      -12.39%      0.0001***       -5.45%   0.1741          -14.37%   0.0001***
                        3   (-1,+1)   CAAR=0               78 0.85%     0.3001      39 1.26%        0.0977$      26 -0.01%   0.9895      192 0.66%     0.2081
                            (-5,+5)   CAAR=0                  -0.86%    0.6052         -0.46%       0.7723          -4.05%   0.1418          -1.67%    0.131
                            (-10,+10) CAAR=0                  -2.81%    0.253          -3.19%       0.188           -5.28%   0.1918          -4.46%    0.0084**
                        4   (-1,+1)   CAAR=0               78 -2.35%    0.0192*     39 -1.61%       0.0295*      26 -2.81%   0.0461*     192 -2.46%    0.0001***
                            (-5,+5)   CAAR=0                  -2.63%    0.2011         1.78%        0.2508          -2.65%   0.3524          -1.75%    0.1668
                            (-10,+10) CAAR=0                  -3.84%    0.2041         -1.52%       0.5154          -2.98%   0.473           -3.12%    0.1028
                        5   (-1,+2)   CAAR=0               77 0.27%     0.8309      39 0.70%        0.554        26 -1.24%   0.4582      190 -0.44%    0.4865
                            (-1,+1)   CAAR=0                  -0.41%    0.7089         0.64%        0.5037          -0.93%   0.5185          -0.62%    0.2511
                            (-5,+5)   CAAR=0                  -4.79%    0.0337*        1.60%        0.46            -4.27%   0.1396          -5.32%    0.0001***
                            (-10,+10) CAAR=0                  -7.14%    0.0288*        2.15%        0.5442          -9.19%   0.0274*         -8.78%    0.0001***
                        6   (0,+1)    CAAR=0               76 -0.56%    0.5196      38 -0.34%       0.5369       26 -0.30%   0.7902      191 -0.17%    0.6764
                            (-1,+1)   CAAR=0                  0.10%     0.9227         -0.04%       0.944           1.08%    0.4434          0.46%     0.3732
                            (-5,+5)   CAAR=0                  0.56%     0.7952         0.82%        0.577           0.33%    0.9058          2.82%     0.0134*
                            (-10,+10) CAAR=0                  -3.70%    0.237          -0.94%       0.6796          -0.20%   0.9593          1.64%     0.3612
                        7   (-2, +2)  CAAR=0               72 1.76%     0.0777$     40 1.21%        0.0835$      25 2.47%    0.3782      186 1.77%     0.0013**
                            (-1, +1)  CAAR=0                  0.87%     0.25           0.64%        0.2305          2.28%    0.2386          0.99%     0.0154*
                            (-5,+5)   CAAR=0                  -1.22%    0.4357         -0.73%       0.4966          4.46%    0.4107          -0.35%    0.6907
                            (-10,+10) CAAR=0                  2.20%     0.3334         1.40%        0.3677          11.28%   0.2225          2.70%     0.045*
                        8   (-6,+1)   CAAR=0               72 0.68%     0.5844      40 0.70%        0.4397       25 0.77%    0.7819      187 1.05%     0.208
                            (-1,+1)   CAAR=0                  0.86%     0.2439         -0.89%       0.1057          0.93%    0.5383          0.81%     0.0644$
                            (-5,+5)   CAAR=0                  -1.38%    0.3551         1.59%        0.144           1.29%    0.7128          0.04%     0.9633
                            (-10,+10) CAAR=0                  -1.34%    0.5453         0.27%        0.8648          1.51%    0.7956          0.15%     0.9285
                        9   (-1, +1)  CAAR=0               72 -1.02%    0.168       39 -0.07%       0.91         25 -3.32%   0.0086**    183 -0.53%    0.2149
                            (-5,+5)   CAAR=0                  -1.06%    0.4704         1.25%        0.3055          0.65%    0.7986          1.25%     0.1452
                            (-10,+10) CAAR=0                  1.33%     0.5214         6.86%        0.0001***       1.62%    0.6583          4.52%     0.0003***
                        10 (-1, +1)   CAAR=0               72 1.69%     0.0246*     39 1.17%        0.0617$      25 2.07%    0.103       183 1.61%     0.0002***
                            (-5,+5)   CAAR=0                  0.57%     0.6922         3.12%        0.0105*         1.52%    0.5426          2.15%     0.0114*
                            (-10,+10) CAAR=0                  -0.16%    0.9377         7.63%        0.0001***       -0.50%   0.8895          3.05%     0.0136*
                        11 (-1, +1)   CAAR=0               72 -0.59%    0.4197      39 1.15%        0.0726$      25 -1.51%   0.2349      183 -0.51%    0.234
                            (-5,+5)   CAAR=0                  -2.68%    0.0739$        1.89%        0.1408          -2.31%   0.3849          -2.73%    0.0024**
                            (-10,+10) CAAR=0                  -4.81%    0.0207*        -3.45%       0.0527$         -3.66%   0.3237          -6.15%    0.0001***
                        12 (-4,0)     CAAR=0               71 -0.54%    0.5734      39 -1.07%       0.2146       25 -1.68%   0.3134      182 -1.25%    0.0273*
                            (-1,+1)   CAAR=0                  -1.35%    0.0725$        -1.88%       0.0048**        -2.56%   0.0458*         -2.21%    0.0001***
                            (-5,+5)   CAAR=0                  -2.95%    0.047*         -4.68%       0.0004***       -5.35%   0.0382*         -5.03%    0.0001***
                            (-10,+10) CAAR=0                  -5.59%    0.0074**       -8.89%       0.0001***       -6.85%   0.0617$         -7.21%    0.0001***
                        13 (-1,+1)    CAAR=0               71 -0.99%    0.1853      39 -1.73%       0.0097**     25 -0.68%   0.5906      182 -1.81%    0.0001***
                            (-5,+5)   CAAR=0                  -0.75%    0.6075         -5.02%       0.0001***       -3.95%   0.12            -3.29%    0.0002***
                            (-10,+10) CAAR=0                  -2.22%    0.2855         -3.43%       0.0627$         -4.26%   0.2421          -3.10%    0.0131*


***Significant at 0.1% level; **Significant at 1% level;
*Significant at 5% level; $Significant at 10% level.
                                          Table 3: Results of the Multivariate Regression Model Analysis
                                                      REIT                     Construction            Transportation                 Utility             Bank (MktCap >= 200M)
          No. Windows Hypotheses N               CAAR        Prob>F    N     CAAR      Prob>F     N    CAAR      Prob>F    N     CAAR        Prob>F      N CAAR        Prob>F
          1   (-2, +2)  CAAR=0    189            -0.55%      0.1577     28   -0.15%    0.9519      121 0.15%     0.8593     60   -1.08%      0.298       191 -5.21%    0.0001***
              (-5,+1)   CAAR=0                   -1.66%      0.0005***       2.18%     0.4825          1.80%     0.095$          1.31%       0.354           -8.36%    0.0001***
              (-1,+1)   CAAR=0                   -0.34%      0.2567          -1.46%    0.4663          2.86%     0.0001***       -0.84%      0.253           -1.84%    0.0001***
              (-5,+5)   CAAR=0                   -2.12%      0.0005***       1.88%     0.6307          -0.52%    0.7021          3.05%       0.134           -10.54% 0.0001***
              (-10,+10) CAAR=0                   -3.62%      0.0001***       4.69%     0.3975          2.22%     0.259           3.77%       0.2903          -9.02%    0.0001***
          2   (0,+1)    CAAR=0    189            -0.84%      0.0007*** 28    0.90%     0.5819      121 0.90%     0.1089     60   1.10%       0.1035      191 -0.02%    0.9002
              (-1,+1)   CAAR=0                   -0.98%      0.0012**        -0.31%    0.8759          -2.03%    0.0001***       0.82%       0.343           -1.47%    0.0001***
              (-5,+5)   CAAR=0                   -3.26%      0.0001***       0.33%     0.9312          -1.41%    0.3062          -3.53%      0.117           -6.53%    0.0001***
              (-10,+10) CAAR=0                   -6.74%      0.0001***       4.22%     0.4491          1.33%     0.5055          -3.92%      0.3127          -14.10% 0.0001***
          3   (-1,+1)   CAAR=0    187            -0.06%      0.8548     25   -0.49%    0.7692      123 -0.06%    0.9493     59   -0.14%      0.8145      190 -0.97%    0.001***
              (-5,+5)   CAAR=0                   -1.25%      0.0801$         1.97%     0.5494          4.60%     0.0633$         2.55%       0.059$          -0.74%    0.22
              (-10,+10) CAAR=0                   -4.65%      0.0001***       0.54%     0.9071          10.06%    0.0157*         -2.71%      0.2057          -1.16%    0.1992
          4   (-1,+1)   CAAR=0    187            -0.57%      0.1112     24   0.97%     0.5573      123 1.53%     0.1028     59   1.19%       0.0443*     190 -0.75%    0.0123*
              (-5,+5)   CAAR=0                   -1.39%      0.0527$         0.59%     0.8535          4.25%     0.0484*         2.27%       0.0792$         -0.18%    0.7654
              (-10,+10) CAAR=0                   -1.56%      0.13            -0.26%    0.9533          7.02%     0.0444*         3.40%       0.0921$         -1.87%    0.0407*
          5   (-1,+2)   CAAR=0    185            -0.43%      0.296      24   -0.97%    0.6152      120 1.66%     0.0995$    59   -1.50%      0.0164*     190 -0.63%    0.0652$
              (-1,+1)   CAAR=0                   -0.14%      0.6825          0.82%     0.6201          0.94%     0.2624          -1.42%      0.0078**        -0.45%    0.1256
              (-5,+5)   CAAR=0                   -1.38%      0.0521$         -0.97%    0.7654          0.35%     0.8407          -3.71%      0.0009***       -0.01%    0.9838
              (-10,+10) CAAR=0                   -1.64%      0.1078          1.05%     0.8181          7.56%     0.0065**        -6.57%      0.0001***       -2.33%    0.0078**
          6   (0,+1)    CAAR=0    186            1.13%       0.0001*** 24    1.22%     0.3704      120 -0.08%    0.8999     60   0.12%       0.7225      189 0.65%     0.0052**
              (-1,+1)   CAAR=0                   1.08%       0.0037**        1.01%     0.5459          0.54%     0.4994          2.24%       0.0001***       0.88%     0.0021**
              (-5,+5)   CAAR=0                   3.89%       0.0001***       4.73%     0.147           -1.13%    0.4919          6.69%       0.0001***       1.08%     0.0588$
              (-10,+10) CAAR=0                   5.14%       0.0007***       13.76%    0.0028**        1.87%     0.4471          4.42%       0.0079**        -2.42%    0.0038**
          7   (-2, +2)  CAAR=0    181            -0.24%      0.5474     23   2.05%     0.4004      111 2.80%     0.0013**   57   -1.15%      0.0467*     186 0.76%     0.0207*
              (-1, +1)  CAAR=0                   -0.18%      0.5354          3.37%     0.0731$         2.07%     0.0018**        -0.30%      0.4971          0.33%     0.1932
              (-5,+5)   CAAR=0                   0.52%       0.3904          3.25%     0.3759          3.35%     0.0116*         -2.14%      0.0165*         1.13%     0.024*
              (-10,+10) CAAR=0                   3.92%       0.0001***       5.29%     0.3062          5.70%     0.0025**        -2.66%      0.0363*         2.49%     0.0004***
          8   (-6,+1)   CAAR=0    180            0.83%       0.1037     23   0.23%     0.9415      110 0.80%     0.4557     57   0.00%       0.9986      186 1.88%     0.0001***
              (-1,+1)   CAAR=0                   0.24%       0.4265          -0.23%    0.9046          1.60%     0.0136*         -0.61%      0.1683          -0.36%    0.1523
              (-5,+5)   CAAR=0                   2.51%       0.0001***       0.40%     0.9149          -0.02%    0.9846          -0.29%      0.7345          3.65%     0.0001***
              (-10,+10) CAAR=0                   -0.31%      0.7251          -3.21%    0.5502          2.72%     0.1404          -1.50%      0.2386          5.09%     0.0001***
          9   (-1, +1)  CAAR=0    178            -0.78%      0.0252*    21   4.54%     0.0296*     103 1.58%     0.0142*    57   0.80%       0.1783      184 -1.97%    0.0001***
              (-5,+5)   CAAR=0                   -6.03%      0.0001***       0.74%     0.8548          0.68%     0.59            -4.33%      0.0003***       -1.34%    0.0116*
              (-10,+10) CAAR=0                   -4.80%      0.0001***       7.99%     0.1632          0.91%     0.6083          -5.79%      0.0005***       1.52%     0.0401*
          10 (-1, +1)   CAAR=0    178            -2.70%      0.0001*** 21    -0.46%    0.8233      103 0.14%     0.8197     57   -2.96%      0.0001***   184 0.64%     0.0181*
              (-5,+5)   CAAR=0                   -5.34%      0.0001***       6.03%     0.1299          -0.35%    0.7811          -4.40%      0.0002***       1.14%     0.0304*
              (-10,+10) CAAR=0                   -7.21%      0.0001***       9.63%     0.0851$         2.76%     0.1194          -2.74%      0.1027          1.44%     0.0509$
          11 (-1, +1)   CAAR=0    177            -0.79%      0.0235*    21   -0.42%    0.8437      103 -0.44%    0.4913     57   -0.44%      0.4847      184 -1.07%    0.0001***
              (-5,+5)   CAAR=0                   -2.59%      0.0002***       5.83%     0.1691          0.59%     0.6464          2.21%       0.0815$         -0.32%    0.5487
              (-10,+10) CAAR=0                   -7.65%      0.0001***       7.03%     0.2301          -2.71%    0.1289          -2.01%      0.2513          -3.66%    0.0001***
          12 (-4,0)     CAAR=0    176            -1.50%      0.0011**   21   -0.69%    0.8214      102 -5.06%    0.0001*** 57    2.39%       0.0056**    183 -0.44%    0.2237
              (-1,+1)   CAAR=0                   -1.29%      0.0003***       0.51%     0.8274          -1.65%    0.0132*         0.41%       0.5357          0.44%     0.1147
              (-5,+5)   CAAR=0                   -3.69%      0.0001***       -2.00%    0.6654          -7.08%    0.0001***       1.45%       0.2653          -2.64%    0.0001***
              (-10,+10) CAAR=0                   -3.53%      0.0003***       3.25%     0.6164          -6.93%    0.0001***       -4.96%      0.0067**        -8.00%    0.0001***
          13 (-1,+1)    CAAR=0    176            -0.77%      0.0273*    21   -1.07%    0.6584      102 -1.70%    0.011*     57   -1.90%      0.0045**    183 -1.46%    0.0001***
              (-5,+5)   CAAR=0                   -1.92%      0.0053**        5.55%     0.239           -4.72%    0.0003***       -2.32%      0.0746$         -3.25%    0.0001***
              (-10,+10) CAAR=0                   -2.57%      0.0078**        4.35%     0.5118          -5.90%    0.0013**        0.80%       0.6605          -2.98%    0.0001***


***Significant at 0.1% level; **Significant at 1% level;
*Significant at 5% level; $Significant at 10% level.
                                      Figure 1: Coverage under the TRIA of 2002




                Overall Liability Limit = $100 Billion




                                                                                                                           Insurer Share: 10%
                Federal Share:
                90% with Discretionary Recoupment




           Deductible and Mandatory Recoupment
           Deductible (% of Premiums): 7% 2003, 10% 2004, 15% 2005.
           Aggregate Retention Limit: $10B 2003, $12.5B 2004, $15B 2005.




                          Figure 2: Stock Price Impact of the Passage of TRIA (11/20/2002)

        4.0%



        2.0%



        0.0%
                                           Agents
                    P&C




                                                                               Construction
                                                                    REITs




                                                                                              Transportation



                                                                                                               Utilities



                                                                                                                                                Banks
                               Life




                                                    Insure Total




        -2.0%
CAAR




        -4.0%



        -6.0%



        -8.0%



       -10.0%

                                                    (-1,+1)        (-5,+5)   (-10,+10)
                                              Figure 3: P&C Insurers Average CAAR -- All TRIA Events

             3.0%



             1.0%


                           1          2           3        4          5            6            7        8            9          10          11          12      13
            -1.0%
CAAR




            -3.0%



            -5.0%



            -7.0%



            -9.0%

                                                                                 (-1,1)       (-5,+5)   (-10,+10)




                                          Figure 4: Commercial P&C Premium Rate Change By Line

           60%

                                      Commercial Auto
                                      Commercial Property
           50%                        General Liability
                                      Umbrella
                                      Workers’ Compensation
           40%                        Terrorism
% Change




           30%




           20%




           10%




            0%
                    4Q99


                               1Q00


                                       2Q00


                                                 3Q00


                                                        4Q00


                                                               1Q01


                                                                          2Q02


                                                                                       3Q01


                                                                                                 4Q01


                                                                                                        1Q02


                                                                                                               2Q02


                                                                                                                          3Q02


                                                                                                                                      4Q02


                                                                                                                                                  1Q03


                                                                                                                                                         2Q03


                                                                                                                                                                3Q03




           Source: Council of Insurance Agents and Brokers.
                                                                                                                                  No. Employees (000s)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0.4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0.6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0.8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        1.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1.4

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      2001.01




                                                                                                      5,900
                                                                                                              6,000
                                                                                                                      6,100
                                                                                                                              6,200
                                                                                                                                      6,300
                                                                                                                                              6,400
                                                                                                                                                      6,500
                                                                                                                                                              6,600
                                                                                                                                                                      6,700
                                                                                                                                                                              6,800
                                                                                                                                                                                      6,900
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      2001.02
                                                                                            1999.01
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      2001.03
                                                                                            1999.03
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      2001.04
                                                                                            1999.05
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      2001.05
                                                                                            1999.07
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      2001.06




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Source: U.S. Census Bureau
                                                                                            1999.09                                                                                                                                                                                                   2001.07
                                                                                            1999.11                                                                                                                                                                                                   2001.08
                                                                                            2000.01                                                                                                                                                                                                   2001.09




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Office
                                                                                            2000.03                                                                                                                                                                                                   2001.10
                                                                                            2000.05                                                                                                                                                                                                   2001.11
                                                                                            2000.07                                                                                                                                                                                                   2001.12




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Retail
                                                                                            2000.09                                                                                                                                                                                                   2002.01
                                                                                            2000.11                                                                                                                                                                                                   2002.02

                                                                                            2001.01                                                                                                                                                                                                   2002.03

                                                                                            2001.03                                                                                                                                                                                                   2002.04
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      2002.05
                                                                                            2001.05
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      2002.06
                                                                                            2001.07

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Manufacturing
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      2002.07
                                                                                            2001.09
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      2002.08
                                                                                            2001.11
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      2002.09




Source: U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, non-farm private sector construction employment.
                                                                                            2002.01
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Health


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      2002.10
                                                                                            2002.03
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      2002.11
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Figure 5: Value of New Construction Put In Place




                                                                                            2002.05                                                                                                                                                                                                   2002.12
                                                                                            2002.07                                                                                                                                                                                                   2003.01
                                                                                            2002.09                                                                                                                                                                                                   2003.02
                                                                                            2002.11                                                                                                                                                                                                   2003.03
                                                                                                                                                                                              Figure 6: Total Non-Farm Private Sector Construction Employment (SA)



                                                                                            2003.01                                                                                                                                                                                                   2003.04
                                                                                            2003.03                                                                                                                                                                                                   2003.05
                                                                                            2003.05                                                                                                                                                                                                   2003.06
                                                                                            2003.07                                                                                                                                                                                                   2003.07

                                                                                            2003.09                                                                                                                                                                                                   2003.08
