                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




             ENTRY REGULATION AS A BARRIER TO ENTREPRENEURSHIP

                                           Leora Klapper
                                            Luc Laeven
                                          Raghuram Rajan

                                        Working Paper 10380
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w10380


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                       Cambridge, MA 02138
                                            March 2004
We thank William Schwert, an anonymous referee, Allen Berger, Arnoud Boot, Nicola Cetorelli,
Stijn Claessens, Mihir Desai, Simeon Djankov, Alexander Dyck, Saul Estrin, Raymond Fisman,
Nicola Gennaioli, Paul Gompers, Luigi Guiso, Stephen Haber, Robert Hauswald, Thomas
Hellman, Simon Johnson, Steven Kaplan, Naomi Lamoreaux, Joshua Lerner, Inessa Love,
Vojislav Maksimovic, Atif Mian, Enrico Perotti, Michel Robe, Roberta Romano, Jean-Laurent
Rosenthal, Jan Svejnar, Scott Stern, Gregory Udell, Christopher Woodruff, and seminar
participants at the Fifth International Conference on Financial Market Development in Emerging
and Transition Economies in Hyderabad, American University, University of Amsterdam,
University of Maryland, the NBER Corporate Finance Program Meeting at the University of
Chicago, the SME Conference at the World Bank, the Entrepreneurship Conference at Harvard
Business School, the AEA meetings in Philadelphia, and the World Bank/NYU Workshop on
Entry, Entrepreneurship, and Financial Development for valuable comments; Ying Lin and Victor
Sulla for outstanding research assistance; Sebastian Roels at Bureau Van Dijk for help with the
Amadeus data; and Brian Williams and Ryan Paul at Dun & Bradstreet for help with the Dun &
Bradstreet data. Rajan thanks the National Science Foundation, the Center for the Study of the
State and the Economy at the Graduate School of Business, University of Chicago for research
support during part of this study. We also thank the World Bank for financial support. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2004 by Leora Klapper, Luc Laeven, and Raghuram Rajan. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Entry Regulation as a Barrier to Entrepreneurship
Leora Klapper, Luc Laeven, and Raghuram Rajan
NBER Working Paper No. 10380
March 2004, Revised June 2020
JEL No. L1,G3

                                         ABSTRACT

Using a comprehensive database of European firms, we study the effect of market entry
regulations on the creation of new limited-liability firms, the average size of entrants, and the
growth of incumbent firms. We find that costly regulations hamper the creation of new firms,
especially in industries that should naturally have high entry. These regulations also force new
entrants to be larger and cause incumbent firms in naturally high-entry industries to grow more
slowly. Our results hold even when we correct for the availability of financing, the degree of
protection of intellectual property, and labor regulations.

Leora Klapper                                   Raghuram Rajan
The World Bank                                  Booth School of Business
1818 H Street, NW                               University of Chicago
Washington, DC 20433                            5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
lklapper@worldbank.org                          Chicago, IL 60637
                                                and NBER
Luc Laeven                                      raghuram.rajan@ChicagoBooth.edu
European Central Bank
Research Department
Sonnemannstrasse 20
Frankfurt am Main
GERMANY
Luc.Laeven@ecb.europa.eu
1. Introduction

         Entrepreneurship is a critical part of the process of creative destruction that Joseph Schumpeter

(1911) argued is so important for the continued dynamism of the modern economy. That it helps

economic growth has been documented in previous work (e.g., Hause and Du Rietz, 1984; Black and

Strahan, 2002). Yet a number of countries put in place regulations that make it more difficult to start a

new firm. Our focus in this paper is on the cost of meeting the regulatory requirements for setting up a

limited liability company (we will use “entry costs” or “entry regulation” interchangeably since our

measure proxies for both). We study the effect of such entry regulations on (i) the creation of new firms,

(ii) the average size of firms that finally are able to incorporate, and (iii) the dynamism of incumbent

firms.

         We start by investigating the cross-country picture of new firm incorporation.        We use a

comprehensive, recently released database of corporations across a number of developed and transition

countries in Europe to assess this picture. Some facts are striking. For instance, one might believe that

Italy, with its myriad small corporations, should have tremendous incorporation of new firms (we use

“incorporation of new firms” and “entry” interchangeably). Actually, the share of new corporations in

Italy (the fraction of corporations that are one or two years old) is only 3.8% compared to 13.5% on

average for France, Germany, and the United Kingdom.

         What might account for these differences? One potential explanation is the cost of meeting the

regulatory requirements for setting up a limited liability company. Why might such regulations exist?

The early debate on incorporation emphasized the risk that crooks might register new companies with

little capital and dupe unsuspecting investors or consumers.         For instance, The Times of London

thundered against the principle of free incorporation through limited liability in 1824:

Nothing can be so unjust as for a few persons abounding in wealth to offer a portion of their excess for
the information of a company, to play with that excess for the information of a company – to lend the
importance of their whole name and credit to the society, and then should the funds prove insufficient to
answer all demands, to retire into the security of their unhazarded fortune, and leave the bait to be
devoured by the poor deceived fish (Halpern et al., 1980, p. 117).




                                                     2
Thus one motivation for requiring a firm to go through a detailed (and hence costly) bureaucratic process

to register as a limited liability company is to screen out potential frauds and cheats. But there could be

other motivations. For example, to the extent that information is generated during the process, it could

help the tax authorities improve collections, or it could help improve the accuracy of various censuses and

hence the public decision-making process.

        More recently, however, there is a growing view that costly regulations impede the setting up of

businesses and stand in the way of economic growth (see de Soto, 1989; Djankov et al., 2002; World

Bank, 2004). Do higher regulatory costs really have adverse effects? While Djankov et al. (2002) find

that countries with higher entry costs have more corruption and larger unofficial economies – suggesting

that the motivation for these regulations is not entirely benign – they do not measure the direct impact or

entry costs, which is our focus.

        First, we study whether entry costs affect the extent of incorporation, a necessary first step in

determining whether these regulations have any effect. We focus on cross-industry, cross-country

interaction effects. That is, we ask whether the fraction of new corporations is lower in an industry with a

higher “natural” propensity for entry when the country has higher costs of complying with bureaucratic

requirements for incorporation. The methodology, following Rajan and Zingales (1998), enables us to

finesse a number of problems associated with the more traditional cross-country regressions – such as the

problem that a healthy economy scores well on a number of cross-country variables, which makes it hard

to estimate the direct effect of each variable in a cross-country regression (and equally hard to correct for

all possible country variables that might matter). By focusing on interactions, we can absorb country-level

variables and instead examine the differential effects of country-level variables across industries that

might be most responsive to them. The downside of this methodology, of course, is that while it can tell

us whether entry regulation works in predicted economic ways, it cannot tell us the overall magnitude of

the effect, only the relative magnitude on “naturally high-entry” industries. But since our primary interest

is in examining whether bureaucratic regulations affect entrepreneurship, this is not a major concern.




                                                     3
        We find that the rate of new corporation creation in “naturally high-entry” industries is relatively

lower in countries with higher entry costs, suggesting that these costs matter. Interestingly, they matter

most in richer countries, or countries that are not corrupt, where the regulations on the books are more

likely to be enforced. Our findings suggest an explanation for the low level of incorporation in Italy: the

average direct cost associated with fulfilling the bureaucratic regulations for registering a new corporation

in Italy is 20% of per capita GNP compared to 10% of per capita GNP on average for other G-7 European

countries.

        Second, we study the effect of bureaucratic entry regulations on the average size of entrant firms.

Given that the high entry costs are largely fixed, they should be reflected in an increased average size of

entrants into high-entry industries in countries with high costs. We indeed find this to be the case. The

average value added of new firms in high-entry industries is disproportionately higher in countries that

have higher entry costs. This means that not only do such regulations discourage small firms from setting

up, they also force others to grow without the protection of limited liability until they reach a scale that

makes the cost of incorporation affordable.

        If entry regulations indiscriminately screen out small young firms, which are the source of

Schumpeterian waves of creative destruction, then constraints on their emergence should have a chilling

effect on incumbents and mute the disciplinary effects of competition, with older firms more likely to be

lazy and less capable of enhancing productivity. If, by contrast, entry regulations are effective at

screening, older firms that have come through the screening process could be better firms and more able

to increase productivity. We therefore ask whether entry regulations affect the productivity growth of

older incumbent firms. We find that the growth in value added per employee for firms older than two

years is relatively lower in naturally high-entry industries when the industry is in a country with higher

bureaucratic barriers to entry, consistent with the hypothesis that entry regulations indiscriminately screen

out small young firms and inhibit the disciplinary effects of competition.

        One might also expect the effects of the absence of competition to become more pronounced over

time, with older incumbents in protected industries becoming far more reliant on the rents from


                                                     4
incumbency than on efficiency gains. This is in fact the case. Value added per employee for older

incumbents grows relatively more slowly in naturally high-entry industries in countries with costly

bureaucratic barriers, although this effect is absent for young incumbents. Thus, costly entry regulations

are a form of protection that has the most deleterious effect on the performance of seasoned incumbents.

        In this regard, the comparison between high-entry-regulation Italy and the low-entry-regulation

United Kingdom is particularly telling. Across all industries, firms start out larger when young in Italy,

but grow more slowly so that firms in the United Kingdom are about twice as large by age ten (Figure 1).

This suggests that Italy has small firms not because there is too much entry but because there is too little!

        Finally, to check whether entry regulations proxy for other aspects of the business environment

that are likely to have an impact on entry, such as financial development, labor regulation, and protection

of intellectual property, we include these environmental variables interacted with the characteristics of the

industry they are most likely to influence. We find that these aspects of the business environment do

matter, but primarily for the rate of incorporation, and not for the size of entrants or the productivity

growth of incumbents. It is particularly noteworthy that the effect of entry regulations persists despite the

inclusion of these other interactions.

        In a related paper, Desai, Gompers, and Lerner (2003) use a cross-country approach and also find

that entry regulations have a negative impact on firm entry. The cross-country approach has a number of

limitations. In particular, variations in coverage in the database across countries could affect findings, a

criticism that is less applicable to a within-country, cross-industry approach. Nevertheless, their findings

are complementary to ours. Another related cross-country study is by Scarpetta et al. (2002), who use

firm-level survey data from OECD countries to analyze firm entry and exit. They find that higher product

market and labor regulations are negatively correlated with the entry of small and medium-sized firms

SMEs) in OECD countries. Bertrand and Kamarz (2002) examine the expansion decisions of French

retailers following new zoning regulations introduced in France and find a strong relation between

increases in entry deterrence (such as rejection of expansion or entry decisions) and decreases in

employment growth.


                                                      5
          There is a substantial literature on entry into an industry (possibly by a firm from another

industry) as distinguished from firm creation or entrepreneurship. It is the latter sense in which we use the

term “entry.” It would take us too much out of our way to describe the literature on industry entry, so we

refer the reader to Gilbert (1989) for a comprehensive survey. Note that there are technological

determinants of entry into an industry such as minimum scale, etc., that also affect firm creation. We

assume these determinants carry over countries and are absorbed by industry indicators. Our focus is on

environmental determinants of firm creation.

          The paper proceeds as follows. In Section 2 we describe the data and in Section 3 we present the

empirical methodology. We present the empirical results in Section 4. Section 5 concludes.

2. Data

2.1 Amadeus database

          Central to our analysis is the firm-level Amadeus database. Amadeus is a commercial database

provided by Bureau van Dijk. It contains financial information on over five million private and publicly

owned firms across 34 Western and Eastern European countries. The database includes up to ten years of

information per company, although coverage varies by country. Amadeus is especially useful because it

covers a large fraction of new and SME companies across all industries. The Amadeus database is created

by collecting standardized data received from 50 vendors across Europe. The local source for these data is

generally the office of the Registrar of Companies.

          The Amadeus database includes firm-level accounting data in standardized financial format for

22 balance sheet items, 22 income statement items, and 21 financial ratios. The accounts are transformed

into a universal format to enhance comparison across countries, though coverage of these items varies

across countries. We use period average exchange rates from the International Monetary Fund’s

International Financial Statistics to convert all accounting data into U.S. dollars.

          In addition to financial information, Amadeus also provides other firm-level information. We use

information on the year of incorporation to calculate the age of the firm. Amadeus also assigns companies

a three-digit NACE code – the European standard of industry classification – which we use to classify


                                                      6
firms and construct industry dummy variables.                 The NACE codes follow the NACE Revision 1

classification. In our analysis, we use NACE codes at a two-digit level so that we have a sufficient

number of firms per industry.

2.2 Sample selection

           We use the 2001 edition of Amadeus and limit our sample to the years 1998 and 1999. 1 There

are two reasons to limit our analysis. First, there is the potential problem of survivorship: as companies

exit or stop reporting their financial statements, Amadeus puts a “not available/missing” for four years

following the last included filing. Firms are not removed from the database unless there is no reporting for

at least five years (i.e., 1997 or earlier). So the data for firms from 1997 as reported in the 2001 database

will not include firms that exited in 1997 or before. To avoid this potential survivorship bias, we restrict

our attention to 1998 and 1999. A second reason is that efforts were made in 1998 to expand the coverage

for Central and Eastern European countries allowing us to include more countries, but making the prior

data less comparable. For example, the coverage of Central and Eastern European firms increased by

16% from 1997 to 1998, but less than 5%, on average, for the following two years.

           As shown in Table 1, Column (i), we start with a sample in Amadeus of about 3.5 million annual

observations over the years 1998-1999. We then impose a number of restrictions on the data. First, we

require reporting firms to have some basic accounting information in their accounts over the years (i.e.,

data on total assets, sales, profit before tax, or employment). The reason for dropping those that do not

report is that there could be country differences in the criteria for including firms with no information on

their accounts. In addition, this criterion excludes any “phantom” firms established for tax or other

purposes.

           Next we delete from our sample firms that report only consolidated statements, to avoid double-

counting firms and subsidiaries or operations abroad. For most firms in Amadeus, unconsolidated

statements are reported and consolidated statements are provided when available. We also exclude

certain industries. First, we drop several primary industries where the activity is country-specific (e.g.,

1
    Due to lags in data collection, the coverage for the year 2000 is incomplete.


                                                             7
not all countries have uranium mines). These industries include agriculture (NACE code 1), forestry

(NACE code 2), fishing (NACE code 5), and mining (NACE codes 10-14). We also exclude utilities

(NACE codes 40-41), which tend to be regulated and largely state-owned industries in Europe. We drop

the recycling industry (NACE code 37), which is difficult to match with a comparable SIC code(s). We

also drop the financial services industries (NACE codes 65 and 66) because financial ratios for financial

companies are not comparable to those of nonfinancial companies. In addition, financial institutions tend

to be subject to specific entry restrictions (e.g., initial capital requirements) that do not apply to

nonfinancial firms.       Barth, Caprio, and Levine (2004) discuss financial sector regulations across

countries. Finally, we drop the government/public sector, education (mainly public sector in Europe), the

health and social sector, activities of organizations, private households, extra-territorial organizations, and

firms that cannot be classified (NACE codes 75, 80, 85, 91, 92, 95, and 99). For robustness, we exclude

additional industries that may be state-controlled, such as all mining activities. We also exclude, by

country, any industries with less than three firms (although we check whether such exclusion affects our

results qualitatively).    We are left with 47 NACE industries, which is the maximum number of

observations per country.

        Finally, we exclude all legal forms other than the equivalent of public and private limited liability

corporations. 2 In particular, we exclude proprietorships and partnerships. Two arguments prompt this.

First, a big and common carrot behind registration as a corporation is limited liability, which allows

entrepreneurs and investors to take risks. By contrast, the benefits of registration as other forms can vary

considerably across countries, which will make the analysis harder to interpret. Second, the coverage of

proprietorships and other unincorporated firms in Amadeus is poor and uneven: in most European

countries, only limited liability companies are required to file statements. However, most European

countries require all limited liability corporations to file financial statements, which makes the coverage



2
  We include Plc and Ltd in the UK, AG and GmbH in Germany, and SA and SARL in France and exclude the
GmbH & Co KG, which is a hybrid legal form (a combination of a partnership and a private limited company) used
in Austria and Germany. The results do not alter when we include the latter.


                                                      8
for corporations extensive and the best available. We use the information on legal form in Amadeus –

which is country-specific – to identify public and private limited companies.

        In Appendix 1, we summarize the cross-country differences in the collection of company

accounts in Amadeus. We exclude from our sample several European countries where the coverage is

incomplete or the data quality is poor. First, we exclude Switzerland, since small firms are not required to

file. Second, we exclude the countries of the former Republic of Yugoslavia (Bosnia-Herzegovina,

Croatia, former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, and Federal Republic of Yugoslavia), which were at

war during our sample period and where data coverage is limited. Third, we exclude Slovakia, Slovenia,

Russia, and the Ukraine, which have only a very small number of total filings (i.e., less than 1,000 firms

annually). These restrictions exclude 342,216 firms over the two years (9.8% of total firms)

        As shown in Table 1, Column (ii), after applying these exclusion criteria, we have a smaller,

comprehensive sample of incorporated firms in a large number of European countries, which enhances

comparability across countries. These restrictions exclude 342,216 firms over two years (9.8% of total

firms).Our sample now has over three million annual firms and 57 million employees.

        We are not done yet. We have national statistics from Eurostat (2003) on numbers of, and

employment in, firms of different sizes. In Table 2, we compare the ratio of firms and employment in

Amadeus and in published national statistics in Eurostat (2003). Data, by firm size, are unavailable for

non-EU countries. Columns (i) and (ii) show the coverage in Amadeus of large firms (the ratio of firms

and employment at firms with more than 250 employees in Amadeus versus that in national statistics) and

Columns (iii) and (iv) show the coverage of small firms (the ratio of firms and employment at firms with

10-50 employees in Amadeus versus that in national statistics). Column (v) shows the absolute value of

the difference between the ratio of employment in small firms to the ratio of employment in large firms in

Amadeus less the ratio of employment at small and large firms in national statistics. This ratio is used to

test whether our Amadeus sample is biased towards larger firms. The discrepancy between Amadeus and

national figures can also be explained by: (1) the lack of employment data for a significant number of




                                                     9
firms in Amadeus, and (2) the fact that for the purpose of cross-country comparisons, our Amadeus

dataset excludes proprietorships and partnerships.

        We exclude a country from our dataset if two conditions are met: (1) the ratio of employment in

firms with more than 250 employees in Amadeus to that in national statistics (Column (ii)) is less than

50%, and (2) the absolute difference between the ratios in Amadeus and national statistics of employment

in firms with 10-50 employees to employment in firms with greater than 250 employees (Column (v)) is

more than 25%. Four countries do not meet the criteria: Iceland, Ireland, Luxembourg, and Portugal.

Since these cutoffs could be considered somewhat arbitrary, we also test whether the qualitative results

hold if we do not apply these criteria.

        We believe that our inclusion criteria create the most comparable sample of firms across

countries, but we should be cautious about deriving strong conclusions from direct cross-country

comparisons. However, even if we have not eliminated all biases between countries, our basic test

examines within-country differences across countries, and will not be affected unless there are systematic

biases in reporting industries within a country. Our final sample includes 3,371,073 firms in 21 countries:

Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria, the Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece,

Hungary, Italy, Latvia, Lithuania, the Netherlands, Norway, Poland, Romania, Spain, Sweden, and the

United Kingdom.

2.3 Industry-level entry variables

        We measure entry as the fraction of new firms to the total number of firms in an industry, where a

new firm is defined as a firm that is one or two years old. We calculate entry at the two-digit NACE

industry level averaged over the years 1998 and 1999. We refer to this variable as Entry. For a complete

list of variable names and definitions, see Appendix 2. Our empirical results are qualitatively robust to

defining new firms as age equal to one or to using entry rates calculated for one year (1998 or 1999) only.

        We require firms to survive at least one year and exclude firms in year 0. We exclude firms less

than one year old to avoid frivolous filings and because of the difference in initial filing requirements

across countries. In particular, in some countries firms in their first year do not have to file accounting


                                                     10
information until after the end of their first year of operation, while in others they have up to one year to

file. We check that the results are not qualitatively affected by including firms under one year old as new

firms. The median share of firms of age zero over the period 1998-99 is 2.5%.

        In Table 3, we describe the country averages of the entry variables that we use in our analysis.

We calculate entry and new firm employment rates for all firms. As shown in Column (i), the average

entry rate across industries and countries is about 13.3%. Since we define new firms as firms that are one

or two years old, this is calculated over two years, on average, and corresponds to an average annual entry

rate of about 6.6% (or 4.6% when excluding small firms). The entry rate varies from a high of 19.2% in

Lithuania to a low of 3.5% in Italy. Overall, we find an average of about 15.7% of new firms in Eastern

European countries, as compared to 11.9% for Western European countries. This difference reflects the

recent emergence of a large number of private firms in the transition economies.

        Djankov et al. (2002) have data on the procedures that are officially required for an entrepreneur

to obtain all necessary permits, and to notify and file with all requisite authorities, in order to legally

operate a business. These data refer to 1999 and are shown in Column (ii). These procedures include (i)

obtaining all the necessary permits and licenses, and (ii) completing all the required inscriptions,

verifications, and notifications to enable the company to start operation. To make the procedures and

companies comparable across countries, the survey assumes that the intent is to open a limited liability

company and that the founders complete all procedures themselves (without intermediaries). This means

the entry barriers are likely to be more onerous for small firms where this latter assumption is likely to be

true. We report in Table 3, Column (iii), the direct costs of setting up a new business expressed as a

percentage of per capita GNP in U.S. dollars. The cost of entry varies from a high of 86% of GNP per

capita in Hungary to a low of 1% of GNP per capita in Finland and the U.K.

        In Table 4, Column (i), we present entry rates for a selection of industries based on (groupings of)

two-digit NACE codes.       The highest entry rates are in communications (telephone, wireless, etc.),

computer services, and services, with the lowest entry into chemical manufacturing, construction, and

transportation. The industries with high entry rates are generally those related to the high-tech sector,


                                                     11
which experienced global growth over the late 1990s. Industries with lower entry rates are those that

similarly faced a global decline in the late 1990s (construction) as well as traditionally more concentrated

industries (such as chemicals).

        As a comparison, we calculate one-year entry rates in the United States from the Dun &

Bradstreet (D&B) database of over seven million U.S. corporations over the period 1998-99. We refer to

this variable as EntryUS. In Table 4, Column (iii), we present U.S. entry rates (EntryUS) for the same

NACE codes. Complete two-digit NACE U.S. entry and exit rates are shown in Appendix 3. We use the

International Concordance between the U.S. 1987 SIC and the NACE Revision 1 industrial classifications

to match the four-digit level SIC codes used by D&B with the two-digit level NACE codes used in

Amadeus. As in Europe, we find similar high entry rates in the computer and communications industries

in the United States and low entry rates in industries such as manufacturing of basic metals and

machinery, suggesting common investment opportunity shocks in these industries.               One way of

conceptualizing our methodology (though not the only way) is that it essentially examines how different

countries respond to these shocks.

        In Table 5, we examine the size (measured by number of employees in Amadeus) distribution of

entering firms, averaged over 1998 and 1999.          An important caveat is that these data are less

comprehensive since employment (which we need to classify firms) is missing for about 38% of

observations in our sample. The data confirm that most of the entry occurs in small firms. Interestingly,

we find a greater fraction of new, larger firms in the Eastern European transition countries. This might

suggest that new, private firms are emerging across all size groups, rather than only among small firms. It

could also reflect a number of larger, state-owned firms that continue to be privatized and reincorporated

following the transition. An exception to the transition countries is Romania, which includes over

200,000 firms with less than 10 employees. On average, about 63% of new firms have fewer than ten

employees, 23% have 10-50 employees, 12% have 50-250 employees, and 2% have more than 250

employees. Since new firms in this largest category are likely to be existing firms that reincorporate




                                                    12
following a merger or acquisition, we check that our qualitative results hold when we exclude new firms

with more than 250 employees.

3. Methodology

         We explore the differential effects of certain country characteristics on entry across industries

with different natural demands for that characteristic. In other words, we are interested in the interaction

between country and industry-specific variables. We use industry indicators to control for level

differences across industries and country indicators to control for level differences across countries. The

model is as follows:

         Entry j ,k = Constant + Φ 1 ⋅ Industry dummies j
                       + Φ 2 ⋅ Country dummies k
                       + φ 3 ⋅ Industry share j,k                                                             (1)
                       + φ 4 ⋅ ( Industry characteristic j ⋅ Country characteristic k )
                       + ε j,k

where a subscript j indicates industry j, a subscript k indicates country k, and uppercase coefficients

indicate vectors. The dependent variable is the ratio of new firms to total firms of industry j in country k.

The industry indicators correct for industry-specific effects. Similarly, the country indicators correct for

country-specific variables. 3 The industry j share of total sales in country k captures an industry-specific

convergence effect: we correct for the possibility that sectors that are large relative to the rest of the

economy experience lower entry rates. We get similar results when we use value added rather than sales

as a measure of relative industry size, but prefer to use sales as a measure of size because value added

figures are missing for several industries in a number of countries. Finally, ε j,k is an error term with the

usual distributional assumptions. The focus is on the interaction term and its coefficient φ 4 .

         The critical aspect, of course, is the country characteristic and the industry characteristic. The first

country characteristic we focus on is the cost of fulfilling the bureaucratic requirements to register a

3
  One of the omitted variables that could explain cross-country variation in incorporation rates is differences in the
tax regimes and tax treatments of corporations. In many countries, limited companies are set up for tax purposes
rather than entrepreneurial activities. If this taxation difference varies across countries, this would create a hard to
quantify bias. The country indicators, however, control for such differences across countries.


                                                          13
company. Costly entry regulations will make it more difficult for new firms to enter. Djankov et al.

(2002) calculate the direct costs associated with starting up a business as a percentage of per capita GNP

in 1999. Following their work, we term the log of this variable EntCost. We use the log of the entry cost

variable (which takes values of between zero and one because it is expressed in percentage terms of per

capita GNP) so that in absolute terms higher costs are associated with lower values.

        We would expect industries that naturally have low entry barriers to be most affected by

regulations on entry. We therefore need to know what entry would look like if there were few artificial or

infrastructural barriers to entry – not just bureaucratic barriers but also other potential barriers like rigid

labor regulation or poor access to financing. Under the assumption that these barriers are low in the

United States (for instance, entry costs in the U.S. are 0.5% of per capita GNP compared to an average of

20% of per capita GNP in our sample of European countries), we would expect the rate of entry in an

industry in the United States to be a good proxy for the “natural” propensity for entry in that industry –

reflecting technological barriers in that industry like economies of scale or incumbent organizational

efficiencies obtained from experience. Of course, there is a degree of heroism in assuming that entry in

the United States does not suffer from artificial barriers (or even in assuming that there is a clear

distinction between natural and artificial barriers). Nevertheless, all that is important for us is that the rank

ordering of entry in the United States correspond to the rank ordering of natural barriers across industries,

and that this rank ordering carry over to other countries. We do, however, check the robustness of the

results to measures based on entry in other regions.

        As a measure of industry share, we use the Amadeus database to construct the ratio of the

industry’s sales to total sales of firms in the country. We refer to this variable as Industry Share. We use

the average of this variable for the years 1998-1999. We calculate this country-industry level variable for

two-digit NACE industries using data in Amadeus. These industry shares of total sales are expected to

capture a potential convergence effect.

        In the basic regression then, EntCost is our country characteristic and EntryUS is the industry

characteristic indicating whether the industry has “naturally high entry.” If, as hypothesized, bureaucratic


                                                       14
entry requirements do have an effect, they should particularly impede entry in industries that are naturally

prone to entry (or seen another way, entry into an industry that is a natural monopoly should be little

affected by the existence of bureaucratic entry barriers). We thus expect coefficient φ 4 to be negative.

4. Results

4.1 Entry barriers and permutations

        We report summary statistics for the country and industry level variables in Table 6. In Table 7,

Column (i), we present the basic regression, estimated using a Tobit regression with censoring at zero and

one. The coefficient of the interaction term is negative and significant at the 1% level. Since we use the

log of entry cost, which takes values between zero and one, lower entry costs result in a more negative

value for our entry cost variable. Together with the negative coefficient on the interaction term, this

means that relative entry into industries with naturally high entry is disproportionately higher in countries

with low regulatory barriers to entry.

        Since this is a difference-in-difference estimate, it is worth pointing out what the coefficient

means. Take an industry like retail trade (NACE code 52) that is at the 75th percentile of EntryUS and an

industry like manufacturing of pulp, paper, and paper products (NACE code 21) that is at the 25th

percentile of EntryUS. The coefficient estimate suggests that the difference in entry rates between retail

and pulp in the Czech Republic (which is at the 25th percentile in terms of EntCost with entry costs equal

to 8% of per capita GNP) is 0.5 percentage points higher than the difference in entry rates between the

same industries in Italy (which is at the 75th percentile in terms of EntCost with entry costs equal to 20%

of per capita GNP). In other words, moving from Italy to the Czech Republic benefits the high entry retail

sector relatively more. As a comparison, the mean difference in entry rates between the retail and pulp

industries across countries is 5%. This suggests that the effect of regulatory entry barriers accounts for

about 10% of the mean difference.

        Since this basic result is critical to any further analysis, we attempt to rule out other explanations

of this result by conducting a variety of robustness checks. In Column (ii) we use as an alternative




                                                     15
measure of entry regulation the logarithm of the number of procedures required to set up a business from

Djankov et al. (2002). The maximum value of number of entry procedures in the sample is 16, for Italy

and Romania. We indeed find higher entry rates into industries with high entry in the U.S. in countries

with fewer entry procedures. The coefficient estimate suggests that the difference in entry rates between

retail and pulp in Sweden (which is at the 25th percentile in terms of the number of entry procedures) is

0.8 percentage points higher than the difference in entry rates between the same industries in Spain

(which is at the 75th percentile in terms of the number of entry procedures). In Column (iii) we include

the monetized value of the entrepreneur’s time to set up a business in the cost of entry and find similar

results.

           Next, we estimate using different samples. In Column (iv), we exclude transition countries.

Privatization has resulted in the emergence of a large number of private firms in these economies, and we

want to make sure our results are not driven by this. Our results are robust to the exclusion of these

countries. Our results are also robust to adding back those countries that fail to meet our inclusion criteria

(i.e., Iceland, Ireland, Luxembourg, and Portugal), and to dropping one country at a time (not reported in

tables).

           We also analyze “official” data from Eurostat, which is calculated by the European Union (EU)

using confidential census data for a sample of nine EU countries, by “EU-industries,” which are broader

than two-digit NACE codes. We do not have data from this sample for non-EU transition countries or for

certain industries. For example, whereas we have about 600 observations by country and two-digit NACE

industry codes using the Amadeus database, Eurostat only includes about 250 observations. Eurostat

provides entry rates, calculated as the one-year change in the number of firms, and exit rates, calculated as

the number of firms exiting the industry, excluding mergers and acquisitions. Entry rates across countries

and industries using the Amadeus database and Eurostat data are significantly correlated at about 67%.

As shown in Column (v), our main regression results are robust to the substitution of entry rates from

Eurostat. This suggests that our calculations using the Amadeus data are in line with official figures.

4.2 Robustness to outliers


                                                     16
           Our estimation strategy can be thought of as a difference-in-difference estimation, where we

divide the countries into two groups: high entry regulation (HR) and low entry regulation (LR) groups,

and the industries into high entry (HE) and low entry (LE) groups. If we abstract away from any control

variables, our estimate is: [HE(HR) – LE(HR)] – [HE(LR) – LE(LR)]. This estimate captures the average

effect only. For robustness, we employ a similar non-parametric difference-in-difference estimation

strategy to investigate whether the effect is generally present in all countries and industries.4 We report

the results of this procedure but do not include a separate table.

           We first divide the countries into HR and LR, and then rank the industries from the lowest natural

entry to the highest. Next, we pick the lowest natural entry industry (LWE) as our reference industry, and

repeat the difference-in-difference estimation above for each remaining industry J, i.e., we compute:

[J(HR) – LWE(HR)] – [(J(LR) – LWE(LR)], for each industry J. The effect is strongest for the computer

and related activities (NACE 72) and post and telecommunications (NACE 64) industries. We also find

that the effect tends to be larger for industries with higher natural entry.

           Next, we repeat the exercise for countries, i.e., we divide industries into low entry (LE) and high

entry (HE), and order countries from lowest to highest entry regulation. Again, we find that the average

effect is consistent with our main results. The effect is strongest for Norway and the United Kingdom.

What is reassuring is that no single industry or country appears to be driving the results. In particular, the

results in Table 7 are also robust to (i) the exclusion of Italy, a developed country with relatively high

entry barriers, and (ii) the exclusion of the following information technology-intensive industries:

manufacture of communication equipment (NACE 32) and computer and related activities (NACE 72).

4.3 Alternative measures

           In Table 8 we examine alternatives to U.S. entry rates as measures of the natural propensity to

enter. Prior literature (Dunne et al., 1988) finds that exit rates and entry rates are strongly correlated – the

more there is creation through young firms, the more destruction there also is. In Column (i) we calculate

ExitUS, which is the share of firms that exit in the U.S. D&B data measured by the number of firms that

4
    We thank Atif Mian for this suggestion.


                                                      17
exit in year t (because of closure or acquisition) as a percentage of all firms in year t-1. This measure is

averaged for the industry over the period 1998-99. ExitUS should serve as a proxy for “natural entry” and

when we replace EntryUS with it in the regression, the interaction has the expected negative sign and is

significant (this also suggests that our industry characteristics are not just picking up growth opportunities

in the industry but some measure of the industry’s natural dynamism).

        One might think it obvious that bureaucratic costs would deter entry. What about other costs that

weigh on entrants? For example, we expect that firms are more likely to enter and receive start-up

financing if bankruptcy proceedings are less costly in the case of default. As a measure of bankruptcy

costs, we use the actual cost of bankruptcy proceedings as the percentage of the estate that is consumed in

bankruptcy proceedings (Djankov et al., 2003). We find that entry is higher in high-entry industries in

countries with lower cost of bankruptcy (Column (ii) in Table 8).

        Another form of entry barrier is the differential income taxes for corporations compared to

individuals, which can cause a tax penalty and make incorporation unattractive. In Column (iii) we

include the interaction between EntryUS and Tax Disadvantage, which is defined as the difference

between the top corporate income tax and the top personal income tax rates in the country (obtained from

PricewaterhouseCoopers Worldwide Taxes 1999-2000). 5 We find that entry is significantly higher in

high-entry industries in countries where tax rates on corporate income are much lower than those on

personal income.

        In Column (iv) we use the D& B data to calculate SME, which is the ratio of the number of Small

and Medium Enterprises (SMEs), defined as businesses with less than 250 employees, to the total number

of firms. Since new firms are generally also small, we expect greater entry into industries with larger

shares of smaller firms. Indeed, we find a significantly negative coefficient, suggesting that higher entry

costs discourage entry into industries with larger shares of SMEs. In Columns (v-vi), we use firm size as

the industry characteristic. We use Compustat data of U.S. listed firms to calculate SCALE as the log of

5
  Our measure of tax disadvantage differs from the measure used in Gordon and MacKie-Mason (1997) which takes
taxation of corporate dividends into account.



                                                     18
median assets of firms in an industry and SIZE as the log of median total sales. Assets and sales take

values less than one (they are divided by 10 billion US dollars) so that the log is a negative number, and

more negative values denote industries with firms of smaller size. Since entry costs are more negative

when low, the positive coefficient estimate indicates that smaller scale/average size industries have

relatively more entry in low entry cost countries.

         Next, we examine the persistence of U.S. entry rates. Dunne and Roberts (1991) and Cable and

Schwalbach (1991) study U.S. and international data, respectively, and find that the relation between

industry characteristics and industry turnover patterns is stable over time. These results suggest stability

of industry structures over time and countries. However, for robustness we compute the average of annual

D & B entry rates of U.S. corporations from 1990-2000 (EntryUS, 1990-2000). The raw correlation between

U.S. entry rates in 1998-99 – the variable in the baseline regression – and U.S. entry rates over the 1990s

is 0.32 and significant at the 5% level. When we replace the EntryUS variables with EntryUS, 1990-2000, we

find that the coefficient on the interaction term remains highly significant and of similar magnitude

(Column (vii) in Table 8).

        Finally, it could be that our results are driven by the peculiarities of industry structure in the U.S.

Our method should work so long as we measure entry rates in a country where barriers to entry are

thought to be small. In Column (viii), we use entry rates calculated for firms in the United Kingdom

(EntryUK). There are important differences between the United Kingdom and the U.S. For instance, the

United Kingdom’s bankruptcy system is more creditor-friendly and the composition of its industries is

different. Nevertheless, the correlation between entry rates in the U.S. and in the United Kingdom is 0.60

and significant at the 1% level. The regression results (excluding industries of the United Kingdom)

show that the coefficient on the interaction term remains highly significant. Column (ix) shows that our

results are also robust to using entry rates calculated using firms across all European countries in our

sample (EntryEurope). The correlation between entry rates in the U.S. and the average entry rate across

Europe is 0.60 and significant at the 1% level.

4.4 Causality


                                                     19
        We have not fully addressed the issue of causality. We know the findings do not arise because

there are fewer high natural entry industries in countries with high bureaucratic entry barriers – this is the

virtue of correcting for industry effects. But there could be omitted variables that jointly drive the

propensity to enter and the degree of bureaucratic entry barriers. One way to test the direction of causality

is to use instruments. It has been generally found that the origin of a country’s legal system seems to be

strongly associated with the regulatory system in place today (see, for example, La Porta et al., 1999).

While there has been some debate about the precise mechanism by which this association exists, a

country’s legal origin offers a proxy for predetermined components of regulation. When we instrument

entry regulation with legal origin, we find that the coefficient estimate for the interaction term is highly

significant, the same sign and approximately the same magnitude as shown earlier in Table 7 (Column (i)

in Table 9). The legal origin variables explain 59% of the variation in the entry cost variable. Entry costs

tend to be lowest in countries with Anglo-Saxon and Scandinavian legal origin and highest in countries

with French legal origin.

        The instrumental variable approach might still not fully address the causality problem: it could be

that countries with large “high natural entry” industries have a strong entrepreneurial culture and select

low entry regulation. (If legal origin also drives entrepreneurial culture, the instrument could be pre-

determined, but might not satisfy the exclusion restriction – it might be correlated with other omitted

variables that determine entry.) A crude way to correct for this is to include the interaction between

EntryUS and the aggregate rate of entry in the country (the fraction of new firms to total firms). If the

aggregate rate of entry proxies for entrepreneurial culture, and so do entry costs, the inclusion of this new

interaction variable should reduce the magnitude of the estimated coefficient on the basic interaction

significantly. It does not (see Table 9, Column (ii)).

        Another approach is to check whether the result holds when we restrict the sample to industries

that are relatively small. These industries are unlikely to be responsible for the entry barriers since they

have limited political clout. For each country, industries are defined to be small if their Industry Share is

in the country’s bottom textile in Industry Share. When we restrict our sample to small industries, we still


                                                     20
find a strongly significant interaction coefficient of approximately the same magnitude as shown earlier in

Table 7 (Column (iii) in Table 9). This suggests that industries that are unlikely to be responsible for the

entry regulations are equally affected by it.

        While entry regulation is not strongly correlated with economic development (as measured by per

capita GDP) in our sample, we also confirm that our results are robust to the inclusion of the interaction

of EntryUS and the logarithm of per capita GDP (Column (iv) in Table 9). We have also checked whether

the results are robust to controlling for growth opportunities. Following Fisman and Love (2003b), we use

industry-level U.S. sales growth over the period 1990-2000 as proxy for industry growth opportunities.

Our entry interaction variable still enters significantly at the 1% level when we add the interaction

between U.S. sales growth and entry costs (not shown). We get similar results when we calculate average

U.S. sales growth for the period 1980-1990.

        Another concern is that countries with more untrustworthy populations erect higher bureaucratic

barriers so as to screen would-be entrepreneurs more carefully. If this were true, bureaucratic barriers

might affect entry, and might cause incumbents to become fat and lazy, but this is necessary because the

alternative of unrestricted entry by charlatans would be much worse. One way to address this concern is

to check whether the underlying population results in differential selection. More developed countries

have better-developed information systems, better product inspections and quality control, better contract

and law enforcement, and consequently, an entrepreneurial population less inclined to misbehavior. (The

underlying population in wealthier countries might also be socialized to be more honest (less adverse

selection) but for our purposes it is only necessary that the richer infrastructure gives them more incentive

to behave, so there is less need for screening.) If bureaucratic rules are meant to screen entry efficiently,

we should expect them to be particularly effective in low-income countries relative to high-income

countries. In Column (v) of Table 9 we estimate different slopes for the interaction variable for whether

the industry is in a country that is above or below the sample median per capita income. If, in fact, entry

regulations screen more effectively in low-income countries where there is less alternative infrastructure

to assure compliance, we should find the coefficient estimate for the interaction in below-sample-median


                                                     21
income countries to be significantly more negative. It is not. 6 Similarly, we find that entry barriers work

most effectively in preventing entry in low-corruption countries rather than in high-corruption countries

(Column (vi) in Table 9), suggesting that they do not help select more carefully amongst an untrustworthy

population.

         Taken together, these results suggest that the regulation of entry seems to have causal effects,

more so in wealthy countries or countries that are not corrupt than in poor or corrupt countries. Thus, it is

unlikely that these regulations are particularly effective in screening populations in countries where other

formal screening mechanisms do not exist or where the population is more likely to be untrustworthy.

         Finally, we are concerned that there could be a high degree of underreporting of new firms, since

we measure entry only into the formal sector. In countries where for tax avoidance and other reasons it is

attractive to remain informal, we expect to see less entry into the formal sector and fewer firms choosing

the legal form of a limited liability company. The correlation between our measure of the informal sector

(Informal) calculated as the size of the informal economy as a percentage of official GNI averaged over

the period 1999-2000 and the cost of entry regulations (EntCost) is 0.37 although not statistically

significant at the 10 percent level. In column (vii), we include an interaction of EntryUS and a measure of

the share of the informal economy (Informal).

         The coefficient estimate for the interaction between EntryUS and Informal is negative and

statistically significant, suggesting that underreporting of new firms is more likely in high-entry industries

in countries with an inhospitable business environment. However, our main interaction variable between

EntryUS and EntCost remains highly significant and virtually unchanged in magnitude, suggesting that

bureaucratic regulations have an independent effect over and above the effects of the inhospitable

environment. This is not particularly surprising in light of our finding that bureaucratic regulations have

the most impact in developed and less corrupt countries, which are unlikely to have an inhospitable

business environment.


6
  When allowing for different slopes for transition versus non-transition countries, we find a stronger effect for non-
transition countries, i.e., for countries where we expect a stronger legal system etc. (not shown).


                                                         22
4.5 The consequences of preventing free entry

        Entry regulations, at least in the way we measure them, could be thought of as a fixed cost. They

should be reflected in an increased average size of entrants into high-entry industries in countries with

high entry costs. In Table 10, Panel A, Column (i), the dependent variable is the average size of entrants

(measured as the logarithm of average value added in millions of Euros in industry i in country j over the

period 1998-99, where value added is computed as earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation, and

amortization, plus labor costs). The explanatory variables are the standard ones. We find that the average

size of entering firms is indeed significantly higher in high-entry industries in countries with high entry

costs. A one standard deviation increase in entry costs raises the average size of entrants by 0.78 million

euros in an industry that is one standard deviation higher in natural entry rate, a substantial magnitude

when compared to the median size of entrants across industries of 0.87 million euros.

        While some of the lower entry we have found earlier could simply be because a number of small

firms will be discouraged from setting up, others might have to grow without the protection of limited

liability until they reach the scale to afford the cost of incorporation. In either case, entry costs could have

a dampening effect on innovation and risk-taking.

        An immediate question is whether entry regulation affects the ability or incentive of incumbents

to enhance productivity. If entry regulations only serve to protect incumbents and prevent the disciplinary

effects of competition, incumbent firms are less likely to be able, or forced, to enhance productivity. If,

by contrast, regulations are effective at screening, incumbent firms that have come through the screening

process could be better firms, more able to enhance productivity.

        In Table 10, Panel A, Columns (ii-viii), we examine the effect of entry regulation on the relative

performance of incumbent or established firms, defined as all firms more than two years old. We use the

growth in value added per employee as a measure of firm performance. To reduce the influence of

outliers, the dependent variable in the regressions in this table is censored.

        In Panel A, Columns (ii-v), we present Tobit estimations where the dependent variable is the real

growth in value added per employee over the period 1998-99 averaged over all incumbent firms in the


                                                      23
industry in a country. In Column (ii), the negative significant coefficient on the interaction variable

indicates that incumbent firms in naturally high-entry industries have relatively less growth in value

added when they are in a country with high entry regulations. We verify that this result is not simply

because incumbents in countries with high entry costs are larger – the result survives when we include the

average value added for incumbents in the industry in that country (not reported in the table).

        Again, it is worth pointing out what the coefficient means by comparing the retail trade industry,

which is at the 75th percentile of EntryUS, and the pulp and paper manufacturing industry, which is at the

25th percentile of EntryUS. The coefficient estimate suggests that the difference in real growth rates of

value added per worker between retail and pulp in the Czech Republic (which is at the 25th percentile in

terms of EntCost) is 0.7 percentage points higher than the difference in real growth rates between the

same industries in Italy (which is at the 75th percentile in terms of EntCost). In other words, moving from

Italy to the Czech Republic benefits the growth rate of the high-entry retail sector relatively more. Since

the average real growth rate in value added per worker is 1%, this is a sizeable magnitude.

        We also include other measures of firm entry. Column (iii) shows that our results are robust to

the substitution of entry rates with the percentage of SMEs, defined as firms with less than 250

employees. The estimates in Columns (iv-v) indicate that incumbent firms in industries with smaller

scale tend to increase productivity more slowly in countries with high regulatory entry barriers. Next, we

test the direction of causality using legal origin as an instrument for entry regulation. Column (vi) shows

that the results are robust to using instrumental variables, although the magnitude of the coefficient

estimate for the interaction term is somewhat reduced. Finally, in Columns (vii) and (viii), we verify that

the adverse effect on productivity growth is more pronounced in high GDP and low corruption countries,

consistent with our earlier finding that these are the countries where entry barriers have an impact.

        If the lower regulatory barriers indeed allow for more disciplining of entry, older incumbents

should be particularly affected since they have survived much harsher competition. The effects should be

far less pronounced for young incumbent firms because competition has not had time to work its selection




                                                     24
effects. Put another way, older incumbents in protected industries should have become far more reliant on

the rents from incumbency than on efficiency gains.

        We split each industry in each country into incumbent young firms (firms between three and five

years of age) and incumbent old firms (firms over five years of age) and compute value-added growth

rates for each age segment. We then estimate the regression in Table 10, Panel A, Column (ii) for each

segment. The regression estimates are in Table 10, Panel B. They suggest that the adverse interaction

effects on growth are present primarily for the older firms, and a likelihood ratio test confirms the

difference in coefficients across the two samples.

        In sum, value added per worker grows relatively more slowly for older incumbents in naturally

high-entry industries in countries with high bureaucratic barriers but not for young incumbents. This is

consistent with older firms, who have had to survive greater competition in countries with low entry

barriers, becoming relatively more efficient.

        This has effects on overall growth rates. As a suggestive comparison, Fig. 1 plots average value

added for firms in different age groups for two countries, high-barrier Italy and the low-barrier United

Kingdom. Across all industries, firms start out larger when young in Italy, but grow more slowly so that

firms in the United Kingdom are about twice as large by age ten.

        Taken together, these results suggest that entry regulations adversely affect the growth of those

industries that might be presumed to benefit most by the added selectivity that such regulation might

bring. This strongly suggests that there are costs to such regulations that should be taken into account in

evaluating any potential benefits.

4.6 Other regulations and the business environment

        Thus far, the focus has been on entry regulations and their effect on firm entry, size, and growth.

But there are other regulations and aspects of the business environment that might affect entry and firm

growth, such as financial development, labor regulation, and protection of intellectual property. We want

to make sure that the effect we have focused on thus far is not driven by these other aspects of the

business environment. To the extent that onerous entry regulations go together with lower financial


                                                     25
development, more stringent employee protection, and lower property rights protection, they could all

capture similar aspects of an unfavorable business environment. We therefore consider the effects of the

availability of financing, labor regulations, and the protection of intellectual property on firm entry and

growth.

          We focus on these three dimensions of the business environment because they have been found to

explain variation in firm entry, size, and growth in previous literature. Black and Strahan (2002) find that

financial development following bank deregulation fostered firm entry in the United States. Di Patti and

Dell’Ariccia (2004) find that entry is higher in informationally opaque industries in Italian regions that

have a more concentrated banking sector. Fisman and Love (2003a) focus on access to trade credit rather

than bank credit and find that industries with higher dependence on trade credit financing exhibit higher

growth rates in countries with relatively weak financial institutions.

          Stricter labor regulations, such as the ability to hire and fire workers, have also been found to

correlate with firm entry. Scarpetta et al. (2002) use firm-level survey data from OECD countries and find

that firm entry is lower in countries with stricter labor regulations.

          There is also work related to the importance of property rights for firm size and firm growth.

Kumar, Rajan, and Zingales (2002) find that the average size of firms in human capital and in R&D

intensive industries is larger in countries that protect property rights and patents. Using survey data from

five transition countries on the reinvestment of profits by entrepreneurs, Johnson et al. (2002) find lower

investment by entrepreneurs in countries with weak property rights. Claessens and Laeven (2003) find

that growth of industries that rely on intangible assets is disproportionately lower in countries with weak

intellectual property rights. Except for the work by Scarpetta et al. (2002), none of these other papers also

examine entry regulations.

          We find that these aspects of the business environment have a significant impact, but primarily on

the rate of incorporation and not on the productivity growth of incumbents. Importantly, when we control

for these other aspects of the business environment, entry regulations remain an important determinant of

new firm entry and the growth of incumbent firms.


                                                      26
4.6.1 Access to finance

        First, we consider access to finance as an alternative determinant of firm entry and growth.

Liquidity constraints can hinder people from starting businesses (see, e.g., Evans and Jovanovic, 1989).

This suggests that entry rates should be lower in countries with less developed financial systems. 7 In fact,

Rajan and Zingales (2003) suggest that the absence of regulations protecting investors could be a very

effective barrier to new firm creation.

        We use ExtFin, a measure of dependence on external finance (the industry-level median of the

ratio of capital expenditures minus cash flow over capital expenditures – see Rajan and Zingales (1998)

for details) as the industry characteristic. We also calculate an industry-level measure of reliance on

supplier trade financing as the average ratio of accounts payable to total assets across all firms in the

industry. Both measures are calculated for the period 1990-99 for all U.S. listed firms in Compustat.

        We also use alternative measures of access to financing. As a measure of banking development,

we include the ratio of domestic credit to the private sector to GDP from the International Monetary

Fund’s International Financial Statistics. As a proxy for capital market development, we use the ratio of

stock market capitalization to GDP from the World Bank Development Indicators. To measure country-

level provisioning of supplier trade credit, we use firm-level financial data in Amadeus to calculate the

unweighted ratio of the sum of total accounts receivables to total assets for all firms.

        In Table 11A, Column (i), we find as predicted that entry is higher in more financially dependent

industries in countries that have higher financial development. We find similar results when substituting

the stock market capitalization variable for the private credit variable. These results suggest that new firm

creation depends on access to start-up capital.

        Next, we use industry-level trade credit dependence. Industries with higher dependence on trade

credit financing exhibit higher entry rates in countries with greater availability of trade credit (not shown).

We find that supplier financing matters even after controlling for the effect of financial development and

7
  Rajan and Zingales (1998) find that there are more new establishments in industrial sectors with greater external
financing needs in more developed financial systems. This is not exactly the same as our findings, since new
establishments need not be new entry but could simply be new plants set up by existing firms.


                                                        27
entry costs (not shown). In sum, these results suggest that the availability of both private (bank) credit and

trade credit aids entry in financially dependent industries.

4.6.2 Labor regulation

        We next turn to labor market regulation, specifically laws that prevent a firm from firing

employees. This could cut both ways. One could argue that strict labor regulations protect employees and

give them the confidence to join small, untested firms (much the way that good corporate governance

offers investors confidence), thus reducing start up-costs. Regulations could also hamper the growth of

large incumbent firms, whose adherence to regulations is more easily monitored, thus creating the space

for new firms to enter. However, one could argue for the opposite effect of labor regulations on entry: the

cost of compliance with regulations has fixed components that make them particularly costly for small

businesses to meet, and could inhibit entry. Small firms might not be able to afford to keep their

employees through downturns, and thus might underhire in the face of strict labor regulations.

        We use the employment laws index of worker protection developed by Botero et al. (2004),

which indicates the strictness of labor regulations in the country in 1997. This index was constructed by

examining detailed provisions in the labor laws regarding alternative employment contracts, conditions of

employment, and job security. The index takes values between zero and three, with higher values

implying that regulation is more protective of a worker. We refer to this index as EmpLaw.

        Following our methodology, we need to find an industry characteristic that would make an

industry most susceptible to labor regulation. We would expect labor regulations to impinge the most on

industries that are the most labor intensive. We calculate labor intensity, LabInt, from U.S. data as the

industry median over all Compustat firms in that industry of the number of employees divided by the

amount of fixed assets (in millions of dollars), and is calculated over all firm-years over the period 1998-

99. A higher score indicates higher labor intensity. We have explored the use of other measures of labor

intensity such as employees over total assets and get similar results. In Table 11A, Column (ii), we find

that labor regulations have a dampening effect on entry in labor-intensive industries.

4.6.3 Regulations protecting property


                                                      28
           Now consider regulations protecting intellectual property. Strong patent protection could dissuade

entry because it protects incumbents and forces new entrants to carve a wide path around existing

intellectual property. On the other hand, new entrants do not have the organizational structure, finance, or

intellectual capital to create a significant first-mover advantage and thus dissuade potential imitators. As a

result, they might have a greater incentive to do research if they know their research will be protected

legally.

           Following the now familiar method, our country-level variable is Property Rights, which is an

index of the protection of property in a country from the Economic Freedom Index constructed by the

Heritage Foundation. This variable is estimated for the year 1997 and has been used previously by

Claessens and Laeven (2003).

           The industry variable measured from U.S. data, R&D, is a measure of dependence on research

and development and equals the industry-level median of the ratio of research and development expenses

to sales for Compustat firms in the same industry over the period 1990-99. The numerator and

denominator are summed over all years for each firm before dividing.

           In Table 11A, Column (iii), the interaction variable is positive and significant, suggesting that

there is more entry in R&D intensive industries in countries that protect property better. This echoes the

findings of Claessens and Laeven (2003). We find similar results when using a more specific index of

intellectual property rights from the World Economic Forum (2002) (not shown).

4.6.4. Business environment

           Do higher entry costs reflect a generally hostile business environment? Because the correlations

in Table 11B suggest that higher entry costs accompany lower private credit to GDP, more stringent

employee protection, and lower property rights protection, these could all be aspects of an unfavorable

business environment (or, put another way, good institutions tend to go together). But only the correlation

with private credit is significant at the 10% level, suggesting there is some variation.

           When we estimate a regression with all the interactions included in Table 11A, Column (iv), we

find that all variables retain their predicted effect and statistical significance except the financial


                                                      29
development interaction (not surprising since private credit is more strongly statistically correlated with

entry costs and the other regulatory variables considered). The coefficient estimate of the entry costs

interaction remains statistically significant and of similar magnitude in Table 11 A Column (iv) as in the

baseline regression in Table 7, Column (i).

4.6.5 Performance of incumbents and other regulations

        Do these other impediments to entry affect the average size of entrants? While low credit, high

labor regulation, or low protection of property rights could particularly affect young firms, they are not

just an up-front fixed cost that can be overcome by reaching the right size. For example, profitable firms

can overcome constraints on external credit, firms that utilize labor very effectively can overcome high

labor regulatory costs, and low protection of property rights can be overcome by being more secretive or

more efficient at commercialization than the competition. Indeed, when we regress the average value

added by entrants (our measure of size) against the various interactions, only the entry cost interaction is

significant (Table 11A, Column (v)). This suggests that the other constraints on entry must be overcome

by factors other than sheer size.

        If the other constraints have to be overcome by being more efficient, then one might expect

ambiguous effects of a hostile business environment (apart from entry costs) on the productivity growth

of incumbents. On the one hand, the absence of the disciplinary effect of competition from new young

entrants gives incumbents less incentive to be efficient. On the other hand, the hostile environment forces

them to be more efficient in order to survive (and to have entered in the first place).

        If we estimate the regression with the real growth in value added per employee of incumbent

firms as a dependent variable, and include all the interactions in Table 11A, Column (vi), we find that

none of the interaction terms with the other regulatory variables enters significantly. Importantly, the

entry regulation interaction continues to enter negatively and is statistically significant and with a similar

order of magnitude as the regressions reported in Table 10. In sum, there could well be offsetting effects

of other constraints to entry as hypothesized above; or, put another way, firms need not be particularly

clever or efficient to pay high bureaucratic costs of entry, they only need to be large enough to afford it.


                                                     30
5. Conclusion

        This paper uses cross-country data to identify the impact of the business environment on

entrepreneurship. We use the Amadeus database, which includes financial data on over three million

firms in Western and Eastern Europe. These data improve upon previously used datasets in that they

include (1) a large number of private, unlisted, and publicly traded corporations and (2) all sectors (i.e.,

not limited to manufacturing). This database offers a unique opportunity for us to construct entry rates

across sectors and test the effect of diverse industry- and country-level characteristics on new firm

creation.

        To summarize our results, we find that entry regulations hamper entry, especially in industries

that naturally should have high entry. Entrants are larger – suggesting that small firms are dissuaded from

entering or have to grow without the protection of limited liability until they can afford the costs of

incorporation. Also, the value added per employee in naturally “high-entry” industries grows more slowly

in countries with high entry barriers. The effect is primarily seen in older firms, suggesting that entry

barriers mute the disciplining effect of competition. Taken together, our findings suggest that entry

regulations have significant adverse effects. Since we have not measured the value of all potential

benefits, we cannot make a categorical statement about the net welfare effects of these regulations.

        However, the effect of these entry regulations is seen primarily in developed countries or

countries where there is little corruption. To the extent that the benefits of screening are small, and other

benefits – such as the provision of greater information to the authorities – can be captured even with

reduced costs (for example, by automating the process), a reduction in the cost of complying with

regulations governing incorporation will have the most pronounced effect in developed countries such as

those in Continental Europe, where existing entry regulations are most effectively enforced.

        In developing countries or countries where corruption is a serious problem, entry regulations are

unlikely to help screen out cheats. To the extent that such regulations increase the cost of entry (if nothing

else, through the additional bribes that have to be paid), without any benefits in screening or information

gathering, there could be merit to reducing the regulatory requirements substantially.


                                                     31
        The broader point made is that entry regulation has costs over and above the direct costs of

compliance and enforcement. While there could indeed be deeper politico-economic interests

underpinning such regulation that negate any attempt at deregulation, authorities should weigh these

“excess costs” of entry regulation carefully in deciding policy.




                                                     32
                                               References

•   Barth, J. R., Caprio, Jr., G., and Levine, R., 2004. Bank supervision and regulation: What works
    best? Journal of Financial Intermediation 13, 205-248.

•   Bertrand, M., and Kramarz, F., 2002. Does entry regulation hinder job creation? Evidence from the
    French retail industry. Quarterly Journal of Economics 117, 1369-1413.

•   Black, S. E. and Strahan, P. E., 2002. Entrepreneurship and bank credit availability. Journal of
    Finance 57, 2807-2833.

•   Botero, J., Djankov, S., La Porta, R., Lopez-de-Silanes, F., and Shleifer, A., 2004. The regulation of
    labor. Quarterly Journal of Economics 119, 1339-1382.

•   Cable, J. and Schwalbach, J., 1991. International comparisons of entry and exit: Entry and market
    contestability. In: Geroski, P.A. and Schwalbach, J. (Eds.), Entry and Market Contestability: An
    International Comparison. Blackwell Publishers, London, pp. 257-281.

•   Claessens, S. and Laeven, L., 2003. Financial development, property rights, and growth. Journal of
    Finance 58, 2401-2436.

•   Desai, M., Gompers, P., Lerner, J., 2003. Institutions, capital constraints and entrepreneurial firm
    dynamics: Evidence from Europe. Unpublished working paper. National Bureau of Economic
    Research.

•   De Soto, H., 1990. The Other Path. Harper and Row, New York.

•   Di Patti, E. B. and Dell'Ariccia, G., 2004. Bank competition and firm creation. Journal of Money,
    Credit, and Banking 36, 225-252.

•   Djankov, S., Hart, O., Nenova, T., and Shleifer, A., 2003. Efficiency in bankruptcy. Unpublished
    working paper. Harvard University, Department of Economics.

•   Djankov, S., La Porta, R., F. Lopez-de-Silanes, and Shleifer, A., 2002. The regulation of entry.
    Quarterly Journal of Economics 117, 1-35.

•   Dunne, T. and Roberts, M. J., 1991. Variation in producer turnover across U.S. manufacturing
    industries. In: Geroski, P.A., and Schwalbach, J. (Eds.), Entry and Market Contestability: An
    International Comparison. Blackwell Publishers, London, pp. 187-203.

•   Dunne, T., Roberts, M. J., and Samuelson, L., 1988. Patterns of firm entry and exit in U.S.
    manufacturing industries. RAND Journal of Economics 19, 495-515.

•   European Commission, 2003. Enterprises in Europe, Sixth Report. Eurostat, Office for Official
    Publications of the European Communities, Luxembourg.

•   Evans, D. S., and Jovanovic, B., 1989. An estimated model of entrepreneurial choice under liquidity
    constraints. Journal of Political Economy 97, 808-827.

•   Fisman, R. and Love, I., 2003a. Trade credit, financial intermediary development and industry
    growth. Journal of Finance 58, 353-374.


                                                   33
•   Fisman, R. and Love, I., 2003b. Financial dependence and growth revisited. Unpublished working
    paper, National Bureau of Economic Research.

•   Gilbert, R. J., 1989. Mobility barriers and the value of incumbency. In: Schmalensee, R. L. and
    Willig, R. D. (Eds.), Handbook of Industrial Organization Volume 1. Elsevier, Amsterdam, pp .720-
    781.

•   Gordon, R. and Mackie-Mason, J. K., 1997. How much do taxes discourage incorporation? Journal
    of Finance 52, 477-505.

•   Halpern, P., Trebilcock, M., and Turnbull, S., 1980. An economic analysis of limited liability in
    corporate law. University of Toronto Law Review 30, 117-150.

•   Hause, J. C. and du Rietz, G., 1984. Entry, industry growth, and the microdynamics of industry
    supply. Journal of Political Economy 92, 733-757.

•   Johnson, S., McMillan, J., and Woodruff, C., 2002. Property rights and finance. American Economic
    Review 92, 1335-1356.

•   Kumar, K., Rajan, R., and Zingales, L., 2002. What determines firm size? Unpublished working
    paper, University of Chicago.

•   La Porta, R., Lopez-de-Silanes, F., Shleifer, A., and Vishny, R. W., 1999. The quality of government.
    Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization 15, 222-279.

•   Rajan, R., and Zingales, L., 1998. Financial dependence and growth. American Economic Review
    88, 559-586.

•   Rajan, R. and Zingales, L., 2003. The great reversal: The politics of financial development in the 20th
    century. Journal of Financial Economics 69, 5-50.

•   Scarpetta, S., Hemmings, P., Tressel, T., and Woo, J., 2002. The role of policy and institutions for
    productivity and firm dynamics: evidence from micro and industry data. Unpublished working paper,
    OECD.

•   Schneider, F., 2002. Size and measurement of the informal economy in 110 countries around the
    world. Unpublished working paper, World Bank.

•   Schumpeter, J.A., 1911. Theorie Der Wirtschaftlichen Entwicklung. Duncker & Humblot, Leipzig.

•   World Bank, 2004. Doing Business 2004: Understanding Regulation. World Bank and Oxford
    University Press, Washington DC.




                                                    34
            Table 1: Number of firms, corporations and employment, by country and year

This table summarizes (i) the total number of firms, (ii) the total number of corporations (plc and ltd, or their
equivalents) and (iii) employment from the Amadeus database. We exclude about 25,000 firms with no financial
data (i.e., inactive firms). The total employment figures exclude firms with missing employment in all years. We
use current employment figures to replace lagged employment figures if previous year(s) employment are missing
and extrapolate forward employment figures if current year(s) employment is missing.

                                    (i)                   (ii)                           (iii)
                                Total Firms        Total Corporations             Total Employment
        Country               1998        1999    1998           1999             1998            1999
        Austria              25,243      27,170  18,224         19,684           737,114        717,498
        Belgium             229,171     244,361 215,709        230,352          1,459,269      1,501,236
        Bulgaria             28,272      38,840  17,004         21,167          1,113,907      1,116,755
        Czech Republic       7,153       7,613   7,153          7,613           1,424,975      1,472,515
        Denmark              72,989      82,639  68,906         77,720           902,078        961,128
        Estonia              10,438      27,407  10,243         26,737           269,042        321,308
        Finland              47,646      57,781  46,286         55,765           789,208        867,984
        France              652,376     676,781 584,274        604,155          7,640,624      7,724,623
        Germany             468,865     519,759 334,305        372,167         10,266,932 10,005,253
        Greece               17,617      18,604  17,297         18,280           708,412        710,973
        Hungary              29,397      17,404  25,731         15,794           854,131        751,858
        Ireland              15,184      10,587  13,835         9,759            104,543         78,324
        Italy               117,670     126,514 111,736        120,393          4,598,602      4,808,664
        Latvia               2,433       2,681   2,244          2,482            226,195        232,865
        Lithuania            1,123       1,247   1,113          1,228            180,049        144,779
        Netherlands         145,634     153,430 145,454        153,276           587,366        581,869
        Norway              104,836     115,804 104,836        115,804           991,191       1,059,226
        Poland               10,605      10,309  8,668          8,451           2,667,816      2,423,589
        Portugal             21,351      23,798  20,734         23,096           396,088        195,393
        Romania             302,705     318,020 287,657        303,374          4,027,310      3,506,044
        Spain               166,688     180,621 164,879        178,662          4,849,609      4,894,020
        Sweden              193,333     204,936 193,333        204,936          1,931,973      2,022,113
        UK                  506,610     863,498 491,891        833,033         10,712,104 10,545,236
        Total              3,218,450 3,770,760 2,896,065      3,408,713        58,289,265 57,511,010




                                                       35
                                Table 2: Comparison with National Statistics

This table compares the number of corporations in Amadeus in 1999 with the total number of firms according to
1996 data from Enterprises in Europe: 6th report (Eurostat, 2003). The Amadeus ratios are calculated using our
extrapolated employment data. The national statistics (Eurostat) refer to all enterprises, including proprietorships.
Enterprises with zero employees are excluded from both samples. Enterprises in Europe does not cover Eastern
European countries, Norway, and Switzerland. In Column (i), we report the ratio of the number of firms with more
than 250 employees in Amadeus to the number of firms with more than 250 employees in national statistics. In
Column (ii), we report the ratio of total employment at firms with more than 250 employees in Amadeus to total
employment at firms with more than 250 employees in national statistics. In Column (iii), we report the ratio of the
number of firms with 10-50 employees in Amadeus to the number of firms with 10-50 employees in national
statistics. In Column (iv), we report the ratio of total employment at firms with 10-50 employees in Amadeus to
total employment at firms with 10-50 employees in national statistics. Column (v) indicates whether there is a bias
in the relative coverage of large (versus small) firms in Amadeus and is equal to the absolute value of the difference
between the ratio of employment in firms with 10-50 employees to employment in firms with more than 250
employees in Amadeus and the ratio of employment in firms with 10-50 employees to employment in firms with
more than 250 employees in national statistics. All data are shown as percentages. Due to data unavailability, large
firms in Iceland refer to firms with more than 100 (rather than 250) employees.

                          (i)                  (ii)               (iii)              (iv)                (v)
                         Coverage of large firms by              Coverage of small firms by
                                                                                                      Relative
                                number of:                              number of:
                                                                                                     coverage of
                                                                                                     small firms
  Country                 Firms            Employees             Firms             Employees
  Austria                 44.4%              38.7%               54.6%               65.2%              10.6%
  Belgium                 70.0%              57.4%               65.9%               50.6%              15.3%
  Denmark                100.0%              77.2%               63.3%               73.1%               9.8%
  Finland                125.0%              90.2%               39.0%               42.4%               3.4%
  France                  65.2%              54.2%               66.8%               57.8%               9.0%
  Germany                 34.3%              39.0%               47.4%               49.5%               2.1%
  Greece                 200.0%              84.4%               58.0%               97.7%              39.7%
  Iceland                 30.0%              39.3%                6.2%               37.9%              31.7%
  Ireland                 33.3%              14.8%               23.1%               67.9%              44.8%
  Italy                   57.9%              78.5%               45.3%              100.0%              54.7%
  Luxembourg              40.0%              38.3%                2.9%               82.2%              79.3%
  Netherlands             14.3%              11.9%               31.5%               46.4%              14.9%
  Portugal                33.3%              20.5%               12.8%              117.5%             104.7%
  Spain                   83.3%              98.6%               53.2%               99.0%              45.8%
  Sweden                 114.3%             105.6%               43.7%               47.8%               4.1%
  UK                      85.1%              79.4%                8.6%               31.0%              22.4%




                                                         36
          Table 3: Entry rates and main explanatory variables by country, average 1998-99

Column (i) shows entry rates of new firms in Amadeus, averaged by country for the period 1998-99. We exclude
the agricultural, mining, utility, finance, and public sectors. We exclude country-industry observations based on
fewer than three firm observations. New firms are defined as corporations one and two years old. Columns (ii-iii)
show the number of entry procedures and entry costs as a percentage of per capita GNP, respectively (Djankov et
al., 2002). All data are shown as percentages.

                                          (i)                  (ii)                  (iii)
                                    % of new firms       Number of entry          Entry cost
              Country
                                  (1 and 2 years old)      procedures       (% of per capita GNP)
              Austria                   13.00                   9                   27.28
              Belgium                   11.58                   8                    9.98
              Bulgaria                   8.60                  10                   14.41
              Czech Republic            11.55                  10                    8.22
              Denmark                   13.66                   3                   10.00
              Estonia                   20.41                 n.a.                   n.a.
              Finland                   11.13                   5                    1.16
              France                    14.68                  15                   14.30
              Germany                   12.34                  10                   15.69
              Greece                    15.44                  15                   58.60
              Hungary                   17.38                   8                   85.87
              Italy                      3.46                  16                   20.02
              Latvia                    18.16                   7                   42.34
              Lithuania                 19.23                  10                    5.46
              Netherlands                8.48                   8                   18.41
              Norway                    16.87                   4                    4.72
              Poland                    12.04                  11                   25.46
              Romania                   17.97                  16                   15.31
              Spain                     11.41                  11                   17.30
              Sweden                     7.90                   6                    2.56
              UK                        15.01                   5                    1.43
              Averages:
                Western Europe           11.92                8.85                  15.50
                Transition
                                         15.67                10.29                 28.15
                countries
                  All countries          13.35                9.35                  19.93




                                                        37
           Table 4: Entry rates across Europe and the United States by two-digit NACE code

This table shows entry rates of new firms across Europe and the U.S. by two-digit NACE industry codes. Column (i)
shows European data from Amadeus, averaged across countries, and averaged for the years 1998-99. Column (ii)
defines new firms as corporations one year old, to compare to the U.S. data. In Column (iii), data on U.S. entry rates
are from Dun & Bradstreet, averaged for the years 1998-99, and new firms are defined as corporations of age 1.
Data are shown as percentages. We exclude the agricultural, mining, utility, finance, and public sectors (NACE
codes 5-7, 10-14, 50-51, 65-67, 85, and 91-92). We also exclude country-industry observations based on less than
three firm observations. “Total” is the average of all non-excluded two-digit NACE codes.

                                                                                         (i)             (ii)   (iii)
                                                                                               Europe           U.S.

Industry                                                               NACE code     Age 1 & 2          Age 1   Age 1
Manufacturing                                                           15 – 36        11.07             6.00   6.31
- Food products and beverages                                              15          9.78              4.63   5.24
- Tobacco products                                                         16          16.12            15.23   7.45
- Textiles                                                                 17          9.37              4.82   6.92
- Wearing apparel; dressing and dyeing of fur                              18          9.56              4.83   6.44
- Luggage, handbags, saddlery and footwear                                 19          8.48              6.12   9.06
- Wood and of products of wood and cork, except furniture                  20          11.09             5.62   5.98
- Pulp, paper and paper products                                           21          9.32              5.74   5.26
- Publishing, printing and reproduction of recorded media                  22          11.15             5.71   5.49
- Coke, refined petroleum products and nuclear fuel                        23          10.78             7.11   5.80
- Chemicals, and chemical products                                         24          9.53              4.64   6.08
- Rubber and plastic products                                              25          11.15             5.17   4.46
- Other non-metallic mineral products                                      26          9.33              4.90   5.79
- Basic metals                                                             27          12.54             7.33   4.90
- Fabricated metal products, except machinery and equipment                28          11.58             5.99   5.71
- Machinery and equipment not elsewhere classified                         29          10.46             4.86   4.30
- Office machinery and computers                                           30          15.53             9.33   8.67
- Electrical machinery and apparatus not elsewhere classified              31          11.06             5.82   5.92
- Radio, television and communication equipment and apparatus              32          14.35             7.14   8.45
- Medical, precision and optical instruments, watches and clocks           33          9.97              5.62   5.72
- Motor vehicles, trailers and semi-trailers                               34          10.78             5.47   5.20
- Other transport equipment                                                35          12.90             6.94   7.96
- Furniture; manufacturing not elsewhere classified                        36          11.73             5.90   7.92
Construction                                                               45          13.56             6.51   8.14
Trade                                                                   50 – 52        14.27             6.92   5.86
- Sale, maintenance and repair of motor vehicles and motorcycles           50          13.15             6.21   5.05
- Wholesale trade and commission trade, except of motor vehicles           51          14.65             7.00   5.35
- Retail trade, except of motor vehicles and motorcycles                   52          15.01             7.55   7.19
Hotels and Restaurants                                                     55          14.73             7.42   5.95
Transportation                                                          60 – 63        13.90             7.58   6.74
- Land transport; transport via pipelines                                  60          15.56             7.82   8.41
- Water transport                                                          61          11.67             7.12   5.61
- Air transport                                                            62          13.53             8.62   6.19
- Supporting and auxiliary transport activities, and travel agencies       63          14.20             6.95   6.77
Post and telecommunications                                                64          26.71            14.00   10.09
Services                                                               70 – 74, 93     18.01             9.77   7.51
- Real estate activities                                                   70          15.76             8.20   5.33
- Leasing of equipment and machinery                                       71          17.66             9.18   6.34
- Computer services                                                        72          22.19            12.49   10.73
- Research and development                                                 73          16.76            10.29   6.53
- Other business activities                                                74          16.98             8.76   6.46
- Other services activities                                                93          16.76            10.29   6.53
Total                                                                   15 – 93        13.27             7.09   6.65




                                                                38
                         Table 5: Size distribution of new firms in Europe,
                           by country and firm size, average of 1998 and 1999

This table shows the size distribution of new firms in Amadeus by country, averaged over the period 1998-99. New
firms are defined as corporations that are one or two years old. Columns indicate percentages of total new
corporations in a particular size category.

                                   (i)                 (ii)                (iii)                 (iv)
                                           Percentage of new corporations with employment:

Country                            < 10                10-50               50-250               > 250
Austria                           61.32                29.89                7.04                 1.76
Belgium                           91.18                7.44                 1.17                 0.20
Bulgaria                          54.51                24.10                16.64                4.75
Czech Republic                    28.18                34.83                29.39                7.60
Denmark                           82.57                15.42                1.74                 0.27
Estonia                           77.39                19.36                2.72                 0.53
Finland                           87.37                9.70                 2.30                 0.63
France                            90.91                8.00                 0.93                 0.16
Germany                           80.50                16.05                2.71                 0.74
Greece                            54.54                40.42                4.49                 0.54
Hungary                           43.03                38.90                14.83                3.24
Ireland                            7.89                34.54                52.30                0.00
Italy                             66.18                23.21                8.35                 2.25
Latvia                            50.02                31.37                14.80                3.81
Lithuania                         36.38                47.04                12.79                3.78
Netherlands                       57.67                23.15                16.33                2.85
Norway                            86.42                11.68                1.55                 0.36
Poland                            19.50                28.42                41.87               10.20
Portugal                          50.87                28.35                16.50                4.28
Romania                           92.07                6.02                 1.44                 0.46
Spain                             68.06                27.54                3.82                 0.58
Sweden                            91.32                7.54                 0.98                 0.17
United Kingdom                    70.14                17.18                9.83                 2.85
Averages:
 Western Europe                   69.80                20.01                8.67                 1.18
 Transition countries             50.14                28.76                16.81                4.30
   All countries                  62.96                23.05                11.50                2.26




                                                      39
                         Table 6: Summary statistics of country-level variables

                          Panel A: Summary statistics of country-level variables

Panel A shows summary statistics of country-level variables. In the regressions, we use the logarithm of the
entry costs, entry procedures, and bankruptcy costs as reported in Panel A. Panel B shows summary
statistics of U.S. industry-level characteristics. Averages are reported across sector groups based on two-
digit NACE industry codes. Entry rates, exit rates, external financial dependence, labor intensity, and R&D
intensity are reported in percentages. See Appendix 3 for complete two-digit NACE U.S. entry and exit
rates. We exclude the agricultural, mining, utility, finance, and public sectors and two-digit industries with
fewer than 3 observations. See Appendix 2 for complete variable definitions and sources.

                                          (i)             (ii)      (iii)       (iv)        (v)        (vi)
                                       Number of
Variable                                               Mean       Median     Std. Dev.     Min         Max
                                       countries


Entry costs (EntCost)                      20           0.20        0.15       0.21        0.01        0.86

Entry Procedures (EntProc)                 20           9.35        9.50       3.90        3.00       16.00

Bankrupty Costs (BankCost)                 20           0.13        0.08       0.11        0.01        0.38

Private Credit (Priv)                      21           0.58        0.58       0.38        0.10        1.20

Employment laws (EmpLaw)                   20           1.55        1.68       0.36        0.80        2.18

Property rights (Prop)                     21           4.14        4.00       0.85        2.00        5.00

Tax Disadvantage (Tax)                     21          -0.11        -0.10      0.09        -0.28       0.00




                                                     40
                      Panel B: Summary statistics of U.S. and Amadeus industry-level variables, by industry


                                  (i)        (ii)         (iii)            (iv)        (v)       (vi)      (vii)      (viii)      (ix)
                                           NACE                                       Total     Total     External    Labor
                                Sector                 Entry rate        Exit rate                                                R&D
Industry                                  Industry                                   Assets    Revenues   Finance    Intensity
                                 code                  (EntryUS)         (ExitUS)                                                (R&D)
                                            Code                                     (Scale)    (Size)    (ExtFin)   (LabInt)
Manufacturing                      1      15 – 36        6.31             21.71      318.44     385.41     26.60      23.94      3.15

- Manufacture of chemicals                   24          6.08             22.43      31.04      17.22      79.05      11.12      12.68
- Manufacture of office
                                             30          8.67             34.23      34.65      40.23      50.15      54.31      10.35
  machinery and computers
- Manufacture of radio,
  television, and                            32          8.45             27.43      42.95      51.69      32.76      19.61      10.62
  Communication equipment
Construction                       2         45          8.14             19.89      97.24      127.54     46.98      22.27      0.50

Trade                              3      50 – 52        5.86             20.30      104.70     209.29     54.79      43.56      0.00

Hotels and Restaurants             4         55          5.95             15.88      52.82      62.65      42.51      95.70      0.00

Transportation                     5      60 – 63        6.74             24.63      218.34     204.39     13.01      20.13      7.50

Communications                     6         64          10.09            31.36      270.85     108.67     85.58       9.63      2.23

Services                           7     70 – 74, 93     7.51             20.30      47.76      46.17      96.87      28.68      10.21

- Computer services                          72          10.73            25.61      17.85      20.95     123.86      22.81      17.57

           Average                1-7      15-93         6.65             21.74      234.23     276.32     41.00       2.80      4.12
           Median                                        6.14             20.66      94.36      126.06     28.05       1.96      1.31
     Standard deviation                                  1.59              4.76      643.11     733.22     50.20       2.16      7.52




                                                                    41
                                                           Table 7: Determinants of Entry Rates

The reported estimates are from Tobit regressions. The dependent variable in Columns (i-iv) is the ratio of new firms to total firms, averaged over the period
1998-99, by two-digit NACE industry code and country (Amadeus). Industry Share is the industry share in sales (Amadeus). EntryUS is the ratio of new firms to
total firms in the U.S., by two-digit NACE industry code (Dun & Bradstreet). In Column (iv), we exclude transition countries. The dependent variable in Column
(v) is the ratio of new firms to total firms for the year 1999 by Eurostat industry code and country, calculated using data from Eurostat. All regressions include a
constant, country dummies and two-digit industry dummies, not shown. White (1980) standard errors are reported in parentheses. *, **, and *** denote
significant at 10%, 5%, and 1%, respectively. See Appendix 2 for complete variable definitions and sources.

                                                                   (i)           (ii)             (iii)       (iv)         (v)
                                                                                        Fraction of new firms

                                                                 Entry         Entry          EntCost &      Excl.      EuroStat
                                                                 Costs       Procedures         Time       Transition    Data

                                 Industry Share                   -0.092        -0.093          -0.095        0.157
                                                                 (0.108)       (0.109)         (0.108)       (0.123)
                                 EntryUS * EntCost             -0.175***                                   -0.110***    -0.198***
                                                                 (0.047)                                     (0.041)      (0.043)
                                 EntryUS * EntProc                           -0.656***
                                                                               (0.177)
                                 EntryUS * EntCost&Time                                       -0.211***
                                                                                                (0.055)

                                 Observations                     708            708             708          484          259




                                                                                42
                                              Table 8: Alternative Proxies for Natural Propensity to Enter
The reported estimates are from Tobit regressions. The dependent variable is the ratio of new firms to total firms, averaged over the period 1998-99, by two-digit NACE
industry and country (Amadeus). Industry Share is the industry share in sales (Amadeus). Exit is exit rates of U.S. firms, averaged over the period 1998-99, by NACE
industry (Dun & Bradstreet). EntCost is country-level entry cost (Djankov et al., 2002). EntryUS is the ratio of new firms to total firms in the U.S., by NACE industry
(Dun & Bradstreet) BankCost is the country-level bankruptcy cost (Djankov et al., 2003). Tax is the difference between the top corporate income and personal income tax
rates in the country (PricewaterhouseCoopers). SME is the percentage of U.S. firms with fewer than 250 employees, averaged over the period 1998-99, by NACE
industry (D & B). Scale is the median assets of U.S. firms, averaged over the period 1998-99, by NACE industry (Compustat). Size is the median sales of U.S. firms,
averaged over the period 1998-99, by NACE industry (Compustat). EntryUS, 1990-2000 is the entry rate of U.S. firms, averaged over the period 1990-2000, by NACE industry
(D & B). EntryUK is the entry rate of U.K. firms, averaged over the period 1998-99, by NACE industry (Amadeus). EntryEurope is the entry rate of firms in Europe,
averaged over the period 1998-99, by NACE industry (Amadeus). All regressions include a constant, and country and industry dummies, not shown. See Appendix 2 for
complete variable definitions and sources. White (1980) standard errors are reported in parentheses. *, **, and *** denote significant at 10%, 5%, and 1%, respectively.
                                       (i)            (ii)            (iii)           (iv)          (v)           (vi)         (vii)         (viii)          (ix)
                                      Exit        Bankruptcy         Taxes           SME           Scale         Size         1990s           UK          Europe
    Industry Share                   -0.081         -0.083           -0.108         -0.083        -0.087        -0.088        -0.074        -0.143         -0.105
                                    (0.109)        (0.108)          (0.109)        (0.109)       (0.109)       (0.109)       (0.109)       (0.111)        (0.107)
    Exit * EntCost                 -0.032**
                                    (0.015)
    EntryUS * BankCost                             -3.491***
                                                     (0.863)
    EntryUS * EntCost                                              -0.207***
                                                                     (0.050)
    EntryUS * Tax                                                   -2.429**
                                                                     (1.228)
    SME * EntCost                                                                  -0.007*
                                                                                   (0.004)
    Scale * EntCost                                                                             0.002***
                                                                                                 (0.001)
    Size * EntCost                                                                                            0.002***
                                                                                                               (0.001)
    EntryUS, 1990-2000 * EntCost                                                                                             -0.142**
                                                                                                                              (0.064)
    EntryUK * EntCost                                                                                                                     -0.095***
                                                                                                                                            (0.022)
    EntryEurope * EntCost                                                                                                                               -0.094***
                                                                                                                                                          (0.015)
    Observations                      708             708             708            708           708           708           708           670            708




                                                                                  43
                                                          Table 9: Causality and Selection Issues

This table shows an instrumental variable regression with robust errors (Column (i)) and Tobit regressions with censoring at 0 and 1 (Columns (ii-viii)). The
dependent variable is the ratio of new firms to total firms, averaged over the period 1998-99, by two-digit NACE industry code and country. In column (i), we
use the legal origin variable in La Porta et al. (1998) as instrument for entry regulations. The standard errors are corrected for clustering at the country level.
Column (ii) includes an interaction of industry-level U.S. entry and the average entry rate for the country as a whole. Column (iii) shows Tobit regressions with
the sample restricted to industries that are in the country’s bottom tertile in industry share. Column (iv) includes an interaction of industry-level entry and the
logarithm of per capita GDP in the country. Columns (v-vi) show Tobit results when we estimate different slopes for the interaction variables for whether the
industry is in a country below or above the sample median per capita income (low GDP per capita and high GDP per capita), or above or below the sample
median level of corruption (high corruption and low corruption). Column (vii) includes an interaction of industry-level entry and the share of the informal
economy in the country (Informal) from Schneider (2002). All regressions include a constant and country and industry dummies, not shown. See Appendix 2 for
complete variable definitions and sources. White (1980) standard errors are reported in parentheses. *, **, and *** denote significant at 10%, 5%, and 1%,
respectively.

                                                      (i)             (ii)                  (iii)            (iv)           (v)           (vi)            (vii)
                                                     IV:       Country-average                                                                         Informal
                                                                                      Small industries   Development       GDP        Corruption
                                               Legal origin          Entry                                                                               sector
Industry Share                                     -0.092           -0.089                -3.704*            -0.128        -0.110        -0.117          -0.143
                                                  (0.090)          (0.108)                (2.085)           (0.107)       (0.108)       (0.108)         (0.108)
EntryUS * EntCost                               -0.175***        -0.164***               -0.191**         -0.186***                                   -0.173***
                                                  (0.055)          (0.048)                (0.093)           (0.046)                                     (0.046)
EntryUS * Country-average Entry                                     2.730
                                                                   (2.672)
EntryUS * GDP per capita                                                                                  0.419***
                                                                                                           (0.092)
Low GDP per capita * EntryUS * EntCost                                                                                     0.087
                                                                                                                          (0.127)
High GDP per capita * EntryUS * EntCost                                                                                 -0.170***
                                                                                                                          (0.047)
High Corruption * EntryUS * EntCost                                                                                                       0.186
                                                                                                                                         (0.128)
Low Corruption * EntryUS * EntCost                                                                                                     -0.168***
                                                                                                                                         (0.047)
EntryUS * Informal                                                                                                                                    -0.057***
                                                                                                                                                        (0.013)

Observations                                       708               708                    214             708            708            708            708




                                                                                 44
                                                       Table 10: The Consequences of Preventing Free Entry
Column (i) of Panel A reports OLS estimates. The dependent variable is the logarithm of the average value added (in millions of Euros) of entrants for each industry and country,
averaged over the years 1998-99. Entrants are defined as firms that are one or two years old. Columns (ii) to (v) of Panel A show Tobit regressions with alternative proxies for the
propensity to enter. Column (vi) shows an instrumental variable regression. We use legal origin of the country as instrument for entry cost. Columns (vii-viii) show Tobit results
when we estimate different slopes for the interaction variables for whether the industry is in a country below or above the sample median of per capita income, or above or below
the sample median of corruption. The dependent variable in Columns (ii-viii) is the industry-level real growth in value added per employee of incumbent firms, defined as firms
with age >2. Panel B reports results from Tobit estimations. The dependent variable is the industry-level real growth in value added per employee of incumbent firms calculated for
two age groups: age 3-5 and age>5. Growth rates are averages for the period 1998-99, by two-digit NACE industry and country, and excluding observations based on fewer than
three firms. Growth observations are censored at -50% and +100%. Industry Share is the industry share in sales. EntryUS is the ratio of new firms to total firms in the United States.
EntCost is country-level entry costs. SME is the percentage of U.S. firms with fewer than 250 employees. Scale is the median assets of U.S. firms in an industry. Size is the median
sales of U.S. firms in an industry. EntryUS, SME, Scale, and Size are averages for the period 1998-99 and calculated at the two-digit NACE industry level. See Appendix 2 for
complete variable definitions and sources. All regressions include a constant, country dummies, and two-digit industry dummies, not shown. White (1980) standard errors are
reported in parentheses. In Panel B we report the p-value of a Wald test for whether the coefficients of the interaction term are equal across the two regressions and the p-value of a
likelihood ratio test of equality of all regression coefficients across the two regressions. *, **, and *** denote significant at 10%, 5%, and 1%, respectively.

                                                 Panel A: Size of Entrants and Performance of Incumbent Firms
                                                               (i)               (ii)          (iii)          (iv)           (v)           (vi)           (vii)          (viii)
                                                        Size of entrants      Growth           SME            Scale          Size      Legal origin       GDP         Corruption
    Industry Share                                           2.334             -0.050          -0.030        -0.048         -0.040        -0.178         -0.038         0.012
                                                            (3.890)           (0.530)         (0.529)       (0.530)        (0.530)       (0.378)        (0.531)        (0.530)
    EntryUS * EntCost                                      9.936***          -0.426**                                                    -0.211*
                                                            (1.861)           (0.202)                                                    (0.113)
    SME * EntCost                                                                           -0.039**
                                                                                             (0.015)
    Scale * EntCost                                                                                         0.006**
                                                                                                            (0.003)
    Size * EntCost                                                                                                        0.007**
                                                                                                                          (0.003)
    Low GDP per capita * EntryUS * EntCost                                                                                                               -0.607
                                                                                                                                                        (0.607)
    High GDP per capita * EntryUS * EntCost                                                                                                            -0.431**
                                                                                                                                                        (0.203)
    High Corruption * EntryUS * EntCost                                                                                                                                -0.456**
                                                                                                                                                                        (0.202)
    Low Corruption * EntryUS * EntCost                                                                                                                                 -1.394**
                                                                                                                                                                        (0.614)
    Observations                                              484               572            572            572            572           572            572             572




                                                                                         45
    Panel B: Performance of Young and Old Incumbent Firms

                                               (i)                (ii)
                                             Age 3-5           Age > 5

EntryUS * EntCost                             -0.038           -0.396**
                                             (0.281)            (0.199)

Wald test of equality of slope
                                                       0.300
coefficients (p-value)
Likelihood ratio test of equality of
                                                       0.001***
all regression coefficients (p-value)
Observations                                  472                 615




                                        46
                                             Table 11A: Other Regulations and the Business Environment

This table shows Tobit regressions with censoring at zero and one (Columns (i-iv and vi) and an OLS regression (Column (v)). The dependent variable in
regressions (i-iv) is the ratio of new firms (defined as age 1-2) to total firms, averaged over the period 1998-99, by two-digit NACE industry code and country.
The dependent variable in regression (v) is the logarithm of the average value added (in millions of Euros) of entrants, defined as firms with age 1-2, for each
industry and country. The dependent variable in regression (vi) is the industry-level real growth in value added per employee for firms with age>2. Industry
Share is the industry share in sales. EntryUS * EntCost is the interaction of industry-level new entry ratios and country-level entry costs. ExtFinUS * Priv is the
interaction of industry-level external financial dependence for the period 1990-99 (from Compustat) and country-level private credit-to-GDP. LabIntUS *
EmplLaw is the interaction of industry-level labor intensity and country-level employment laws index. R&DUS * Prop is the interaction of industry-level R&D
intensity and country-level Property rights. See Appendix 2 for complete variable definitions and sources. All regressions include a constant, country dummies,
and industry dummies, not shown. White (1980) standard errors are reported in parentheses. *, **, and *** denote significant at 10%, 5%, and 1%, respectively.

                                             (i)            (ii)            (iii)          (iv)               (v)                   (vi)
                                                                Entry rates                            Size of entrants    Growth of incumbents
                                           Finance         Labor        Innovation     Horse race        Horse race            Horse race
               Industry Share               -0.118         -0.108          -0.135         -0.157             2.690                -0.029
                                           (0.108)        (0.108)         (0.108)        (0.108)           (3.891)               (0.534)
               EntryUS * EntCost         -0.155***      -0.195***       -0.166***      -0.177***          9.506***              -0.420**
                                           (0.047)        (0.048)         (0.047)        (0.048)           (1.862)               (0.210)
               ExtFinUS * Priv            0.034***                                         0.016             0.344                 0.005
                                           (0.010)                                       (0.012)           (0.619)               (0.052)
               LabIntUS * EmplLaw                        -2.580**                       -2.447**           -25.704                 2.451
                                                          (1.014)                        (1.007)          (27.180)               (4.432)
               R&DUS * Prop                                             0.117***       0.093***             -2.330                 0.045
                                                                         (0.030)         (0.034)           (1.881)               (0.148)

               Observations                 708            708             679             679               468                     548




                                                                                 47
                                                Table 11B: Correlations between Regulatory Variables

This table shows the correlations between the different country-level regulatory variables considered in the regressions reported in Table 11A. EntCost is
country-level costs associated with entry regulation. Priv is the country-level ratio of private credit to GDP. EmplLaw is a country-level index of employment
regulations. Prop is a country-level measure of protection of property rights. See Appendix 2 for complete variable definitions and sources. P-values are reported
between brackets.

                                                                EntCost       Priv      EmplLaw        Prop
                                                   EntCost       1.00

                                                   Priv           -0.38       1.00
                                                                 (0.10)
                                                   EmplLaw         0.37       -0.44        1.00
                                                                 (0.11)      (0.05)
                                                   Prop           -0.29        0.70       -0.44        1.00
                                                                 (0.22)      (0.00)       (0.05)




                                                                               48
                                                                       Figure 1: Firm Size and Age

This figure compares firm size (as measured by average value added for the period 1998-99) for each age cohort in the United Kingdom (a country with low
bureaucratic entry barriers) and Italy (a country with high bureaucratic entry barriers).


                                                                         Average value added


                                           1,600,000

                                           1,400,000
                                                                                    United Kingdom
                                           1,200,000
                       Value added (usd)




                                           1,000,000

                                            800,000
                                                                                                                       Italy

                                            600,000

                                            400,000

                                            200,000

                                                   -
                                                       1   2   3   4      5    6      7      8       9       10   11    12     13   14   15
                                                                                   Age of the firm (years)




                                                                                    49
                                               Appendix 1: Details about collection of company accounts in Amadeus

Country             Which companies have to file accounts?                                                                     Are all public and       Maximum period a          Maximum period
                                                                                                                               private limited          company can take to       between filing of
                                                                                                                               companies required       file accounts after its   accounts and records
                                                                                                                               to file accounts ?       year end                  appearing in database
Austria             Public limited companies (AG) and private limited companies (GmbH).                                        Yes                      12 months                 3 months
Belgium             All public limited companies (SA/NV) companies, private limited companies (SPRL/BV/BVBA),                  Yes                      7 months                  3 months
                    partnerships, cooperatives, and European Economic Interest Groupings.
Bulgaria            Joint Stock companies (EAD).                                                                               No,     only public      n.a.                      n.a.
                                                                                                                               limited companies.
Czech Republic     Joint stock companies, limited liability companies and cooperatives. Limited liability companies and        No, only if they meet     6 months                 4-5 weeks
                   cooperatives only if they meet at least one of the following two conditions in the previous year: equity >  certain size criteria.
                   CZK 20 million and turnover > CZK 40 million.
Denmark            Public limited companies (A/S), private limited companies (ApS), limited partnerships by shares (P/S), and Yes                        5-6 months               Less than 20 days
                   some limited and general partnerships.
Estonia            Public limited companies, private limited companies, and cooperatives.                                         Yes                    6 months                 12 months
Finland            All joint-stock companies and all cooperatives that meet two of the following three conditions: turnover > No, only if they meet 8 months                      n.a.
                   FIM 20 million, total assets > FIM 10 million, number of employees > 50.                                       certain size criteria.
France             Public limited companies (SA), private limited companies (SARL), limited partnerships (SCS), general Yes                              4-6 months               4 months
                   partnerships (SNC), and sole proprietorships with limited liability (EURL).
Germany            Public limited companies (AG), private limited companies (GmbH), and cooperatives (eG).                        Yes                    12 months                4-6 weeks
Greece             Public and private limited companies (SA).                                                                     Yes                    6 months                 20-40 days
Hungary            All companies, except proprietorships.                                                                         Yes                    5 months                 n.a.
Iceland            All public limited companies (HF), private limited companies (EHF), general cooperatives (SVF), and some Yes                          8 months                 6 weeks
                   partnerships and agricultural cooperatives.
Ireland            Public limited companies (plc) and private limited companies (ltd).                                            Yes                    46 days                  n.a.
Italy              Public limited companies (S.p.A.) and private limited companies (S.r.l.).                                      Yes                    6 months                 5 months
Latvia             All companies, except sole proprietorships and farms with annual turnover < LVL 45,000.                        Yes                    4-10 months              9 months
Lithuania          All companies.                                                                                                 Yes                    5 months                 n.a.
Luxembourg         Public limited companies (S.A.), private limited companies (S.A.R.L.) and cooperatives (S.C.).                 Yes                    6 months                 2 months
Netherlands        Public limited companies (NV) and private limited companies (BV).                                              Yes                    15 months
Norway             All limited liability companies. Unlimited liability entities only if turnover > NOK 2 million.                Yes                    6 months                 2 months
Poland             All joint stock companies, limited liability companies, and partnerships that meet the following criteria: No, only if they meet      9 months                 n.a.
                   employees > 50, total assets > Euro 1 million, and net profits > Euro 3 million.                               certain size criteria.
Portugal           All joint-stock companies and private limited companies.                                                       Yes                    6 months                 2 months
Romania            Joint stock companies, limited liability companies, and partnerships limited by shares.                        Yes                    2.5 months               4 months
Slovak Republic    Joint stock companies (a.s.), limited liability companies (s.r.o.), and cooperatives if they meet two of three No, only if they meet 12 months                 4-5 weeks
                   conditions: Assets > SKK 20 mln, turnover > SKK 40 mln, and number of employees > 20.                          certain size criteria.
Slovenia           All companies.                                                                                                 Yes                    3 months                 2-4 months
Spain              All public limited companies (S.A.), private limited companies (S.L.) and limited partnerships.                Yes                    7 months                 n.a.
Sweden             All public and private limited companies (AB).                                                                 Yes                    6 months                 n.a.
Switzerland        There are no legal requirements to file accounts. Listed public limited corporations (AG/SA) must file No                             n.a.                     3 months
                   accounts to the stock exchange and publish audited statements in the official gazette.
United Kingdom     Public limited companies (plc) and private limited companies (ltd).                                            Yes                    7-10 months              10 weeks
Source: Amadeus, Bureau Van Dijk, Dun & Bradstreet Country Report Guides, and Primark Capital Markets Guide 1999. Note: Data excludes proprietorships in all countries.




                                                                                              50
                                             Appendix 2: Definition of Variables

Variable                                Description
Amadeus industry-level variables
Entry                                   Share of new firms in the total number of firms. New firms are firms that are one or two
                                        years old. Average for the years 1998-99. We calculate this country-industry level variable
                                        for two-digit NACE industries. Source: Amadeus.
Industry Share                          Ratio of the industry’s sales to total sales. Average for the years 1998-99. We calculate
                                        this country-industry level variable for two-digit NACE industries. Source: Amadeus.
Growth in value added per               Growth in value added per employee over the period 1998-99 averaged over all incumbent
employee                                firms in the industry in a country. Incumbent firms are defined as firms that are more than
                                        two years old. Value added is computed as earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and
                                        amortization, plus labor costs. We calculate this country-industry level variable for two-
                                        digit NACE industries. Source: Amadeus.
Size of entrants                        Logarithm of average value added (in millions of Euros) of entrants, defined as firms that
                                        are one or two years old, over the period 1998-99. We calculate this country-industry level
                                        variable for two-digit NACE industries. Source: Amadeus.
Eurostat industry-level variables
Eurostat Entry                          Entry rate for the year 1999 by Eurostat industry (based on two-digit NACE industries).
                                        Source: Eurostat.
Eurostat Exit                           Exit rate for the year 1999 by Eurostat industry (based on two-digit NACE industries).
                                        Source: Eurostat.
U.S. Benchmark variables
Entry U.S. (EntryUS)                    Entry rates for U.S. corporations. Calculated for two-digit NACE industries (original data
                                        on a four-digit SIC level). Average for the years 1998-99. Source: Dun & Bradstreet.
Exit U.S. (ExitUS)                      Exit rates for U.S. corporations. Calculated for two-digit NACE industries (original data on
                                        a four-digit SIC level). Average for the years 1998-99. Source: Dun & Bradstreet.
Entry U.S. 1990s (EntryUS, 1990-2000)   Entry rates for U.S. corporations. Calculated for two-digit NACE industries (original data
                                        on a four-digit SIC level). Average for the years 1990-2000. Source: Dun & Bradstreet.
Entry U.K. (EntryUK)                    Entry rates for U.K. corporations. Calculated for two-digit NACE industries. Average for
                                        the years 1998-99. Source: Amadeus.
Entry Europe (EntryEurope)              Entry rates averaged across all corporations in the sampled European countries. Calculated
                                        for two-digit NACE industries. Average for the years 1998-99. Source: Amadeus.
Total Assets (Scale)                    Industry-level median of total assets. We compute this measure for all U.S. firms for the
                                        year 1995. Calculated for two-digit NACE industries (original data on a four-digit SIC
                                        level). Source: Compustat.
Total Revenues (Size)                   Industry-level median of total revenues. We compute this measure for all U.S. firms for the
                                        year 1995. Calculated for two-digit NACE industries (original data on a four-digit SIC
                                        level). Source: Compustat.
External financial dependence           Industry-level median of the ratio of capital expenditures minus cash flow over capital
(ExtFin)                                expenditures. The numerator and denominator are summed over all years for each firm
                                        before dividing. Cash flow is defined as the sum of funds from operations, decreases in
                                        inventories, decreases in receivables, and increases in payables. Capital expenditures
                                        include net acquisitions of fixed assets. This definition follows Rajan and Zingales (1998).
                                        We compute this measure for all U.S. firms for the period 1990-99. Calculated for two-digit



                                                                 51
Variable                        Description
                                NACE industries (original data on a four-digit SIC level). Source: Compustat.
R & D intensity (R&D)           Measure of dependence on research and development, equal to the industry-level median of
                                the ratio of research and development expenses to sales. The numerator and denominator
                                are summed over all years for each firm before dividing. We compute this measure for all
                                U.S. firms for the period 1990-99. Calculated for two-digit NACE industries (original data
                                on a four-digit SIC level). Source: Compustat.
Labor intensity (LabInt)        Measure of labor intensity, equal to the amount of employees per value added, industry
                                medians of ratios over all firm-years in the relevant time period. We compute this measure
                                for all U.S. firms for the period 1990-99. A higher score indicates higher labor intensity.
                                Calculated for two-digit NACE industries (original data on a four-digit SIC level). Source:
                                Compustat.
Country-Level Variables
Entry cost (EntCost)            Cost of business registration, expressed as a percentage of per capita GNP. Data for the
                                year 1999. Source: Djankov et al. (2002).
Entry cost and time (EntTime)   Cost of business registration, including the monetized value of the entrepreneur’s time.
                                Source: Djankov et al. (2002).
Entry procedures (EntProc)      Number of procedures to register a business. Data for the year 1999. Source: Djankov et
                                al. (2002).
Bankruptcy cost (BankCost)      Actual cost of bankruptcy proceedings as a percentage of the estate. Data for the year 2003.
                                Source: Djankov et al. (2003).
Informal sector (Informal)      Share of the informal economy, calculated as the size of the informal economy as a
                                percentage of official GNI. Average over the period 1999-2000. Source: Schneider (2002).
Tax disadvantage (Tax)          Tax disadvantage is the difference between the top corporate income tax and the top
                                personal income tax rates in the country (PricewaterhouseCoopers Worldwide Taxes 1999-
                                2000).
Private credit to GDP (Priv)    Ratio of domestic credit to the private sector scaled by GDP, average over the period 1995-
                                99. Source: International Monetary Fund’s International Financial Statistics (IMF-IFS).
Stock market capitalization     Ratio of stock market capitalization to GDP, average over the period 1995-99. Source:
(MCap)                          World Bank World Development Indicators (WDI).
Employment laws (EmpLaw)        Index of labor regulations from Botero et al. (2004). Ranges from zero to three. A higher
                                score indicates that regulation is more protective of a worker. Data refer to 1997.
Property rights (Prop)          Index of property rights for the year 1997. Source: Index of Economic Freedom, Heritage
                                Foundation. Ranges from one to five with higher score indicating greater protection of
                                property rights (we reversed the original scale).




                                                         52
  Appendix 3: U.S. entry and exit rates, by two-digit NACE Revision 1 or two-digit 1987 U.S. SIC code
  Sample of all U.S. corporations from Dun & Bradstreet. Averages for the years 1998-99. Entry is the percentage of new
  corporations (firms that are one year old). Exit is the percentage of firms that exited following formal bankruptcy
  proceedings.
NACE                 Industry              Entry    Exit      SIC                  Industry               Entry     Exit
10     Coal mining                          3.05    4.08       10    Metal mining                          3.42     2.72
11     Oil and gas extraction               4.45    1.35       12    Coal mining                           3.05     4.08
13     Mining of metal ores                 3.41    2.86       13    Oil and gas extraction                4.32     1.33
14     Other mining and quarrying           3.73    1.39       14    Nonmetallic minerals, except fuels    3.73     1.39
15     Food products and beverages          5.24    1.91       15    General building contractors          9.27     4.58
16     Tobacco products                     7.45    1.40       16    Heavy construction contractors        4.98     2.00
17     Textiles                             6.92    2.46       17    Special trade contractors             7.81     4.10
18     Wearing apparel; fur                 6.44    3.03       20    Food and kindred products             5.24     1.91
19     Luggage, handbags, footwear          9.06    2.51       21    Tobacco manufactures                  7.45     1.40
20     Wood, except furniture               5.98    3.29       22    Textile mill products                 6.14     2.65
21     Pulp and paper                       5.26    1.87       23    Apparel and other textile products    7.02     2.68
22     Publishing; printing                 5.49    2.14       24    Lumber and wood products              6.39     3.17
23     Coke and petroleum products          5.80    0.81       25    Furniture and fixtures                5.03     2.59
24     Chemicals                            6.08    1.45       26    Paper and allied products             5.26     1.87
25     Rubber and plastic products          4.46    1.79       27    Printing and publishing               5.49     2.14
26     Non-metallic mineral products        5.79    1.74       28    Chemicals and allied products         6.02     1.44
27     Basic metals                         4.90    2.13       29    Petroleum and coal products           4.89     0.95
28     Fabricated metal products            5.71    1.98       30    Rubber and plastics                   4.29     1.52
29     Machinery and equipment n.e.c.       4.30    1.74       31    Leather and leather products          9.00     2.37
30     Office machinery and computers       8.67    2.20       32    Stone, clay, and glass products       5.93     1.79
31     Electrical machinery                 5.92    1.52       33    Primary metal industries              4.90     2.13
32     Communication equipment              8.45    2.27       34    Fabricated metal products             4.31     1.83
33     Instruments, watches and clocks      5.72    1.45       35    Machinery and equipment               4.52     1.75
34     Motor vehicles and trailers          5.20    2.42       36    Electrical and electronic equipment 7.07       1.89
35     Other transport equipment            7.96    2.18       37    Transportation equipment              6.77     2.27
36     Furniture; manufacturing n.e.c.      7.92    2.33       38    Instruments and related products      6.02     1.05
40     Electricity, gas, hot water          5.56    0.88       39    Miscellaneous manufacturing           8.62     2.25
41     Distribution of water                1.74    0.28       40    Railroads and rail transportation     4.87     2.48
45     Construction                         8.14    4.14       41    Local passenger transit               5.90     3.98
50     Sale and repair of motor vehicles    5.05    2.74       42    Motor freight transportation          8.45     7.33
51     Wholesale trade                      5.35    1.54       44    Water transportation                  4.22     1.56
52     Retail trade                         7.19    2.81       45    Transportation by air                 4.65     1.55
55     Hotels and restaurants               5.95    2.54       46    Pipelines, except natural gas         2.22     0.44
60     Land transport                       8.41    7.68       47    Transportation services               8.24     2.14
61     Water transport                      5.61    1.95       48    Communications                        8.80     1.77
62     Air transport                        6.19    1.75       49    Electric, gas, and sanitary services  4.68     1.51
63     Supporting transport activities      6.77    1.67       50    Wholesale trade--durable goods        4.94     1.50
64     Post and telecommunications         10.09    2.14       51    Wholesale trade--nondurable goods 5.68         1.68
70     Real estate activities               5.33    1.56       52    Building materials                    4.93     1.81
71     Renting of machinery, equipment      6.34    1.93       53    General merchandise stores            6.44     2.21
72     Computer and related activities     10.73    1.91       54    Food stores                           5.72     2.28
73     Research and development             6.53    0.93       55    Automotive dealers; gas stations      4.68     2.02
74     Other business activities            9.65    4.60       56    Apparel and accessory stores          8.61     2.42
85     Health and social work               2.83    1.51       57    Furniture stores                      7.56     2.61
90     Sewage; disposal; sanitation         5.43    2.22       58    Eating and drinking places            6.29     2.77
92     Recreation, culture and sports       6.46    2.35       59    Miscellaneous retail                  7.55     2.97
93     Other services activities            6.46    3.67       65    Real estate                           5.22     1.52
                                                               70    Hotels and other lodging places       3.83     1.13
                                                               72    Personal services                     6.56     3.73
                                                               73    Business services                    11.49     5.68
                                                               75    Automotive repair and services        5.47     3.31
                                                               76    Miscellaneous repair services         8.09     4.14
                                                               78    Motion pictures                       9.58     3.47
                                                               79    Amusement and recreation              6.20     2.43
                                                               80    Health services                       2.19     1.04
                                                               83    Social services                       4.52     2.70




                                                           53
