                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                            THE TRILEMMA IN HISTORY:
                        TRADEOFFS AMONG EXCHANGE RATES,
                      MONETARY POLICIES, AND CAPITAL MOBILITY

                                            Maurice Obstfeld
                                           Jay C. Shambaugh
                                            Alan M. Taylor

                                         Working Paper 10396
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w10396


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      March 2004




This paper was originally prepared for the conference “The Political Economy of Globalization: Can the Past
Inform the Present” sponsored by the IIS at Trinity College, Dublin and funded in part by the European
Science Foundation. The authors thank the attendees for comments and the sponsors for financial support.
We also thank participants at the NBER's Fall 2002 program meeting in international finance and
macroeconomics and the Fourth Annual IMF Research Conference, particularly our discussants, Jeffrey
Frankel, Lars Svensson, and Helene Rey. Obstfeld gratefully acknowledges the financial support of the NSF,
through a grant to the NBER. Taylor gratefully acknowledges the support of the Chancellor’s Fellowship at
the University of California, Davis. We thank Julian di Giovanni and Miguel Angel Fuentes for excellent
research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the author and not necessarily those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2004 by Maurice Obstfeld, Jay C. Shambaugh, and Alan M. Taylor. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
The Trilemma in History:
Tradeoffs among Exchange Rates, Monetary Policies, and Capital Mobility
Maurice Obstfeld, Jay C. Shambaugh, and Alan M. Taylor
NBER Working Paper No. 10396
March 2004
JEL No. F33, F41, F42
                                        ABSTRACT
The exchange-rate regime is often seen as constrained by the monetary policy trilemma, which

imposes a stark tradeoff among exchange stability, monetary independence, and capital market

openness. Yet the trilemma has not gone without challenge. Some (e.g., Calvo and Reinhart 2001,

2002) argue that under the modern float there could be limited monetary autonomy. Others (e.g.,

Bordo and Flandreau 2003), that even under the classical gold standard domestic monetary

autonomy was considerable. This paper studies the coherence of international interest rates over

more than 130 years. The constraints implied by the trilemma are largely borne out by history.

Maurice Obstfeld
Department of Economics
549 Evans Hall #3880
University of California
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and NBER
obstfeld@econ.berkeley.edu

Jay C. Shambaugh
Department of Economics
309 Rockefeller Hall
Dartmouth College
Hanover, NH 03755
jay.c.shambaugh@dartmouth.edu

Alan M. Taylor
Department of Economics
University of California
One Shields Avenue
Davis, CA 95616-8578
and NBER
amtaylor@ucdavis.edu
The characterization of economic globalization as a “golden straitjacket” evokes two distinct sets
of questions.1 One can ask how golden the jacket is, or else how strait it is. The former question
has occupied many applied economists, who have studied the relationship of openness to growth
and so forth. The latter question has been much less studied, yet it appears equally important for
any overall assessment of the costs and benefits of economic openness. The goal of this paper is
to examine the constraints that financial globalization places on macroeconomic policies.
           At the most general level, policymakers in open economies face a macroeconomic
trilemma. Typically they are confronted with three typically desirable, yet contradictory,
objectives:
           1.      to stabilize the exchange rate;
           2.      to enjoy free international capital mobility,;
           3.      to engage in a monetary policy oriented toward domestic goals.
Because only two out of the three objectives can be mutually consistent, policymakers must
decide which one to give up. This is the trilemma. If monetary policy activism (3) is taken to
mean the ability to drive local interest rates away from the world rate—the criterion we shall
employ here—then arbitrage in open capital markets (2) and simple interest parity under a
credibly fixed exchange rate (1) clearly defeat the objective. Despite the clarity and simplicity of
this prediction, one is surprised by the frequency with which the lessons of the trilemma seem to
be disregarded by policymakers, even today. This might reflect the lack of empirical studies
showing how tight the constraints of the trilemma really are.
           Major empirical challenges confront anyone seeking empirical measures of the three
economic objectives underlying the trilemma. The first element, the exchange rate, is perhaps
the simplest to measure. One might use the volatility of the exchange rate, or a simple binary
indicator of pegging or not pegging. However, even here some disputes arise. Should one
employ unconditional or conditional volatility measures? If using an indicator variable, should
the exchange rate regime be classified by its de jure or de facto status? A country’s actual
exchange rate regime choice often departs from its self-reported status, as published by the
International Monetary Fund (IMF). The preferred approach is therefore to examine what
countries do, not what they say (Obstfeld and Rogoff 1995; Calvo and Reinhart 2001, 2002;
Levy-Yeyati and Sturzenegger 2002; Reinhart and Rogoff 2004).


1
    The quotation is from Friedman (1999).


                                                     1
         The second element of the trilemma, capital mobility, is even harder to measure. Postwar
empirical analysis has tended to rely on the IMF’s classifications of capital mobility restrictions,
which only have broad coverage in recent decades. These are general qualitative indices and, as
with the de jure exchange rate reports, questions have been raised about their de facto accuracy.
For an historical study like ours, we face the further obstacle that there exist no comparable
sources on pre-1945 capital controls.
         The third element, measuring the activism of monetary policy, is also problematic. The
approach taken by Rose (1996), for example, uses a simple monetary model of exchange in
which the exchange rate responds to “fundamentals” such as money, output, and interest rates.
Rose tests how well the model fits the data (in the second moments) to see how exchange rate
flexibility is related to “monetary divergence” in two countries, as well as to various controls
based on capital mobility indices. His results were “somewhat favorable but surprisingly weak”
(p. 926). Still, as many papers have pointed out, we are poorly equipped to identify monetary
policy shocks. Using monetary aggregates is unattractive when one cannot easily distinguish
between demand and supply shocks to money, and also when the stability of velocity has to be
assumed. An older and distinct approach, based on trying to measure the capital-account offset to
domestic credit expansion, suffers from similar problems in empirically identifying exogenous
credit shocks.
         Here we take a different approach. First, our measure of monetary independence will be
based not on quantity aggregates, but on observed short-term nominal market interest rates. This
approach has intuitive appeal because monetary policy (a few experiments aside) has almost
always taken the form of interest-rate targeting or manipulation, with little meaningful reference
to money-supply quantity targets. Even if the interest rate is not the primary instrument of
monetary policy, it should be directly affected by monetary-policy changes and thus would still
                                           2
serve as a measure of the stance of policy. If the interest rate is insulated from market


2
  Goodhart (1989) notes that “monetary policy operations of the Central Banks” can be viewed as “quantity, or rate
setting actions (though, of course, one is the dual of the other). ” Generally, central banks have long viewed a short-
term interest rate as their preferred policy instrument. Occasionally a central bank (such as the German Bundesbank
starting in the 1970s) has focused on monetary aggregates, a practice that still survives in the European Central
Bank's much-debated (but basically irrelevant) “second pillar” of monetary policy. In the process of disinflation
beginning in the late 1970s, other central banks, such as the Federal Reserve and the Bank of England, briefly paid
attention to quantity targets. In recent decades, financial innovation and instability in money demand has led to a
widespread acceptance that quantity targets are impracticable. As Goodhart puts it, “it became generally accepted
that adjustments to the general level of short-term interest rates formed just about the only effective monetary
instrument.”


                                                        2
conditions by capital controls, this is of interest as well in that it demonstrates how capital
controls can allow monetary autonomy and a fixed exchange rate to exist simultaneously. That
is, it demonstrates the power of the third leg of the trilemma. The question we pose is whether
the exchange-rate and capital-control regimes influence the extent to which local interest rates
diverge from the “world” interest rate (in some well-defined base-country market).3
         We focus on the nominal, not real, interest rate for two reasons. The first is that the
nominal rate generally is the instrument of the central bank. In addition, though, under free
international capital mobility, credibly fixed exchange rates imply that the nominal interest rate
in the local country must equal that in the center or base country. On the other hand,
international real rates of interest need not be equalized under these conditions. For example,
expected changes in real exchange rates can generate international real interest differences even
when there is no monetary policy autonomy. As a result, there is no strong theoretical prediction
that pegs and nonpegs will look different with regards to real interest rate movements against a
base country.
         Our approach vastly expands the sample range of experience studied. In particular, our
study of international interest rate transmission will encompass historical episodes as far back as
     4
1870. An enlargement of the data universe is attractive on a number of grounds. First, we can
see whether the trilemma has endured over a long period as a useful characterization of policy
choice. The more durable it can be shown to have been over the long course of history, the more
seriously should its constraints be taken by policymakers. Second, the larger historical adds
useful additional variance to the data and reveals useful benchmarks for exactly how tightly the
straitjacket of globalization fits in different times and places. Across the different historical eras,
very different attitudes toward policy activism and toward capital controls prevailed. Thus, cross-
era as well as within-era comparisons are important in reaching our conclusions.
         Finally, our findings can be compared with historical narratives (e.g., Eichengreen 1996;
Obstfeld and Taylor 2004). The classical gold standard was a highly globalized period of mostly

3
  As noted below, our approach follows that of Shambaugh (2004) and is closely related to the work of Frankel
(1999) and Frankel et al. (2000, 2002). A delicate question arises, of course, over whether an observed non-
divergence of such interest rates can be seen as evidence of a tight market exchange-rate constraint, rather than a
deliberate policy choice to follow the base country's interest rates for other reasons. We consider this question
below.
4
  Specifically, we will try to assess the potency of the trilemma as an overarching explanation of policy constraints
in both the pre-World War One gold standard period (1870–1913), the convertible Bretton Woods period (1959–73),
and in the post-Bretton Woods era (1974–present). In comparison, Rose (1996) studied the period 1967–92, and




                                                       3
fixed rates, unfettered capital mobility, and, hence, limited monetary independence. The
architecture of the post-World War Two Bretton Woods system provided monetary autonomy
with relatively stable fixed-but-adjustable exchange rates, necessitating strict limits on capital
mobility. These eras offer a clean contrast with the recent era, when countries to greater or lesser
degree have dismantled their postwar systems of capital controls. Today, some countries have
adopted flexible exchange rates as a route to monetary independence, some have fixed and tied
their hands, while others have endured crises and confusion in vacillating between these two
“corner solutions.”
        Are such narratives supported by the data? We think so. In this study we find pronounced
and rapid transmission of interest-rate shocks during fixed-rate episodes under the classical gold
standard period. In marked contrast, during the Bretton Woods era fixed exchange rates did not
provide much of a constraint on domestic interest rates, a clear by-product of widespread capital
controls. Now, in the contemporary post-Bretton Woods era, there are signs of reversion to the
more globalized pattern, with increased interest rate transmission among fixed-rate countries.
Still, an alternative solution of the trilemma is also clearly present in our contemporary findings:
nonpegs, both before 1914 and in the present, have enjoyed considerably more monetary
independence than pegs. This relative difference in independence provides another important
benchmark in showing how to judge the lack of independence under a peg. Overall, as witnessed
in the systematic variation in policymakers’ room for maneuver, we find strong evidence in
support of the trilemma, which emerges in the data as a long enduring and still very relevant
constraint on the political policy equilibrium.


Data


Data Sources
Our core data are all monthly.
        Short-term interest rate data for the gold standard era reflect the arduous collection
efforts of Neal and Weidenmier (2003), whom we thank for sharing the resource they have
assembled. The Neal-Weidenmier data are available for 15 countries plus the United Kingdom.
Before World War One, the UK interest rate is used as the central or base rate with which other


Shambaugh (2004) and Frankel et al. (2000, 2002), the modern post-1970 period through the end of the twentieth
century.


                                                     4
countries' rates are compared. The gold standard interest-rate series start in 1870 for many
countries and later for others. All series end in 1914.
           Interest rates data for the Bretton Woods era consist of both short-term money market
rates (interbank and call money rates) and short term treasury bill rates (generally three-month
rates), all average monthly values taken from the IFS CD-ROM and Global Financial Data.5
Availability determines which data we use. While the maturity on different types of rate differ
slightly, rates for the same country, when available, are in practice extremely highly correlated.
Data for 21 countries in addition to the United States are available. The base interest rate under
Bretton Woods is the US interest rate (money market or treasury bill) that matches the interest
rate used for each local country. Due to a lack of monthly data before 1957, and the expansion of
convertibility that took place in 1959, the Bretton Woods data that we examine are limited to the
years 1959–70. We stop in 1970 due to the increasing speculation on exchange parity changes
that characterized the early 1970s.
           For the post-Bretton Woods era (1973-2000), the interest rates are once again average
monthly values of short-term money market and short-term treasury bill rates from the IFS CD-
ROM. Those data are augmented on the basis of Datastream and Global Financial Data. In all,
data for 103 countries are available. Given diverse pegging patterns in the modern period, we
allow base to differ across countries, as described in Shambaugh (2004). For many countries the
United States is the natural base, but the base is Germany for much of Europe, the base is France
for some of Africa, and the base is the UK, South Africa, Australia, or India for others. For pegs,
the interest rate is obviously the country to which the local country pegs. For pegged countries
that are not pegged, the base country is the one to which the local country would most likely
follow if it were pegging. This choice is determined by previous pegging history, which is
relevant in almost all cases, but otherwise by the dominant currency in the region (the one to
which neighboring countries peg). Information from the IMF’s Annual Report on Exchange
Arrangements and Exchange Restrictions and from B. Taylor (2000) is used as well. Because
almost all countries peg at some point in the sample, and those that switch bases usually switch
from one peg to another, the assignment of a base currency is generally quite simple. Once again,
the base interest rate used is always of the same type (money market or treasury bill) as the one
available for the local country.


5
    Data for the US are extended back in time using information from FRED on the St. Louis Federal Reserve website.


                                                        5
         All interest rates are expressed in the form ln(1+R). While this has a trivial effect at low
to moderate interest rates, it does reduce the impact of outliers. In addition, hyperinflations are
excluded from the post-Bretton Woods sample due to the excessive weight they would carry in
the regression results.

Exchange-Rate Regime Coding
Exchange-rate regimes under the gold standard can be determined in two alternative ways: based
on the legal commitment of countries to gold (the de jure status) or on the observed behavior of
the exchange rate (the de facto status). De jure Gold Standard coding is based on Meissner
(2001), Eichengreen (1996), Global Financial Data, and Hawtrey (1947).6 De facto classification
follows the coding methodology for the post-Bretton Woods era developed in Shambaugh
(2004). In applying it under the gold standard, we check whether the end-of-month month
exchange rate against the pound sterling stays within ±2% bands over the course of a year. In
addition, single realignments are not considered breaks in the regime as long as the transition is
immediate from one peg to another. Finally, single-year pegs are dropped as they quite possibly
reflect simply an absence of volatility. In such cases, it seems unlikely that there exists either
commitment on the government’s part or confidence in the market that the rate will not change.7
The de jure and de facto criteria are in broad agreement, although many countries begin to peg
de facto a number of years before they officially adopt the gold standard. We apply the same de
facto test (with respect to the appropriate base currency) to the two other epochs.
         For our segment of the Bretton Woods period (1959-70), all countries are pegged both de
jure and de facto with the exception of Canada in 1960–61 and 1970, Brazil in the early and late
1960’s, the UK in 1967, and Germany beginning in 1969. This lack of diversity is not a result of
our sample, but the era. Looking at all 145 countries with exchange rate data from 1960-66, 2.5
per year, on average, are not pegged. In 1967 and 1969, there are some realignments, but all
quickly return to pegging. Thus, we will not use the Bretton Woods era to provide a within-era
contrast in regimes. Instead, data from the Bretton Woods years yield estimates for an era in
which pegs coexisted with capital controls, in contrast to the pegs without capital controls
characterizing the gold standard.


6
  Bimetallic regimes are treated as pegs. We recognize that this convention is somewhat arbitrary, but it affects only
a small number of observations.
7
  When pursuing differences regressions, we also drop the first year of a peg to ensure we are not differencing the
interest rate data across nonpegged and pegged observations.


                                                        6
        Finally, the post-Bretton Woods era coding uses the de facto classification from
Shambaugh (2004), as described above.8 We have adopted the terms "peg" and "nonpeg" to
describe countries’ regimes to emphasize that the countries without pegged rates may not be pure
floats; instead, the government may conduct some deliberate exchange-rate management.
Roughly half the observations are pegs and half are not, providing plentiful within-era variation.

Individual Country Episodes
For the PSS analysis, individual country/regime episodes are examined using monthly data. De
facto coding of the exchange-rate regime coding follows much the same pattern as for annual
data: we ask if the exchange rate has stayed within ±2% bands over at least 12 months. Episodes
for the gold standard and Bretton Woods eras are listed in Appendix 1. Short episodes of less
than three years are excluded as such data series are of insufficient length for reliable time-series
estimation. There are 13 defined peg episodes and 7 nonpeg episodes based on de jure status
under the gold standard, and 20 pegs and 5 nonpegs based on de facto status. Under Bretton
Woods, there are 19 pegs and only one nonpeg (Brazil). The other nonpegs in that era are too
brief to include. In addition, in the post-Bretton Woods era, there is a considerable amount of
flipping back and forth from peg to nonpeg for many countries. For this era, a separate category
of “occasional peg” is created. Occasional pegs have at least 3 short pegs lasting less than three
years, and the episode is defined from the start of the pegging until the last peg period ends. To
prevent short nonpeg episodes that are really simply the middle of these occasional pegs from
being counted as nonpegs, nonpegs must last at least 10 years in the post-Bretton Woods era.
There are 70 pegs, 25 occasional pegs, and 32 nonpegs during that era.


Capital Control Status
For part of the empirical analysis we will want to code countries as either having or not having
capital controls. This determination is not straightforward. De facto classifications are difficult to
use for a number of reasons. Most are available for a limited number of countries and a limited
amount of time. Some rely on interest rate differentials (the phenomenon we study) and thus are
not appropriate. While de jure codes are available for many countries, they are available only

8
 Shambaugh (2004) provides an extensive discussion of different options from IMF coding to other de facto
classifications. Recent work by Reinhart and Rogoff (2004) uses data on parallel market exchange rates to classify
the currency regime, and thus is not directly relevant for the present inquiry. Regimes with parallel rates rely on
capital controls to ensure exchange-market separation, so the exchange rate's behavior need not constrain monetary
policy. Interestingly, however, our basic results still hold even if we use the Reinhart-Rogoff coding.


                                                       7
after 1973. We proceed by assuming that all countries have open capital markets during the gold
standard era, that none do during Bretton Woods, and that the official IMF coding from the
Exchange Rate Arrangements yearbooks is a reasonable approximation for measuring the use of
capital controls during the post-Bretton Woods era.9

Persistence in Interest Rates
Figures 1a, 1b, and 1c display base interest rates during the three eras that we study. On visual
inspection, the gold-standard UK interest rate appears to be far more stationary than the US
postwar interest rates, as expected. Simple statistical tests back up the ocular evidence: first-
order autocorrelations are much lower under the gold standard, as the table below shows.


                                               Gold Standard        Bretton Woods        Post-Bretton Woods

     Autocorrelation coefficient for local
     rates                                            0.82                 0.94                    0.92

     Autocorrelation coefficient for base
     rates                                            0.80                 0.98                    0.96



         Proceeding more rigorously, we applied the unit root tests of Elliot, Rothenberg and
Stock (1996), using the modified AIC of Ng and Perron (2001). Only over certain subsamples do
these tests reject a unit root. Over the full gold standard period we reject a unit root in the UK
interest rate (at the 95% confidence level). For the US Treasury bill rate, one rejects the unit root
null for the full 1948–73 sample, but not based on the 1959–70 sample that we use in our
regressions. Over the full post-Bretton Woods era, in only 1.6% of the episodes can a unit root be
rejected for the base interest rate. Local rates follow a similar pattern. In 8 of the 25 gold-
standard episodes, one rejects a unit root in the local interest rate (including rejections for all of
the long series). But one cannot reject a unit root in any of the 21 Bretton Woods episodes at the
95% confidence level, and one can reject a unit root in only 5 of 127 post-Bretton Woods
           10
episodes.

9
  After 1995, the IMF switches from a binary coding (line E2) to a disaggregated coding. Following Shambaugh
(2004) we use changes in the disaggregated coding and descriptions in the yearbooks to determine changes in the
binary codes. The IMF coding is very similar to the disaggregated coding of Quinn (1997) when data are available
for both.
10
   Use of an ADF unit root test generates a similar pattern as those above with a slightly higher number of rejections.
Likewise, using the Ng-Perron sequential t-test rather than the MAIC allows a few more rejections in the gold
standard era. The post Bretton Woods era are generally so far from rejecting a unit root that lag length is irrelevant.


                                                        8
         These observations motivate our discussion of econometric methodology below.


Methodology


Alternative specifications could be used to test the degree to which a local country’s interest rate
follows a canonical base country’s interest rate. The time series properties of the data are quite
important in assessing these alternatives. Nominal interest rates tend to be statistically
indistinguishable from unit-root processes in limited data samples. They are not literally unit-
root processes. If they were, some series would wander into negative territory and others would
rise unboundedly, behavior that we do not observe in practice.11 Given the low power of most
unit root tests12 and the need to use relatively short time series in some cases to isolate individual
currency episodes, we cannot posit unambiguously the stationarity properties of the data. Thus,
we pursue alternative modes of analysis under different assumptions.
         If the data are nonstationary or nearly so, any simple regression of the levels of one series
on another leaves open the possibility of spurious regression (Granger and Newbold 1974;
Phillips 1988). An appropriate approach would then be to difference the data and examine a
simple equation such as:


                                         ∆Rit = α + β∆Rbit + uit ,                                        (1)


where Rit is the local interest rate at time t, Rbit is the base rate at time t, and ∆ is the difference
operator. This is also a useful specification when the interest rate data are highly persistent and
have a long run relationship. For example, suppose that uncovered interest parity holds, with the
nominal international interest differential the sum of a statistically stationary expected
depreciation rate and a stationary risk premium. Then a regression in interest-rate levels must
yield a slope coefficient approaching unity as the sample size rises, regardless of the extent to
which the nonbase country exercises its short-run interest-rate independence. A regression in
differences such as (1), however, will measure that exercise of independence even in a large
sample.

11
   As Stanton (1997) observes, nominal rates seem to behave like nonstationary processes until they reach very high
or very low levels, at which point there is some mean reversion. See also Wu and Zhang (1997).
12
   Caner and Kilian (2001) show that tests with stationarity as the null are likely to entail spurious rejections when
the data are stationary but highly persistent.


                                                        9
With perfect capital mobility and an exchange rate permanently and credibly pegged within a
band that is literally of zero width, we would expect to find β = 1 above: home and base-country
interest rates would always move one-for-one, and the pegging country's monetary independence
would be nil. Otherwise, we would find β < 1 if the home monetary authority uses its monetary
independence to offset base interest-rate shocks but β > 1 if it reinforces them.
         The data are in panel form, but fixed country effects are not employed in applying (1)
because such an effect would assume a constant rate of change in the interest rate for an
individual country, a highly unlikely scenario.13 The response to a change in the base rate may
not be immediate and may vary across countries, so the results of estimating (1) on the pooled
sample using high-frequency (monthly) data are quite unclear. At an annual frequency, though,
there appears to be sufficient similarity across the countries to allow for the pooling of year
averages of monthly data.14 We therefore adopt that approach. While this basic specification
cannot tell us much about the dynamics of the relationships nor about individual country
episodes, it can at least inform us about general patterns across the different eras and across
                                  15
exchange rate regime types.


Dynamic Specification
We also examine the dynamics of individual country/exchange rate regime episodes and test for
the presence of significant levels relationships between domestic and base interest rates. One
approach might be to estimate an error-correction model, assuming that the two interest rates are
I(1) and cointegrated. Given uncertainty over the order of integration of the interest rates,
however, the technique developed by Pesaran, Shin, and Smith (2001), henceforth PSS, and also
used in Frankel, Schmukler, and Serven (2002), is quite helpful. The main advantage of the PSS
approach is their provision of the different critical values that apply in the I(0) and I(1) cases.


13
   Likewise one could question the need for any constant term in equation (1). In practice, however, the estimated
constant for this equation was very close to zero.
14
   This also means that if some of the series are cointegrated with the base rate, the differences specification is less
problematic for annual data as the dynamic adjustments are likely to have settled down to a large extent after a year.
In practice, the differences regressions do not show autocorrelation (as one might fear if the series are cointegrated)
only pooled OLS levels regressions do (not reported).
15
   There are, of course, many other factors one could expect to affect the degree to which a country follows the base
country interest rate. Common shocks, world or regional trade shares, capital controls, level of industrialization,
level of debt, etc. could all have some impact. Shambaugh (2004) considers the impact of these factors in studying
the post-Bretton Woods era. With the exception of capital controls, which are quite important, the exchange-rate
regime tends to be the major determinant of how closely a country follows the base interest rate. This relationship is
robust to adding controls for time, trade share, world interest rates, debt exposure, and level of industrialization.


                                                        10
         Using the PSS methodology, one can test a specification like the error correction form,
but consult the critical values provided by PSS to test the significance of a levels relationship
between interest rates without necessarily assuming their order of integration. Thus, if the test
statistic either surpasses both critical values or falls short of both critical values, we can either
reject the null (of no long-run levels relationship between interest rates) or not without having to
take a stand on the order of integration. Only when the test statistic is in the intermediate range
                                                                                         16
must we know the order of integration to make judgments about the data.
         To employ the PSS test, we adopt the specification


                            ∆Rit = α + β∆Rbit + θ (c + Ri ,t −1 − γRbi ,t −1 ) + uit ,                    (2)


where we can include lags of ∆Rbit and ∆Rit as necessary. Above, γ is a cointegrating coefficient
in the I(1) case; in general, we refer to it as the levels relationship. Following PSS, we test the
significance of the adjustment speed θ to determine whether there is a significant long-run levels
relationship. If the local interest rate adjusts to restore the equilibrium relationship after shocks to
the base interest rate, we would find θ < 0. The size of the coefficient shows the speed of
adjustment, with θ = −0.5 in equation (2) implying a half-life of one month.17


Effects of Exchange-Rate Bands: What Should We Expect to Find?

In practice, “fixed” exchange rates are fixed only up to a possibly narrow fluctuation band; our
methodology for selecting de facto pegs has allowed for this. As a result, even under a perfectly
credible peg, β could conceivably be below or above 1. How big could the divergence from 1
be? We have experimented with simulations of an extension of Krugman's (1991) target zone
model, using Svensson's (1991) term-structure model to derive interest rates for non-
infinitesimal maturities when the fluctuation band is quite narrow (±1%). These simulated rates
can then be used to carry out regressions of the form given by equation (1). Appendix 2 describes
our simulation methodology in detail. Even under the gold standard, the gold import and export

16
   It is difficult to try to analyze the pooled sample with PSS or EC techniques as the data are quite unbalanced with
certain countries pegging at certain times and not others. Furthermore, the short-run dynamics appear to differ
widely across countries, making pooling questionable.
17
   We also report the adjustment speeds obtained if one estimates an error correction form simply imposing a
cointegration coefficient or levels relationship of =1 (which it should be asymptotically if the series are I(1) and
cointegrated).


                                                         11
points defined narrow fluctuation bands for exchange rates. In using the gold standard period as a
benchmark for across-era comparisons of interest-rate independence, we will have greater
confidence in interpreting the findings if the empirical interest-rate relationships line up with the
predictions of a basic theoretical model.
          For this application, we approximate Krugman's continuous-time model by assuming a
first-order autoregression (with no deterministic drift) for the stochastic “fundamentals” process
determining the exchange rate. As in Krugman (1991), the fundamentals for the domestic
currency price of foreign exchange would include the relative (domestic less foreign) money
supply and other variables, with a rise in the relative domestic money supply raising the relative
domestic-currency price of foreign currency (a domestic depreciation). The reason for assuming
a mean-reverting fundamentals process, rather than the random walk assumed by Krugman
(1991), is to allow a meaningful comparison of interest relationships under a target zone with
those under a freely floating exchange rate. (Under a driftless random-walk fundamentals
process, domestic and base interest rates would always be equal in a float.) Parameters assumed
are described in Appendix 2. As in Svensson (1991), we calculate the domestic interest rate for
maturity m and current fundamentals x by adding to the foreign interest rate the expected
depreciation rate over the term of the loan.
          A key parameter is in the simulations is ρ( z, Rb), the correlation between innovations
     z in the domestic fundamentals process and innovations in the base foreign interest rate. For
example, let x = m − mb, the difference between domestic and foreign money supplies. In that
case, a positive value for ρ( z, Rb) implies a tendency for the domestic central bank to increase
the relative domestic money supply whenever foreign interest rates rise. That response implies a
smaller increase in the domestic interest rate than the point-for-point rise that would occur were
m − mb held constant (the latter outcome being the mean tendency in the case ρ( z, Rb) =0). In
the simulations that we illustrate below, we alternatively assume that ρ( z, Rb) = 0.5, which we
interpret as partial interest rate smoothing, and ρ( z, Rb) = 0.8, aggressive interest rate
smoothing.18 The simulations are for overnight interest rates; we have also carried out
simulations on three-month rates, which tend to be more tightly linked.


18
  Conversely, a negative ρ would imply that domestic monetary policy reinforces the foreign interest rate shock, as
under the supposed “rules of the game” of the classical gold standard. The results we find below are consistent with
the modern view that these classical rules were not always followed in practice, even before 1914; see Bloomfield
(1959) for a pioneering study.


                                                      12
Overnight interest      Target           Target zone        Free float      Free float       Target          Free float
rates                   zone             median est.        mean est.      median est.      zone mean       mean est.
                        mean est.       R2                                 R2               est.           


ρ( z, Rb) = 0.5              0.56              0.12             0.37             0.05           -0.21            -0.08
                            (0.12)                             (0.09)                           (0.07)           (0.03)

ρ( z, Rb) = 0.8              0.34              0.05             0.00             0.00           -0.22            -0.08
                            (0.15)                             (0.08)                           (0.08)           (0.04)




         We see that β coefficients well below 1 are likely to arise when domestic authorities
partially smooth short-term domestic interest rates, notwithstanding the enforcement of a narrow
target zone for the exchange rate.19 Interestingly, though, for the same value of ρ( z, Rb), the β
can remain quite high even under a free float (albeit lower than under the target zone). Thus,
moving from a target zone to a float reduces β from 0.56 to 0.37 in the simulations for ρ( z, Rb)
= 0.5. As we would expect, a higher value of ρ( z, Rb) can reduce β substantially under any
currency regime.20 The simulation results underscore the importance of having the classical gold
standard (itself a target zone system because of gold points) as a quantitative benchmark for
results from later periods. Because the gold standard is widely acknowledged to be an era in
which the exercise of monetary independence was limited, results that look similar to those
found in pre-1914 data, even if they entail a β below 1, can be construed as supporting the
hypothesis that pegs greatly limit monetary autonomy.21



19
   Of course, Krugman's model assumes effectively infinite foreign reserves, a factor that may exaggerate the ability
of some countries to smooth the path of domestic interest rates. On the other hand, exchange rate bands introduce
the possibility of risk premia in interest rates (deviations from uncovered interest parity), although these are likely to
be small for narrow bands and we do not model them.
20
   For ρ( z, Rb) = 0, the mean β is essentially 1 under the target zone or the float, as expected. For ρ( z, Rb) < 0,
the mean β exceeds 1 and is relatively higher under the float.
21
   Thus, a β below 1 is not sufficient for substantive monetary independence. We caution the reader that it is not
strictly necessary either. An economy buffeted by permanent real shocks, for example, will be stabilized by a
floating exchange rate even if its interest rate never deviates from the foreign rate. An important (and unanswered)
question is whether independence at the short end of the term structure but not at the long end, as in a fairly narrow
target zone, confers on a central bank much leverage over the economy. Some scholars of the gold standard argue
that the gold points allowed considerable monetary independence, a contention that, if true, would make the gold
standard an unacceptable benchmark for judging the degree to which a pegged exchange rate binds monetary policy.


                                                         13
        We have also estimated the equation in interest-rate levels corresponding to (1) using the
simulated data. In all cases, mean estimates of β are substantially closer to 1, as econometric
theory would lead us to expect, and they move closer to 1 as we increase the length of the
simulated data series. These latter findings suggest that, due to the high persistence of nominal
interest rates and their tendency to trend together, levels regressions contain less information
about monetary independence than do regressions in differences.
        The final two columns of the preceding table report simulated mean estimates of the PSS
adjustment-speed parameter, . The estimate under a target zone is about 20% per month, significantly
faster than the estimated 8% per month under a float. The mean values seem insensitive to the underlying
value of the short-run policy response parameter ρ( z, Rb).



Discussion of Findings

The broadest characterization of the data comes from pooling nonoverlapping annual differences
of year-averaged monthly interest rates. This specification measures the extent to which, on
average across countries, a change in the base interest rate is followed abroad in the same year.
        The results of estimating equation (1) are shown in Table 1, which reveals striking
differences across the time periods. If we simply pool data within periods, with no distinction
across exchange-rate regimes, we see that the gold standard and post-Bretton Woods eras have
fairly similar slope coefficients β (0.42 and 0.36, respectively), especially when compared to the
Bretton Woods era (−0.20).22 The big difference between the gold standard and the current era
appears in the R2, where gold standard base-rate changes can explain a comparatively large
                                                                      2
fraction of local-rate changes, but modern base rate changes cannot (R = 0.26 versus 0.03,
respectively). For the Bretton Woods era the β coefficient is indistinguishable from zero and the
R2 is only 0.02, showing that the capital controls of the era seem to have essentially shut down
the mechanism by which local countries are forced to follow the base country. In many cases, of
course, those controls allowed governments to administer domestic interest rates.
        While there are not enough nonpeg episodes under Bretton Woods to examine the
nonpegs separately, the pegs and nonpegs do appear to behave quite differently in both the gold
standard and modern eras. The coefficients (and associated standard errors) on the base rate are

The dynamic cointegration results we report below throw doubt, however, on the hypothesis of substantial monetary
independence under gold.



                                                     14
similar for pegs in the two eras, both are similar to the simulation results reported earlier, and
both are significantly higher than the nonpegs. More notably, the R2 for the pegs is 0.41 in the
gold standard and 0.19 for the modern era compared to 0.00 and 0.01, respectively, for the
nonpegs. This sharp contrast indicates a large difference in the extent the base rate can explain
the behavior of local rates. The much higher R2 under gold standard pegs is striking, and greatly
exceeds the median simulated value for a narrow target zone. The empirical estimate, reflecting
fewer interest rate changes for reasons other than following the base rate, could reflect a lower
variance of fundamentals under the gold standard, or less use of the independence conferred by
bands. It could also reflect the relatively greater credibility of gold standard exchange rate
commitments or the more frequent presence of capital controls in the modern era, although we
can draw no firm conclusions without further investigation.
                                                                 2
         In neither era do we see slope coefficients or R s close to 1, which a model with no
exchange rate bands, costless arbitrage, and perfect regime credibility would imply. Instead we
see results more consistent with a tight target zone. The simulation provides a benchmark and
shows that a β of 0.5 to 0.6 and R2s of around 0.1 to 0.2 are consistent with a target zone with
little exchange-rate variation. Looking at the gold standard results and simulation, we should not
be surprised by the somewhat low slope coefficients and R2s that we find for pegs in the current
era. As we have noted, even in the essentially capital-control free era of the gold standard,
pegged countries' interest rates did not show a perfect correlation with the base interest rate due
to exchange rate movements within the gold points, which gives latitude for short-term interest-
rate divergence (Svensson 1994). Now as then, most exchange rates that we consider to be
pegged actually do move within specified narrow bands.
         A second contrast between the gold standard and modern eras appears in examining the
nonpegs. Gold-standard de facto nonpegs on average show almost no connection to the base rate
(β = 0.05, standard error = 0.09, R = 0), while the slope coefficient for the modern era is much
                                   2



closer to that for the pegs (β = 0.27). The modern (post-Bretton Woods) nonpeg R2 is still quite
low (0.01), implying substantial variation independent of the base rate, but the gap between the
peg and nonpeg slope coefficients is not nearly as large for the modern era as under the gold
standard.23


22
  We refer in the text to the de facto results, though de jure results are always reasonably close.
23
  It should be noted that some interest rate series in the modern era are entirely flat (see Shambaugh 2004). When
these rates are excluded, the results for modern pegs become β = 0.59, standard error = 0.04, R = 0.26, and for
                                                                                                  2




                                                      15
         This point is seen more sharply when one pools the data and includes and interaction
term for pegging times the base interest rate:


                               ∆Rit = α + β∆Rbit + β 2 PEGit ∆Rbit + u it .                               (3)


While under the de facto gold standard, β is close to zero (0.05) and does not differ statistically
from zero (standard error = 0.10), the coefficient on β2 in equation (3) is 0.47 (0.09). With post-
Bretton Woods data, β is estimated as 0.26 (0.08) and β2 as 0.19 (0.09).24, 25
         The general message from these tests is that the exchange rate regime does affect the
extent to which a country follows the base, but that the capital controls of the Bretton Woods era
seemed to significantly slow or even stop those reactions. The results from the gold standard
shed some light on the modern findings. They show that we should not be surprised to find a
slope coefficient β or an R that is distant from 1. Our comparison with the gold standard also
                           2



shows, however, that the nonpegs of the post-Bretton Woods era to respond more strongly to
changes in the base than was true of nonpegs before 1914. No doubt this finding results from
policies meant to limit exchange-rate induced redistributions -- a matter of less government
concern before 1914.
         In general, the within-era information points to a significant influence of the exchange-
rate regime on the extent to which a country shadows the base interest rate. Conversely, the
across-era comparisons help show the role of capital controls and of different attitudes toward
macro-management. As a final check, we pool the eras and test directly the importance of the
exchange rate regime and capital control status. These results are reported in Table 2.
         First, we divide the sample into pegs and nonpegs, and then capital controls and no
capital controls. Looking first at the exchange rate regime, we still see a stark difference between
                                                                      2
pegs and nonpegs with coefficients of 0.43 vs. 0.26 and R s of 0.17 vs. 0.01. Similarly, we see an


modern floats, β = 0.28, standard error = 0.08, R = 0.01. Thus, removing these mostly small Caribbean countries
                                                 2

                                                     2
increases the gap between the two and raises the R on the pegs.
   Again, excluding the interest rates which are constant over the entire modern sample generates β1 = 0.31 (0.08), β2
24


= 0.27 (0.09).
25
   While one obviously cannot compare R2 across regime when the data is pooled, we can regress the estimated
errors on the dummy for peg status to see if the errors vary with exchange rate regime. As expected, the errors are in
fact larger for nonpegs as a model using the base interest rate simply does not predict changes in the nonpegged
countries’ interest rates very well. In the pooled regressions for the de facto gold standard regime and de facto post
Bretton Woods era, when the errors are regressed on the peg status, the coefficient is negative and significantly
different from zero at 99% the confidence level.


                                                       16
impact of capital controls with non-capital control countries showing a coefficient of 0.56 and R2
of 0.10 and capital control countries showing a coefficient of 0.26 and R2 of 0.01. Thus, both legs
of the trilemma appear to be validated. Tables 2b and 2c test more carefully the interaction of
these two sides.
         While, as expected, pegs with open capital markets have the highest coefficient and R2,
there is some evidence of what today has been called “fear of floating” (Calvo and Reinhart
2002), because open capital market nonpegs have a coefficient of 0.53 compared to the pegs’
0.61. On the other hand, the R2 still shows a considerable gap with pegs having R2 = 0.30 and
floats R2 = 0.06. Thus, despite moving with the base country to some extent, only a small portion
of the changes in the floats’ interest rates can be explained by changes in the base rate. In
addition, we do not find that capital controls are completely isolating. Pegs with capital controls
                                           2
have higher slope coefficients and R s than the nonpegs with closed markets.
         The pooled data show that both the exchange rate regime and capital controls matter
(Table 2c), though in columns 1 and 2, capital controls appear to be more important. Once again,
removing the countries in the modern era for whom interest rates never change (and thus appear
to be purely administered nonmarket rates) increases the importance of the peg variable
(columns 3 and 4). 26 We also see in columns 2 and 4 that the impact of capital controls and
exchange rate regimes are not purely additive as the coefficient on the interaction of the two is
estimated to be negative. Either policy will provide a degree of independence and adding the
second increases the independence, but not by as much as the policy on its own.
         Overall, this evidence supports a modified view of the trilemma for the modern era. Both
the exchange rate regime and capital controls clearly affect autonomy, but the combination of
floating with capital controls seems to provide unfettered autonomy and removing either limits
autonomy to some degree. Nonpegs with open markets and pegs with closed retain some
interest-rate autonomy, and, as expected, pegs with open markets have the least of all.


Levels Analysis
         Finally, we can learn considerably more about the relationships of local to base countries
by examining specific individual country relationships and estimating testing both the levels

26
  Again, regressing the errors on the exchange rate and capital control regime dummies confirms the findings on
explanatory power seen in the R2 differences in the divided sample regressions. In all four columns, observations
with pegs and open capital markets are associated with smaller errors as they can be better explained by the base




                                                      17
relationships between interest rates ( in equation (2)) and the dynamic adjustment speed ().
Rather than assuming a levels relationship exists and estimating it, we test for the presence of
level relationships and examine the dynamics of the system. Table 3 shows the results for
individual-country regime episodes as well as averages across pegs and nonpegs by era.
         In the case of the gold standard, we see that in only two cases are we forced to assume the
order of integration as in all others the test statistic for  either passes both critical values or fails
to do so. Looking at both the de jure and de facto gold standard classifications, we see that there
were nonpeg episodes that demonstrate considerable independence. Perhaps the clearest
evidence comes from the fact that the levels relationships                have negative signs, implying that
rates moved opposite one another over the long run, for two of the seven nonpegs in the de jure
classification and all five under the de facto classification. These backwards levels relationships
make the average half lives problematic as an indicator of how closely these countries followed
the base: many of the nonpegs moved away from the base. The nonpegs of Portugal, Russia, and
Spain (all de facto and de jure) show considerable independence from the UK interest rate before
1914.
         At the same time, there certainly were some countries that exhibited “fear of floating.”
Despite not being on the gold standard de jure and thus officially being a nonpeg, some countries
followed the base interest rate quite closely. In the case of the Netherlands, 1870–75, the
exchange rate is in fact pegged despite no announcement, so it is unsurprising to see the interest
rate move so tightly with the base. Austria de facto pegged on and off during its official nonpeg
period (1870-92), and it too shows a reasonably tight relationship with the base.27
         In general, the pegs show little independence. With the exception of India’s early pegging
experience, all episodes show the expected sign for , and adjustment, measured by -, tends to
be quick. The only episodes with very slow adjustment (Spain’s early de facto peg and
Portugal’s early de facto peg) are short ones. Long-time gold standard members show levels
relationships ranging from 0.4 to 0.6 and adjustment half-lives between two and five months.


interest rate. Coefficients on the peg dummy or the capital control dummy (or a combination) are always negative
and significantly different from zero at better than the 99% confidence level.
27
   Readers may notice a large difference between the estimates of for India’s de facto and de jure nonpegs despite
a difference of only 18 observations. Early in India’s de jure float, there were some large changes in the interest rate
that affect the results. India was in a de facto peg at the time and thus these observations are not in the de facto
nonpeg. In addition, this episode is quite sensitive to the lag length chosen. While the standard deviation of the
levels estimate across different lag specifications is no more than 0.02-0.05 for most episodes, it is quite large (over
1) for the Indian float.


                                                        18
       The fact that the levels relationship is far less than unity in most cases may seem odd
until one considers the era. Because the UK interest rate always resided within reasonably small
bands, countries could partially adjust to the UK rate change and use the margin afforded by the
gold points and arbitrage costs to cover the rest. If the UK rate continued long in one direction, a
foreign country would eventually have to adjust fully, but because the UK rate reverted toward
its mean, the estimated level relationship can be less than one. This reflects the constrained
interest-rate independence in exchange-rate target zones of the kind described by Svensson
(1994). At the same time, though, countries had to move quite quickly to carry out at least some
adjustment to any change. Should one consider a levels coefficient of 0.6 and a half-life to
shocks of under three months to be evidence of monetary independence under the gold standard?
Given the insignificant levels relationships and/or half-lives of over a year that are found in some
nonpegs, we would judge that pegs did not have extensive independence under the gold standard,
consistent with the prediction of the trilemma.
       If one imposes a long-run levels coefficient    of unity, then the adjustment speeds appear
to slow down because in truth, the rates never did fully adjust. Thus, Bordo and MacDonald’s
(1997) depiction of monetary independence under the gold standard due to slow adjustment
speeds may require re-examination. (Their study covered only the UK, France, and Germany,
with a data set starting in 1880.) By assuming nonstationarity in the gold standard interest-rate
data and imposing a unit cointegration coefficient between national rates (consistent with their
estimates), the Bordo-MacDonald study may give an exaggerated impression of how slow
adjustment speeds actually were. In our gold-standard data, most levels coefficients are
significantly below 1, and allowing for this apparently raises estimated adjustment speeds. There
was some room for independence under the gold standard, but it appears more obviously for
countries that were not pegged. Some nonpegs followed the UK rate anyway, but some did not
and exhibited their potential for monetary independence.
       The Bretton Woods era provides little room for comparison across regime types, since
only Brazil is a nonpeg country according to our criteria. Brazil pegged sporadically in 1965-7,
so one could either examine just 1968-70 or include the entire period (both results are reported).
Brazil certainly shows independence, given an insignificant estimated levels relationship        and a
very slow adjustment speed  (half-life of over 17 months) over the full period. (The levels
relationship is negative over the later period.) At the same time, capital controls appear to have
isolated some of the pegs. Jamaica, Japan, Pakistan, and Zimbabwe all have negative levels


                                               19
relationships ( < 0) and three more countries have insignificantly positive relationships with
half lives exceeding a year. Even in some countries where the levels relationship is close to 1
(e.g., Canada and the Netherlands), the adjustment speed implied by  is slow enough that the
levels relationship is not clearly significant. Barbados, Germany, Sweden, and the UK have
levels relationships above 0.5 and half-lives from 3 to 7 months, implying a tighter relationship
than even many gold standard pegs. Thus, not all countries were isolated from the US interest
rate during Bretton Woods, and it is likely that over time, the insulation weakened (as seen in the
eventual collapse of the system). On average, though, for only 20% of the pegs can we reject the
hypothesis that there is no levels relationship. The average adjustment speed for pegs is over nine
months, demonstrating far more flexibility than under the gold standard. It was precisely the
desire for such added flexibility, of course, that inspired the design of the Bretton Woods system.
       There are too many post-Bretton Woods episodes to consider individually, so we report
only averages across the three currency regimes. For pegs and occasional pegs, there are very
few instances of negative levels relationships; as a result, we would view the averages as more
reliable. Interestingly, the estimated values of  for the post-Bretton Woods pegs and nonpegs,
respectively, are of similar magnitudes to those in the simulations described earlier.
       Compared to the other eras, we notice three striking features. The first is that far fewer of
the episodes are statistically significant. Not only are fewer significant when assuming I(0)
interest rates, but because the data are so close to being nonstationary, one should probably
consider the I(1) critical value as the more relevant one. This means that even fewer episodes are
significant, especially compared to the gold standard. This finding, though, may result in part
from the slightly shorter time spans of the modern episodes.
       Second, the adjustment speeds are lower in the post-Bretton Woods era. This is especially
true for the nonpegs, for which the average half-life is over 30 months. Over 50% of the
nonpegged episodes show half lives that exceed a year, implying a considerable amount of
                           2
autonomy. Like the low R s in the differences regressions, these results seem to point to a
significant amount of autonomy for floating-rate countries and a substantive difference between
pegs and nonpegs. This conclusion stands in contrast to previous work on the subject arguing
that only a few large countries can pursue independence, regardless of the exchange-rate regime.
The PSS results show even more independence for the nonpegs, though, as the average nonpeg
levels relationship   is in fact estimated to be negative. This suggests that on average, long




                                               20
nonpegged episodes today show as much independence as those of the gold standard era.28 This
result is directly opposite to the suggestions of Frankel et al. (2000, 2002) and the message of the
“fear of floating” literature in general, which argues that floating in a globalized world offers
little room for monetary independence.29 Pegs are also somewhat slower to adjust than during the
gold standard, with an average adjustment speed of  = −0.19 compared to the de facto gold
standard adjustment speed of  = −0.27. Still, the average adjustment speed under pegs in the
current period is faster than under Bretton Woods, and more importantly, much faster for pegs
than for nonpegs.
         While adjustment speed for pegs is slower for the modern era the under the gold standard,
the levels relationships are closer to one. The average for pegs is                = 0.93, compared to between
0.4 and 0.5 for the other eras. Once again, the explanation may lie in the rapidly moving and
near-unit-root base interest rates characterizing the modern period. Even if capital controls are
present, if countries do not adjust fully over time, the exchange rate may not last.
         The comparison across different eras is illuminating. While the gold standard saw pegs
with low levels relationships          but fast adjustment speeds , and the modern era has seen
countries with slower adjustment speeds but levels relationships closer to 1, the Bretton Woods
era had both slower adjustment speeds and lower levels relationships. Comparing the gold
standard and modern eras, we see that there appears to be room for nonpegs to have some
monetary independence especially, when compared to the fixed exchange rate countries. The
high levels relationships for pegs during the current era are a switch from the past. But the
adjustment speeds seen today do not necessarily demonstrate the exigencies of modern capital
markets, because those speeds in fact appear to be somewhat below those prevailing in the pre-
            30
1914 past.
         While useful for different types of data, the alternative tests seem to lead to similar
conclusions. Countries that peg do indeed have less monetary freedom than nonpegs, although

28
   While this result may appear to be inconsistent with the differences regressions (which show nonpegs having a
tighter bond with the base today than in the past), the incongruity is understandable. The PSS results are only for
long-standing nonpegs, while the pooled results include as nonpeg the nonpeg years of countries that flip back and
forth.
29
   See Shambaugh (2004) for a more detailed discussion of these results. Borenzstein et al. (2001), using a different
methodology and country sample, obtain results on monetary independence that support our conclusions. It is
important to note that this does not mean that no declared floats exhibit fear of floating, but that some countries that
show actual exchange rate flexibility do exhibit strong monetary independence from the base rate.
30
   It should be noted that the adjustment speeds are not simply lower because the levels relationships are higher.
Even when one imposes the level at one, the gold standard data shows a faster adjustment as can be seen on the EC
half-life line in the tables.


                                                        21
the capital controls of Bretton Woods did succeed in weakening the linkages among national
interest rates.31 In addition, despite gold points and less sophisticated arbitrage and
communications technologies, pegged countries under the gold standard arguably had even less
freedom than do pegged countries today.
            It must be acknowledged that we cannot speak to the ways in which intent of the
monetary authorities underlies the preceding evidence on interest-rate independence. It is
possible that common shocks, not the constraint of the exchange rate regime, make interest rates
move together under pegs, and that fixed rates are adopted precisely when such common shocks
dominate. Evidence in Shambaugh (2004) suggests that common shocks are not behind the
correlation of pegs’ interest rates after 1973, but without a fully specified model of monetary
authorities’ intentions -- and data sufficient to test it -- we can do little more than acknowledge
the caveat and move on.


Conclusion

The overall lesson of our analysis is that the trilemma makes sense as a guiding policy
framework. Exchange rate pegs do result in a substantially closer connection to the base country
interest rate than do nonpegs. The interest rates of pegged economies react more to changes in
the base rate; the base rate can explain more of the changes in the local rate for pegs; and, the
pegs react more quickly and have a stronger long run relationship to the base than do nonpegs.
Absent capital controls, countries choosing to peg lose considerable monetary independence. At
the same time, nonpegs appear to have a reasonable amount of autonomy even when there are no
capital controls. Pegs are rarely completely handcuffed (in any era) though, because of exchange
rate bands and, possibly, arbitrage costs. Conversely, nonpegs are never purely free floats, as
even countries that are not pegging their currencies do often choose to follow the base interest
rate to some degree.
            The results also show some interesting perspectives across eras. Pegs in both eras of open
capital markets show fairly similar relationships with the base interest rate. In particular, pooled
                                               2
regressions look somewhat similar, though the R for the gold standard is always higher. In line
with conventional wisdom, the gold standard was not an era with extensive independence for the
pegged countries. The pooled slope coefficients on base interest-rate changes are strongly

31
     Shambaugh (2004) finds that capital controls are quite important in distinguishing the degree to which a country



                                                         22
positive, and adjustment speeds faster, in the gold standard era. The gold standard is a useful
benchmark from which to judge the relationships between countries today. We see that slope
coefficients and R2 for pegs significantly below unity should not be a surprise. These results also
match our target zone simulations, which again show that we should not expect slope
coefficients and R2s for pegs to equal one even if the target zone is quite narrow.
         Based on the differences regressions, the nonpegs of today do appear to have interest
rates more tightly linked to base rates than in the past (especially absent capital controls). But
there are many countries, not just a few large ones, that consistently move their interest rates in
ways that imply no long-run levels relationship with the base and show much slower adjustment
to shocks. The longer run nonpegs that are used as episodes show a very weak connection to the
base with negative or insignificant levels relationships and slow adjustment. The fact that there
are a few examples of countries exhibiting “fear of floating” under the gold standard strengthens
the argument that it is not that nonpegs cannot exert independence (for some certainly could
during the gold standard), but that some may simply choose not to do so.
         A last lesson is that the designers of the Bretton Woods system achieved their goal of
exchange-rate stability with more room for interest-rate autonomy. Despite fairly rigid pegs, the
Bretton Woods era shows both weaker levels relationships and slower adjustment speeds to the
long run. As capital controls became more porous over the 1960s, the combination of exchange
rate pegs and monetary independence became untenable. Despite recent challenges to the
trilemma as a concept, we see its lessons borne out over a long span of modern economic history.




follows the base in the modern era as well.


                                               23
Appendix 1: Data Availability and List of Episodes

Gold Standard:
Data available:
                        from              to
France                 1–1870           6–1914
Germany                1–1870           6–1914
Netherlands            1–1870           6–1914
Belgium                1–1870           6–1914
Italy                  1–1885           6–1914
Austria                1–1870           6–1914
Spain                  1–1883           6–1914
Portugal               1–1885           6–1914
Russia                 1–1870           8–1900
Denmark                5–1884           6–1914
US                    11–1880           6–1914
India                  5–1884           6–1914
Switzerland           12–1892           6–1914
Sweden                12–1892           6–1914
Norway                 1–1894           6–1914

Gold Standard de jure Episodes
Pegs
                        actual                                 with data available
                        from                to               from                to
France                 1–1870             6–1914            2–1872             6–1914
Germany               12–1871             6–1914           12–1872             6–1914
Netherlands           6–1875              6–1914            6–1876             6–1914
Belgium               1–1870              6–1914            1–1870             6–1914
Italy                  1–1884            12–1893            1–1885            12–1893
Austria               8–1892              6–1914            8–1893             6–1914
Portugal              1–1870              6–1891            1–1885             6–1891
Denmark                1–1873             6–1914            5–1884             6–1914
US                    1–1879              6–1914           11–1880             6–1914
India                 1–1898              6–1914            1–1899             6–1914
Switzerland            1–1870             6–1914           12–1892             6–1914
Sweden                 1–1873             6–1914           12–1892             6–1914
Norway                1–1873              6–1914            1–1894             6–1914
Russia                1–1897              6–1914           1–1897              8–1900   insufficient data
Spain                 1–1870             12–1882             none                       no data
Nonpegs
Netherlands          1–1870              5–1875            3–1871            5–1875
Italy                1–1894               6–1914           1–1894            6–1914
Austria              1–1870              7–1892            2–1871            7–1892
Spain                1–1883               6–1914           1–1883            6–1914
Portugal             7–1891               6–1914           7–1891            6–1914
Russia               1–1870             12–1896            2–1871           12–1896
India                5–1884             12–1897            5–1884           12–1897
Germany              1–1870              11–1871      insufficient data
Sweden, Norway, Denmark, US, Australia all end nonpeg periods before data becomes available




                                                   24
Gold Standard de facto Episode
Pegs                  From      To
France              4–1872    6–1914
Germany              7–1872   6–1914
Netherlands          1–1870   6–1914
Belgium             12–1872   6–1914
Italy early peg      1–1885   2–1892
Italy late peg      10–1902   6–1914
Austria early peg    6–1879   8–1888
Austria late peg     5–1894   6–1914
Spain early peg      1–1883   1–1890
Spain late peg       6–1910   5–1914
Portugal early       1–1885   1–1890
Portugal late peg    6–1910   5–1914
Russia              9–1894    8–1900
Denmark              5–1884   6–1914
US                  1–1883    6–1914
India early peg      1–1899   3–1903
India late peg       5–1904   6–1914
Switzerland         12–1892   6–1914
Sweden              12–1892   6–1914
Norway               1–1894   6–1914
Nonpegs
Spain                8–1891   11–1901
Portugal             8–1891   11–1901
Russia 1            12–1875   2–1882
Russia 2            11–1887   9–1893
India               10–1890   12–1897




                                        25
Bretton Woods:
All countries are pegged except Brazil (in the early and late 1960’s), Canada (1960–61, 5-1970ff), the UK in 1967
and Germany beginning in mid-1969.
Data available: (annual data is available for most countries for the full 1959–70 period)
                            From            To      series used
Australia                 11-1959        12-1970       T-bill
Austria                    2-1960        12-1970       T-bill
Barbados                  12-1966        12-1970       T-bill
Belgium                    1–1959       12–1970        T-bill
Brazil                     1–1964       12–1970 mon.mkt
Canada                     1–1959       12–1970        T-bill
France                     1–1960       12–1970        T-bill
Germany                   12–1959       12–1970 mon.mkt
India                      1–1959       12–1970 mon.mkt
Italy                      1-1959        12-1970       T-bill
Jamaica                    1–1959       12–1970        T-bill
Japan                      1–1959       12–1970 mon.mkt
Malaysia                   2-1961        12-1970       T-bill
Netherlands                1–1959       12–1970        T-bill
Pakistan                   1–1964       12–1970 mon.mkt
South Africa               1–1959       12–1970        T-bill
Sweden                     1–1959       12–1970        T-bill
Switzerland                1-1959        12-1970     mon.mkt
Trinidad and Tobago       12–1964       12–1970        T-bill
UK                         1–1959       12–1970        T-bill
Zimbabwe                   2-1962        12-1970       T-bill



Post-Bretton Woods Era Country Sample:

Algeria, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Australia, Austria, The Bahamas, Bahrain, Barbados,
Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bolivia, Brazil, Bukina Faso, Canada, Hong Kong, Colombia, Cote D
Ivoire, Denmark, Dominica, Dominican Republic, Egypt, El Salvador, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland,
France, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guyana, Haiti, Hungary, Iceland, India,
Indonesia, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Kenya, Korea, Kuwait, Lao People’s Dem. Rep,
Lebanon, Lesotho, Libya, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta,
Mauritius, Mexico, Morocco, Mozambique, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, Netherlands Antilles,
New Zealand, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Pakistan, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Philippines,
Poland, Portugal, Romania, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Solomon Islands,
South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, St. Kitts and Nevis, St. Lucia, St. Vincent & Grens., Swaziland,
Sweden, Switzerland, Tanzania, Thailand, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda,
United Kingdom, Uruguay, Vanuatu, Venezuela, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Data are available for some or all of the years 1973-2000. More details are available in Shambaugh (2004).




                                                      26
Appendix 2: Simulating Interest Rates in an Exchange-Rate Target Zone

       In simulating international interest-rate covariation when the exchange rate is confined to

a target zone [e,e ], we draw on the basic analysis of Krugman (1991), with some modifications.

       In Krugman's model, the time-t (log) exchange rate e(t) is determined by the equilibrium

condition


                                               Et {de(t + 1)}
                           e(t ) = x(t ) + η                  ,
                                                    dt


where x(t) is the (log) "fundamental" underlying exchange-rate behavior and  is the interest

semi-elasticity of money demand. Because we wish to compare target zones with unconstrained

floating rates, and a random walk for the floating exchange rate would force perfect international

correlation of interest rates, we instead assume mean-reverting fundamentals as in Froot and

Obstfeld (1991). Fundamentals follow the zero-drift diffusion process:




                           dx(t ) = −ξ x(t )dt + σ dz (t ).


The solution for the exchange satisfies the nonlinear ordinary differential equation in x,




                                                     ησ2
                         e( x) = x − ηξ xe' ( x) +           e' ' ( x).
                                                         2


The preceding generalization of Hermite's equation has the general solution




                                                    27
                   x           1 1 ξ x2           1 + ηξ 3 ξ x 2 
       e( x ) =        + A1 M     , ,     + A2 M        , ,     ,  x,
                1 + ηξ         2ηξ 2 σ 2          2ηξ 2 σ 2 
                                                                  


where M(.,.,.) is the confluent hypergeometric function (of the first kind) and A1 and A2 are

arbitrary constants. (Note that this solution corrects the formula reported by Froot and Obstfeld

1991.) The exchange rate bounds determine fundamentals bounds [ x, x] at which intervention to

contain the exchange rate occurs. The economically relevant particular solution for e(x) (given

by values for A1 and A2) is determined jointly with [ x, x] by the conditions:


                                        e(x ) = e,

                                          ()
                                        e x = e,

                                        e' (x ) = 0,

                                          ()
                                        e' x = 0.


Because the problem is symmetric when the drift in fundamentals is zero, A1 = 0. In the

simulations we assume a currency band of 1 percent, that is, [e,e ] = [0.01, 0.01]. Of course,

the above solution describes a freely floating exchange rate when A1 = A2 = 0.

       Instantaneous interest differentials equal instantaneous expected currency depreciation

rates. As the interest rates we use in our empirical analysis have noninfinitesimal maturities,

however, we build on Svensson's (1991) model of the term structure in a target zone to derive

interest rates on longer-dated instruments. Let f(m,x) denote the exchange rate expected to

prevail after a time interval of length m has elapsed, given current fundamentals of x (where m is

a fraction of a year). Svensson (1991) approximates the annualized interest differential (home

less foreign) at maturity m by

                                                  f (m, x ) − e( x)
                                    δ (m, x ) =                     ,
                                                        m
                                                  28
and shows further that f(m,x) satisfies a partial differential equation (the heat equation) that in the

present context would be written as


                                                           σ2
                           f m (m, x) = −ξ xf x (m, x) +      f xx (m, x).
                                                           2


The relevant particular solution invokes the boundary condition f(0,x) = e(x) as well as zero-

slope conditions at [ x, x] , for all m, identical in form to those used to solve for e(x) (see

Svensson 1991 for details). This partial differential equation is solved numerically for a mesh of

100 x values in [ x, x] including the edges, and a mesh of three values for m, zero and the inverses

of the two interest-rate maturities considered (overnight and three months).

        In practice the simulations adopt a finite, brief time interval of 10 minutes and

approximate the diffusion process driving the fundamentals by the difference equation

                                xt + h − xt = −ξ xt h + σ h (z t + h − z t ),


where the shock zt+h − zt is standard normal and ) 2 is the annual variance of the innovation in

fundamentals. (Realizations of x are constrained to stay within [ x, x] .) Thus, assuming a 360-day

year, h = 1/(360+24+6) = 1/51,840. The innovations in the base interest rate, Rb(t+h)  Rbt, and

domestic fundamentals, zt+h − zt, are drawn from a bivariate normal distribution. As explained

above in the main text, the key parameter of this bivariate distribution is the correlation

coefficient between innovations in the base interest rate and in domestic fundamentals,

'( Rbt, zt). That correlation coefficient summarizes the extent to which policy smoothes

domestic interest rates in the face of foreign interest-rate shocks. Base interest rates are

constrained to be nonnegative. The base interest rate is expressed on an annualized basis. We



                                                    29
adopt parameter settings under which  = 4, ! = 1.5, ) = 0.11, and the standard deviation of the

annual change in Rbt is 0.019 (so that the standard deviation of Rb(t+h)  Rbt is 0.019 +

(51,840)1/2).

       To bring the simulation methodology into line with our empirical specification, we add

an exogenous shock v to the domestic interest rate that uncovered interest parity would predict.

For annualized rates of maturity m,

                             Rtm = Rbtm + δ (m, x ) + vt ,


where the standard deviation of v is 0.002 (that is, 20 basis points). In practice, the addition of

the random noise could create a pure arbitrage possibility -- for example, if the domestic interest

rate were to exceed the foreign rate by a percentage exceeding the maximum domestic-currency

depreciation rate allowed by the band. To avoid this outcome, instead of adding the raw shock v

in the preceding interest-rate equation, for the target zone we add the truncated shock




                       0.01 − f (m, x)        − 0.01 − f (m, x) 
             v~ ≡ min                  , max                   , v .
                             m                       m             


       As noted, we model domestic interest rates at the overnight and three-month maturities.

To generate our simulated interest-rate data, we sample the base interest rate Rb and the

fundamental x on the last day of a 30-day month, at the end of hour 8 (the close of the last

trading day) and then compute e(x), f(m,x), (m,x), and the domestic interest rate Rm. We

constrain the domestic interest rate to be nonnegative. This procedure gives us 12 yearly

observations, and we repeat it over 30 years. The resulting simulated data are then used in the

illustrative synthetic regressions. Values reported are based on 1,000 replications.



                                                   30
References

Banerjee, A., J. Dolado, J. Galbraith, and D. Hendry. 1997, Cointegration, Error-Correction, and the
        Econometric Analysis of Non-stationary Data. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Bloomfield, Arthur I. 1959. Monetary Policy under the International Gold Standard: 1880-1914. New
        York: Federal Reserve Bank of New York.
Bordo, Michael D., and Ronald MacDonald. 1997. Violations of the “Rules of the Game” and the
        Credibility of the Classical Gold Standard, 1880–1914. Working Paper Series no. 6115, National
        Bureau of Economic Research (July).
Bordo, Michael D., and Marc Flandreau. 2003. Core, Periphery, Exchange Rate Regimes, and
        Globalization. In Globalization in Historical Perspective, edited by M. D. Bordo, A. M. Taylor
        and J. G. Williamson. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Borenzstein, E., J. Zettelmeyer, and T. Philippon. 2001. Monetary Independence in Emerging Markets:
        Does the Exchange Rate Regime Make a Difference ? IMF Working Paper WP/01/1.
Calvo, Guillermo A., and Carmen M. Reinhart. 2001. Fixing for Your Life. In Brookings Trade Forum
        2000, edited by Susan M. Collins and Dani Rodrik. Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution.
Calvo, Guillermo A., and Carmen M. Reinhart. 2002. Fear of Floating. Quarterly Journal of Economics
        117 (May): 379–408.
Caner, Mehmet, and Lutz Kilian. 2001. Size Distortions of Tests of the Null Hypothesis of Stationarity:
        Evidence and Implications for the PPP Debate. Journal of International Money and Finance 20:
        639–57
Eichengreen, Barry. 1996. Globalizing Capital: A History of the International Monetary System.
        Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press.
Elliot, Graham, Thomas Rothenberg, and James Stock. 1996. Efficient Tests for an Autoregressive Unit
        Root. Econometrica 64 (July): 813-36
Frankel, Jeffrey A. 1999. No Single Currency Regime is Right for All Countries or at All Times. Princeton
        University, International Finance Section, Essays in International Finance no. 215 (August).
Frankel, Jeffrey A., Sergio L. Schmukler, and Luis Servén. 2000. Global Transmission of Interest Rates:
        Monetary Independence and Currency Regime. Mimeo, World Bank, (August).
Frankel, Jeffrey A., Sergio L. Schmukler, and Luis Servén. 2002. Global Transmission of Interest Rates:
        Monetary Independence and Currency Regime. Working Paper Series no. 8828, National Bureau
        of Economic Research (March).
Friedman, Thomas L. 1999. The Lexus and the Olive Tree. New York: Farrar Straus Giroux.




                                                  31
Froot, Kenneth A., and Maurice Obstfeld. 1991. Stochastic Process Switching: Some Simple Solutions.
        Econometrica 59 (January): 241-50.
Goodhart, Charles A. E. 1989. The Conduct of Monetary Policy. Economic Journal vol. 99 no. 396, pp.
        293-346.
Granger, Clive W. J., and Paul Newbold. 1974. Spurious Regressions in Econometrics. Journal of
        Econometrics 2 (1974): 111–20.
Hawtrey, Ralph. 1947. The Gold Standard. London: Longmans, Green.
International Monetary Fund. Various dates. Annual Report on Exchange Arrangements and Exchange
        Restrictions.
Krugman, Paul R. 1991. Target Zones and Exchange Rate Dynamics. Quarterly Journal of Economics
        106 (August): 669-82.
Levy Yeyati, Eduardo, and Federico Sturzenegger. 2002. Classifying Exchange Rate Regimes: Deeds vs.
        Words. Universidad Torcuato Di Tella. Photocopy.
Meissner, Christopher M. 2001. A New World Order: Explaining the Emergence of the Classical Gold
        Standard. U.C. Berkeley. Photocopy.
Neal, Larry, and Marc Weidenmier. 2003. Crises in the Global Economy from Tulips to Today:
        Contagion and Consequences. In Globalization in Historical Perspective, edited by M. D. Bordo,
        A. M. Taylor and J. G. Williamson. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Ng, Serena, and Pierre Perron. 2001. Lag Length Selection and the Construction of Unit Root Tests with
        Good Size and Power. Econometrica 69 (November): 1519-54.
Obstfeld, Maurice, and Kenneth Rogoff. 1995. The Mirage of Fixed Exchange Rates. Journal of
        Economic Perspectives 9 (Fall): 73–96.
Obstfeld, Maurice, and Alan M. Taylor. 2004. Global Capital Markets: Integration, Crisis, and Growth.
        Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Pesaran, M. Hashem, Yongcheol Shin, and Richard J. Smith. 2001. Bounds Testing Approaches to the
        Analysis of Level Relationships. Journal of Applied Econometrics 16 (May/June): 289–326.
Phillips, Peter C. B. 1988. Regression Theory for Near Integrated Time Series. Journal of Econometrics
        56: 1021–43.
Quinn, Dennis. 1997. The Correlates of Changes in International Financial Regulation. American
        Political Science Review 91 (September): 531-51.
Reinhart, Carmen M., and Kenneth S. Rogoff. 2004. The Modern History of Exchange Rate
        Arrangements: A Reinterpretation. Quarterly Journal of Economics 119 (February): 1-48.
Rose, Andrew K. 1996. Explaining Exchange Rate Volatility: An Empirical Analysis of ‘The Holy
        Trinity’ of Monetary Independence, Fixed Exchange Rates, and Capital Mobility. Journal of
        International Money and Finance 15 (6): 925–45.


                                                 32
Shambaugh, Jay C. 2004. The Effects of Fixed Exchange Rates on Monetary Policy. Quarterly Journal of
        Economics 119 (February): 301-52.
Stanton, Richard H. 1997. A Nonparametric Model of Term Structure Dynamics and the Market Price of
        Interest Rate Risk. Mimeo, Haas School of Business, University of California, Berkeley.
Svensson, Lars E. O. 1991. The Term Structure of Interest Rate Differentials in a Target Zone: Theory
        and Swedish Data. Journal of Monetary Economics 28: 87-116.
Svensson, Lars E. O. 1994. Why Exchange Rate Bands? Journal of Monetary Economics 33: 157–99.
Taylor, Bryan. 2000. Encyclopedia of Global Financial Markets. Global Financial Database.
Wu, Y., and H. Zhang. 1997. Do Interest Rates Follow Unit-Root Processes ? Evidence from Cross-
        Maturity Treasury Bill Yields. Review of Quantitative Finance and Accounting 8: 69–81.




                                                33
Table 1.             Differences regressions on annual data32
                     Gold Standard de jure classification
                                pool                peg                     nonpeg                   pool
     # observations               499                    350                   140                   490
     β
                                        aa                     aa                    aa                     aa
                                  .42                    .52                   .16                    .16
     β std error                   .03                   .04                   .06                    .06
     β2
                                                                                                            aa
                                                                                                      .36
     β 2 std error                                                                                    .07
         2
     R                             .26                   .36                   .05                    .30


                     Gold Standard de facto classification
                                pool                peg                     nonpeg                   Pool
     # observations               499                    399                    85                   484
     β
                                        aa                     aa
                                  .42                    .52                   .05                    .05
     β std error                   .03                   .04                   .09                    .10
     β2
                                                                                                            aa
                                                                                                      .47
     β 2 std error                                                                                    .09
         2
     R                             .26                   .41                   .00                    .33


                     Bretton Woods
                                pool                    peg                 nonpeg                   pool
     # observations               227                    208                    na                    na
     β
                                         b                     a
                                  -.20                  -.26
     β std error                   .11                   .11
     β2
     β 2 std error
     R2                            .02                   .04


                     Post-Bretton Woods
                                 pool                   peg                 nonpeg                   pool
     # observations               1920                   748                  1103                   1848
     β
                                        aa                     aa                    aa                     aa
                                  .36                    .46                   .27                    .26
     β std error                   .05                   .04                   .08                    .08
     β2
                                                                                                            a
                                                                                                      .19
     β 2 std error                                                                                    .09
         2
     R                             .03                   .19                   .01                    .03
aa denotes a coefficient statistically significantly different from zero at the 99% level, a at 95%, and b at 90%.

32
  DW statistics never indicate autocorrelation problems for the differences regressions. Due to the cross-sectional
nature of the data, robust standard errors are reported.


                                                        34
Table 2.           Annual differences on pooled sample

                   Table 2a
                                pool                   peg                        nonpeg                    no capital            capital
                                                                                                             controls            controls
   # observations               2646               1355                            1202                          1076                     1541
   β
                                       aa                    aa                          aa                            aa                       aa
                                 .35                   .43                         .26                           .56                      .26
   β std error                   .04                   .03                         .08                           .05                      .06
   R2                            .03                   .17                         .01                           .11                      .01



                   Table 2b
                               peg & no            peg with capital                        nonpeg & no                       nonpeg with
                            capital controls           controls                           capital controls                  capital controls
   # observations                  613                             739                             423                               753
   β
                                             aa                              aa                             aa
                                   .61                             .36                             .53                               .15
   β std error                      .05                            .04                             .07                               .11
       2
   R                                .30                            .13                             .06                               .00



                   Table 2c
                                  pool                            pool                         pool - no                     pool - no
                                                                                              constant R                    constant R
   # observations                 2526                            2526                           2305                          2305
   β
                                            b                                                          b
                                   .17                            .15                            .19                           .16
   β std error                     .10                            .11                            .10                           .12
   β2
                                            b                           b                              aa                            a
                                   .17                            .21                            .24                           .31
   β 2 std error                   .09                            .12                            .09                           .12
   β3
                                            aa                          aa                             aa                            aa
                                   .33                            .39                            .31                           .40
   β 3 std error                   .08                            .14                            .09                           .14
   β4                                                             -.17                                                         -.22
   β 4 std error                                                  .15                                                          .16
       2
   R                               .03                            .03                            .03                           .03


β = coefficient on Rb
β 2 = coefficient on (peg) × Rb
β 3 = coefficient on (no capital controls) × Rb
β 4 = coefficient on (peg) × (no capital controls) ×     Rb
aa denotes a coefficient statistically significantly different from zero at the 99% level, a at 95%, and b at 90%.

''No constant R'' signals that interest rates which are constant over long periods of the sample have been removed.




                                                                  35
Table 3. PSS results

Gold Standard de jure
                              # obs    θ        γ        tstat θ sig at 0 sig at 1 half-life EC θ
            Pegs
            France             520 -0.19       0.56       -7.37    1        1       3.30    -0.07
            Germany            499 -0.20       0.59       -4.20    1        1       3.14    -0.19
            Netherlands        457 -0.18       0.63       -7.26    1        1       3.46    -0.13
            Belgium            529 -0.22       0.60       -7.33    1        1       2.80    -0.14
            Italy              107 -0.23       0.47       -3.48    1        1       2.69    -0.17
            Austria            251 -0.10       0.27       -2.76    0        0       6.82    -0.04
            Portugal            77 -0.08       1.03       -1.68    0        0       8.00    -0.10
            Denmark            361 -0.09       0.57       -4.09    1        1       7.14    -0.08
            US                 401 -0.66       0.41      -10.00    1        1       0.64    -0.35
            India              198 -0.28      -0.13       -3.72    1        1       2.08    -0.21
            Switzerland        258 -0.22       0.43       -5.33    1        1       2.79    -0.04
            Sweden             258 -0.14       0.39       -3.87    1        1       4.73    -0.07
            Norway             245 -0.11       0.54       -4.41    1        1       5.82    -0.05
            Nonpegs
            Netherlands         60    -0.34    0.96      -4.19     1       1        1.67    -0.37
            Italy              256    -0.21    0.49      -6.16     1       1        2.89    -0.11
            Austria            264    -0.19    0.50      -5.41     1       1        3.35    -0.10
            Spain              386    -0.09    0.06      -3.94     1       1       7.76     -0.02
            Portugal           276    -0.05   -0.10      -2.03     0       0       13.41    -0.01
            Russia             309    -0.19   -0.06      -6.14     1       1       3.36      0.00
            India              163    -0.23    0.94      -5.12     1       1        2.60    -0.18
            Nonpegs                   -0.19    0.40      -4.71    86%     86%      5.00     -0.11
            Pegs                      -0.21    0.49      -5.04    85%     85%      4.11     -0.13

θ             the adjustment speed to shocks in the levels relationship
γ             the levels relationship
t-stat θ      the t-stat on the adjustment speed which is used to determine the significance of the levels
              relationship.
sig at 0      signifies whether we can reject no levels relationship if we assume the data is stationary
sig at 1      signifies whether we can reject no levels relationship if we assume the data is non-stationary
half-life     the half-life of a shock (in months) based on the adjustment speed
EC θ          the adjustment speed when one runs the data in error-correction form assuming a level relationship
              equal to 1, using six lags of change in base rate and change in local rate.




                                                    36
              Table 3. PSS results (cont.)

Gold Standard de facto
                                # obs    θ        γ        tstat θ sig at 0 sig at 1 half-life EC θ
            Pegs
            France              507     -0.13   0.45 -4.45           1        1      4.90     -0.07
            Germany             504     -0.20   0.59 -4.22           1        1      3.12     -0.19
            Netherlands         529     -0.21   0.69 -8.85           1        1      2.98     -0.16
            Belgium             499     -0.17   0.65 -5.18           1        1      3.64     -0.13
            Italy early peg      95     -0.29   0.44 -4.16           1        1      2.04     -0.06
            Italy late peg      141     -0.19   0.38 -3.41           1        1      3.31     -0.14
            Austria early peg   111     -0.70   0.27 -4.85           1        1       0.57    -0.13
            Austria late peg    242     -0.09   0.28 -2.59           0        0      7.35     -0.04
            Spain early peg      93     -0.02   1.46 -0.95           0        0      28.96    -0.04
            Spain late peg       48     -0.32   0.31 -3.01           1        0      1.79     -0.06
            Portugal early       60     -0.06   1.14 -1.01           0        0      11.61    -0.10
            Portugal late peg    48     -0.64   0.01 -24.54          1        1      0.69     0.00
            Russia               72     -0.26   0.29 -3.26           1        1      2.32     -0.05
            Denmark             361     -0.09   0.57 -4.09           1        1      7.14     -0.08
            US                  377     -0.66   0.42 -9.64           1        1      0.64     -0.35
            India early peg      60     -0.32   -1.15 -2.43          0        0       1.83    -0.11
            India late peg      122     -0.49   0.25 -3.09           1        0      1.04     -0.39
            Switzerland         258     -0.22   0.43 -5.33           1        1      2.79     -0.04
            Sweden              258     -0.14   0.39 -3.87           1        1      4.73     -0.07
            Norway              245     -0.11   0.54 -4.41           1        1      5.82     -0.05
            Nonpegs
            Spain               112     -0.10   -0.14      -2.39     0       0        6.78    -0.02
            Portugal            112     -0.15   -0.08      -2.53     0       0        4.31    -0.01
            Russia 1             59      -.18   -0.09      -2.04     0       0        3.39      .02
            Russia 2             71      -.13   -0.41      -2.12     0       0        4.97     -.03
            India               145     -0.22   -0.16      -3.34     1       1        2.75    -0.18
            Nonpegs                     -0.16   -0.18      -2.44    20%     20%       4.44    -0.04
            Pegs                        -0.27    0.43      -5.25    80%     70%       4.79    -0.12




                                                      37
Table 3. PSS results (cont.)

Bretton Woods
  Pegs                          #obs     θ        γ    tstat θ   sig at 0   sig at 1   half-life    EC θ
  Australia full                144    -0.07    0.53    -3.77       1          1         9.15       -0.05
  Austria full                  130    -0.03    0.65    -1.25       0          0        21.42       -0.03
  Barbados full 1966:12 ff       48    -0.12   0.60     -2.25       0          0        5.24        -0.04
  Belgium full                  144    -0.12    0.56    -3.18       1          0         5.30       -0.05
  Canada 1963:1 to 1970:5        89    -0.14   0.90     -2.60       0          0         4.65       -0.13
  France 1960:1 ff              131    -0.04    1.70    -2.11       0          0        15.96       -0.03
  Germany 1959:1 to 1969:8      115    -0.21    0.56    -3.78       1          1         2.90       -0.05
  India full                    144    -0.40    0.17    -6.06       1          1         1.35       -0.11
  Italy full                    144    -0.06    0.85    -2.60       0          0        10.34       -0.05
  Jamaica full                  144    -0.06   -0.05    -2.30       0          0        12.25       -0.01
  Japan full                    144    -0.13   -0.29    -2.42       0          0         4.96       -0.04
  Malaysia 1961:12 ff           118    -0.08    0.03    -2.14       0          0         8.53       -0.02
  Netherlands full              144    -0.08    1.20    -2.83       0          0         8.84       -0.09
  Southafrica full              144    -0.03    0.46    -2.24       0          0        25.47       -0.02
  Sweden full                   144    -0.12    1.05    -3.18       1          0         5.48       -0.13
  Switzerland full              144    -0.05    0.68    -3.31       1          1        12.73       -0.02
  Pakistan 1964:1 ff             83    -0.05   -0.11    -1.62       0          0         12.5       -0.02
  Trinidadandtobago 1964:12ff    72    -0.13    0.13    -2.16       0          0         5.15       -0.01
  Unitedkingdom 59:1 to 67:10   106    -0.10   0.70     -2.66       0          0         6.72       -0.12
  Zimbabwe 1962:2 ff            106    -0.10   -0.06    -2.89       1          0         6.67        0.00
  Nonpegs
  Brazil full (64:1 to 70:12)   83     -0.04    0.07   -1.32        0          0        17.72       -0.05
  Brazil 68:1 to 70:12          36     -0.23   -0.51   -3.14        1          0        2.71        0.05

  Pegs                          122    -0.11    0.51   -2.77      35%        0.20        9.28       -0.05
  Nonpegs                        36    -0.23   -0.51   -3.14      1.00       0.00        2.71       0.05



Post-Bretton Woods Averages
                                         θ        γ    tstat θ sig at 0     sig at 1   half-life   EC θ
         Nonpegs                       -0.06   -0.43    -2.21    31%          25%       35.16      -0.04
         Occasional pegs               -0.11    0.68    -2.38    24%          20%       10.56      -0.08
         Pegs                          -0.19   0.93     -2.56    43%          27%        7.84      -0.11




                                                 38
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         10




                                                                                                                                                          0
                                                                                                                                                          1
                                                                                                                                                          2
                                                                                                                                                          3
                                                                                                                                                          4
                                                                                                                                                          5
                                                                                                                                                          6
                                                                                                                                                          7
                                                                                                                                                          8
                                                                                                                                                          9
                                                                                                                                                         10
          0   5   10   15   20
1973M1                                                                                                                                          1959M1                                                        1870
                                                                                                                                                                                                              1871




                                                     Figure 1c.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Figure 1a.


1974M2




                                                                                                                                                                                  Figure 1b.
                                                                                                                                                1959M8
1975M3                                                                                                                                                                                                        1873
                                                                                                                                                1960M3
1976M4                                                                                                                                                                                                        1875
1977M5                                                                                                                                          1960M1
                                                                                                                                                                                                              1877
1978M6                                                                                                                                          1961M5                                                        1879
1979M7
                                                                                                                                                1961M1                                                        1881
1980M8
                                                                                                                                                1962M7                                                        1882
1981M9
                                                                                                                                                                                                              1884
1982M10                                                                                                                                         1963M2
1983M11                                                                                                                                                                                                       1886
                                                                                                                                                1963M9
1984M12                                                                                                                                                                                                       1888
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Base in Gold Standard era




                                                                                                                                                1964M4
                                                                                                                                                                                  Base in Bretton Woods era
1986M1                                                                                                                                                                                                        1890
1987M2                                                                                                                                          1964M1                                                        1892
1988M3                                                                                                                                                                                                        1893
                                                                                                                                                1965M6
1989M4
                                                                                                                                                1966M1                                                        1895
                                                                                                                                                              US Fed Funds Rate




                                 US Fed Funds Rate
1990M5
                                                                                                                                                                                                              1897
1991M6                                                                                                                                          1966M8
                                                                                                                                                                                                              1899
1992M7
                                                                                                                                                1967M3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Great Britain Money Market Rates




                                                                                                                                                                                                              1901
1993M8
                                                                                                                                                1967M1                                                        1903
1994M9
1995M10                                                                                                                                         1968M5                                                        1904
1996M11                                                                                                                                         1968M1                                                        1906
1997M12                                                                                                                                                                                                       1908
                                                                                                                                                1969M7
1999M1                                                                                                                                                                                                        1910
2000M2                                                                                                                                          1970M2
                                                                                                                                                                                                              1912
2001M3                                                                                                                                          1970M9
                                                                                                                                                                                                              1914



                                                     Base in Post-Bretton Woods era (not all countries are based to US, but it is an example)
