NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

RULE-OF-THUMB CONSUMERS AND THE
DESIGN OF INTEREST RATE RULES
Jordi Galí
J. David López-Salido
Javier Vallés
Working Paper 10392
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10392
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2004

We have benefited from comments by Bill Dupor, Ken West (the editor), an anonymous referee, and
participants at the JMCB-Chicago Fed Tobin’s Conference and the NBER Summer Institute, as well as
seminars at the Federal Reserve Board, BIS, CREI-UPF, George Washington University and Bank of Spain.
All remaining errors are our own. Galí acknowledges financial support from DURSI (Generalitat de
Catalunya), MCYT (Grant SEC2002-03816) and the Bank of Spain. The views expressed in this paper do
not necessarily represent those of the Bank of Spain. The views expressed herein are those of the author and
not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2004 by Jordi Galí, J. David López-Salido, and Javier Vallés. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Rule-of-Thumb Consumers and the Design of Interest Rate Rules
Jordi Galí, J. David López-Salido, and Javier Vallés
NBER Working Paper No. 10392
March 2004
JEL No. E32, E52
ABSTRACT

We introduce rule-of-thumb consumers in an otherwise standard dynamic sticky price model, and
show how their presence can change dramatically the properties of widely used interest rate rules.
In particular, the existence of a unique equilibrium is no longer guaranteed by an interest rate rule
that satisfies the so called Taylor principle. Our findings call for caution when using estimates of
interest rate rules in order to assess the merits of monetary policy in specific historical periods.
Jordi Galí
Centre de Recerca en Economia Internacional (CREI)
Ramon Trias Fargas 25
08005 Barcelona
SPAIN
and NBER
jordi.gali@upf.edu
J. David López-Salido
Bank of Spain
davidl@bde.es
Javier Vallés
Bank of Spain
valles@bde.es

1

Introduction

The study of the properties of alternative monetary policy rules, and the assessment
of their relative merits, has been one of the central themes of the recent literature
on monetary policy. Many useful insights have emerged from that research, with
implications for the practical conduct of monetary policy, and for our understanding
of its role in diﬀerent macroeconomic episodes.
Among some of the recurrent themes, much attention has been drawn to the potential benefits and dangers associated with simple interest rate rules. Thus, while it
has been argued that simple interest rate rules can approximate well the performance
of complex optimal rules in a variety of environments,1 those rules have also been
shown to contain the seeds of unnecessary instability when improperly designed.2
A suﬃciently strong feedback from endogenous target variables to the short-term
nominal interest rate is often argued to be one of the requirements for the existence
a locally unique rational expectations equilibrium and, hence, for the avoidance of
indeterminacy and fluctuations driven by self-fulfilling expectations. For a large number of models used in applications that determinacy condition can be stated in a way
that is both precise and general: the policy rule must imply an eventual increase in
the real interest rate in response to a sustained increase in the rate of inflation. In
other words, the monetary authority must adjust (possibly gradually) the short-term
nominal rate more than one-for-one with changes in inflation. That condition, which
following Woodford (2001) is often referred to as the Taylor principle, has also been
taken as a benchmark for the purposes of evaluating the stabilizing role of central
banks’ policies in specific historical periods. Thus, some authors have hypothesized
that the large and persistent fluctuations in inflation and output in the late 60s and
1
2

This is possibly the main conclusion from the contributions to the Taylor (1999a) volume.
See, e.g., Kerr and King (1996), Bernanke and Woodford (1997), Taylor (1999b), Clarida, Galí

and Gertler (2000), and Benhabib, Schmitt-Grohé, and Uribe (2001a,b), among others.

1

70s in the U.S. may have been a consequence of the Federal Reserve’s failure to meet
the Taylor principle in that period; by contrast, the era of low and steady inflation
that has characterized most of Volcker and Greenspan’s tenure seems to have been
associated with interest rate policies that satisfied the Taylor principle.3
In the present paper we show how the presence of non-Ricardian consumers may
alter dramatically the properties of simple interest rate rules, and overturn some of
the conventional results found in the literature. In particular, we analyze a standard
new Keynesian model modified to allow for a fraction of consumers who do not borrow
or save in order to smooth consumption, but instead follow a simple rule-of-thumb:
each period they consume their current labor income.
To anticipate our main result: when the central bank follows a rule that implies an
adjustment of the nominal interest rate in response to variations in current inflation
and output, the size of the inflation coeﬃcient that is required in order to rule out
multiple equilibria is an increasing function of the weight of rule-of thumb consumers
in the economy (for any given output coeﬃcient). In particular, we show that if the
weight of such rule-of-thumb consumers is large enough, a Taylor-type rule must imply
a (permanent) change in the nominal interest rate in response to a (permanent) change
in inflation that is significantly above unity, in order to guarantee the uniqueness of
equilibrium. Hence, the Taylor principle becomes too weak a criterion for stability
when the share of rule-of-thumb consumers is large.
We also find that, independently of their weight in the economy, the presence
of rule-of-thumb consumers cannot in itself overturn the conventional result on the
suﬃciency of the Taylor principle. Instead, we argue that it is the interaction of those
consumers with countercyclical markups (resulting from sticky prices in our model)
3

See, e.g., Taylor (1999b), and Clarida, Galí, and Gertler (2000). Orphanides (2001) argues that

the Fed’s failure to satisfy the Taylor principle was not intentional; instead it was a consequence of
a persistent bias in their real-time measures of potential output.

2

that lies behind our main result.
In addition to our analysis of a standard contemporaneous rule, we also investigate
the properties of a forward-looking interest rate rule. We show that the conditions
for a unique equilibrium under such a rule are somewhat diﬀerent from those in a
contemporaneous one. In particular, we show that when the share of rule-of-thumb
consumers is suﬃciently large it may not be possible to guarantee a (locally) unique
equilibrium or, if it is possible, it may require that interest rates respond less than
one-for-one to changes in expected inflation.
Our framework shares most of the features of recent dynamic optimizing sticky
price models.4 The only diﬀerence lies in the presence of rule-of-thumb consumers,
who are assumed to coexist with conventional Ricardian consumers. While the behavior that we assume for rule-of-thumb consumers is admittedly simplistic (and justified
only on tractability grounds), we believe that their presence captures an important
aspect of actual economies which is missing in conventional models. Empirical support of non-Ricardian behavior among a substantial fraction of households in the U.S.
and other industrialized countries can be found in Campbell and Mankiw (1989). It
is also consistent, at least prima facie, with the findings of a myriad of papers rejecting the permanent income hypothesis on the basis of aggregate data. While many
authors have stressed the consequences of the presence of rule-of-thumb consumers
for fiscal policy,5 the study of its implications for the design of monetary policy is
largely non-existent.6
A number of papers in the literature have also pointed to some of the limitations
4

See, e.g., Rotemberg and Woodford (1999), Clarida, Gali and Gertler (1999), or Woodford

(2001).
5
See, e.g., Mankiw (2000) and Galí, López-Salido and Vallés (2003c).
6
A recent paper by Amato and Laubach (2003) constitutes an exception. In that paper the
authors derive the appropriate loss function that a benevolent central banker should seek to minimize
in the presence of habit formation and rule-of-thumb consumers.

3

of the Taylor principle as a criterion for the stability properties of interest rate rules,
in the presence of some departures from standard assumptions. Thus, Edge and Rudd
(2002) and Roisland (2003) show how the Taylor criterion needs to be strengthened
in the presence of taxes on nominal capital income. Fair (2003) argues that the
Taylor principle is not a requirement for stability if aggregate demand responds to
nominal interest rates (as opposed to real rates) and inflation has a negative eﬀect on
consumption expenditures (through its eﬀects on real wages and wealth), as it is the
case in estimated versions of his multicountry model. Christiano and Gust (1999) find
that the stability properties of simple interest rate rules are significantly altered when
the assumption of limited participation is introduced. Benhabib, Schmitt-Grohé and
Uribe (2001a) demonstrate that an interest rate rule satisfying the Taylor principle
will generally not prevent the existence of multiple equilibrium paths converging to
the liquidity trap steady state that arises in the presence of a zero lower bound on
nominal rates. The present paper can be viewed as complementing that work, by
pointing to an additional independent source of deviations from the Taylor principle
as a criterion for stability of monetary policy rules.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 lays out the basic model,
and derives the optimality conditions for consumers and firms, as well as their loglinear counterparts. Section 3 contains an analysis of the equilibrium dynamics and
its properties under our baseline interest rate rule, with a special emphasis on the
conditions that the latter must satisfy in order to guarantee uniqueness. Section
4 examines the robustness of those results and the required modifications when a
forward looking interest rate rules is assumed. Section 5 concludes.

4

2

A New Keynesian Model with Rule-of-Thumb
Consumers

The economy consists of two types households, a continuum of firms producing diﬀerentiated intermediate goods, a perfectly competitive final goods firm, and a central
bank in charge of monetary policy. Next we describe the objectives and constraints
of the diﬀerent agents. Except for the presence of rule-of-thumb consumers, our
framework corresponds to a conventional New Keynesian model with staggered price
setting à la Calvo used in numerous recent applications. A feature of our model that
is worth emphasizing is the presence of capital accumulation. That feature has often
been ignored in the recent literature, on the grounds that its introduction does not
alter significantly most of the conclusions.7 In our framework, however, the existence
of a mechanism to smooth consumption over time is critical for the distinction between Ricardian and non-Ricardian consumers to be meaningful, thus justifying the
need for introducing capital accumulation explicitly.8

2.1

Households

We assume a continuum of infinitely-lived households, indexed by i ∈ [0, 1]. A fraction
1 − λ of households have access to capital markets where they can trade a full set
of contingent securities, and buy and sell physical capital (which they accumulate
and rent out to firms). We use the term optimizing or Ricardian to refer to that
subset of households. The remaining fraction λ of households do not own any assets
7

Among the papers that introduce capital accumulation explicitly in a new Keynesian framework

we can mention King and Watson (1996), Yun (1996), Dotsey (1999), Kim (2000) and Dupor (2002).
8
Notice that in the absence of capital accumulation both types of households would behave
identically in equilibrium, thus implying that constraint on the behavior of rule-of-thumb consumers
would not be binding.

5

nor have any liabilities; they just consume their current labor income. We refer to
them as rule-of-thumb (or non-Ricardian) consumers. Diﬀerent interpretations for
the latter include myopia, lack of access to capital markets, fear of saving, ignorance
of intertemporal trading opportunities, etc. Campbell and Mankiw (1989) provide
some evidence, based on estimates of a modified Euler equation, of the quantitative
importance of such rule-of-thumb consumers in the U.S. and other industrialized
economies.
2.1.1

Optimizing Households

Let Cto , and Lot represent consumption and leisure for optimizing households (henceforth we use a “o” superscript to refer to optimizing households’ variables). Preferences are defined by the discount factor β ∈ (0, 1) and the period utility U (Cto , Lot ).
P
t
o
o
o
o
Optimizing households seek to maximize E0 ∞
t=0 β U(Ct , Lt ), where Lt + Nt = 1,
subject to the sequence of budget constraints,

Pt (Cto + Ito ) + Rt−1 Bt+1 = Wt Nto + Rtk Kto + Bt + Dt

(1)

and the capital accumulation equation
o
Kt+1

= (1 − δ)

Kto

µ

Ito
+φ
Kto

¶

Kto

(2)

Hence, at the beginning of the period the consumer receives labor income Wt Nto
(where Wt denotes the nominal wage), and income from renting his capital holdings
Kto to firms at the (nominal) rental cost Rtk . Bt is the quantity of nominally riskless
one-period bonds carried over from period t−1, and paying one unit of the numéraire
in period t . Rt denotes the gross nominal return on bonds purchased in period
t. Dt are dividends from ownership of firms. Pt Cto and Pt Ito denote, respectively,
nominal expenditures on consumption and capital goods. Capital adjustment costs
³ o´
are introduced through the term φ KIto Kto , which determines the change in the
t

6

capital stock (gross of depreciation) induced by investment spending Ito . We assume
φ0 > 0, and φ00 ≤ 0, with φ0 (δ) = 1, and φ(δ) = δ. In what follows we specialize the
period utility to take the form U (C, L) ≡

1
1−σ

(C Lν )1−σ where σ ≥ 0 and ν > 0.

The first order conditions for the optimizing consumer’s problem can be written
as:
Cto
1 Wt
=
o
Lt
ν Pt

(3)

(4)
1 = Rt Et {Λt,t+1 }
½
·
µ
¶¸¾
µ o ¶
It+1
k
φ0t+1
(5)
+ Pt+1 Qt+1 (1 − δ) + φt+1 −
Pt Qt = Et Λt,t+1 Rt+1
o
Kt+1
1
Qt = ³ o ´
(6)
I
φ0 Kto
t
³ o ´
³ o ´
It+1
I
and φ0t+1 = φ0 Kt+1
, respectively; Λt,t+k is the stochastic
where φt+1 = φ K o
o
t+1

t+1

discount factor for nominal payoﬀs given by:
µ o ¶−σ µ o ¶ν(1−σ) µ
¶
Ct+k
Lt+k
Pt
k
Λt,t+k ≡ β
Cto
Lot
Pt+k

(7)

and where Qt is the (real) shadow value of capital in place, i.e., Tobin’s Q. Notice
that, under our assumption on φ, the elasticity of the investment-capital ratio with
1
respect to Q is given by − φ00 (δ)δ
≡ η.

2.1.2

Rule-of-Thumb Households

Rule-of-thumb households do not attempt (or are just unable) to smooth their consumption path in the face of fluctuations in labor income. Each period they solve
the static problem, i.e. they maximize their period utility U(Ctr , Lrt ) subject to the
constraint that all their labor income is consumed, that is:
Pt Ctr = Wt Ntr

(8)

and where an “r” superscript is used to denote variables specific to rule-of-thumb
households.
7

The associated first order condition is given by:
Ctr
1 Wt
=
r
Lt
ν Pt

(9)

which combined with (8) yields
Ntr =

1
≡ Nr
1+ν

(10)

hence implying a constant employment for rule-of-thumb households9 , as well as a
consumption level proportional to the real wage:10
Ctr =
2.1.3

1 Wt
1 + ν Pt

(11)

Aggregation

Aggregate consumption and leisure are a weighted average of the corresponding variables for each consumer type. Formally:
Ct ≡ λ Ctr + (1 − λ) Cto

(12)

Nt ≡ λ Ntr + (1 − λ) Nto

(13)

Similarly, aggregate investment and capital stock are given It ≡ (1 − λ) Ito , and
Kt ≡ (1 − λ) Kto . We can combine (12) and (13) with the optimality conditions (9),
(10), and (11) to obtain,
Nt =
9

λ
+ (1 − λ) Nto
1+ν

Alternatively we could have assumed directly a constant labor supply for rule of thumb house-

holds.
10
Notice that under our assumptions, real wages are the only source of fluctuations in rule of
thumb households’ disposable income. More realistically, as shown in Gali, Lopez-Salido and Valles
(2003c), the introduction of labor market frictions can generate fluctuations in hours of rule of thumb
consumers, thus implying a second margin of variation in disposable income. In that context, it may
be possible to preserve our findings even in the presence of wage stickiness (nominal or real). This
constitutes a natural extension of this paper and is part of our ongoing research.

8

1
Ct =
ν

µ

Wt
Pt

¶

(1 − Nt )

(14)

which will be used below.

2.2

Firms

We assume the existence of a continuum of monopolistically competitive firms producing diﬀerentiated intermediate goods. The latter are used as inputs by a (perfectly
competitive) firm producing a single final good.
2.2.1

Final Goods Firm

The final good is produced by a representative, perfectly competitive firm with a
ε
³R
´ ε−1
ε−1
1
ε
constant returns technology: Yt = 0 Xt (j)
dj
, where Xt (j) is the quantity

of intermediate good j used as an input. Profit maximization, taking as given the

final goods price Pt and the prices for the intermediate goods Pt (j), for all j ∈ [0, 1],
´−ε
³
Yt . Finally, the zero profit
yields the set of demand schedules, Xt (j) = PPt (j)
t
1
³R
´ 1−ε
1
condition yields, Pt = 0 Pt (j)1−ε dj
.
2.2.2

Intermediate Goods Firm

The production function for a typical intermediate goods firm (say, the one producing
good j) is given by:
Yt (j) = Kt (j)α Nt (j)1−α

(15)

where Kt (j) and Nt (j) represents the capital and labor services hired by firm j.11
Cost minimization, taking the wage and the rental cost of capital as given, implies
¡ α ¢ ³ Wt ´
Kt (j)
the optimality condition Nt (j) = 1−α
. Hence, real marginal cost is common
Rk
³ k ´αt ³ ´1−α
Wt
, where Φ ≡ αα (1 − α)1−α .
to all firms and given by: MCt = Φ1 RPtt
Pt
11

Without loss of generality we have normalized the level of total factor productivity to unity.

9

Price Setting Intermediate firms are assumed to set nominal prices in a staggered
fashion, according to the stochastic time dependent rule proposed by Calvo (1983).
Each firm resets its price with probability 1−θ each period, independently of the time
elapsed since the last adjustment. Thus, each period a measure 1 − θ of producers
reset their prices, while a fraction θ keep their prices unchanged
A firm resetting its price in period t will seek to maximize
max
Et
∗
{Pt }

∞
X
k=0

θk Et {Λt,t+k Yt+k (j) (Pt∗ − Pt+k MCt+k )}

subject to the sequence of demand constraints, Yt+k (j) = Xt+k (j) =

³

Pt∗
Pt+k

´−ε

Yt+k ,

where Pt∗ represents the price chosen by firms resetting prices at time t. The first
order conditions for this problem is:
∞
X
k=0

½
µ
θ Et Λt,t+k Yt+k (j) Pt∗ −
k

ε
Pt+k MCt+k
ε−1

¶¾

=0

(16)

Finally, the equation describing the dynamics for the aggregate price level is given
£
¤ 1
1−ε
by Pt = θ Pt−1
+ (1 − θ) (Pt∗ )1−ε 1−ε .

2.3

Monetary Policy

The central bank is assumed to set the nominal interest rate rt ≡ Rt − 1 every period
according to a simple linear interest rate rule:
rt = r + φπ π t + φy yt

(17)

where φπ ≥ 0, φy ≥ 0 and r is the steady state nominal interest rate. Notice that
the rule above implicitly assumes a zero inflation target, which is consistent with the
steady state around which we will log linearize the price setting equation (16). A
rule analogous to (17) was originally proposed by John Taylor (Taylor (1993)) as a
description for the evolution of short-term interest rates in the U.S. under Greenspan.
10

It has since become known as the Taylor rule and has been used in numerous theoretical and empirical applications.12 In addition to (17), we also analyze the properties
of a forward-looking interest rate rule, in which interest rates respond to expected
inflation and output. We refer the reader to the discussion below for details.

2.4

Market Clearing

The clearing of factor and good markets requires that the following conditions are
R1
R1
satisfied for all t: Nt = 0 Nt (j) dj, Kt = 0 Kt (j) dj, Yt (j) = Xt (j), for all j ∈ [0, 1]

and

Yt = Ct + It

2.5

(18)

Linearized Equilibrium Conditions

Next we derive the log-linear versions of the key optimality and market clearing conditions that will be used in our analysis of the model’s equilibrium dynamics. For
aggregate variables we generally use lower case letters to denote the logs of the corresponding original variables (or their log deviations from steady state), and ignore
constant terms throughout. Some of these conditions hold exactly, while others represent first-order approximations around a zero inflation steady state.
2.5.1

Households

The log-linearized versions of the households’ optimality conditions, expressed in
terms of aggregate variables, are presented next. The reader can find details of the
derivations in a companion working paper.13 Some of these optimality conditions turn
12

This is illustrated in many of the papers contained in the Taylor (1999) volume, which analyze

the properties of rules like (17) or variations thereof in the context a a variety of models.
13
See Galí, López-Salido and Vallés (2003a).

11

out to be independent of λ, the weight of rule-of-thumb consumers in the economy.
Among the latter we have the aggregate labor supply schedule that can be derived
taking logs on both sides of (3):
ct + ϕ nt = wt − pt
where ϕ ≡

N
1−N

(19)

. The latter coeﬃcient, which can be interpreted as the inverse of

the Frisch aggregate labor supply elasticity, can be shown to be independent of λ.14
The log-linearized equations describing the dynamics of Tobin’s Q (6)and its relationship with investment (5)are also independent of λ, and given respectively by
k
− pt+1 )} − (rt − Et {π t+1 })
qt = β Et {qt+1 } + [1 − β(1 − δ)] Et {(rt+1

(20)

it − kt = η qt

(21)

and

The same invariance to λ holds for the log-linearized capital accumulation equation:
kt+1 = δ it + (1 − δ) kt

(22)

The only aggregate equilibrium condition that is aﬀected by the weight of rule-ofthumb consumers turns out to be the log-linearized aggregate Euler equation, which
takes the form
ct = Et {ct+1 } −
where Θ ≡

ϕλ
1−λ

+

1
(rt − Et {π t+1 } − ρ) − Θ Et {∆nt+1 }
σ

(23)

(1− σ1 )νϕ
.
(1−λ)

Notice that the possibility of a non-separable utility (σ 6= 1) justifies in itself the
presence of the term involving expected employment growth in the aggregate Euler
equation. Notice, however, that in the absence of rule-of-thumb consumers we have
14

More specifically, ϕ is given by: ϕ ≡

N
1−N

=

(ρ+δ)(1−α)
1
ν ρ+δ(1−α)+µ(ρ+δ) .

12

Θ = (1 − σ1 )νϕ < 1, since νϕ ∈ (0, 1). In general, however, the size of Θ is a highly
nonlinear function of λ, the weight of rule-of-thumb consumers. As discussed below,
that eﬀect can potentially alter the local stability properties of the dynamical system
describing the equilibrium.
2.5.2

Firms

Log-linearization of (16) and the definition of aggregate price level, around the zero
inflation steady state, yields the familiar equation describing the dynamics of inflation
as a function of the deviations of the average (log) markup from its steady state level
πt = β Et {πt+1 } − τ µt
where τ =

(1−βθ)(1−θ)
θ

(24)

and (ignoring constant terms)

µt = (yt − nt ) − (wt − pt ) = (yt − kt ) − (rtk − pt )

(25)

Furthermore, it can be shown that the following aggregate production function
holds, up to a first order approximation:
yt = α kt + (1 − α) nt
2.5.3

(26)

Market clearing

Log-linearization of the market clearing condition of the final good around the steady
state yields:
yt = γ c ct + (1 − γ c ) it
where γ c ≡

C
Y

=1−

δα(1− 1ε )
(ρ+δ)

(27)

is the aggregate consumption share in the steady state,

which is independent of the weight of rule-of-thumb consumers.

13

3

Analysis of Equilibrium Dynamics

We can now combine equilibrium conditions (19)-(27) to obtain a system of diﬀerence
equations describing the log-linearized equilibrium dynamics of our model economy.
After several straightforward though tedious substitutions, we can reduce that system
to one involving four variables:
A Et {xt+1 } = B xt

(28)

where xt ≡ (nt , ct , π t , kt )0 . Notice that nt , ct , π t , kt are expressed in terms of
log deviations from their values in the zero inflation steady state. The elements of
matrices A and B are all functions of the underlying structural parameters.15
Notice that xt = 0 for all t , which corresponds to the perfect foresight zero
inflation steady state, always constitutes a solution to the above system. This should
not be surprising, given that for simplicity we have not introduced any fundamental
shocks in our model. In the remainder of the paper we study the conditions under
which the solution to (28) is unique and converges to the steady state, for any given
initial capital stock. In doing so we restrict our analysis to solutions of (28) (i.e.,
equilibrium paths) which remain within a small neighborhood of the steady state.16
Before we turn to that task, we discuss briefly the calibration that we use as a baseline
for that analysis.

3.1

Baseline Calibration

The model is calibrated to a quarterly frequency. Table 1 summarizes compactly the
values assumed for the diﬀerent parameters in the baseline calibration. The rate of
depreciation δ is set to 0.025 (implying a 10 percent annual rate). The elasticity of
15
16

See the appendix in Galí, López-Salido and Vallés (2003a).
See, e.g., Benhabib, Schmitt-Grohé and Uribe (2001a) for a discussion of the caveats associated

with that approach.

14

output with respect to capital, α, is assumed to be 13 , a value roughly consistent with
the observed labor income share given any reasonable steady state markup. With
regard to preference parameters, we set the discount factor β equal to 0.99 (implying
a steady state real annual return of 4 percent). The elasticity of substitution across
intermediate goods, ε, is set to 6, a value consistent with a steady state markup µ of
0.2. The previous parameters are kept at their baseline values throughout the present
section.
Next we turn to the parameters for which some sensitivity analysis is conducted,
by examining a range of values in addition to their baseline settings. We set the
baseline value for parameter ν in a way consistent with a unit Frisch elasticity of
labor supply (i.e., ϕ = 1) in our baseline calibration. That choice is associated
with a fraction of time allocated to work in the steady state given by N = 12 . We
choose a baseline value of one for σ, which corresponds to a separable (log-log) utility
specification. The fraction of firms that keep their prices unchanged, θ, is given a
baseline value of 0.75, which corresponds to an average price duration of one year.
This is consistent with the findings reported in Taylor (1999c). Following King and
Watson (1996), we set η, the elasticity of investment with respect to Tobin’s Q, equal
to 1.0 under our baseline calibration.17 Finally, we set φπ = 1.5 and φy = 0.5 as the
baseline values for the interest rate rule coeﬃcients, in a way consistent with Taylor’s
(1993) characterization of U.S. monetary policy under Greenspan.
Much of the sensitivity analysis below focuses on the weight of rule-of-thumb
households (λ) and its interaction with θ, σ, ϕ, η, and φπ and φy .
17

Other authors who have worked with an identical specification of capital adjustment costs have

considered alternative calibrations of that elasticity. Thus, e.g., Dotsey (1999) assumes an elasticity
of 0.25; Dupor (2002) assumes a baseline elasticity of 5; Baxter and Crucini (1993) set a baseline
value of 15; Abel (1980) estimates that elasticity to be between 0.3 and 0.5 .

15

3.2

Determinacy Analysis

Vector xt contains three non-predetermined variables (hours, consumption and inflation) and a predetermined one (capital stock). Hence, the solution to (28) is unique
if and only if three eigenvalues of matrix A−1 B lie outside the unit circle, and one
lies inside.18 Alternatively, if there is more than one eigenvalue of A−1 B inside the
unit circle the equilibrium is locally indeterminate: for any initial capital stock there
exists a continuum of deterministic equilibrium paths converging to the steady state,
and the possibility of stationary sunspot fluctuations arises. On the other hand, if
all the eigenvalues A−1 B lie outside the unit circle, there is no solution to (28) that
converges to the steady state, unless the initial capital stock happens to be at its
steady state level (in which case xt = 0 for all t is the only non-explosive solution).
Below our focus is on how the the presence of rule-of-thumb consumers may influence
the configuration of eigenvalues of the dynamical system, and hence the properties of
the equilibrium.

3.3

The Taylor Principle and Indeterminacy

We start by exploring the conditions for the existence of a unique equilibrium as a
function of the degree of price stickiness (indexed by parameter θ) and the weight of
rule-of-thumb households (indexed by parameter λ) under an interest rate rule like
(17). As shown by Bullard and Mitra (2002) and Woodford (2001), in a version of
the model above with neither capital nor rule-of-thumb consumers, a necessary and
suﬃcient condition for the existence of a (locally) unique equilibrium is given by19
φπ > 1 −

(1 − β) φy
τ (1 + ϕ)

(29)

A rule like (17) which meets the condition above is said to satisfy the Taylor
18
19

See, e.g., Blanchard and Kahn (1980).
As in Bullard and Mitra (2002) we restrict ourselves to non-negative values of φπ and φy .

16

principle. As discussed in Woodford (2001), such a rule guarantees that in response
to permanent change in inflation (and, hence, in output), the nominal interest rate is
adjusted more than one-for-one. In the particular case of a zero coeﬃcient on output
the Taylor principle is satisfied whenever φπ > 1. More generally, as (29) makes clear,
it is possible for the equilibrium to be unique for values of φπ less than one, as long
as as the central bank raises the interest rate suﬃciently in response to an increase in
output. In other words, in the canonical model there is some substitutability between
the size of the response to output and that of the response to inflation. As shown in
Dupor (2002) and further illustrated below, the previous finding carries over, at least
qualitatively, to a version of the model with capital accumulation and fully Ricardian
consumers. In particular, when φy = 0 the condition for uniqueness is given by
φπ > 1.
Next we analyze the extent to which those conditions need to be modified in
order to guarantee the existence of a unique equilibrium in the model with rule-ofthumb consumers laid out above. A key finding of our paper is illustrated by Figure
1. That figure represents the equilibrium properties of our model economy for all
configurations of λ and θ, under the assumption of φπ = 1.5 and φy = 0.5, parameter
values that clearly satisfy the Taylor criterion in standard models. In particular,
the figure displays the regions in the parameter space (λ, θ) that are associated with
the presence of uniqueness and multiplicity of a rational expectations equilibrium
in a neighborhood of the steady state. Notice that each graph corresponds to an
alternative pair of settings for the risk aversion coeﬃcient σ and the inverse labor
supply elasticity ϕ.
A key finding emerges clearly: the combination of a high degree of price stickiness
with a large share of rule-of-thumb consumers rules out the existence of a unique
equilibrium converging to the steady state. Instead, the economy is characterized

17

in that case by indeterminacy of equilibrium (dark region). Conversely, if (a) prices
are suﬃciently flexible (low θ) and/or (b) the share of rule-of-thumb consumers is
suﬃciently small (low λ), the existence of a unique equilibrium is guaranteed. That
finding holds irrespective of the assumed values for σ and ϕ, even though the relative
size of the diﬀerent regions can be seen to depend on those parameters. In particular,
the size of the uniqueness region appears to shrink as σ and ϕ increase. In sum, as
made clear by Figure 1, the Taylor principle may no longer be a useful criterion for
the design of interest rate rules in economies with strong nominal rigidities and a
substantial weight of rule-of-thumb consumers.
Importantly, while the previous result has been illustrated under the assumption
of φπ = 1.5 and φy = 0.5 (the values proposed by Taylor (1993)), similar patterns
arise for a large set of configurations of those coeﬃcients that would be associated
with the existence of a unique equilibrium in the absence of rule-of-thumb consumers.
The size of the indeterminacy region can be shown to shrink gradually as the size
of the interest rate response to inflation and output increases (while keeping other
parameters constant). In particular, for any given value of the output coeﬃcient, φy
(and given a configuration of settings for the remaining parameters), the minimum
threshold value for the inflation coeﬃcient φπ consistent with an unique equilibrium
lies above the one corresponding to the model without rule-of-thumb consumers. In
other words, a strengthened condition on the size of the response of interest rates to
changes in inflation is required in that case. Next, we provide an explicit analysis of
the variation in the threshold value for φπ , as a function of diﬀerent parameter values
and, most importantly, as a function of the share of rule-of-thumb households.

18

3.4

Interest Rate Rules and Rule-of-Thumb Consumers: Requirements for Stability

Figure 2 plots the threshold value of φπ that is required for a unique equilibrium
as a function of the share of rule-of-thumb consumers, for three alternative values
of φy : 0.5 (our baseline case), 0.0 (the pure inflation targeting case) and 1.0 (as in
the modified Taylor rule considered in Taylor (1999c)). For convenience, we plot the
inverse of the threshold value of φπ .20 We notice that as φy increases, the threshold
value for φπ falls, for any given share of rule-of-thumb consumers. Yet, as the Figure
makes clear, the fact that the central bank is responding to output does not relieve
it from the need to respond to inflation on a more than one-for-one basis, once a
certain share of rule-of-thumb consumers is attained. Furthermore, as in our baseline
case, the size of the minimum required response is increasing in that share. Thus, for
instance, when φy = 0.0 the central bank needs to vary the nominal rate in response
to changes in inflation on a more than one-for-one basis whenever the share of rule-ofthumb consumers is above 0.57. In particular, when λ = 23 , the inflation coeﬃcient φπ
must lie above 6 (approximately) in order to guarantee a unique equilibrium. Even
though our simple-minded rule-of-thumb consumers do not have a literal counterpart
that would allow us to determine λ with precision, we view these values as falling
within the range of empirical plausibility given some of the existing micro and macro
evidence. In particular, estimated Euler equations for aggregate consumption whose
specification allows for the presence of rule-of-thumb consumers point to values for λ
in the neighborhood of one-half (Campbell and Mankiw (1989)). In addition, and as
recently surveyed in Mankiw (2000), recent empirical microeconomic evidence tends
to support that finding.
20
21

21

The inverse of the threshold value is bounded, which facilitates graphical display.
Empirical estimates of the marginal propensity to consume out of current income range from

0.35 up to 0.6 (see Souleles (1999)) or even 0.8 (see Shea (1995)), values that are well above those

19

Figures 3a - 3d, display similar information for alternative calibrations of θ, ϕ,
η, and σ, respectively, with all other parameters set at their baseline values in each
case. For convenience we set φy = 0, for in that case the Taylor principle takes a very
simple form: the threshold value for φπ in the absence of rule-of-thumb consumers
is equal to one, which provides a convenient benchmark. The picture that emerges
is, qualitatively, similar to that of Figure 2 with φy = 0. Notice first that, in every
case considered, the threshold value for φπ is equal to one, so long as the weight of
rule-of-thumb consumers is suﬃciently low. Once a certain weight for λ is attained,
the lower bound for φπ can be seen to increase rapidly with the share of rule-ofthumb consumers. Regarding the influence of the parameters under consideration,
the main qualitative findings can be summarized as follows: the deviation from the
Taylor principle criterion seems to become more likely and/or quantitatively larger
the stronger is the degree of price stickiness (i.e., the higher is θ), the lower is the
labor supply elasticity (i.e., the higher is ϕ), the more convex capital adjustment
costs are (i.e., the lower is η), and the higher is the risk aversion parameter σ.

3.5

Impulse Responses and Economic Mechanisms

As discussed above, in the standard new Keynesian framework with a representative
consumer, the Taylor principle generally constitutes the appropriate criterion for
determining whether an interest rate rule of the sort considered in the literature will
guarantee or not a unique equilibrium, and thus rule out the possibility of sunspotdriven fluctuations. The basic intuition goes as follows. Suppose that, in the absence
of any shock to fundamentals that could justify it, there was an increase in the level of
economic activity, with agents anticipating the latter to return only gradually to its
implied by the permanent income hypothesis. On the other hand Wolﬀ (1998) reports that the mean
net worth of the lowest two quintiles of the US wealth distribution is only $ 900.

20

original (steady state) level. That increase in economic activity would be associated
with increases in hours, lower markups (because of sticky prices), and persistently
high inflation (resulting from the attempts by firms adjusting prices to re-establish
their desired markups). But an interest rate rule that satisfied the Taylor principle
would generate high real interest rates along the adjustment path, and hence, would
call for a low level of consumption and investment relative to the steady state. The
implied impact on aggregate demand would make it impossible to sustain the initial
boom, thus rendering it inconsistent with a rational expectations equilibrium.
Consider instead the dynamic response of the economy to such an exogenous
revision in expectations when the weight of rule-of-thumb consumers is suﬃciently
high to allow for multiple equilibria even though the interest rate rule satisfies the
Taylor principle. That response is illustrated graphically in Figure 4, which displays
the simulated responses to an expansionary sunspot shock for a calibrated version
of our model economy meeting the above criteria. In particular we set φπ = 1.5,
φy = 0.5 and λ = 0.85. The presence of rule-of-thumb consumers, combined with
countercyclical markups, makes it possible to break the logic used above to rule out
a sunspot-driven variation in economic activity. Two features are critical here. First,
the decline in markups resulting from sluggish price adjustment allows real wages to
go up (this eﬀect is stronger in economies with a low labor supply elasticity) in spite of
the decline in labor productivity associated with higher employment. Secondly, and
most importantly, the increase in real wages generates a boom in consumption among
rule-of-thumb consumers. If the weight of the latter in the economy is suﬃciently
important, the rise in their consumption will more than oﬀset the decline in that of
Ricardian consumers, as well as the drop in aggregate investment (both generated
by the rise in interest rates). As a result, aggregate demand will rise, thus making
it possible to sustain the persistent boom in output that was originally anticipated

21

by agents. That possibility is facilitated by the presence of highly convex adjustment
costs (low η), which will mute the investment response, together with a low elasticity
of intertemporal substitution (a high σ), which will dampen the response of the
consumption of Ricardian households.

4

A Forward-Looking Rule

In the present section we analyze the properties of our model when the central bank
follows a forward-looking interest rate rule of the form
rt = r + φπ Et {π t+1 } + φy Et {yt+1 }

(30)

The rule above corresponds to a particular case of the specification originally
proposed by Bernanke and Woodford (1997), and estimated by Clarida, Galí and
Gertler (1998, 2000).22 Dupor (2002) analyzes the equilibrium properties of a rule
identical to (30) in the context of a new Keynesian model with capital accumulation
similar to the one used in the present paper, though without rule-of-thumb consumers.
His analysis suggests that the Taylor principle remains a useful criterion for this kind
of economies, but with an important additional constraint: φπ should not lie above
some upper limit φuπ > 1 (which in turn depends on φy ) in order for the rational
expectations equilibrium to be (locally) unique. In other words, in addition to the
usual lower bound associated to the Taylor principle, there is an upper bound to the
size of the response to expected inflation that must be satisfied; if that upper bound
is overshot the equilibrium becomes indeterminate. A similar result has been shown
analytically in the context of a similar model without capital. See, e.g., Bernanke
22

In Galí, López-Salido and Vallés (2003a) we also provide an analysis of the properties of a

backward looking rule. For the most part those properties are qualitatively similar to those of a
forward looking rule.

22

and Woodford (1997) and Bullard and Mitra (2002).23
How does the presence of rule-of-thumb consumers aﬀect the previous result?
Figure 5 represents graphically the interval of φπ values for which a unique equilibrium
exists, as a function of the weight of rule-of-thumb consumers λ, and for alternative
values of φy .
First, when φy = 0 and for low values of λ (roughly below 0.6) the qualitative
result found in the literature carries over to our economy: the uniqueness requires
that φπ lies within some interval bounded below by 1. Interestingly, for this region,
the size of that interval shrinks gradually as λ increases. That result is consistent
with the findings of Dupor (2002) for the particular case of λ = 0 (no rule-of-thumb
consumers).
Most interestingly (and surprisingly), when the weight of rule-of-thumb consumers
λ lies above a certain threshold, the properties of the forward-looking rule change
dramatically. In particular, a value for φπ below unity is needed in order to guarantee
the existence of a unique rational expectations equilibrium. In other words, the
central bank would be ill advised if it were to follow a forward-looking rule satisfying
the Taylor principle, since that policy would necessarily generate an indeterminate
equilibrium.24
A systematic response of the interest rate to changes in output (φy > 0), even
if small in size, has a significant impact on the stability properties of our model
economy. Thus, for low values of λ, a positive setting for φy tends to raise the upper
threshold for φπ consistent with a unique equilibrium. As seen in the four consecutive
23

More recently, Levin, Wieland and Williams (2003) have shown that the existence of such an

upper threshold is inherent to a variety of forward-looking rules, with the uniqueness region generally
shrinking as the forecast horizon is raised.
24
See Galí, López-Salido and Vallés (2003a) for a discussion of the reasons why a large presence of
rule-of-thumb consumers make it possible for a rule that responds less than one-for-one to (expected)
inflation to be consistent with a unique equilibrium.

23

graphs of Figure 5, the eﬀect of φy on the size of the uniqueness region appears to
be non-monotonic, increasing very quickly for low values of φy and shrinking back
gradually for higher values. On the other hand, for higher values of λ, the opposite
eﬀect takes place: the interval of φπ values for which there is a unique equilibrium
becomes smaller as we increase the size of the output coeﬃcient relative to the φy = 0
case. In fact, under our baseline calibration, when φy = 0.5 and for λ suﬃciently high,
an indeterminate equilibrium arises regardless of the value of the inflation coeﬃcient.
The high sensitivity of the model’s stability properties to the size of the output
coeﬃcient in a forward-looking interest rate rule in a model with capital accumulation
(but no rule-of-thumb consumers) had already been noticed by Dupor (2002). The
above analysis raises an important qualification (and warning) on such earlier results:
in the presence of rule-of-thumb consumers an aggressive response to output does not
seem warranted, for it can only reduce the region of inflation coeﬃcients consistent
with a unique equilibrium. On the other hand, a small response to output has the
opposite eﬀect: it tends to enlarge the size of the uniqueness region.
In summary, when the central bank follows a forward-looking rule like (30) the
presence of rule-of-thumb consumers either shrinks the interval of φπ values for which
the equilibrium is unique (in the case of low λ), or makes a passive policy necessary
to guarantee that uniqueness (for high values of λ).

5

Concluding Remarks

The Taylor principle, i.e., the notion that central banks should raise (lower) nominal
interest rates more than one-for-one in response to a rise (decline) in inflation, is
generally viewed as a prima facie criterion in the assessment of a monetary policy.
Thus, an interest rate rule that satisfies the Taylor principle is viewed as a policy
with stabilizing properties, whereas the failure to meet the Taylor criterion is often
24

pointed to as a possible explanation for periods characterized by large fluctuations in
inflation and widespread macroeconomic instability.
In the present paper we have provided a simple but potentially important qualification to that view. We have shown how the presence of rule-of-thumb (non-Ricardian)
consumers in an otherwise standard dynamic sticky price model, can alter the properties of simple interest rate rules dramatically. The intuition behind the important
role played by rule-of-thumb consumers is easy to grasp: the behavior of those households is, by definition, insulated from the otherwise stabilizing force associated with
changes in real interest rates. We summarize our main results as follows.
1. Under a contemporaneous interest rate rule, the existence of a unique equilibrium is no longer guaranteed by the Taylor principle when the weight of ruleof-thumb consumers attains a certain threshold. Instead the central bank may
be required to pursue a more anti-inflationary policy than it would otherwise
be needed.
2. Under a forward-looking interest rate rule, the presence of rule-of-thumb consumers also complicates substantially the central bank’s task, by shrinking the
range of responses to inflation consistent with a unique equilibrium (when the
share of rule-of-thumb consumers is relatively low), or by requiring that a passive interest rate rule is followed (when the share of rule-of-thumb consumers is
large).
We interpret the previous results as raising a call for caution on the part of central
banks when designing their monetary policy strategies: the latter should not ignore
the potential importance of rule-of-thumb consumers (or, more broadly speaking, procyclical components of aggregate demand that are insensitive to interest rates). From
that viewpoint, our findings suggest that if the share of rule-of-thumb consumers is
25

non-negligible the strength of the interest rate response to contemporaneous inflation
may have to be increased in order to avoid multiple equilibria. But if that share takes
a high value, the size of the response required to guarantee a unique equilibrium may
be too large to be credible, or even to be consistent with a non-negative nominal rate.
In that case, our findings suggest that the central bank should consider adopting a
passive rule that responds to expected inflation only (as an alternative to a rule that
responds to current inflation with a very high coeﬃcient). It is clear, however, that
such an alternative would have practical diﬃculties, especially from the viewpoint of
communication with the public.
The above discussion notwithstanding, it is not the objective of the present paper
to come up with specific policy recommendations: our model is clearly too simplistic
to be taken at face value, and any sharp conclusion coming out of it might not be
robust to alternative specifications. On the other hand we believe our analysis is
useful in at least one regard: it points to some important limitations of the Taylor
principle as a simple criterion for the assessment of monetary policy when rule-ofthumb consumers (or the like) are present in the economy. In that respect, our
findings call for caution when interpreting estimates of interest rate rules similar to
the ones analyzed in the present paper in order to assess the merits of monetary policy
in specific historical periods.25 In particular, our results suggest that evidence on the
size of the response of interest rates to changes in inflation should not automatically
be viewed as allowing for indeterminacy and sunspot fluctuations (if the estimates
suggest that the Taylor principle is not met) nor, alternatively, as guaranteeing a
unique equilibrium (if the Taylor principle is shown to be satisfied in the data).
Knowledge of the exact specification of the interest rate rule (e.g. whether it is
forward looking or not) as well as other aspects of the model would be required for
25

See, e.g., Taylor (1999b) and Clarida, Galí, and Gertler (2000).

26

a proper assessment of the stabilizing properties of historical monetary policy rules.
In addition to its implications for the stability of interest rate rules, the presence of
rule-of-thumb consumers is also likely to have an influence in the nature of the central
bank objective function. Early results along these lines, though in the context of a
model somewhat diﬀerent from the one in the present paper, can be found in Amato
and Laubach (2003). We think that the derivation of optimal monetary policy rules
as well as the assessment of simple policy rules using a welfare based criteria can be
a fruitful line of research.
More generally, we believe that the introduction of rule-of-thumb consumers in
dynamic general equilibrium models used for policy analysis not only enhances significantly the realism of those models, but it can also allow us to uncover interesting
insights that may be relevant for the design of policies and helpful in our eﬀorts to
understand many macroeconomic phenomena. An illustration of that potential usefulness can be found in a companion paper (Galí, López-Salido and Valles (2003c)),
where we have argued that the presence of rule-of-thumb consumers may help account
for the observed eﬀects of fiscal policy shocks, some of which are otherwise hard to
explain with conventional new Keynesian or neoclassical models.

27

References
Abel, A. (1980): “Empirical Investment Equations. An integrated Framework,”
Carnegie Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy , 12, 39-91.
Amato, Jeﬀery, and Thomas Laubach (2003): “Rule-of-Thumb Behavior and Monetary Policy,” European Economic Review, Vol 47 (5), 791-831.
Baxter, M. and M. Crucini, (1993): “Explaining Saving Investment Correlations,”
American Economic Review, vol. 83, no. 1, 416-436.
Benhabib, Jess, Stephanie Schmitt-Grohe, and Martin Uribe (2001a): “The Perils
of Taylor Rules,” Journal of Economic Theory 96, 40-69.
Benhabib, Jess, Stephanie Schmitt-Grohe, and Martin Uribe (2001b): “Monetary
Policy and Multiple Equilibria,” American Economic Review vol. 91, no. 1, 167-186.
Bernanke, Ben S., and Michael Woodford (1997): “Inflation Forecasts and Monetary Policy,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, vol. 24, 653-684:
Blanchard, Olivier and Charles Kahn (1980), “The Solution of Linear Diﬀerence
Models under Rational Expectations”, Econometrica, 48, 1305-1311.
Bullard, James, and Kaushik Mitra (2002): “Learning About Monetary Policy
Rules,” Journal of Monetary Economics, vol. 49, no. 6, 1105-1130.
Campbell, John Y. and N. Gregory Mankiw (1989): “Consumption, Income, and
Interest Rates: Reinterpreting the Time Series Evidence,” in O.J. Blanchard and S.
Fischer (eds.), NBER Macroeconomics Annual 1989, 185-216, MIT Press
Calvo, Guillermo, 1983, “Staggered Prices in a Utility Maximizing Framework,”
Journal of Monetary Economics, 12, 383-398.
Christiano, Lawrence J., and Christopher J. Gust (1999): “A Comment on Robustness of Simple Monetary Policy Rules under Model Uncertainty,” in J.B. Taylor
ed., Monetary Policy Rules, University of Chicago Press.
Clarida, Richard, Jordi Galí, and Mark Gertler (1998): “Monetary Policy Rules

28

in Practice: Some International Evidence”, European Economic Review, 42 (6), June
1998, pp. 1033-1067.
Clarida, Richard, Jordi Galí, and Mark Gertler (1999): “The Science of Monetary
Policy: A New Keynesian Perspective,” Journal of Economic Literature, vol. 37,
1661-1707.
Clarida, Richard, Jordi Galí, and Mark Gertler (2000): “Monetary Policy Rules
and Macroeconomic Stability: Evidence and Some Theory,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, vol. 105, issue 1, 147-180.
Dotsey, Michael (1999): “Structure from Shocks,” Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Working Paper 99-6.
Dupor, Bill (2002): “Interest Rate Policy and Investment with Adjustment Costs,”
manuscript.
Edge, Rochelle M., and Jeremy B. Rudd (2002): “Taxation and the Taylor Principle” Federal Reserve Board, finance and Economics Discussion Series no. 2002-51
Fair, Ray C. (2003): “Estimates of the Eﬀectiveness of Monetary Policy,” Journal
of Money, Credit and Banking, forthcoming.
Galí, Jordi, J. David López-Salido, and Javier Vallés (2003a): “rule-of-thumb
Consumers and the Design of Interest Rate Rules,” Working Paper # 0320, Banco
de España.
Galí, Jordi, J. David López-Salido, and Javier Vallés (2003b): “Technology Shocks
and Monetary Policy: Assessing the Fed’s Performance,” Journal of Monetary Economics, vol. 50, no. 4.
Galí, Jordi, J. David López-Salido, and Javier Vallés (2003c): “Understanding the
Eﬀects of Government Spending on Consumption,” mimeo Banco de España .
Kerr, William, and Robert G. King: “Limits on interest rate rules in the IS model,”
Economic Quarterly, Spring issue, 47-75.

29

Kim, J. (2000), “Constructing and estimating a realistic optimizing model of
monetary policy,” Journal of Monetary Economics, vol. 45, Issue 2 , April 2000,
329-359
King, Robert, and Mark Watson (1996), “Money, Prices, Interest Rates and the
Business Cycle” Review of Economics and Statistics, 78, 35-53
Levin, Andrew, Volker Wieland, John C. Williams (2002): “The Performance of
Forecast-Based Monetary Policy Rules under Model Uncertainty,” American Economic Review, vol. 93, no. 3, 622-645.
Mankiw, N. Gregory (2000): “The Savers-Spenders Theory of Fiscal Policy,”
American Economic Review, vol. 90, no. 2, 120-125.
McCallum, B. (1999): “Issues in the Design of Monetary Policy Rules”, in J.B.
Taylor and M. Woodford eds., Handbook of Macroeconomics, vol. 1c, 1341-1397,
Elsevier, New York.
Orphanides, A. (2001), “Monetary Policy Rules based on Real Time Data,” American Economic Review, vol. 91, no. 4, 964-985
Roisland, Oistein (2003): “Capital Income Taxation, Equilibrium Determinacy,
and the Taylor Principle” Economics Letters 81, 147-153.
Rotemberg, J. and M. Woodford (1999): “Interest Rate Rules in an Estimated
Sticky Price Model,” in J.B. Taylor ed., Monetary Policy Rules, University of Chicago
Press, 57-119.
Shea, John, (1995): “Union Contracts and the Life-Cycle/Permanent-Income Hypothesis, ” American Economic Review vol. 85, 186—200.
Souleles, Nicholas S. (1999): “The Response of Household Consumption to Income
Tax Refund, ” American Economic Review vol. 89, 947—958.
Taylor, John B. (1993): “Discretion versus Policy Rules in Practice,” Carnegie
Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy , December 1993, 39, 195-214.

30

Taylor, John B. (1999a): Monetary Policy Rules, University of Chicago Press and
NBER.
Taylor, John B. (1999b): “An Historical Analysis of Monetary Policy Rules,” in
J.B. Taylor ed., Monetary Policy Rules, University of Chicago Press.
Taylor, John B. (1999c): “Staggered Price and Wage Setting in Macroeconomics,”
in J.B. Taylor and M. Woodford eds., Handbook of Macroeconomics, chapter 15, 13411397, Elsevier, New York.
Woodford, Michael (2001): “The Taylor Rule and Optimal Monetary Policy,”
American Economic Review vol. 91, no. 2, 232-237.
Yun, Tack (1996): “Nominal Price Rigidity, Money Supply Endogeneity, and
Business Cycles,” Journal of M onetary Economics 37, 345-370.
Wolﬀ, Edward (1998): ”Recent trends in the size distribution of Household wealth”,
Journal of Economic Perspectives, 12(3), 131-150

31

Table 1. Baseline Calibration

Parameters

Values

Description of the Parameters

δ

0.025

α

1/3

Elasticity of output with respect to capital

β

0.99

Discount factor

ε

6

Elasticity of substitution among intermediate goods

ϕ

1

Inverse of the (Frisch) labor supply elasticity

σ

1

Relative risk aversion

θ

3/4

η

1

φπ

1.5

Inflation coeﬃcient in interest rate rule

φy

0.5

Output coeﬃcient in interest rate rule

Depreciation rate

Fraction of firms that leave their prices unchanged

Elasticity of investment to Tobin’s Q

32

Figure 1
Rule-of-Thumb Consumers, Price Stickiness and Indeterminacy

indeterminacy
uniqueness
Note: Simulations based on the parameter values of the Table 1 and the baseline Taylor
rule with Φπ=1.5 and Φy=0.5.

Figure 2
Rule-of-Thumb Consumers and
the Threshold Inflation Coefficient

1/φ
π

φy=1.0

1

0.8

φy=0.5

0.6

0.4

φy=0.0

0.2

0

0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

0.7

rule-of-thumb share ( λ)

0.8

0.9

1

Note: Simulations based on the parameter values of the Table 1 and the baseline Taylor
rule. The threshold inflation coefficient is the lowest value of Φπ that gurantees a
unique solution.

Figure 3
Rule-of-Thumb Consumers and
the Threshold Inflation Coefficient
a. The Role of Price stickiness
1/φ
π

b. The Role of Labor Supply Elasticity
1/φ
π

1

0.8

1

0.8

phi=0.5
θ=0.25

0.6

0.6

0.4

phi=1

0.4

θ=0.5
θ=0.75

0.2

0

0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

phi=5

0.2

0.6

0.7

0.8

0.9

0

1

0

0.1

0.2

rule-of-thumb share ( λ)

c. The Role of Capital Adjustment Costs
1/φ
π

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

0.7

rule-of-thumb share ( λ)

0.8

0.9

1

d. The Role of Risk Aversion
1/φ

π

1

1

η=20

0.8

0.8

0.6

σ=1

0.6

σ=2
0.4

0.4

η=0.05

0

0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

σ=5

η=1

0.2

0.6

0.7

rule-of-thumb share ( λ)

0.2

0.8

0.9

1

0

0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

0.7

rule-of-thumb share (λ )

0.8

0.9

1

Note: Simulations based on the parameter values of the Table 1 and the baseline Taylor rule
under ΦY =0. The threshold inflation coefficient is the lowest value of Φπ that guarantees a
unique solution.

Figure 4
Dynamic Responses to a Sunspot Shock
Baseline Taylor Rule (Φπ=1.5, Φy=0.5, λ=0.85)

0.4

inflation

0.2
0
0.4

0

2

4

6

8

0

0

2

4

6

8

0

0

2

4

6

8

2

12

10

12

markup

-1
-2

10

real rate

0.2
0

12

nominal rate

0.2

0.4

10

0

2

4

6

8

10

12

real wage

0
-2

0

2

4

6

8

10

12

1
0

output
-1
1

0

2

4

6

8

0.5
0
1

10

12

hours
0

2

4

6

0

2

4

6

8

10

12

0
-1
0

aggregate consumption

-1
-2
0

8

12

consumption: ricardian households
0

2

4

6

8

10

12

investment

-0.5
-1

10

0

2

4

6

8

10

12

Note: Simulations based on the parameter values of the Table 1 and the baseline Taylor
rule under Φπ=1.5, Φy=0.5, λ=0.85.

Figure 5
Rule-of-Thumb Consumers and Indeterminacy
The Forward Looking Rule Taylor Rule

indeterminacy

uniqueness

Note: Simulations based on the parameter values of the Table 1 and the forward looking
Taylor rule.

Figure 6
Dynamic Responses to a Cost Push Shock
when the Taylor Principle is not Met
Forward Looking Rule

0
-2
-4

0

output
0

2

4

6

8

10

12

hours
-5

0

0

2

4

6

8

10

12

consumption
-5

10

0

2

4

6

8

10

12

consumption: ricardian households
5
0

4

0

2

4

6

8

12

investment

2
0

10

0

2

4

6

8

10

12

2
1
0
0.4

inflation
0

2

4

6

8

0.2
0
0

20

0

2

4

6

8

0

0

2

4

6

8

12

10

12

markup

0

2

4

6

8

-5
-10

10

real rate

10

0

12

nominal rate

-0.5
-1

10

10

12

real wage
0

2

4

6

8

10

12

horizon

Note: Simulations based on parameter values of Table 1, under λ = 0.85 and a
forward looking Taylor rule with Φy = 0 and Φπ =0.2

