                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          TRANSPARENCY OF INFORMATION AND
                             COORDINATION IN ECONOMIES
                         WITH INVESTMENT COMPLEMENTARITIES

                                      George-Marios Angeletos
                                         Alessandro Pavan

                                         Working Paper 10391
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w10391


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      March 2004




This paper was prepared for the annual meeting of the American Economic Association and will appear in
American Economic Review 94:1 (Papers and Proceedings). We are grateful to Narayana Kocherlakota for
the invitation. For useful comments, we thank Daron Acemoglu, Ricardo Caballero, Christian Hellwig, Bengt
Holmstrom and Ivan Werning. The views expressed herein are those of the author and not necessarily those
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2004 by George-Marios Angeletos and Alessandro Pavan. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Transparency of Information and Coordination in Economies with Investment
George-Marios Angeletos and Alessandro Pavan
NBER Working Paper No. 10391
March 2004
JEL No. D6, D8, E6
                                       ABSTRACT



How do public and private information affect equilibrium allocations and social welfare in

economies with investment complementarities? And what is the optimal transparency in the

information conveyed, for example, by economic statistics, policy announcements, or news in the

media? We first consider an environment where the complementarities are weak so that the

equilibrium is unique no matter the structure of information. An increase in the precision of public

information may have the perverse effect of increasing aggregate volatility. Nevertheless, as long

as there is no value to lotteries, welfare unambiguously increases with an increase in either the

relative or the absolute precision of public information. Hence, full transparency is optimal. This is

because more transparency facilitates more effective coordination, which is valuable from a social

perspective. On the other hand, when complementarities are strong enough that multiple equilibria

are possible, more transparency permits the market to coordinate more effectively on either the bad

or the good equilibrium. In this case, constructive ambiguity becomes optimal if there is a high risk

that more transparency will lead to coordination failures.

George-Marios Angeletos
Department of Economics
MIT
50 Memorial Drive, E51-251
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
angelet@mit.edu

Alessandro Pavan
alepavan@northwestern.edu
                                 G.M. Angeletos and A. Pavan                                          2

1    Introduction

Economies with production externalities, demand spillovers, incomplete financial markets, and Key-
nesian frictions are only a few examples where macroeconomic complementarities play a prominent
role. Within this class of economies, how does the precision of publicly provided and privately
collected information aﬀect equilibrium allocations and social welfare? And what is the optimal
transparency in the information conveyed, for example, by economic statistics, policy announce-
ments, or news in the media? To answer these questions, we consider a simple real economy where
the individual return to investment is increasing in the aggregate level of investment and where
market participants have heterogenous expectations about the underlying economic fundamentals
(the exogenous productivity). We interpret an increase in the transparency of public information
either as a reduction in the level of common uncertainty for given level of idiosyncratic uncertainty
(that is, an increase in the absolute precision of public information), or as a reduction in the het-
erogeneity of expectations across market participants for given level of overall uncertainty (that is,
an increase in the relative precision of public information).
    We first consider an environment where complementarities are weak so that the equilibrium is
unique no matter the structure of information. Like in Morris and Shin (2002), complementarities
increase the sensitivity of equilibrium allocations with respect to public information, which increases
the volatility generated by common noise in market expectations. Moreover, when information is
heterogeneous, an increase in the precision of public information may have the perverse eﬀect of
increasing aggregate volatility, by increasing the sensitivity of economic activity to common noise.
On the contrary, an increase in the precision of private information necessarily reduces aggregate
volatility. Nevertheless, we show that, as long as there is no value to lotteries, welfare unambiguously
increases with an increase in either the relative or the absolute precision of public information.
Hence, policies that either disseminate more precise information about economic fundamentals,
or reduce the heterogeneous interpretation of economic statistics and policy measures, necessarily
boost welfare. On the contrary, an increase in the precision of private information may reduce
welfare by increasing the heterogeneity of expectations and thereby obstructing coordination in the
market, in which case policies that discourage the private collection of private information may
increase welfare.
    Morris and Shin (2002) have recently argued that, in environments with strategic complemen-
tarities and heterogeneous information, more precise public information can reduce social welfare,
whereas more precise private information is always beneficial. We find rather the opposite. The
                                     G.M. Angeletos and A. Pavan                                                  3


diﬀerence in the results is due to an important distinction between the environments in the two
models. Morris and Shin (2002) consider a kind of “beauty contest,” where the payoﬀ of a player
decreases with the distance between his own action and the action of others, but where this dis-
tance is irrelevant from a social perspective. It follows that the complementarity is present only
at the private level and hence the attempt of the agents to align their actions is socially wasteful.
In this case, more transparent public information facilitates more eﬀective coordination, which is
valued by the market but not by the society. In contrast, we consider environments where the
complementarity is present at the social level so that eﬀective market coordination is socially valu-
able, as it is likely to be the case in economies with production and demand spillovers, network
externalities, or incomplete financial markets. As shown in Angeletos and Pavan (2003), market
participants use public information to align their investment choices, but not enough as compared
to what is socially optimal, for they do not internalize the positive externality of their investment
on the return to others. As a consequence, more transparent public information, by permitting
more eﬀective coordination in the market, necessarily increases welfare, despite the fact that it may
lead to higher volatility.1
       In the light of these results, we finally consider the possibility that complementarities are strong
enough that multiple equilibria emerge for certain structures of information, in which case more
eﬀective coordination in the market need not always be socially beneficial. Indeed, there is a criti-
cal threshold for the transparency of public information above which multiple equilibrium levels of
investment are possible. Above this threshold, the desirability of more eﬀective market coordina-
tion and thus the welfare eﬀect of more transparent public information depend critically on which
equilibrium is selected. If the market coordinates on the socially desirable equilibrium, facilitating
coordination is beneficial, and welfare tends to be maximized at high levels of transparency. If in-
stead the market coordinates on the undesirable equilibrium, impeding coordination by introducing
noise in public information can be welfare enhancing.
       This final result is related to Angeletos, Hellwig and Pavan (2003). They show that, in coor-
dination environments where a privately-informed policy maker is interested in fashioning market
outcomes, active policy intervention may lead to policy traps, where the optimal policy and market
outcomes are dictated largely by arbitrary self-fulfilling market expectations. In the present paper,
   1
       In independent parallel work, Hellwig (2003) and Lorenzoni (2003), building on Woodford (2002), examine
monetary economies in which complementarities arise in pricing decisions. They also find that the Morris-Shin result
about the social value of public information can be reversed. However, they do not show how the welfare eﬀects of
public information depend on whether market coordination is socially desirable.
                                            G.M. Angeletos and A. Pavan                                            4


we do not consider active policy intervention. Nevertheless, a similar trap emerges regarding the
information disseminated by government agencies and central bankers: The optimal transparency
depends on the aggressiveness or leniency of market expectations.
        We conclude that, in the class of environments considered in this paper,2 noise in public
information may be socially desirable only when there is a high risk that more transparency will
introduce coordination failures. Otherwise, the timely and frequent provision of public information
seems warranted from a social perspective, even if that may lead to an increase in volatility.


2        Weak Complementarities

Preferences and Technologies. The economy is populated by a continuum of measure one of agents,
indexed by i and uniformly distributed over the [0, 1] interval. Agents are risk neutral with utility

                                                            ui = Aki − 12 ki2 .                                  (1)

We interpret ki ∈ R as individual investment (or eﬀort), A as the return to investment, and ki2 /2
                                      R1
as the cost of investment. We let K = 0 ki di denote the aggregate level of investment.
        Like in Bryant (1983), Cooper and John (1988), Acemoglu (1993), Benhabib and Farmer (1994),
and others, we introduce a complementarity by assuming that the individual return to investment
is increasing in the aggregate level of investment:

                                                          A = (1 − α)θ + αK.                                     (2)

The random variable θ parametrizes the exogenous return to investment (the underlying funda-
mentals of the economy) and the coeﬃcient α ≥ 0 captures the degree of complementarity.
                                                                    R1
   Finally, social welfare is given by a utilitarian aggregator, w = 0 ui di. Using (1) and (2), we
have that                                       Z   1
                          w = AK −          1
                                            2           ki2 di = (1 − α)θK − (1 − 2α) 12 K 2 − 12 var,
                                                0
                  R1
where var =         0   (ki   − K)2 di   measures the cross-sectional heterogeneity in investment. Note that w
is concave in K for α < 1/2, whereas it is convex for α > 1/2. In the latter case, lotteries would be
welfare increasing and volatility in K would be desirable. Since we are interested in the canonical
    2
        Canzoneri (1985), Cukierman and Meltzer (1986), Atkeson and Kehoe (2001), Stokey (2002) and others consider
how the transparency of policy instruments relates to the ability of the market to detect policy deviations in Barro-
Gordon environments where the government lacks commitment. Our approach is clearly orthogonal to that line of
research.
                                      G.M. Angeletos and A. Pavan                                                   5


case where welfare is decreasing in both volatility and heterogeneity, we restrict α ∈ [0, 1/2). This
also suﬃces for the equilibrium to be unique.3
       Information and Transparency. The fundamentals θ ∈ R are not known at the time investment
decisions are made. Furthermore, agents have heterogenous beliefs about θ. For simplicity, we let
the common prior about θ be uniform over R. We summarize the public information by a suﬃcient
statistic z such that z = θ + σz ε, where ε is standard normal, independent of θ and common
across agents. Similarly, the private information of agent i is summarized by a suﬃcient statistic
xi = θ + σx ξ i , where ξ i is standard normal, independent of θ and i.i.d. across agents. σz and σx
parametrize the precision of public and private information, respectively.
       Letting δ ≡ σ−2    −2    −2             −2    −2 −1/2 , the posterior belief of agent i about θ
                    z /(σ x + σ z ) and σ ≡ (σ x + σ z )
is normal with mean Ei [θ] ≡ E[θ|xi , z] = (1 − δ)xi + δz and variance V ari [θ] ≡ V ar[θ|xi , z] = σ2 .
Literally interpreted, the dependence of Ei [θ] on xi is the result of the observation of private signals
about θ. More generally, however, xi introduces idiosyncratic variation in market expectations about
the fundamentals and may thus be read also as heterogeneity in the filtering and interpretation
of commonly available information. In this sense, δ measures the level of conformity in market
expectations, whereas σ the quality of available information.
       In the following, we interpret an increase in the transparency of public information either as a
reduction in σz for given σx (that is, an increase in the absolute precision of public information),
or an increase in δ for given σ (an increase in the relative precision of public information4 ). What
we have in mind is that the transparency of public announcements, policy measures, and news
in the media may aﬀect either the noise in publicly available information, or the extent to which
such information is interpreted diﬀerently across market participants. As it will become clear, our
results are not very sensitive to which of the two interpretations we adopt.


2.1       Equilibrium

Each agent chooses ki so as to maximize Ei [ui ] . It follows that the optimal investment is given by

                                    ki = Ei [A] = (1 − α)Ei [θ] + αEi [K].                                        (3)

Individual investment is thus increasing in the expected level of the fundamentals and in the
expected level of aggregate investment.
   3
       The equilibrium is unique if and only if α < 1. The case α ∈ [1/2, 1) is considered in Angeletos and Pavan
(2003). In that case, introducing noise in public information can be desirable to the extent that this substitutes for
the absence of socially valuable lotteries.
   4
     Note that δ is an increasing transformation of the relative precision of public information.
                                        G.M. Angeletos and A. Pavan                                                  6


       Given the linearity of (3) and the normality of posterior beliefs about θ, equilibrium investment
decisions are linear so that ki = βxi + γz, where β and γ are constants determined in equilibrium.
Then, K = βθ + γz and thus

                              ki = Ei [A] = (1 − α + αβ) [(1 − δ)xi + δz] + αγz.

It follows that β = (1 − α)(1 − δ)/[1 − α(1 − δ)] and γ = δ/[1 − α(1 − δ)]. Clearly, this is the unique
symmetric linear (rational expectations) equilibrium. Furthermore, as proved in Morris and Shin
(2002), when best responses are linear in Ei [θ] and Ei [K], there do not exist equilibria other than
this one.5 Hence,

Proposition 1 The equilibrium exists, is unique, and is given by ki = βxi + γz, where
                                                                                   αδ(1 − δ)
                           β = 1 − δ − ρ,        γ = δ + ρ,      and     ρ=                    .                   (4)
                                                                                 1 − α (1 − δ)
       Note that β = 1 − δ and γ = δ for α = 0. The term ρ thus measures the excess sensitivity
of equilibrium allocations to public information as compared to the case where there are no com-
plementarities. Moreover, ρ is increasing in α. Stronger complementarities thus lead to a higher
sensitivity of investment to public information. This is a direct implication of the fact that, in
equilibrium, the public signal is a relatively better predictor of aggregate behavior than the private
signal.
       The equilibrium levels of volatility and heterogeneity are V ar(K|θ) = (γσz )2 and V ar(ki |θ, z) =
(βσx )2 , respectively, where β and γ are given by (4). It follows that

Proposition 2 (i) Volatility necessarily increases with an increase in δ for given σ, and increases
                                                                      1
with a reduction in σz for given σx if and only if σ2z >                   2
                                                                     1−α σ x .   (ii) Heterogeneity falls with either
an increase in δ or a reduction in σz .

       This result may suggest that transparency can be socially undesirable when it increases volatil-
ity. However, we will see that welfare necessarily increases with an increase in either the relative
or the absolute precision of public information.


2.2       Welfare

We now consider social welfare evaluated at equilibrium. This is given by w(θ) = 12 θ2 − 12 Ω, where

                    Ω = (βσ x )2 + (1 − 2α)(γσz )2 = V ar(ki |θ, z) + (1 − 2α)V ar(K|θ).
   5
       Note that, although the two models are diﬀerent, the structure of the best responses is identical and so are the
equilibrium strategies.
                                    G.M. Angeletos and A. Pavan                                      7


Ω measures the welfare consequences of heterogeneity in individual investment and volatility in
aggregate investment. Since α < 1/2, welfare decreases with both heterogeneity and volatility.
Furthermore, the relative weight on heterogeneity is increasing in α. This reflects the social value of
coordination: The stronger the complementarity, the more important the alignment in individual
investment decisions.
                                      √                 √
    Using (4) and substituting σx = σ/ 1 − δ and σz = σ/ δ, we get
                                              (1 − 2α) + α2 (1 − δ) 2
                                       Ω=                          σ .
                                                 [1 − α(1 − δ)]2
It follows that α ∈ [0, 1/2) suﬃces for Ω > 0 and therefore

Proposition 3 Welfare necessarily increases with either an increase in δ or a reduction in σ.

    That welfare decreases with σ for given δ follows directly from the fact that an increase in σ
means an increase in both volatility and heterogeneity. On the other hand, as shown in Propo-
sition 2, an increase in δ implies lower heterogeneity at the expense of higher volatility. To un-
derstand why the eﬀect of lower heterogeneity dominates, note that social welfare under a util-
itarian objective coincides with the expected utility of an agent. Suppose for a moment that
there were no complementarity (α = 0), in which case β = 1 − δ and γ = δ. It follows that
Ω = (βσx )2 + (γσz )2 = (1 − δ)σ2 + δσ 2 = σ 2 , so that the expected utility of an agent depends
only on σ and not on δ. This result should be expected: An increase in δ given σ substitutes a
higher precision in public information for a lower precision in private information, without altering
the overall precision of information. When α = 0, individual choices are not interdependent and
the decomposition of information between private and public is irrelevant. When instead α > 0,
public information becomes more important than private information in predicting the return to
investment, so that a substitution from private to public information raises the expected utility of
an agent. In other words, an increase in δ raises welfare because it permits the agents to second
guess each others’ actions better and therefore facilitates more coordination in the market.
    We next consider the comparative statics of w with respect to σx and σz , which combine the
eﬀects of δ and σ. To this aim, we first rewrite Ω as
                                           £                           ¤
                                    σ2x σ2z (1 − 2α)σ2x + (1 − α)2 σ2z
                               Ω=                                        .
                                             [σ2x + (1 − α)σ2z ]2
It follows that

Proposition 4 (i) A reduction in σ z necessarily increases welfare. (ii) A reduction in σx decreases
                             1               (1−α)2 2
welfare if and only if α >   3   and σ2x >    3α−1 σ z .
                                       G.M. Angeletos and A. Pavan                                   8


      Hence, more precise public information necessarily increases welfare. This is because a reduc-
tion in σz for given σ x implies both better coordination (higher δ) and lower uncertainty (lower
σ). On the contrary, more precise private information has an ambiguous eﬀect on welfare. This is
because a reduction in σx for given σ z means lower uncertainty (lower σ) at the expense of lower
coordination (lower δ). If the complementarity is suﬃciently weak, so that there is little value to
coordination, or if the relative precision of public information is suﬃciently low, so that volatil-
ity is low relative to heterogeneity, the benefit of lower uncertainty outweighs the cost of lower
coordination. Otherwise, a reduction in σ x reduces welfare.
      One can interpret σx as the amount of information collected privately by market participants.
Given the precision of the information and the strategies of the other agents, an individual decision
maker always values more precise information. Hence, a lower σx is always beneficial from a
private perspective. On the other hand, an agent may prefer other agents to have less precise
private information, since this would permit him to predict more accurately the aggregate level of
investment. In other words, the private collection of information may create a negative externality,
implying that a lower σx need not be beneficial from a social viewpoint. We can thus have a
market failure in the amount of private information collected by individual agents, in which case
government intervention that discourages the collection of private information may actually increase
welfare.
      Finally, our result that more transparency in public information increases welfare even though it
may also increase volatility, contrasts with the result of Morris and Shin (2002). As we anticipated
in the introduction, the diﬀerence is due to the social value of coordination. In our model, the
complementarity is equally present at the private and the social level.6 In Morris and Shin (2002),
instead, there is an additional externality that perfectly oﬀsets the complementarity at the social
level. To see this, let L = (θ − A)K and suppose individual payoﬀs is ui = Aki − 12 ki2 + L, in which
                              R       R
case welfare reduces to w = ui di = (θki − 12 ki2 )di. This is the analogue of Morris and Shin (2002)
in our setting. L is the externality that renders the social (gross) return to investment independent
of K, thus removing the complementarity at the social level. It follows that the coordination
motive is not warranted from a social perspective, in which case stronger complementarity or
more transparent public information may decrease welfare by exacerbating this motive. If instead
coordination is socially valuable, as it is probably the case in economies with production or demand
spillovers, network externalities, or incomplete financial markets, then more transparency is most
likely to boost welfare.
  6
      See also Angeletos and Pavan (2003) for further discussion.
                                   G.M. Angeletos and A. Pavan                                             9


3     Strong Complementarities

In this section, we consider environments in which the complementarity is suﬃciently strong to
induce multiple equilibria for some information structures. To capture this possibility, we now let

                                            A = θ + 1[K ≥ r],

where 1[K ≥ r] equals one if K ≥ r and zero otherwise. r ∈ (0, 1) represents the critical size of
aggregate investment necessary for the complementarity to pay oﬀ; without serious loss of generality,
we let r = 1/2. For tractability, we also let the cost of investment be linear, so that

                                              ui = Aki − ki ,

and constrain ki ∈ [0, 1].
      Let θ ≡ 0 and θ ≡ 1. If θ ∈ [θ, θ] were common knowledge, both ki = 1 and ki = 0 for all i
would be an equilibrium; the former coincides with the first best, whereas the latter represents a
coordination failure. With heterogeneous information, the possibility of multiple equilibria depends
on the transparency of public information, as we show next.


3.1     Equilibrium

An agent finds it optimal to invest ki = 1 if Ei [A] ≥ 1, and ki = 0 otherwise. We restrict
attention to equilibria with monotonic strategies, in which case for every z there exists x∗ (z)
such that ki = 1 if xi > x∗ (z) and ki = 0 otherwise. Aggregate investment is then given by
K(θ, z) = Φ ([θ − x∗ (z)]/σ x ) and is thus increasing in θ. This implies that K ≥ r (= 1/2) if and
only if θ ≥ θ∗ (z), where θ∗ (z) = x∗ (z), and therefore E [A|xi , z] = E [θ|xi , z] + Pr(θ ≥ θ∗ |xi , z), or
equivalently                                               µ                       ¶
                                                        (1 − δ)xi + δz − θ∗
                      E [A|xi , z] = (1 − δ)xi + δz + Φ                                .
                                                                 σ
It follows that ki = 1 if x ≥ x∗ , and ki = 0 otherwise, where x∗ solves E [A|x∗ , z] = 1. Combining
this with θ∗ = x∗ , we conclude that the equilibrium threshold x∗ must solve

                    F (x∗ ; z, δ, σ) ≡ δ(z − x∗ ) − σΦ−1 [1 − (1 − δ)x∗ − δz] = 0.                       (5)
                                                                             √           √
    It is easy to check that the above always admits a solution. Let b δ ≡ 2πσ/(1 + 2πσ)
                                                  √        p
and let σbz be the unique positive solution to σ2z 2π = σ2x σ−2    −2         b
                                                             x + σ z . If δ < δ, or equivalently

σz > σbz , then F is monotonic in x for all z, and thus the equilibrium threshold x∗ is unique.
F is instead non-monotonic whenever δ > b                            bz . In this case, let z, z =
                                            δ, or equivalently σ z < σ
                                   G.M. Angeletos and A. Pavan                                            10

     ©                           ª
1/2 ± m − Φ−1 (m)σ(1 − δ)/δ − 1/2 , where m > 1/2 solves φ(Φ−1 (m)) = σ(1 − δ)/δ, and note
                                / (z, z), (5) has a unique solution x∗ . But for z ∈ (z, z), (5) admits
that 0 < z < 1/2 < z < 1. For z ∈
three solutions, x∗low < x∗medium < x∗high . The two extreme solutions represent stable equilibria; the
intermediate represents an unstable equilibrium, which we disregard. We conclude:

Proposition 5 (i) If δ < b                     bz ), or z ∈
                         δ (equivalently, σz > σ          / (z, z), there exists a unique threshold
equilibrium: ki = 1 if and only if xi ≥ x∗ (z), where x∗ (z) is the unique solution to F (x∗ ; z, δ, σ) = 0.
(ii) If instead δ > b
                    δ (equivalently, σz < σbz ) and z ∈ (z, z), there exist exactly two stable threshold
equilibria: In the first, ki = 1 if and only if xi ≥ x∗low (z); in the second, ki = 1 if and only if
xi ≥ x∗high (z), where x∗low (z) and x∗high (z) are the lowest and highest solutions to F (x∗ ; z, δ, σ) = 0.

       A high level of transparency (high δ or low σz ) may thus lead to multiple equilibria. When
this is the case, the second equilibrium (x∗high ) is characterized by less aggregate investment than
the first (x∗low ).


3.2      Welfare

The probability a coordination failure is possible depends on the transparency of information.
Indeed,                                             µ       ¶       µ       ¶
                                                   z−θ             z−θ
                              Pr[z ∈ (z, z)|θ] = Φ              −Φ
                                                    σz              σz
increases with z, decreases with z, and decreases with σz for θ ∈ (z, z). Moreover, dz/dδ < 0 <
dz/dδ. Hence,

Proposition 6 If δ > b                     bz ) and θ ∈ (z, z), the probability of multiple equi-
                     δ (equivalently, σz < σ
librium levels of investment increases with either a higher δ for given σ, or a lower σz for given
σx .

       An increase in the level of transparency may thus decrease welfare by increasing the proba-
bility that the “bad” equilibrium is played. Unfortunately, it is impossible to characterize welfare
analytically. We thus resort to numerical simulations.
       The eﬀect of σz on w(θ) is illustrated in Figure 1 for various values for θ. The solid lines
represent welfare along the high-investment equilibrium, whereas the dashed lines represent welfare
along the low-investment equilibrium. In general, the welfare eﬀects of transparency are neither
monotonic nor homogeneous across θ. However, the eﬀects tend to be small for suﬃciently low or
suﬃciently high values of θ. We thus choose to concentrate on intermediate fundamentals.
                                G.M. Angeletos and A. Pavan                                      11


    Since σz = 0 restores common knowledge for any given σx > 0, and since the “good” equilibrium
under common knowledge coincides with the first best, it is trivial that welfare is maximized at
σz = 0. Therefore, provided that there is little risk of a coordination failure, full transparency
is desirable. If instead the “bad” equilibrium is played whenever multiple equilibria are possible,
                                                        bz , in which case welfare is maximized at
welfare tends to decrease with a reduction in σz beyond σ
an intermediate level of transparency.
    The patterns revealed by the examples of Figure 1 appear to be robust across a large number
of simulations. Also, simulations of the welfare eﬀect of δ give similar results and are omitted due
to space limitations. We thus conclude

Proposition 7 If the socially preferable equilibrium is selected with high probability whenever mul-
tiple equilibria are possible, welfare is robustly maximal at δ = 1 for given σ, and necessarily
maximal at σz = 0 for given σx . If instead the worse equilibrium is selected with high probability,
welfare is robustly maximized at δ ≤ b          bz .
                                     δ, or σz ≥ σ


4    Concluding Remarks

This paper examined the welfare eﬀects of public and private information in an economy with
investment complementarities. If the complementarity is weak so that multiple equilibria are never
possible, more transparency in public information increases welfare, despite the fact that it also
increases volatility. This is because more transparency facilitates more eﬀective coordination in
the market, which is socially valuable given that the complementarity is present at the aggregate
level. On the other hand, if the complementarity is strong so that multiple equilibria are possible
for high levels of transparency, more precise public information facilitates more eﬀective market
coordination on either equilibrium. In that case, “constructive ambiguity” becomes optimal when
there is a high risk that the undesirable equilibrium is selected.
    In Angeletos and Pavan (2003), we examine in more detail the properties of equilibrium and
optimal allocations for economies with investment complementarities. We expect our insights to
turn useful also in the analysis of other settings in which aggregate complementarities play an im-
portant role, such as economies with incomplete financial markets, Keynesian frictions, or network
externalities.
                               G.M. Angeletos and A. Pavan                                     12


References

 [1] Acemoglu, Daron (1993), “Learning About Others’ Actions and the Investment Accelerator,”
    Economic Journal 103, 318-328.

 [2] Angeletos, George-Marios, Christian Hellwig, and Alessandro Pavan (2003), “Coordination
    and Policy Traps,” MIT/UCLA/Northwestern mimeo.

 [3] Angeletos, George-Marios, and Alessandro Pavan (2003), “The Value of Information and Co-
    ordination in Economies with Investment Complementarities,” MIT/Northwestern mimeo.

 [4] Atkeson, Andrew, and Patrick Kehoe (2001), “The Advantage of Transparent Instruments of
    Monetary Policy,” NBER working paper.

 [5] Benhabib, Jess, and Roger Farmer (1994), “Indeterminacy and Increasing Returns,” Journal
    of Economic Theory 63, 19-41.

 [6] Bryant, John (1983), “A Simple Rational Expectations Keynes-Type Model,” Quarterly Jour-
    nal of Economics 98, 3, 525-28.

 [7] Canzoneri, Matthew (1985), “Monetary Policy Games and the Role of Private Information,”
    American Economic Review 75, 1056-70.

 [8] Cooper, Russell, and Andrew John (1988), “Coordinating Coordination Failures in Keynesian
    Models,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 103, 441—463.

 [9] Cukierman, Alex, and Allan Meltzer (1986), “A Theory of Ambiguity, Credibility, and Inflation
    under Discretion and Asymmetric Information,” Econometrica 54, 1099-128.

[10] Hellwig, Christian (2003), “On the Aggregate Eﬀects of Information Heterogeneity,” UCLA
    mimeo.

[11] Lorenzoni, Guido (2003), “Imperfect Information and Aggregate Demand,” Princeton Univer-
    sity mimeo.

[12] Morris, Stephen, and Hyun Song Shin (2002), “The Social Value of Public Information”,
    American Economic Review 92, 1521-1534.

[13] Stokey, Nancy (2002), “Rules versus Discretion After Twenty-Five Years,” NBER Macroeco-
    nomics Annual 17, 9-45.
                             G.M. Angeletos and A. Pavan                               13


[14] Woodford, Michael (2003), “Imperfect Common Knowledge and the Eﬀects of Monetary Pol-
    icy,” in Knowledge, Information and Expectations in Modern Macroeconomics: in Honor of
    Edmund S. Phelps (P. Aghion, R. Frydman, J. Stiglitz, and M. Woodford, eds.).
                  8θ =    0.5<
                     → -−0.5
   0

-0.1

-0.2

-0.3

-0.4

   0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8        1     1.2 1.4 1.6σz

                  8θ = 0.25<
                     → 0.25
   0

-0.1

-0.2

-0.3

-0.4

   0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8        1     1.2 1.4 1.6σz

                  8θ = 0.75<
                     → 0.75
   0

-0.1

-0.2

-0.3

-0.4

   0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8        1     1.2 1.4 1.6σz

                   8θ =→ 1.5
                         1.5<
   0

-0.1

-0.2

-0.3

-0.4

   0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8        1     1.2 1.4 1.6σz


                 Figure 1
        The effect of σz on welfare.
