                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                TOP WEALTH SHARES IN THE UNITED STATES, 1916-2000:
                      EVIDENCE FROM ESTATE TAX RETURNS

                                           Wojciech Kopczuk
                                            Emmanuel Saez

                                         Working Paper 10399
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w10399


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      March 2004




We are extremely grateful to Barry Johnson for facilitating our use of the micro estate tax returns data and
for his enormous help and patience explaining it. We thank Ed Wolff for providing us with additional and
unpublished data from Wolff (1989). We thank two anonymous referees, Tony Atkinson, Alan Auerbach,
David Joulfaian, Arthur Kennickell, Thomas Piketty, Karl Scholz, James Poterba, Joel Slemrod, Scott
Weisbenner, and numerous seminar participants for very helpful comments and discussions. Jeff Leibman
and Jeff Brown kindly shared their socioeconomic mortality differential measures. Financial support from
NSF Grant SES-0134946 and from the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council of Canada is
gratefully acknowledged. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of
the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2004 by Wojciech Kopczuk and Emmanuel Saez. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.
Top Wealth Shares in the United States, 1916-2000: Evidence from Estate Tax Returns
Wojciech Kopczuk and Emmanuel Saez
NBER Working Paper No. 10399
March 2004
JEL No. H2, N3
                                         ABSTRACT


This paper presents new homogeneous series on top wealth shares from 1916 to 2000 in the United

States using estate tax return data. Top wealth shares were very high at the beginning of the period

but have been hit sharply by the Great Depression, the New Deal, and World War II shocks. Those

shocks have had permanent effects. Following a decline in the 1970s, top wealth shares recovered

in the early 1980s, but they are still much lower in 2000 than in the early decades of the century.

Most of the changes we document are concentrated among the very top wealth holders with much

smaller movements for groups below the top 0.1%. Consistent with the Survey of Consumer

Finances results, top wealth shares estimated from Estate Tax Returns display no significant increase

since 1995. Evidence from the Forbes 400 richest Americans suggests that only the super-rich have

experienced significant gains relative to the average over the last decade. Our results are consistent

with the decreased importance of capital income at the top of the income distribution documented

by Piketty and Saez (2003) and suggest that the rentier class of the early century is not yet

reconstituted. The most plausible explanations for the facts are perhaps the development of

progressive income and estate taxation which has dramatically impaired the ability of large wealth

holders to maintain their fortunes, and the democratization of stock ownership which now spreads

stock market gains and losses much more widely than in the past.

Wojciech Kopczuk                                      Emmanuel Saez
Columbia University                                   University of California
420 West 118th Street, Rm. 1022 IAB                   549 Evans Hall #3880
MC 3323                                               Berkeley, CA 94720
New York, NY 10027                                    and NBER
and NBER                                              saez@econ.berkeley.edu
wkopczuk@nber.org
1        Introduction

The pattern of wealth and income inequality during the process of development of modern
economies has attracted enormous attention since Kuznets (1955) formulated his famous in-
verted U-curve hypothesis. Wealth tends to be much more concentrated than income because
of life cycle savings and because it can be transmitted from generation to generation. Liberals
have blamed wealth concentration because of concerns for equity and in particular for tilting
the political process in the favor of the wealthy. They have proposed progressive taxation as
an appropriate counter-force against wealth concentration.1 For conservatives, concentration of
wealth is considered as a natural and necessary outcome of an environment that provides incen-
tives for entrepreneurship and wealth accumulation, key elements of macro-economic success.
Redistribution through progressive taxation might weaken those incentives and generate large
efficiency costs. Therefore, it is of great importance to understand the forces driving wealth
concentration over time and whether government interventions through taxation or other regu-
lations are effective and/or harmful to curb wealth inequality. This task is greatly facilitated by
the availability of long and homogeneous series of income or wealth concentration. Such series
are in general difficult to construct because of lack of good data. In this paper, we use the ex-
traordinary micro dataset of estate tax returns that has been recently compiled by the Statistics
of Income Division of the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) in order to construct homogeneous
series of wealth shares accruing to the upper groups of the wealth distribution since 1916, the
beginning of the modern federal estate tax in the United States.
        The IRS dataset includes detailed micro-information for all federal estate tax returns filed
during the 1916-1945 period.2 We supplement these data with both published tabulations and
other IRS micro-data of estate tax returns from selected years of the second half of the century.
We use the estate multiplier technique, which amounts to weighting each estate tax return by the
inverse probability of death, to estimate the wealth distribution of the living adult population
from estate data. First, we have constructed almost annual series of shares of total wealth
    1
        In the early 1930s, President Roosevelt justified the implementation of drastic increases in the burden and
progressivity of federal income and estate taxation in large part on those grounds.
   2
     The estate tax return data was compiled electronically and hence saved for research purposes thanks to Fritz
Scheuren, former director of the Statistics of Income division at the IRS.



                                                          1
accruing to various sub-groups within the 2% of the wealth distribution.3 Although small in
size, these top groups hold a substantial fraction of total net worth in the economy. Second,
for each of these groups, we decompose wealth into various sources such as real estate, fixed
claims assets (bonds, cash, mortgages, etc.), corporate stock, and debts. We also display the
composition by gender, age, and marital characteristics. This exercise follows in the tradition
of Lampman (1962), who produced top wealth share estimates for a few years between 1922
and 1956. Lampman, however, did not analyze groups smaller than the top .5% and this is
an important difference because our analysis shows that, even within the top percentile, there
is dramatic heterogeneity in the shares of wealth patterns. Most importantly, nobody has
attempted to estimate, as we do here, homogeneous series covering the entire century.4
       Our series show that there has been a sharp reduction in wealth concentration over the 20th
century: the top 1% wealth share was close to 40% in the early decades of the century but has
fluctuated between 20 and 25% over the last three decades. This dramatic decline took place at
a very specific time period, from the onset of Great Depression to the end of World War II, and
was concentrated in the very top groups within the top percentile, namely groups within the
top 0.1%. Changes in the top percentile below the top 0.1% have been much more modest. It is
fairly easy to understand why the shocks of the Great Depression, the New Deal policies which
increased dramatically the burden of estate and income taxation for the wealthy, and World
War II, could have had such a dramatic impact on wealth concentration. However, top wealth
shares did not recover in the following decades, a period of rapid growth and great economic
prosperity. In the early 1980s, top wealth shares have increased, and this increase has also been
very concentrated. However, this increase is small relative to the losses from the first part of
the twentieth century and the top wealth shares increased only to the levels prevailing prior to
the recessions of the 1970s. Furthermore, this increase took place in the early 1980s and top
shares were stable during the 1990s. This evidence is consistent with the dramatic decline in top
   3
       For the period 1916-1945, because of very high estate tax exemption levels, the largest group we can consider
is the top 1%.
    4
      Smith (1984) provides estimates for some years between 1958 and 1976 but his series are not fully consistent
with Lampman (1962). Wolff (1994) has patched series from those authors and non-estate data sources to produce
long-term series. We explain in detail in Section 5.3 why such a patching methodology can produce misleading
results.



                                                          2
capital incomes documented in Piketty and Saez (2003) using income tax return data. As they
do, we tentatively suggest (but do not prove) that steep progressive income and estate taxation,
by reducing the rate of wealth accumulation of the rich, may have been the most important
factor preventing large fortunes to be reconstituted after the shocks of the 1929-1945 period.
       Perhaps surprisingly, our top wealth shares series do not increase during the 1990s, a time of
the Internet revolution and the creation of dot-com fortunes, extra-ordinary stock price growth,
and of great increase in income concentration (Piketty and Saez, 2003). Our results are never-
theless consistent with findings from the Survey of Consumer Finances (Kennickell, 2003; Scholz,
2003) which also indicate hardly any growth in wealth concentration since 1995. This absence of
growth in top wealth shares in the 1990s is not necessarily inconsistent with the income shares
results from Piketty and Saez (2003) because the dramatic growth in top income shares since
the 1980s has been primarily due to a surge in top labor incomes, with little growth of top
capital incomes. This may suggest that the new high income earners have not had time yet to
accumulate substantial fortunes, either because the pay surge at the top is too recent a phe-
nomenon, or because their savings rates are very low. We show that, as a possible consequence
of democratization of stock ownership in America, the top 1% individuals do not hold today a
significantly larger fraction of their wealth in the form of stocks than the average person in the
U.S. economy, explaining in part why the bull stock market of the late 1990s has not benefited
disproportionately the rich.5
       Although there is substantial circumstantial evidence that we find persuasive, we cannot
prove that progressive taxation and stock market democratization had the decisive role we
attribute to them. In our view, the primary contribution of this paper is to provide new and
homogeneous series on wealth concentration using the very rich estate tax statistics. We are
aware that the assumptions needed to obtain unbiased estimates using the estate multiplier
method may not be met and, drawing on previous studies, we try to discuss as carefully as
possible how potential sources of bias, such as estate tax evasion and tax avoidance, can affect
our estimates. Much work is still needed to compare systematically the estate tax estimates
   5
       We also examine carefully the evidence from the Forbes 400 richest Americans survey. This evidence shows
sizeable gains but those gains are concentrated among the top individuals in the list and the few years of the
stock market “bubble” of the late 1990s, followed by a sharp decline from 2000 to 2002.




                                                        3
with other sources such as capital income from income tax returns, the Survey of Consumer
Finances, and the Forbes 400 list.
        The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes our data sources and outlines our
estimation methods. Section 3 presents our estimation results. We present and analyze the
trends in top wealth shares and the evolution of the composition of these top wealth holdings.
Section 4 proposes explanations to account for the facts and relates the evolution of top wealth
shares to the evolution of top income shares. Section 5 discusses potential sources of bias, and
compares our wealth share results with previous estimates and estimates from other sources such
as the Survey of Consumer Finances, and the Forbes richest 400 list. Finally, Section 6 offers
a brief conclusion and compares the U.S. results with similar estimates recently constructed
for the United Kingdom and for France. All series and complete technical details about our
methodology are gathered in appendices of the paper.


2        Data, Methodology, and Macro-Series

In this section, we describe briefly the data we use and the broad steps of our estimation
methodology. Readers interested in the complete details of our methods are referred to the
extensive appendices at the end of the paper. Our estimates are from estate tax return data
compiled by the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) since the beginning of the modern estate tax in
the United States in 1916. In the 1980s, the Statistics of Income division of the IRS constructed
electronic micro-files of all federal estate tax returns filed for individuals who died in the period
1916 to 1945. Stratified and large electronic micro-files are also available for 1965, 1969, 1972,
1976, and every year since 1982.6 For a number of years between 1945 and 1965 (when no micro-
files are available), the IRS published detailed tabulations of estate tax returns (U.S. Treasury
Department, Internal Revenue Service, various years).7 This paper uses both the micro-files and
the published tabulated data to construct top wealth shares and composition series for as many
years as possible.
        In the United States, because of large exemption levels, only a small fraction of decedents
has been required to file estate tax returns. Therefore, by necessity, we must restrict our analysis
    6
        Those data are stratified and hence always contain 100% of the very large estates.
    7
        Those tabulations are also based on stratified samples with 100% coverage at the top.


                                                          4
to the top 2% of the wealth distribution. Before 1946, we can analyze only the top 1%. As
the analysis will show, the top 1%, although a small fraction of the total population, holds
a substantial fraction of total wealth. Further, there is substantial heterogeneity between the
bottom of the top 1% and the very top groups within the top 1%. Therefore, we also analyze in
detail smaller groups within the top 1%: the top .5%, top .25%, the top .1%, the top .05%, and
the top .01%. We also analyze the intermediate groups: top 1-.5% denotes the bottom half of
the top 1%, top .5-.25% denoted the bottom half of the top .5%, etc. Estates represent wealth
at the individual level and not the family or household level. Therefore, it is very important to
note that our top wealth shares are based on individuals and not families. We come back to this
issue later. Each of our top groups is defined relative to the total number of adult individuals
(aged 20 and above) in the U.S. population, estimated from census data. Column (1) of Table A
reports the number of adult individuals in the United States from 1916 to 2002. The adult
population has more than tripled from about 60 million in 1916 to over 200 million in 2000. In
2000, there were 201.9 million adults and thus the top 1% is defined as the top 2.019 million
wealth holders, etc.
       We adopt the well-known estate multiplier method to estimate the top wealth shares for the
living population from estate data. The method consists in inflating each estate observation by
a multiplier equal to the inverse probability of death.8 The probability of death is estimated
from mortality tables by age and gender for each year for the U.S. population multiplied by
a social differential mortality factor to reflect the fact that the wealthy (those who file estate
tax returns) have lower mortality rates than average. The social differential mortality rates
are based on the Brown et al. (2002) differentials between college educated whites relative to
the average population and are assumed constant over the whole period (see Appendix B for
a detailed discussion and analysis of the validity of this assumption). The estate multiplier
methodology will provide unbiased estimates of the wealth distribution if our multipliers are
correct on average and if probability of death is independent of wealth within each age and
gender group for estate tax return filers. This assumption might not be correct for three main
reasons. First, extraordinary expenses such as medical expenses and loss of labor income may
   8
       This method was first proposed in Great Britain almost a century ago by Mallet (1908). Atkinson and
Harrison (1978) describe the method in detail.



                                                      5
occur and reduce wealth in the years preceding death. Second, even within the set of estate tax
filers, it might be the case that the most able and successful individuals have lower mortality
rates, or inversely that the stress associated with building a fortune, increases the mortality rate.
Last and most importantly, for estate tax avoidance and other reasons, individuals may start
to give away their wealth to relatives as they feel that their health deteriorates. We will later
address each of these very important issues, and try to analyze whether those potential sources
of bias might have changed overtime.
       The wealth definition we use is equal to all assets (gross estate) less all liabilities (mortgages,
and other debts) as they appear on estate tax returns. Assets are defined as the sum of tangible
assets (real estate and consumer durables), fixed claim assets (cash, deposits, bonds, mortgages,
etc.), corporate equities, equity in unincorporated businesses (farms, small businesses), and var-
ious miscellaneous assets. It is important to note that wealth reported on estate tax returns only
includes the cash surrender value of pensions. Therefore, future pension wealth in the form of
defined benefits plans, and annuitized wealth with no cash surrender value is excluded. Vested
defined contributions accounts (and in particular 401(k) plans) are included in the wealth defi-
nition. Social Security wealth as well as all future labor income and human wealth is obviously
not included in gross estate. Estate tax returns include the full payout of life insurance but we
include only the cash value of life insurance (i.e., the value of life insurance when the person is
living) in our estimates.
       Therefore, we focus on a relatively narrow definition wealth, which includes only the mar-
ketable or accumulated wealth that remains upon the owner’s death. This point is particularly
important for owners of closely held businesses: in many instances, a large part of the value of
their business reflects their personal human capital and future labor, which vanishes at their
death. Both the narrow definition of wealth (on which we focus by necessity because of our
estate data source), and broader wealth definitions including future human wealth are inter-
esting and important to study. The narrow definition is more suited to examine problems of
wealth accumulation and transmission, while the broader definition is more suited to study the
distribution of welfare.9
   9
       The analysis of income distribution captures both labor and capital income and is thus closer to an analysis
of distribution of the broader wealth concept.




                                                          6
       For the years for which no micro data is available, we use the tabulations by gross estate,
age and gender and apply the estate multiplier method within each cell in order to obtain a
distribution of gross wealth for the living. We then use a simple Pareto interpolation technique
and the composition tables to estimate the thresholds and average wealth levels for each of our
top groups.10 For illustration purposes, Table 1 displays the thresholds, the average wealth level
in each group, along with the number of individuals in each group all for 2000, the latest year
available.
       We then estimate shares of wealth by dividing the wealth amounts accruing to each group by
total net-worth of the household sector in the United States. The total net-worth denominator
has been estimated from the Flow of Funds Accounts for the post-war period and from Goldsmith
et al. (1956) and Wolff (1989) for the earlier period.11 The total net-worth denominator includes
all assets less liabilities corresponding to the items reported on estate tax returns so that the
definitions of wealth in the numerator and the denominator are as close as possible. Thus, our
denominator only includes defined contribution pension reserves, and excludes defined benefits
pension reserves. Life insurance reserves, which reflect the cash surrender value of all policies
held are included in our denominator. The total wealth and average wealth (per adult) series
are reported in real 2000 dollars in Columns (3) and (4) of Table A. The CPI deflator used to
convert current incomes to real incomes is reported in Column (10). The average real wealth
series per adult along with the CPI deflator is plotted in Figure 1. Average real wealth per adult
has increased by a factor of three from 1916 to 2000 but the growth was very uneven during the
period. There was virtually no growth in average real wealth from 1916 to the onset of World
War II. Average wealth then grew steadily from World War II to the late 1960s. Since then,
wealth gross has been slower, except in the 1994-2000 period.12
       After we have analyzed the top share data, we will also analyze the composition of wealth
  10
       We also use Pareto interpolations to impute values at the bottom of 1% or 2% of the wealth distribution for
years where the coverage of our micro data is not broad enough.
  11
     Unfortunately, no annual series exist before 1945. Therefore, we have built upon previous incomplete series
to construct complete annual series for the 1916-1944 period.
  12
     It is important to note that comparing real wealth over time is difficult because it requires to use a price
index and there is substantial controversy about how to construct such an index and account properly for the
introduction of new goods. That is why most of the paper focuses on top wealth shares which are independent of
the price index.


                                                         7
and the age, gender, and marital status of top wealth holders, for all years where these data
are available. We divide wealth into six categories: 1) real estate, 2) bonds (federal and local,
corporate and foreign) 3) corporate stock, 4) deposits and saving accounts, cash, and notes, 5)
other assets (including mainly equity in non-corporate businesses), 6) all debts and liabilities.
In order to compare the composition of wealth in the top groups with the composition of total
net-worth in the U.S. economy, we display in columns (5) to (9) of Table A, the fractions of real
estate, fixed claim assets, corporate equity, unincorporated equity, and debts in total net worth
of the household sector in the United States. We also present on Figure 1, the average real value
of corporate equity and the average net worth excluding corporate equity. Those figures show
that the sharp downturns and upturns in average net worth are primarily due to the dramatic
changes in the stock market prices, and that the pattern of net worth excluding corporate equity
has been much smoother.


3     The Evolution of Top Wealth Shares

3.1   Trends

The basic series of top wealth shares are presented in Table B1. Figure 2 displays the wealth
share of the top 1% from 1916 to 2000. The top 1% held close to 40% of total wealth, up to the
onset of the Great Depression. Between 1930 and 1932, the top 1% share fell by more than 10
percentage points, and continued to decline during the New Deal, World War II, and the late
1940s. By 1949, the top 1% share was around 22.5%. The top 1% share increased slightly to
around 25% in the mid-1960s, and then fell to less than 20% in 1976 and 1982. The top 1% share
increases significantly in the early 1980s (from 19% to 22%) and then stays remarkably stable
around 21-22% in the 1990s. This evidence shows that the concentration of wealth ownership in
the United States decreased dramatically over the century. This phenomenon is illustrated on
Figure 3 which displays the average real wealth of those in the top 1% (left-hand-side scale) and
those in the bottom 99% (right-hand-side scale). In 1916, the top 1% wealth holders were more
than 60 times richer on average than the bottom 99%. The figure shows the sharp closing of the
gap between the Great Depression and the post World War II years, as well as the subsequent
parallel growth for the two groups (except for the 1970s). In 2000, the top 1% individuals are


                                               8
about 25 times richer than the rest of the population.
   Therefore, the evidence suggests that the twentieth century’s decline in wealth concentration
took place in a very specific and brief time interval, 1930-1949 which spans the Great Depression,
the New Deal, and World War II. This suggests that the main factors influencing the concen-
tration of wealth might be short-term events with long-lasting effects, rather than slow changes
such as technological progress and economic development or demographic transitions.
   In order to understand the overall pattern of top income shares, it is useful to decompose
the top percentile into smaller groups. Figure 4 displays the wealth shares of the top 1-.5%
(the bottom half of the top 1%), and the top .5-.1% (the next .4 percentile of the distribution).
Figure 4 also displays the share of the second percentile (Top 2-1%) for the 1946-2000 period.
The figure shows that those groups of high but not super-high wealth holders experienced much
smaller movements than the top 1% as a whole. The top 1-.5% has fluctuated between 5 and 6%
except for a short-lived dip during the Great Depression. The top .5-.1% has experienced a more
substantial and long-lasting drop from 12 to 8% but this 4 percentage point drop constitutes a
relatively small part of the 20 point loss of the top 1%. All three groups have been remarkably
stable over the last 25 years.
   Examination of the very top groups in Figure 5 (the top .1% in Panel A and the top .01% in
Panel B) provides a striking contrast to Figure 4. The top .1% declined dramatically from more
than 20% to less than 10% after World War II. For the top .01%, the fall was even more dramatic
from 10% to 4%: those wealthiest individuals, a group of 20,000 persons in 2000, had on average
1000 times the average wealth in 1916, and have about 400 times the average wealth in 2000.
It is interesting to note that, in contrast to the groups below the very top on Figure 4, the fall
for the very top groups continued during World War II. Since the end of World War II, those
top groups have remained fairly stable up to the late 1960s. They experienced an additional
drop in the 1970s, and a very significant increase in the early 1980s: from 1982 to 1985, the top
.01% increased from 2.5% to 4%, a 60% increase. However, as all other groups, those top groups
remained stable in the 1990s. Therefore, the evidence shows that the dramatic movements of
the top 1% share are primarily due to changes taking place within the upper fractiles of the top
1%. The higher the group, the larger the decline. It is thus important to analyze separately
each of the groups within the top 1% in order to understand the difference in the patterns.


                                                9
       Popular accounts (see Section 5.3 below) suggest that the computer technology in the recent
decades has created many new rich individuals. Those newly rich individuals are likely to be
much younger than the older rich. However, even if the new rich are younger and hence less likely
to die than the old rich, our estimates based on estate tax data should not be biased downward.
This is because the estate multiplier method corrects for changes in the age distribution of top
wealth holders. Our estimates should, however, become noisier (as the sampling probability by
death is reduced). This phenomenon should generate noisier series in the recent period but with
no systematic bias as long as our multipliers correctly reflect the inverse probability of death
of the wealthy in each age-gender cell.13 However, the series displayed on Figures 2, 4, and 5
are very smooth in the 1990s, suggesting that the groups we consider are large enough so that
sampling variability is small.14


3.2       Composition

Figure 6 displays the composition of wealth within the top 1% for 1929, a year when top wealth
shares and stock prices were very high. Wealth is divided into four components: real estate,
corporate stock (including both publicly traded and closely held stock), fixed claims assets
(all bonds, cash and deposits, notes, etc.), and other assets (including primarily non-corporate
business assets).15 Figure 6 shows that the share of corporate stock is increasing with wealth
while the share of real estate is decreasing with wealth, the share of fixed claims assets being
slightly decreasing (the share of bonds is slightly increasing and the share of cash and deposits
slightly decreasing). In the bottom of the top 0.5%, each of those three component represents
about one third of total wealth. At the very top, stocks represent almost two thirds of total
wealth while real estate constitutes less than 10%. This broad pattern is evident for all the years
of the 1916-2000 period for which we have data:16 the share of stocks increases with wealth and
the share of real estate decreases. The levels, however, may vary over time due mainly to the
sharp movements in the stock market.
  13
       If fewer than expected of these young wealthy individuals die, the estimate is downward biased but if more
than expected die, the estimate is upward biased.
  14
     The estimates are independent across years as every person dies only once.
  15
     Debts have been excluded from the figure but they are reported in Table B3.
  16
     All these statistics are reported in Table B3.



                                                        10
   Figure 7 displays the fraction of corporate stock in net worth over the period 1916-2000 for
the top .5%, and for total net worth in the U.S. economy (from Tables B3 and A respectively).
Consistent with Figure 6, the fraction of stock is much higher for the top .5% (around 50%
on average) than for total net worth (around 20% on average). Both series are closely parallel
from the 1920s to the mid 1980s: they peak just before the Great Depression, plunge during the
depression, stay low during the New Deal, World War II, up to the early 1950s, and peak again
in the mid-1960s before plummeting in the early 1980s.
   This parallel pattern can explain why the share of wealth held by the top groups dropped so
much during the Great Depression. Real corporate equity held by households fell by 70% from
1929 to 1933 (Figure 1) and the top groups hold a much greater fraction of their wealth in the
form of corporate stock (Figure 7). Those two facts mechanically lead to a dramatic decrease in
the share of wealth accruing to the top groups. The same phenomenon took place in the 1970s
when stock prices plummeted and the shares of top groups declined substantially (the real price
of corporate stock fell by 60% and the top 1% fell by about 20% from 1965 to 1982).
   Corporate profits increased dramatically during World War II, but in order to finance the
war, corporate tax rates increased sharply from about 10% before the war to over 50% during
the war and they stayed at high levels after the war. This fiscal shock in the corporate sector
reduced substantially the share of profits accruing to stock-holders and explains why average
real corporate equity per adult increased by less than 4% from 1941 to 1949 while the average
net worth increased by about 23% (see Figure 1). Thus, top wealth holders, owning mostly
stock, lost relative to the average during the 1940s, and the top shares declined significantly.
   The central puzzle to understand is why this explanation does not work in reverse after 1949,
that is, why top wealth shares did not increase significantly from 1949 to 1965 and from 1986
to 2000 when the stock market prices soared, and the fraction of corporate equity in total net
worth of the household sector increased from just around 12% (in 1949 and 1986) to almost 30%
in 1965 and almost 40% in 2000?
   The series on wealth composition of top groups might explain the absence of growth in top
wealth shares during the 1986-2000 episode. The fraction of corporate stock in the top groups
did not increase significantly during the period (as can be seen on Figure 7, it actually drops
significantly up to 1990 and then recovers during the 1990s). Therefore, although the fraction of


                                                11
corporate equity in total net worth triples (from 12% to 38%), the fraction of corporate equity
held by the top groups is virtually the same in 1986 and 2000 (as displayed on Figure 7). Thus,
the data imply that the share of all corporate stock from the household sector held by the top
wealth holders fell sharply from 1986 to 2000. Several factors may explain those striking results.
First, the development of defined contribution pensions plans, and in particular 401(k) plans,
and mutual funds certainly increased the number of stock-holders in the American population,17
and thus contributed to the democratization of stock ownership among American families. The
Survey of Consumer Finances shows that the fraction of families holding publicly traded stock
(directly or indirectly through mutual funds and pension plans) has increased significantly in
the last two decades, and was just above 50% in 2001.18
       Second, the wealthy may have re-balanced their portfolios as gains from the stock-market
were accruing in the late 1980s and the 1990s, and thus reduced their holdings of equity relative
to more modest families.
       In any case, the data strikingly suggest that top wealth holders did not benefit dispropor-
tionately from the bull stock market relative to the average wealth holder.19 This might explain
in part why top wealth shares did not increase in that period when top income shares were
dramatically increasing (see Section 5 below). By the year 2000, the fraction of wealth held
in stock by the top 1% is just slightly above the fraction of wealth held in stock by the U.S.
household sector (40% versus 38%). Therefore, in the current period, sharp movements of the
stock market are no longer expected to produce sharp movements in top wealth shares as was
the case in the past.20
  17
       The Flow of Funds Accounts show that the fraction of corporate stock held indirectly through Defined
Contribution plans and mutual funds doubled from 17% to 33% between 1986 and 2000.
 18
    In 1989, only 31.7% of American households owned stock, either directly or indirectly though pension and
mutual funds, while 48.9% and 51.9% did in 1998 and 2001 respectively. See Kennickell et al. (1997) and Aizcorbe
et al. (2003).
  19
     It is important to keep in mind that, because the wealth distribution is very skewed, the average wealth is
much larger than median wealth. Obviously, the stock market surge of the 1990s did not benefit the bottom half
of American families who do not hold any stock.
  20
     It should be emphasized, though, that the wealthy may not hold the same stocks as the general population.
In particular, the wealthy hold a disproportionate share of closely held stock, while the general population holds
in general only publicly traded stocks through mutual and pension funds (see e.g. Kennickell, 2003). Estate tax
returns statistics separate closely held from publicly traded stock only since 1986.


                                                        12
3.3       Age, Gender, and Marital Status

Figure 8 displays the average age and the percent female within the top .5% group since 1916.21
The average age displays a remarkable stability over time fluctuating between 55 and 60. Since
the early 1980s, the average age has declined very slightly from 60 to around 57. Thus, the
evidence suggests that there have been no dramatic changes in the age composition of top
wealth holders over time.22 In contrast, the fraction of females among top wealth holders has
almost doubled from around 25% in the early part of the century to around 45% in the 1990s.
The increase started during the Great Depression and continued throughout the 1950s and
1960s, and has been fairly stable since the 1970s. Therefore, there has been substantial gender
equalization in the holding of wealth over the century in the United States, and today, almost
50% of top wealth holders are female. It is striking, comparing Figure 2 and Figure 8, to note
the negative correlation between the top wealth shares and the fraction of women in the top
wealth groups. This suggests that the gender equalization at the top might have contributed to
the decline in top wealth shares measured at the individual level. It is conceivable that wealth
concentration measured at the family level has not declined as much as wealth concentration
measured at the individual level.23
       Estate tax law regarding bequests to spouses has changed over time and this might have
affected the gender composition at the top through behavioral responses to estate taxation.
Before 1948, bequests to spouses were not deductible from taxable estates with an exception
of couples located in the so-called community property states where each spouse owned half of
all assets acquired during marriage. Starting in 1948, spousal bequests became deductible up
to 50% of the net estate. In 1981, spousal bequests became fully deductible.24 Those changes
might have increased the amount of spousal bequests made by wealthy individuals and hence
  21
       Series for all groups are reported in Table B4.
  22
       Although, due to significant decreases in mortality over the course of the 20th century, top wealth holders
nowadays have more years of potential lifespan ahead of them and are therefore younger relative to the average
population than in the early part of the century.
  23
     We come back to this point in Section 5.3 when we compare our estimates with wealth concentration measures
at the family level obtained with the Survey of Consumer Finances for the recent period.
  24
     Similarly, 50% and 100% of spousal gifts became deductible in 1948 and 1981 respectively. In 1976, the
marital deduction was modified to allow for the greater of 50% of estate or $250,000 to be deductible.




                                                         13
potentially increased the fraction of women in the top wealth groups.25 Two points should be
noted.
       First, Figure 8 shows that most of increase in female fraction in the top wealth groups
happened before the changes in estate tax law regarding spousal bequests (in 1948 and 1981)
implying that those tax law changes can explain at best a fraction of the trend. As we discuss
below, estate tax rates at the top became very high in the 1930s.26 As a result, in order to
avoid “double estate taxation”, wealthy husbands had an incentive to pass their wealth directly
to the next generations instead of passing it to their widowed spouses. Such a phenomenon
should have decreased the number of wealthy widows, which should have reduced the number of
wealthy widows at the top. Splitting wealth between spouses using gifts before death was not a
better tax strategy as it would have triggered substantial gift taxes (following the introduction
of the gift tax in 1932) before the marital deduction (for estates and gifts) was introduced in
1948. The main reason why the number of women in the top groups increases so much during
the Great Depression seems to be due to differences in wealth composition between genders. In
the late 1920s, wealthy women held a smaller fraction of their wealth in the form of stock than
wealthy men. As a result, wealthy men lost a larger fraction of their wealth following the stock
market crash of 1929 than wealthy women, thereby contributing to the increase in the fraction
of women at the top.
       Second, even tax law induced changes in spousal bequests have a real impact on the distribu-
tion of wealth across gender lines, and thus should not necessarily be regarded as unimportant.
       The marital status of top wealth holders has experienced relatively modest secular changes.
For males, the fraction of married men has always been high (around 75%), the fraction widowed
has declined slightly (from 10 to 5%) and the fraction single has increased (from 10 to 15%).
For females, the fraction widowed is much higher, although it has declined over the period from
about 40% to 30%. The fraction married has increased from about 40% to 50% for females and
thus the fraction single has been stable around 10%. This reinforces our previous interpretation
that the increase in the fraction female at the top of the wealth distribution has not been due
solely to an increase in the number of wealthy widows following increased spousal bequests,
  25
       See Kopczuk and Slemrod (2003) for a detailed discussion of this point.
  26
       The top estate rate increased from 20 to 45 percent in 1932, and then to 60% in 1935, to 70% in 1936, and
to 77% in 1941.


                                                        14
but might reflect increases in female empowerment in the family (fairer distribution of assets
between spouses) and in the labor market (reduction of the income gender gap overtime).


4         Understanding the Patterns

4.1         Are the Results Consistent with Income Inequality Series?

One of the most striking and debated findings of the literature on inequality has been the sharp
increase in income and wage inequality over the last 25 years in the United States (see Katz and
Autor, 1999, for a recent survey). As evidenced from income tax returns, changes have been
especially dramatic at the top end, with large gains accruing to the top income groups (Feenberg
and Poterba, 1993, 2000; Piketty and Saez, 2003). For example, Piketty and Saez (2003) show
that the top 1% income share doubled from 8% in the 1970s to over 16% in 2000.27 How can
we reconcile the dramatic surge in top income shares with the relative stability of top wealth
shares estimated from estate tax data since the 1980s?
         Figure 9 casts light on this issue. It displays the top .01% income share from Piketty and
Saez (2003), along with the composition of these top incomes28 into capital income (dividends,
rents, interest income, but excluding capital gains), realized capital gains, business income, and
wages and salaries. Up to the 1980s (and except during World War II), capital income and
capital gains formed the vast majority of the top .01% incomes. Consistently with our top .01%
wealth share series presented on Figure 5B, the top .01% income share was very high in the late
1920s, and dropped precipitously during the Great Depression and World War II, and remained
low until the late 1970s. Thus both the income and the estate tax data suggests the top wealth
holders were hit by the shocks of the Great Depression and World War II and that those shocks
persisted a long time after the war.
         Over the last two decades, as can be seen on Figure 9, the top .01% income share has indeed
increased dramatically from 0.9% in 1980 to 3.6% in 2000. However, the important point to
note is that this recent surge is primarily a wage income phenomenon and to a lesser extent
    27
         See the series of Piketty and Saez (2003) updated to year 2000.
    28
         This group represents the top 13,400 taxpayers in 2000, ranked by income excluding realized capital gains
although capital gains are added back to compute income shares.




                                                          15
a business income phenomenon.29 Figure 9 shows that capital income earned by the top .01%
relative to total personal income is not higher in 2000 than it was in the 1970s (around 0.4%).
Adding realized capital gains does not alter this broad picture: capital income including capital
gains earned by the top .01% represents about 1% of total personal income in 2000 versus about
0.75% in the late 1960s, a modest increase relative to the quadrupling of the top .01% income
share during the same period.
       Therefore, the income tax data suggest that the dramatic increase in top incomes is a la-
bor income phenomenon that has not translated yet into an increased concentration of capital
income. Therefore, in the recent period as well, the income tax data paints a story that is con-
sistent with our estate tax data findings of stability of the top wealth shares since the mid-1980s.
The pattern of capital income including realized capital gains displayed on Figure 9 is strikingly
parallel to the pattern of the top .01% wealth share of Figure 5B: a mild peak in the late 1960s,
a decline during the bear stock market of the 1970s, a recovery in the early 1980s, and no growth
from 1990 to 2000.
       Three elements might explain why the surge in top wages since the 1970s did not lead to
a significant increase in top wealth holdings. First, it takes time to accumulate a large fortune
out of earnings.30 The top .01% average income in the late 1990s is around 10 million dollars
while the top .01% wealth holding is around 60 million dollars. Thus, even with substantial
saving rates, it would take at least a decade to the average top .01% income earner starting
with no fortune to become an average top .01% wealth holder. Second, it is possible that the
savings rates of the recent “working rich” who now form the majority of top income earners,
are substantially lower than the savings rates of the “coupon-clippers” of the early part of the
century. Finally, certain groups of individuals report high incomes on their tax return only
temporarily (e.g., executives who exercise stock-options irregularly, careers of sport or show-
business stars usually last for just a few years). To the extent that such cases became more
  29
       Gains from exercised stock options are reported as wage income on income tax returns. There is no doubt
that the recent explosion in the use of stock options to compensate executives has contributed to the surge in top
wage incomes in the United States.
  30
     Even in recent years after the explosion of executive compensation, few of the richest Americans listed on
the annual Forbes 400 survey are salaried executives. Most of them are still either family heirs or successful
entrepreneurs (see Section 5.3.3 below).



                                                       16
prevalent in recent years (as seems possible based on popular accounts), the sharp increase in
the concentration of annual incomes documented by Piketty and Saez (2003) may translate into
a smaller increase in the concentration of lifetime incomes and accumulated wealth.
       The very rough comparison between income and estate data that we have presented suggests
that it would be interesting to try and estimate wealth concentration from income tax return data
using the capitalization of income method. In spite of the existence of extremely detailed and
consistent income tax return annual data in the United States since 1913, this method has very
rarely been used, and the only existing studies have applied the method for isolated years.31 The
explanation for the lack of systematic studies is that the methodology faces serious challenges:
income data provides information only on assets yielding reported income (for example, owner-
occupied real estate or defined contribution pension plans could not be observed), and there is
substantial and unobservable heterogeneity in the returns of many assets, especially corporate
stock (for example, some corporations rarely pay dividends and capital gains are only observed
when realized on income tax returns).32 More recently, Kennickell (2001a,b) has analyzed in
detail the link between income and wealth in order to calibrate sample weights for the Survey
of Consumer Finances. His analysis shows that the relation between capital income reported on
tax returns and wealth from the survey is extremely noisy at the individual level. Nevertheless,
it would certainly be interesting to use income tax return data to provide a tighter comparison
with our wealth concentration results from estates. We leave this important and ambitious
project for future research.


4.2       Possible Explanations for the Decline in Top Wealth Shares

We have described in the previous section the dramatic fall in the top wealth shares (concentrated
within the very top groups) that has taken place from the onset of the Great Depression to the
late 1940s. Our previous analysis has shown that stock market effects might explain the sharp
drop in top wealth shares during the 1930s but cannot explain the absence of recovery in top
  31
       King (1927) and Stewart (1939) used this method for years 1921 and 1922-1936 respectively. More recently,
Greenwood (1983) has constructed wealth distributions for 1973 using simultaneously income tax return data and
other sources.
  32
     See Atkinson and Harrison (1978) for a detailed comparison of the income capitalization and the estate
multiplier methods for the United Kingdom.



                                                        17
wealth shares in the 1950s and 1960s once stock prices recovered by the end of the 1960s. At
that time, the wealth composition in top groups was again very similar to what it had been in
the late 1920s, and yet top wealth shares hardly recovered in the 1950s and 1960s and were still
much lower in the 1960s than before the Great Depression. There are several possible elements
that might explain the absence of recovery of top wealth shares.
       The first and perhaps most obvious factor is the creation and the development of the pro-
gressive income and estate tax. The very large fortunes (such as the top .01%) observed at
the beginning of the 20th century were accumulated during the 19th century, at a time where
progressive taxes hardly existed and capitalists could dispose of almost 100% of their income
to consume, accumulate, and transmit wealth across generations. The conditions faced by 20th
century fortunes after the shock of the Great Depression were substantially different. Starting in
1933 with the new Roosevelt administration, and continuously until the Reagan administrations
of 1980s, top tax rates on both income and estates have been set at very high levels.
       These very high marginal rates applied only to a very small fraction of taxpayers and estates,
but the point is that they were to a large extent designed to hit incomes and estates of the top
0.1% and 0.01% of the distribution. In the presence of progressive capital income taxation,
individuals with large wealth levels need to increase their savings rates out of after tax income
much more than lower wealth holders to maintain their relative wealth position. Moreover,
reduced after-tax rate of return might have affected savings rates of high wealth holders through
standard incentive effects. In the presence of high income and estate taxes, wealthy individuals
also have incentives to give more to charities during their lifetime further reducing top wealth
shares.33
       Second, starting with Sherman and Clayton Acts enacted in 1890 and 1914 respectively,
the U.S. federal government has taken important steps to limit monopoly power using antitrust
regulation. However, the degree of enforcement remained weak until the New Deal (see e.g.,
Thorelli, 1955). By curbing the power of monopolies, it is conceivable that such legislation
contributed to reduced wealth concentration at the very top. Perhaps more importantly, the
Roosevelt administration also introduced legislation to sever the link between finance and man-
  33
       Lampman (1962) also favored progressive taxation as one important factor explaining the reduction in top
wealth shares in his seminal study (see below).



                                                       18
agement of corporations. The Depression’s financial market reforms act broke the links between
board membership, investment banking, and commercial banking. As a result, the model of
great financiers-industrialists which had created the very large fortunes of the Robber Barons
of the late nineteenth and early twentieth century was no longer a possibility after the 1930s.
DeLong (2002) discusses those aspects in more detail and suggests that such regulations severely
prevented the creation of new billionaires during the very prosperous post-World War II decades.
       Finally, the post World War II decades were characterized by a large democratization of
higher education. Following the G.I. bill, the number of college educated men increased very
quickly after World War II.34 This undoubtedly contributed to the emergence of a large middle
and upper middle income class in America which was able to accumulate wealth and hence
perhaps reduce the share of total wealth accruing to the groups in the top percentile.35
       Although we cannot observe the counterfactual world without progressive taxation or an-
titrust regulations, we note that economic growth, in net worth and incomes, has been much
stronger starting with World War II, than in the earlier period. Thus, the macro-economic
evidence does not suggest that progressive taxation prevented the American capital stock from
recovering from the shock of the Great Depression. This is consistent with Piketty (2003), who
shows that, in the purest neo-classical model without any uncertainty, a capital income tax
affecting only the rich does not affect negatively the capital stock in the long-run. If credit
constraints due to asymmetric information are present in the business sector of the economy,
it is even conceivable that redistribution of wealth from large and passive wealth holders to
entrepreneurs with little capital can actually improve economic performance (see e.g., Aghion
and Bolton, 2003, for such a theoretical analysis). Gordon (1998) argues that high personal
income tax rates can result in a tax advantage to entrepreneurial activity, thereby leading to
economic growth. A more thorough investigation of the effects of income and estate taxation
on the concentration of wealth is left for future work.
  34
       The number of Bachelor’s degrees awarded relative to the size of the 23 year old cohort tripled from about
5% in the 1920s to over 15% after World War II (see U.S. Bureau of the Census (1975), series H 755).
  35
     For example, home ownership increased from 41% in 1920 to 62% in 1960 (see U.S. Bureau of the Census,
1975, series N 243).




                                                        19
5         Are Estimates from Estates Reliable?

In this section, we explore the issue of the reliability of our estimates. Our top wealth share
estimates depend crucially on the validity of the estate multiplier method that we use. Thus we
first discuss the potential sources of bias and how they can affect the results we have described.
Second, we compare our results with previous findings using estate data as well as other data
sources such as the Survey of Consumer Finances (SCF), and the Forbes 400 Wealthiest Amer-
icans. We focus on whether biases introduced by the estate multiplier methodology can affect
our two central results: the dramatic drop in top shares since 1929 and the absence of increase
in top shares since the mid-1980s.


5.1         Potential Sources of Bias

The most obvious source of bias would be estate tax evasion. Three studies of evasion, Harris
(1949), McCubbin (1994), and Eller et al. (2001), have used results from Internal Revenue
Service audits of estate tax returns for years 1940-41, 1982, and 1992 (respectively). Harris
(1949) reports under-reporting of net worth of about 10% on average with no definite variation
by size of estate, while McCubbin (1994) and Eller et al. (2001) report smaller evasion of about
2-4% for audited returns.36 Those numbers are small relative to the size of the changes we have
presented. Thus, it sounds unlikely that direct tax evasion can have any substantial effects on
the trends we have documented and can certainly not explain the dramatic drop in top wealth
shares. It seems also quite unlikely that evasion could have hidden a substantial growth in
top wealth shares in the recent period. From 1982 to 2000 in particular, the estate tax law
has changed very little and hence the extent of under-reporting should have remained stable
over time as well. A closely related problem is undervaluation of assets reported on estate tax
returns. We describe the issue of undervaluation in detail in appendix C, and we conclude that
those adjustments appear to be too small to produce a significant effect on estimated top wealth
shares.
         As we have discussed briefly in Section 2, the estate multiplier method requires precise
assumptions in order to generate unbiased estimates of the wealth distribution for the living.
    36
         Those studies underestimate estate tax evasion to the extent that audits fail to uncover all the evaded wealth.




                                                             20
We use the same multiplier within age, gender, and year cells for all estate tax filers, independent
of wealth. We apply the same social differential mortality rates for all years based on the Brown
et al. (2002) differential between college educated whites relative to the average population. This
is not fully satisfactory for two reasons. First, wealthy individuals (those who file estate tax
returns upon death) may not have exactly the same mortality rate as college educated whites
from Brown et al. (2002). The bias introduced, however, may be small, because the social
mortality gradient is steeper at the lower end of the wealth distribution than at the high end.
Second, we use the same social differential rates for the full 1916-2000 period although those
rates might have changed over time. In appendix B we analyze in detail life insurance and
annuities data compiled by the Society of Actuaries. Perhaps surprisingly, the data does not
point to a significant narrowing over time between mortality rates of the general population and
life insurance policy holders. Therefore, our assumption of constant social mortality differential
rates might be acceptable.
       Assuming that our multipliers are right on average, the key additional assumption required
to obtain unbiased wealth shares is that, within age and gender cells and for estate tax filers,
mortality is not correlated with wealth. A negative correlation would generate a downward bias
in top wealth shares as our multiplier would be too low for the richest decedents. For example, if
those with very large estates are less likely to die than those with moderately large estates, then
the estate multiplier will underestimate the very wealthy relative to the moderately wealthy.
       There are two direct reasons why such a negative correlation might arise. First, extraordinary
expenses such as medical expenses and loss of labor income or of the ability to manage assets
efficiently may occur and reduce wealth in the years preceding death, producing a negative
correlation between death probability and wealth. Smith (1999) argues that out-of-pocket health
expenses are moderate and therefore are not a major factor driving the correlation of wealth
and mortality. However, his evidence is based on expenditures for the general population and it
is the end-of-life health expenditures that are most significant. It seems unlikely, though, that
health-related expenses create a significant dent in the fortunes of the super-rich but we were
unable to assess the importance of lost earnings due to health deterioration at the end of life.37
  37
       For some years, our data set contains information about the length of terminal illness. A simple regression of
net worth on the dummy variable indicating a prolonged illness and demographic controls produced a significant



                                                          21
    Second, even within the small group of estate tax filers, the top 1 or 2% wealth holders, it
might be the case that the most able and successful individuals, of a given age and gender, have
lower mortality rates. Although we cannot measure with any precision the quantitative bias
introduced by those effects, there is no reason to believe that such biases could have changed
dramatically over the period we study. In particular, they cannot have evolved so quickly in the
recent period so as to mask a significant increase in top wealth shares and, for the same reason,
they are unlikely to explain the sharp decrease in top wealth shares following the onset of the
Great Depression.
    More importantly, however, for estate tax avoidance and other reasons, individuals may
start to give away their wealth to relatives and heirs as they feel that their health deteriorates.
Indeed, all estate tax planners recommend giving away wealth before death as the best strategy
to reduce transfer tax liability. Gifts, however, create a downward bias only to the extent that
they are made by individuals with higher mortality probability within their age and gender
cell. If gifts are unrelated to mortality within age and gender cells, then they certainly affect
the wealth distribution of the living but the estate multiplier will take into account this effect
without bias. Three important reasons suggest that gifts may not bias our results. First and
since the beginning of the estate tax, gifts made in contemplation of death (within 2-3 years of
death, see appendix C for details) must be included in gross estate and thus are not considered
as having been given in our wealth estimates. We expect that a large fraction of gifts correlated
with mortality falls into this category. Second, a well known advice of estate tax planners is
to start giving as early as possible. Thus, those most interested in tax avoidance will start
giving much before contemplation of death; in that case gifts and mortality have no reason to be
correlated.38 Last, since 1976, the estate and gift tax have been unified and the published IRS
tabulations show that taxable gifts (all gifts above the annual exemption of $10,000 per donee)
represents only about 2-3% of gross estate, even at the top. Thus, lifetime gifts do not seem to
be large enough to produce a significant bias in our estimates for the recent period.
    A more subtle possibility of bias comes from a related tax avoidance practice which consists
in giving assets to heirs without relinquishing control of those assets. This is mostly realized
negative coefficient, suggesting that this effect may play a role.
  38
     Gifts will have a real impact on the individual distribution of wealth although it might not change the dynastic
distribution of resources.


                                                         22
through trusts whose remainder is given to the heir but whose income stream is in full control
of the creator while he is alive. Like an annuity, the value of such a trust for the creator
disappears at death and thus does not appear on estate tax returns. This type of device falls in
between the category of tax avoidance through gifts and under-valuation of the assets effectively
transferred. The popular literature (see e.g., Cooper, 1979 or Zabel, 1995) has suggested that
many such devices can be used to effectively avoid the estate tax but careful interviews of
practitioners (Schmalbeck, 2001) suggest that this is a clear exaggeration and that reducing
significantly the estate tax payments requires actually giving away (either to charities or heirs)
a substantial fraction of wealth. Again, such a source of reduction in wealth holdings reflects a
real de-concentration of individual wealth (though not necessarily welfare).
       The key question we need to address is whether the wealthy derive substantial annuity income
from trusts which the estate multiplier method fails to capture because it disappears at death.
There are two indirect sources of data to cast light on the importance of trusts. First, trusts
are required to file income tax returns and pay annual income taxes on the income generated
by the assets in the trust which is not distributed to beneficiaries.39 Second, income from
trusts distributed to individuals has to be reported on those individuals’ income tax returns.
Therefore, statistics on individual and trust income tax returns published regularly by the
IRS (U.S. Treasury Department, Internal Revenue Service, various years) can be used to assess
the total value of income generated and distributed by trusts. The total income distributed by
trusts to individuals can then be capitalized to get an approximation of total individual wealth
in the form of trusts. This total wealth should be an upper bound of the annuitized trust wealth
that the estate multiplier method fails to capture. Using a 7.5% nominal rate of return on trust
assets (trust income includes both ordinary income and realized capital gains), total wealth in
trusts is only around 1.4% of our total wealth denominator in 1997, the last year for which
statistics on trust income are available.40 Thus, trust wealth is modest relative to the 21% share
of total wealth going to the top 1% or even relative to the 9% share going to the top 0.1% in
  39
       Beneficiaries could be individuals or charitable organizations. Trusts face the top individual income tax rate
(above a very low exemption level) on undistributed income in order to prevent (untaxed) accumulation of wealth
within trusts.
  40
     In 1997, trusts distributed $26.3 billion to beneficiaries (see Mikow (2000-01)), representing a total annuitized
wealth of $350 billion, or 1.4% of the $2.5 trillion total personal wealth in 1997.



                                                          23
1997.41
       Therefore, the popular view that the wealthy hold most of their wealth through trusts which
escape estate taxation appears inconsistent with tax statistics. More importantly, estimated
trust wealth has declined overtime from around 3.5% of total wealth in the 1936, to around 2%
in 1965, to about 1.5% in 1997. Hence, including annuitized trust wealth to our estimates would
not modify much our results and would likely reinforce our main finding of a secular decline of
top wealth shares over the century.


5.2       Changes in Bias Over Time

It is important to emphasize that real responses to estate taxation, such as potential reductions
in entrepreneurship incentives, savings, or increases in gifts to charities or relatives, do not bias
our estimates in general because they do have real effects on the distribution of wealth. Only
outright evasion or avoidance of the type we described in the previous section can bias our
results; and those effects need to evolve over time in order to counteract the trends we have
described. We would expect that changes in the levels of estate taxation would be the main
element affecting avoidance or evasion incentives over time.
       It is therefore important to consider the main changes in the level of estate taxation over the
period (see Appendix C and Luckey, 1995, for further details). Since the beginning of the U.S.
federal estate tax, the rate schedule was progressive and subject to an initial exemption. The
1916 marginal estate tax rates ranged from 0 to 10%. The top rate increased to 40% by 1924,
a change that was repealed by the 1926 Act that reduced top rates to 20%. Starting in 1932, a
sequence of tax schedule changes increased the top rates to 77% by 1942, subject to a $60,000
nominal exemption. The marginal tax rate schedule remained unchanged until 1976, resulting in
a fairly continuous increase of the estate tax burden due to “bracket creep”. Following the 1976
tax reform, the exemption was increased every year. The top marginal tax rates were reduced
to 70% in 1977 and 55% by 1984. There were no major changes until 2001 (the nominal filing
  41
       Income tax statistics show that about 75% of total trust income goes to top 1% income earners and about
40% goes to the top 0.1% income earners. Thus, it seems reasonable to think that about 40% of trust wealth, or
about 0.6% of total individual wealth, is held by the top 0.1%, a small amount relative to the 9% share of wealth
held by that group in 1997.




                                                       24
threshold stayed constant at $600,000 between 1988 and 1997). Figure 10 reports the average
marginal tax rate in the top 0.1% group42 and the statutory marginal tax rate applying to the
largest estates43 (left y-axis), along with the top 0.1% wealth share (right y-axis). It is evident
from this picture that the burden of estate taxation increased significantly over time. Somewhat
surprisingly, the most significant increases in the marginal estate tax burden were brought about
by holding brackets constant in nominal terms rather than by tax schedule changes.
       There are very few attempts to measure the response of wealth to estate taxation.44 Kopczuk
and Slemrod (2001) used the same micro-data that we do to estimate the impact of the marginal
estate tax rates on reported estates. They relied on both time-series variation and cross-sectional
age variation that corresponds to having lived through different estate tax regimes. They found
some evidence of an effect, with estate tax rates at age of 45 or 10 years before death more
strongly correlated with estates than the actual realized marginal tax rates. Because the source
of their data are tax returns, they were unable to distinguish between tax avoidance and the real
response. Holtz-Eakin and Marples (2001) relied on the cross-sectional variation in state estate
and inheritance taxes to estimate the effect on wealth of the living. They found that estate
taxation has a significant effect on wealth accumulation. It should be pointed out though that
their data contained very few wealthy individuals. Taken at face value, both of these studies
find very similar magnitudes of response (see the discussion in Holtz-Eakin and Marples, 2001)
suggesting little role for outright tax evasion: the Holtz-Eakin and Marples (2001) data is not
skewed by tax evasion and avoidance while the effect estimated by Kopczuk and Slemrod (2001)
reflects such potential responses. This would imply that trends in concentration due to tax
evasion and avoidance are not a major issue.
       Regardless of these findings, given that between 1982 and 2000 the estate tax system has
changed very little, we would expect that the extent of tax avoidance and evasion has also
  42
       These tax rates are computed by first evaluating the marginal tax rates at the mean net worth in Top .01%,
.05-.01% and .1-.05% and then weighting the results by net worth in each category. These are “first-dollar”
marginal tax rates that do not take into account deductions but just the initial exemption.
 43
    After 1987, there is an interval of a 5% surtax intended to phase out the initial exemption in which the
marginal tax rate (60%) exceeds the marginal tax rate at the top (55%).
 44
    There is a larger literature that concentrates on gifts. See for example, McGarry (1999); Bernheim et al.
(2001); Poterba (2001); Joulfaian (2003).




                                                        25
remained fairly stable. Therefore, the absence of increase in top shares since in the 1990s is
probably not due to a sudden increase in estate tax evasion or avoidance.45


5.3       Comparison with Previous Studies and Other Sources

Another important way to check the validity of our estimates from estates is to compare them
to findings from other sources. We have presented a brief comparison above with findings from
income tax returns. After reviewing previous estate tax studies, we turn to comparisons with
wealth concentration estimations using other data sources.


5.3.1       Previous Estate Studies

Lampman (1962) was the first to use in a comprehensive way the U.S. estate tax statistics pub-
lished by the IRS to construct top wealth shares. He reported the top 1% wealth shares for the
adult population for a number of years between 1922 and 1956.46 His estimates are reproduced
on Figure 11, along with our series for the top 1%.47 Although the method, adjustments, and
total net worth denominators are different (see appendix E ), his estimates are generally similar
to ours and in particular display the same downward trend after 1929.
       Smith (1984) used estate tax data to produce additional estimates for the top 0.5% and top
1% wealth shares for some years in the 1958-1976 period. In contrast to Lampman (1962) and
our series, the top 1% is defined relative to the full population (not only adults) and individuals
are ranked by gross worth (instead of net worth).48 We reproduce his top 1% wealth share,
which looks broadly similar to our estimates and displays a downward trend which accelerates
in the 1970s. No study has used post 1976 estate data to compute top wealth shares series for
the recent period. A number of studies by the Statistics of Income Division of the IRS have
estimated wealth distributions from estate tax data for various years but those studies only
  45
       Of course, technological advances in estate tax avoidance remains a possibility, especially given that many
changes relating to valuation issues are driven by judicial rather than legislative activity. It is striking to note,
however, that the many books on estate tax avoidance published over time seem to always propose the same type
of methods (see again Cooper, 1979 and Zabel, 1995).
  46
     Lampman (1962) does not analyze smaller groups within the top 1% adults.
  47
     Those statistics are also reported in Table C1.
  48
     See Smith and Franklin (1974) for an attempt to patch the Lampman series with estimates for 1958, 1962,
1965, and 1969.


                                                         26
produce distributions, and composition by brackets and do not try in general to estimate top
shares.49 An exception is Johnson and Schreiber (2002-03) who present graphically the top 1%
and .5% wealth share for 1989, 1992, 1995, and 1998. Their estimates are very close to ours,
and display very little variation over the period.


5.3.2       Survey of Consumer Finances

The Survey of Consumer Finances (SCF) is the only other data that can be used to estimate
adequately top wealth shares in the United States, because it oversamples the wealthy and asks
detailed questions about wealth ownership. However, the survey covers only years 1962, 1983,
1989, 1992, 1995, 1998, 2001 and cannot be used to reliably compute top shares for groups
smaller than the top 0.5% because of small sample size.50 It should also be noted that all the
information in the SCF is at the family level and not the individual level. Top shares estimated
at the individual level might be different from top shares estimated at the family level, and the
difference depends on how wealth is distributed among spouses within families. Atkinson (2003)
discusses this issue formally. He shows that for realistic parameters (on the Pareto distribution
and the number of married individuals relative to singles), for a given top share estimated at
the family level, the corresponding top share at the individual level will be about 20% higher if
all the rich are unmarried or have spouses with no wealth and will be about 20% lower if all the
rich are couples with wealth equally split between spouses. Thus, changes of wealth distribution
within families, which leave unchanged family based wealth shares, can have relatively large
effects on individually based wealth shares. However, the magnitude is not large enough to
explain the dramatic decline of the very top shares over the century solely by equalization of
wealth between spouses within families.51
  49
       See Schwartz (1994) for year 1982, Schwartz and Johnson (1994) for year 1986 and Johnson and Schwartz
(1994) for year 1989, Johnson (1997-98) for years 1992 and 1995, and Johnson and Schreiber (2002-03) for year
1998.
  50
     The 1962 survey is called the Survey of Financial Characteristics of Consumers and is the predecessor of the
modern Surveys of Consumer Finances.
 51
    The negative correlation, however, between the pattern of the top 1% wealth share on Figure 2 and the
fraction female in the top .5% on Figure 8 suggests that equalization of wealth between spouses might have
played a role in reducing individually based wealth concentration.




                                                       27
       Kennickell (2003) provides detailed shares and composition results for the 1989-2001 period,
and Scholz (2003) provides top share estimates for all the years available from the SCF. Ken-
nickell and Scholz results are very close. We reproduce the top 1% wealth share from Scholz
(2003) on Figure 11. The SCF produces estimates of top wealth shares larger than estimates
from estates: the top 1% share from estates is between 20 and 25% while to the top 1% share
from the SCF is slightly above 30%. We discuss below the reasons that have been put forward
to explain this difference by various studies. However, the important point to note is that,
as our estate estimates, the SCF does not display a significant increase in top wealth shares
between 1962 and 2001. There is an increase from 1992 to 1995, but this increase has in large
part disappeared by 2001. As a result, the top 1% shares from the SCF in 1983 and 2001 are
almost identical.52 In particular, it is striking to note that the top 1% share did not increase
at all during the bull stock market in the second half of the 1990s. Therefore, two independent
sources, the estate tax returns and the SCF, arguably the best data sources available to study
wealth concentration in the United States, suggest that wealth concentration has not increased
significantly since the mid-1980s, in spite of the surge in stock market prices.

       A few studies have compared the estate tax data with the SCF data in order to check the
validity of each dataset and potentially estimate the extent of tax avoidance. Scheuren and
McCubbin (1994) and Johnson and Woodburn (1994) present such a comparison for years 1983
and 1989 respectively. They find a substantial gap in top shares estimates based on the two
datasets, of similar magnitude than the one between our estimates and Scholz (2003) estimates.53
As discussed above, an important source of discrepancy comes from the fact that the SCF is
based on families while estate estimates are individually based. Johnson and Woodburn (1994)
tries to correct for this and finds a reduced gap, although, in absence of good information on
the distribution of wealth within rich families, the correction method might be very sensitive to
assumptions (see below).
       Scheuren and McCubbin (1994) describes other potential sources creating biases. In addition
to the tax avoidance and under-valuation issues that we describe above, they show that SCF
  52
       Kennickell (2003) reports standard errors of around 1.5 percentage points around the top 1% share estimates.
Thus, the small movements in the SCF top 1% share might be due in large part to sampling variation.
 53
    The statistics they report do not allow a precise comparison of the gap in the top 1% wealth share.




                                                         28
wealth might be higher than estate wealth because the value of closely held businesses might
drop substantially when the owner-manager dies. Thus, the SCF wealth measure of businesses
incorporates human wealth that is by definition excluded from estates. Therefore, the SCF and
estates may not measure the same wealth concept even though both measures are interesting.
The estate represents wealth that can be transferred while the SCF includes in part human
wealth that is destroyed at death.
   The composition data reported in Kennickell (2003) do not report total stock ownership
separately. However, we can add together the categories of publicly traded stock directly held,
mutual and other investment funds, and cashable pension funds. In 2001, both the top 1%
wealthiest families and the average family held about 35% of their wealth in that form. This
suggests, consistently with our composition results, that the development of retirement pension
funds and mutual funds has contributed to the equalization of publicly held stock ownership
in the United States. We note, however, that the SCF data for 2001 show that the top 1%
hold a much larger fraction than the average (34% versus 19%) in the form of business assets
(which include sole proprietorships, partnerships, as well as closely held corporations). Further
systematic comparisons, asset by asset narrowly defined, of the SCF and estate tax returns
would be very useful to understand better the quantitative importance of each of the sources of
discrepancy we have mentioned.
   More recently, Wolff (1996) uses the SCF 1992 data to estimate how much estate tax would
be collected by applying average mortality rates to the SCF population. He finds that expected
collections estimated from the SCF should be about 4 times larger than actual estate tax collec-
tions for those who died in 1992, suggesting massive tax evasion and avoidance. Poterba (2000),
however, repeats Wolff study for 1995 and finds that estate taxes estimated from the SCF are
just 10% higher than what was actually collected. Eller et al. (2001) tries to reconcile this
discrepancy and shows that the results are quite sensitive to assumptions made about mortality
rates, as well as marital and charitable bequests, but find a range of estimates much closer to
Poterba than to Wolff. Our top wealth share estimates are about 25% lower than the SCF top
wealth shares, suggesting that there might be some under-reporting of estates, but that the
difference is actually much closer to the small gap found by Poterba (2000) than the very large
gap found by Wolff (1996).


                                               29
       Finally, Wolff (1994) has produced series of top 1% wealth shares by pasting together the
earlier estate series by Lampman (1962) and Smith (1984) and the modern SCF estimates.54
These series represent the top 1% households (not individuals) and are reproduced on Figure
11. A close examination reveals that patching together data from difference sources is a per-
ilous exercise. The Wolff series suggest that there has been a tremendous decline in wealth
concentration in the 1960s and 1970s from 34% to 20%, followed by an equally large surge in
concentration to above 35% in 1989. Our series based on an homogeneous estate tax data show
that the evolution of concentration has actually been much less dramatic during that period. As
can be seen from Figure 11, Wolff-Marley’s estimate for 1976 is based on estate tax data while
the 1962 and 1983 estimates are based on the SCF. Thus, the failure to account for the large
gap between the SCF and estate estimates that exists in any given year generates a dramatic
distortion in the time pattern of the Wolff-Marley series.


5.3.3       Forbes 400 Richest Americans

The popular view is that the personal computer revolution of the 1980s, and the development of
Internet in the 1990s, created many new business opportunities and the extremely quick creation
of new fortunes (the so called dot-comers). From this perspective, our finding of no increase in
wealth concentration during the 1990s seems surprising indeed. To pursue this question further,
we use the Forbes magazine annual survey of the top 400 richest Americans, available since
1982.55 This systematic source has certainly been highly influential in creating the feeling that
the last two decades had been extraordinary favorable to the creation of new fortunes.
       The Forbes 400 represent an extremely small fraction of the U.S. adult population, about
the top .0002% in 2000, that is, a group 50 times smaller than our top .01% group. We have
used the Forbes 400 survey to estimate the top .0002% (corresponding almost exactly to the
top 400 individuals in 2000) wealth share. This share is displayed on Figure 12.56 It shows
that the fraction of wealth controlled by the top fortunes tripled from just above 1% in the
  54
       These series are a revised and extended version of the earlier Wolff-Marley series constructed in the same way
and presented in Wolff and Marley (1989).
  55
     Kennickell (2003) also examines the Forbes 400 data for the years corresponding to the SCF surveys between
1989 and 2001.
  56
     Those statistics are also reported in Table C2.



                                                          30
early 1980s to above 3.5% at the peak in 2000. From 2000 to 2002, the share came down to
just below 3% in 2002. Thus the Forbes data is indeed consistent with the popular view that
the richest individuals in the United States control a sizeable share of total wealth and, more
importantly, that this share has increased significantly over the last two decades. The top .01%
share we estimated was around 4% since the mid-1980s. This is compatible with a top .0002%
share slightly above 1% as in the early 1980s but not with a top .0002% share equal to 3.5% as
in the peak of 2000.57 Therefore, it appears that our top wealth share series from estates have
failed to capture the increase due to the surge in the Forbes 400 top fortunes.58
       For the early 1980s, McCubbin (1994) analyzed estate tax returns of Forbes 400 decedents
and found that wealth reported on estate tax returns was on average 35% lower than on the
Forbes list. The discrepancy was attributed mostly to the fact that the estate tax returns
include only the assets and property owned by the individual decedent while the Forbes survey
also includes wealth distributed to the spouse, and the full value of trusts set-up to distribute
wealth to family relatives but whose creator retains control. It would be extremely useful to
repeat this study for the full period 1982-2002 in order to understand the reasons for the growing
discrepancy that has taken place since the mid-1980s between top estates and the Forbes 400.59
       It is interesting to divide further the group of the Forbes 400 into the top 100 and the
next 300 richest (for year 2000). Those top groups correspond to the top .00005% and top
.0002-.00005% using our usual notation. The share of wealth accruing to those two groups is
reported on Figure 12. It displays a striking contrast: the share of wealth of the top 100 have
been multiplied by a factor 4.3 from 1983 to 2000 while the share of wealth of the next 300
richest individuals has only been multiplied by a factor 2.1 during the same period.60 It is also
  57
       More precisely, if wealth is Pareto distributed with parameter a, then the ratio of the top .01% wealth share
to the top .0002% wealth share is (.01/.0002)1−1/a = 3.7 for a = 1.5, which is about the Pareto parameter that
can be obtained for the wealth distribution in 2000 from Table 1.
  58
     If just a few billionaires are responsible for the surge, it is possible that they were simply not sampled (by
death). Given that these types of fortunes accrued to relatively young individuals and that death probability
(adjusted by the socioeconomic status) does not even reach 1% by the age of 60, it seems possible that a few-year
long surge of wealth of a few individuals can remain unnoticed.
  59
     It should also be noted that the Forbes 400 estimates are often educated guesses with potentially large errors.
The Forbes 400 survey might also miss some wealthy individuals. The SCF survey does include a few individuals
missed by Forbes with wealth above the Forbes 400 lower bound.
 60
    The threshold corresponding to the bottom of the top 400 has actually increased “only” by 75% from 1983


                                                          31
important to note that the share of the two groups is closely parallel during the 1980s, a decade
of relatively modest growth for the Forbes shares, and that the bulk of the divergence between
the two Forbes groups, is concentrated in just 3 years, 1996 to 1999, which are the years of the
fastest growth of the stock market (see Figure 1). It would be interesting to use the Forbes
data to analyze to what extent the new technology stock market “bubble” can account for this
phenomenon. In sum, three quarters of all the gains to the Forbes 400 from 1983 to 2000 have
actually accrued to the top quarter of the list, and most of those gains happened in the second
half of the 1990s. Therefore, taken at face value, the Forbes data, combined with the absence
of a significant increase in top wealth shares in the estate tax data and the SCF, suggest that
among the top fractiles of the wealth distribution, only the very top (perhaps a group limited
to just the hundred richest individuals in the country) has experienced sizeable gains since the
mid-1980s, while the other groups of high wealth holders actually did not experience much gains
relative to the average wealth holder in the U.S. population.
    The number of fortunes created by the development and expansion of new technology sector
is certainly more than a few hundred. This fact can be consistent with our findings only if,
at the same time those new fortunes were created, fortunes of similar magnitude were being
destroyed. Analyzing in more detail the rise and fall of the new technology companies over the
last two decades could be an interesting way to cast light on this issue, and understand why the
results from estate tax returns or the SCF seem so much at odds with the popular perception
of the 1990s decade and the Forbes 400 data.
    Our top wealth shares series from estates show a sharp drop in very top wealth shares from
1916 to 2000; although the Forbes data suggest that our estimates have missed the surge in
wealth of the very wealthiest richest Americans. How do the very richest Americans of today
compare with the richest individuals from the beginning of the twentieth century? Forbes
proposed a list in 1918 of the top 30 richest Americans. The richest person at the time was
John Rockefeller, who held an estimated fortune of $1.2 billion (current dollars), and thus held
0.54% of total net worth. How does this compare with the wealth of the richest Americans
in 2000, the very peak of the stock-market? As population has grown by a factor 3.33 from
1918 to 2000, to provide a meaningful comparison, we need to add the fortunes of Bill Gates,
to 2000.



                                               32
Lawrence Ellison, Paul Allen, and one third of Warren Buffet, the four richest Americans in
2000. They total $166.33 billion, which is 0.52% of total net worth, almost exactly the same as
John Rockefeller in 1918. Thus, even the peak of the stock market bubble did not produce top
fortunes larger relative to the average than the one accumulated by John Rockefeller by 1918,
and our top shares results suggest that there were many more wealthy individuals below him
than today below Bill Gates.


6    Conclusion

This paper has presented new homogeneous series on top wealth shares from 1916 to 2000 using
estate tax return data. Although many studies have analyzed wealth inequality in the United
States, none had presented consistent concentration estimates over such a long period on an
almost annual basis. We have found that the shocks of the Great Depression, the New Deal,
and World War II, have produced a dramatic decrease in the top wealth shares. This decrease
has been concentrated within the upper part of the top percentile, the top .1% of the wealth
distribution, with much more modest changes for lower wealth groups within the top 1%. This
evidence is consistent with the dramatic decline in top capital incomes documented in Piketty
and Saez (2003). The large shocks that large wealth holders experienced in the first part of the
century seem to have had a permanent effect: top wealth shares increased very modestly during
the stock market booms of the 1960s and 1990s, and are much lower today than in the pre-
Great Depression era. We have tentatively suggested that steep progressive income and estate
taxation, by reducing the rate of wealth accumulation, may have been the most important factor
preventing large fortunes from being reconstituted. Many other factors such as business and
finance regulations, the emergence of a large middle class in the post World War II period, and
the equalization of wealth across genders might have also contributed to reducing individual
wealth concentration.
    Surprisingly, our top wealth shares series do not increase during the 1990s, a time of extra-
ordinary stock price growth and perceived as having been extremely favorable to the creation
of new fortunes. Our results are consistent with findings from the Survey of Consumer Fi-
nances (Kennickell, 2003; Scholz, 2003) which also display hardly any significant growth in



                                               33
wealth concentration since 1995. This absence of growth in top wealth shares are also consistent
with the top income shares results from Piketty and Saez (2003) because the recent dramatic
growth in top income shares has been primarily due to a surge in top labor incomes, with little
growth of top capital incomes. Examination of the widely known Forbes 400 richest Amer-
icans survey shows a dramatic gain for those wealthy individuals but most of the gains are
concentrated within the top 100 and in the few years of the stock market “bubble” of the late
1990s. Our composition series suggest that by 2000, the top 1% wealth holders do not hold a
significantly larger fraction of their wealth in the form of stocks than the average person in the
U.S. economy, explaining in part why the bull stock market of the late 1990s has not benefited
disproportionately the rich.
   To what extent is the U.S. experience representative of other developed countries’ long run
wealth concentration dynamics? Existing wealth concentration series are unfortunately very
scarce and incomplete for most countries, and it is therefore very difficult to provide a fully
satisfactory answer to this question. However, it is interesting to compare the U.S. top wealth
series with comparable series constructed using the estate multiplier technique as well for the
United Kingdom by Atkinson and Harrison (1978) and the Inland Revenue, and for France
by Piketty et al. (2003). There are important similarities between the American, French, and
British pattern of the top 1% wealth share displayed on Figure 13. In all three countries, top
income shares fell considerably during the 1913 to 1950 period, and they were never able to
come back to the very high levels observed in the early decades of the century. By the end of the
century, the top 1% wealth shares are remarkably close around 22% is all three countries. It is
plausible to think that in all three countries, top capital incomes have been hit by the depression
and wars shocks of the first part of the century and could not recover because of the dynamic
effects of progressive taxation on capital.
   Some important differences among these countries should be mentioned. First, in the early
decades of the twentieth century, top wealth shares were much higher in France, and especially
the United Kingdom, than in the United States. Just before the Great Depression, the top 1%
share is about 40% in the United States, 50% in France, and 60% in the United Kingdom. Thus,
the dramatic fall of top wealth shares that we described for the United States pales in comparison
to the French and British decline. Unsurprisingly, the decline in France is much steeper during


                                                34
World War II, which destroyed a large fraction of the capital stock in the country. Second, in
contrast to France and the United States where the top 1% wealth share has been relatively
stable since the late 1940s, the top 1% wealth share continues to fall in the United Kingdom
from over 45% in the 1950s to about 20% in the late 1970s.61 Finally, the increase in the top 1%
wealth share in the last decades in the United States and the United Kingdom has been of similar
and modest magnitude (from less than 20% to 22-23%) but the timing has been different.62 All
of the gains occurred in the early 1980s in the United States, while all the gains happened in
the late 1990s in the United Kingdom. A detailed analysis of the U.K. very top shares (such as
the top .1%) and composition would be useful to understand whether this difference is driven
from differences in concentration of stock ownership or in the tax systems in the two countries.
       It is striking that, in both the United States and the United Kingdom, top wealth shares
have increased so little in spite of a surge in top income shares. Atkinson (2002) shows that
the top 1% income share increased from less than 5% in the late 1970s to over 10% in 1999 in
the United Kingdom. The increase for the United States has been from less than 8% to about
16% during the same period (Piketty and Saez, 2003). Such a pattern might not last for very
long because our proposed interpretation also suggests that the decline of progressive taxation
observed since the early 1980s in the United States63 and in the United Kingdom could very
well spur a revival of high wealth concentration during the next few decades.
  61
       Analyzing the evolution of top income and wealth taxation in the three countries more carefully could be
useful to test whether taxation is the main factor driving top wealth shares.
  62
     The French top wealth share does not seem to have increased at all since the early 1980s.
  63
     Top income tax rates have gone down dramatically from 70% to 35% since 1981 and the U.S. estate tax is
scheduled to be phased-out by 2011.




                                                       35
Appendix A                The Estate Multiplier Method
The estate multiplier method relies on the assumption that decedents represent a random draw
from the living population. Consequently, denoting the probability of dying by mi , a single
estate observation stands for m1i observations, so that the observed estate of Ei stands for the
wealth of m1i Ei . Our measure of Ei is described in Appendix C and our mortality measures are
presented in Appendix B.
    An implementation of the multiplier technique requires that wealth and mortality rates are
appropriately measured. There are problems with both that we will discuss in what follows.
It also requires the assumption of a random draw from the population. There are at least two
reasons why this assumption is non-trivial.
    First, individuals may de-cumulate wealth in anticipation of death, thereby making decedents
a non-representative sample from the population. For example, some individuals who died had
experienced a prolonged terminal illness. This is important because of accompanying expenses
and the potential tax planning activities in anticipation of death. The effect may simply be
due to higher out of pocket health expenses of the individuals who died compared to survivors.
Smith (1999) argues that such expenses are moderate and therefore do not have major impact
on wealth. However, his evidence is based on expenditures of the living, while there is some
evidence that it is the end-of-life health expenditures that are most significant. Alternatively,
when dealing with the tax data as we do here, there is also a possibility that observed estates are
skewed by tax avoidance and therefore do not accurately reflect wealth of a typical individual.64
    Second, to the extent that a priori mortality risk varies in the population and people have
private information about their own frailty,65 their wealth accumulation patterns might well
be different. Alternatively, under one of the theories explaining the relationship of health and
income or wealth, healthier people may simply be more productive and therefore wealthier. A
correlation of the error between actual and assumed mortality rates with wealth will tend to
bias the results even in the absence of any other measurement issues.
  64
     This type of tax avoidance may be more prevalent among individuals who died compared to those who
survived, because increased likelihood of death may motivate taxpayers to undertake planning. The importance
of such an effect is mitigated by the fact that some avoidance strategies (such as gift giving) that are performed
in anticipation of death are explicitly disallowed by the tax code. Note also that there is a qualitative difference
between tax avoidance and real behavioral response to taxation in this context. To the extent that taxpayers
truly adjust their behavior in response to taxation, it represents an economically meaningful impact on the wealth
distribution. Tax avoidance that allows to reduce the size of taxable estate without effectively relinquishing
control (see Wojciech Kopczuk and Joel Slemrod (2003) and especially the comment by Ray Madoff (2003) for
a related discussion) will bias our results toward finding lower share of wealth at the top without a real effect.
Such response is likely to vary with changes in the tax rates and therefore the bias might have changed over
time. There is some evidence that the size of estates responds to tax incentives (Kopczuk and Slemrod, 2001;
Holtz-Eakin and Marples, 2001). It is unclear whether the effect, if any, would be due to a real reduction in
wealth or else due to tax avoidance. Some authors suggest that tax avoidance is rampant (Cooper, 1979), others
disagree (Schmalbeck, 2001). Poterba (2001) and McGarry (1999) find that easy avoidance strategies that rely
on gifts are not taken advantage of. On the other hand, Joulfaian (2003) finds using aggregate data that gift
tax revenue is highly sensitive to expected marginal tax rates, while Poterba and Weisbenner (2003) find some
evidence of the quantitative importance of an abusive use of minority discount provisions.
  65
     Hurd et al. (1999) find that subjective survival probabilities predict mortality even when socio-economic
characteristics and health conditions are controlled for.




                                                        36
Appendix B                Population and Mortality
Mortality differential — its presence and its size One of the key issues in implementing
the estate multiplier technique to estimate wealth shares of the wealthy is the choice of appro-
priate mortality rates. The ideal mortality tables would apply specifically to the wealthy and
would be broken down by age and demographic characteristics. Our baseline mortality tables
were obtained from the Human Mortality Database (www.mortality.org) and rely on the life
tables constructed by the Office of the Actuary of the Social Security Administration (see Bell
et al., 1992, for a full description of the methodology). The mortality tables by age and gender
are available at annual frequency between 1900 and 1995. Between 1996 and 2000, we are using
mortality projections available from the same source. These mortality tables are representative
of the whole population.
    It is well-known that health and mortality rates are negatively correlated with higher so-
cioeconomic status measured by education, income (Deaton and Paxson, 1999, show that the
effect is still present when education is controlled for), wealth (Attanasio and Hoynes, 2000) and
wealth ranking (Attanasio and Emmerson, 2001). Deaton (2002, 2003) and Smith (1999) are
recent surveys of the literature on this topic. In their pioneering study, Kitagawa and Hauser
(1973) documented the importance of the socioeconomic differences in mortality rates in the
United States using 1960 Census data, but there is also some evidence of differences by social
classes that goes back much further (see Deaton, 2002, for references). The presence of such
differences is also found in more recent data. The U.S. National Longitudinal Mortality Study
was specifically designed to study socioeconomic differentials. The sample consists of 1.3 million
(approximately half of that in the public release data) individuals primarily drawn from the 12
CPS studies between March 1973 and March 1985 and matched with the National Death Index
between 1979 and 1985 to identify deaths (see Rogot et al., 1992, for the details of the design).
Extensive tabulations in Rogot et al. (1992) document substantial mortality differentials by race,
education and income categories. The study has its limitations: income is poorly measured and
the sample does not include institutionalized individuals. Figure A1 is based on the tabulations
in Rogot et al. (1992). It shows the ratio of mortality rates of white individuals with the highest
family incomes to the population average. Income categories are defined in terms of 1980 dollars.
The whites in $25,000 and over group constitute approximately 25% of the population while the
whites in $50,000 and over groups constitute approximately 5%. There is considerable noise in
the estimates for the top income category due to limited number of observations: for example,
the category of 25 to 35 years old women with income above $50,000 includes a bit more than
3000 individuals but just 11 deaths. Nevertheless, the figure illustrates that mortality rates for
the higher income categories are usually significantly below the population ones and that the
gap gets smaller for the elderly.66 Brown et al. (2002) use the NLMS data to estimate the size
of socioeconomic differentials by education and gender. As discussed in what follows, we rely
on their estimates in making adjustments to the mortality rates.
    There is a considerable literature devoted to analyzing causal paths from income to health.67
The direction of causality is not directly relevant for our study, although, to the extent that
health affects wealth, it suggests that the bias discussed earlier may be relevant.
 66
      Using AHEAD data, Hurd et al. (1999) also find that the mortality gap falls with age.
 67
      See Deaton (2002) for a survey and discussion and Adams et al. (2003) for a recent study.




                                                        37
Mortality differential — changes over time The major data problem from our point of
view is that no consistent mortality tables for the wealthy for the whole century are available. It
is certainly possible that the magnitude of the mortality differential between wealthy and the rest
changed over time. Duleep (1989) compared the mortality differentials in the 1970s by income
and education classes based on the Social Security records to the results of Kitagawa and Hauser
(1973) that were based on 1960 Census and found no significant changes. By its design, however,
that study does not directly address the mortality experience of the wealthy (who are above the
Social Security limit). Pappas et al. (1993) replicated the analysis of Kitagawa and Hauser (1973)
using the 1986 National Mortality Follow-back Survey and the 1986 National Health Interview
Survey and concluded that differentials increased between 1960 and 1986. Hattersley (1999)
relies on the UK Longitudinal Study (a panel study) and reports changes in life expectancy
and survival probabilities by social classes (based on the initial occupation) between 1972 and
1996. For both men and women, the results show proportionally bigger increases in the survival
rates for professionals than for unskilled workers (who had lower survival rates to begin with).
Converting her results to mortality rates, they indicate a significant widening of the mortality
differential.68
    We can shed some additional light on the mortality differential over time using insurance
data. It is well-known that both annuitants and purchasers of life insurance are wealthier than
the average. The Society of Actuaries made available on its web page (www.soa.org) a collection
of more than 300 mortality tables for different countries and different periods, including some
tables based on the experience of insurance companies. Unfortunately, variation in the definitions
and approaches used in their construction makes them non-comparable and thus makes it difficult
to credibly trace the evolution of the mortality differential over time. Furthermore, to the extent
that penetration of the insurance markets varied over time, this induces an additional source
of compositional changes. We present the numbers from the George B. Buck Consultants Inc.
U.S. mortality tables that are based on the experience of employees of large industrial clients
pension plans and are dated at 1963, 1974 and 1979. Additionally, the Buck table based on
the experience of employees in State Teacher Retirement Systems is available for 1982. In each
case, these mortality tables cover a few preceding years. Figure A2 compares these mortality
rates to population averages in 1960, 1971, 1975 and 1978 — years that fall in the middle of
the experience periods corresponding to the different tables.69 All of these figures include as a
reference the arithmetic average of the differential over the four series. One thing to note here
is that the 1960 mortality differentials are smallest (the ratios are closest to one) and the 1978
values appear to indicate a bigger differential than the earlier years. As mentioned, however,
the 1978 data is based on a different sample and therefore is likely not comparable to other
series. The education gradient is known to be significant and, arguably, more important than
the income one. The pattern of the earlier data is certainly consistent with mortality differential
increasing over time but it is hardly conclusive.
    Given difficulties involved in studying the size of the gradient in the second part of the 20th
  68
     For example, according to these results, the estimated probability of survival to at least age 65 for a 25-29
year old male professional changed from 72% to 84%, while the respective probabilities for a male unskilled worker
changed from 61% to 64%. Taking these numbers at face value would suggest an large decrease in the ratio of
mortality rates of the skilled to the unskilled from 72% to 45%.
  69
     There is no information about the period covered by the 1963 study so that the value of 1960 was selected
arbitrarily. The mortality rates are weighted by the sizes of policies.



                                                       38
century, it is hardly surprising that the task is even more daunting if one is concerned with
the whole century. Scattered mortality tables based on annuity providers experience and relied
upon in valuation of annuities are available for many different years and they underlie Figure
A3. It has to be stressed that these tables have different sources and are not necessarily directly
comparable.70 No obvious trends in the evolution of mortality differentials are detectable.

Approach. We assume that the differential between mortality rates of the wealthy and those
of the general population stayed constant over time. The evidence regarding changes in the size
of this differential over time is very sketchy. It is somewhat reassuring that mortality tables
based on the experience of pension plans do not contradict our assumption. Even under this
simplifying assumption, we still need to measure the size of these constant differentials. We rely
on estimates from Brown et al. (2002) kindly provided by the authors. Relying on the NLMS
data, they estimated mortality differentials by educational status, sex and gender. We use in our
work the mortality differential for white college graduates (by gender). It would be preferable
from our point of view to use differentials by wealth or at least income classes. Such data is
unfortunately not available. The NLMS has only a poor measure of income and, despite its
large size (more than 1 million observations) the top income category is very thin. We modify
the Brown et al. (2002) factors slightly: their mortality ratios exceed 1 for ages close to 100,
in such cases we set them to equal 1 (and we set them to 1 for all higher ages).71 Figure A4
displays the socioeconomic mortality differentials that we use for both men and women.

Mortality-related sources of a potential bias. The mortality adjustments that we rely on
are crude. There are at least two issues that are of importance. First, the mortality rates may be
systematically biased. It is certainly possible that our assumption of the mortality differential
not changing over time is not correct, so that in any given year the mortality rates are in fact
biased. One would expect that the bias from this source, if any, evolves slowly over time, so
that short-term changes in wealth shares cannot be explained by it. Long-term biases remain,
however, a possibility.
    Second, our assumption that the mortality rates are constant within year×gender×age clus-
ter may be in fact incorrect. The direction of the bias will depend on the sign of the covariance
between the mortality error and its effect on wealth accumulation. In a given cluster, we esti-
                             1
mate the average wealth as m   · W where “bar” stands for the mean. If the mortality rates are in
fact varying, the correct estimate should be T1 · W = m 1            1
                                                          · W + cov( m , W ). Standard arguments
would suggest that higher mortality rates lead to lower wealth due to higher health expenditures,
increased tax avoidance and planning in contemplation of death, or lower productivity. If so,
then the multiplier and wealth are positively correlated, so that the covariance effect tends to
bias our wealth shares estimates downward.
  70
     We selected tables that were subsequently relied upon in valuation of annuities. These are tables numbered
803, 806, 888, 809, 810 and 814 (in chronological order). In some cases, they involve some interpolations (especially
for younger ages). The full methodology is not always fully explained.
  71
     As Brown et al. (2002) point out, there must be a cross-over of mortality rates if groups have the same
maximum age. Effectively then, our assumption implies that the maximum age for the two groups is different.
There are naturally extremely few individuals of such advanced age, even among estate filers. Since mortality
rates by the age of 100 are of the order of .4 even in the most recent data and because our age variables are
truncated at 97, 98 or 99 (depending on the year), it is unlikely that this has any significant effect.



                                                         39
Appendix C               An Overview of Estate Taxation and the Net Worth
                         Measure
An excellent overview of the history of changes in the estate tax can be found in the CRS
report by Luckey (1995). Gale and Slemrod (2001) discuss the economic literature on estate
taxation. The modern estate tax was introduced in 1916. The original tax applied to net estates
above $50,000 dollars with a top marginal rate of 10%. Between 1916 and 1945, there were
11 tax reforms changing marginal tax rates and/or exemptions. By the end of this period, the
top marginal tax rate was 77% and the exemption was $60,000. Both the rate schedule and
the nominal exemption remained unchanged until 1976. Major revisions of the gift and estate
taxation were introduced by the Tax Reform Act of 1976 and the Economic Recovery Tax Act
of 1981. A number of smaller changes throughout the 1980s and 1990s were followed by major
increases in the exemption levels and the scheduled repeal (in 2010) of the tax enacted in 2001.
In what follows, we briefly review the history of provisions that are of major importance to this
paper.

Filing Threshold. The coverage of our data naturally depends on the filing threshold. The
tax applies to net estate (gross estate minus deductions). Beginning with the Revenue Act of
1918 (effective February 24, 1919), a tax return had to be filed for all gross estates exceeding
the exemption, regardless of whether net estate was above or below the threshold. Prior to that
change, the return had to be filed if estate was subject to the tax or where gross estate at death
exceeded $60,000 (while the exemption was $50,000). Subsequent changes in the nominal filing
threshold were as follows: February 26, 1926 — $100,000, June 6, 1932 — $50,000, August 31,
1935 — $40,000, October 21, 1942 — $60,000. Between 1977 and 1988, the exemption changed
every year (on January 1st) beginning with $120,667 and increasing to $600,000. It was further
increased to $625,000 in 1998, $650,000 in 1999 and $675,000 in 2000. The location of this
threshold determines what fraction of population our data represents.

Gross Estate. The 1916 definition of gross estate included all property, gifts made within two
years of death and all assets held jointly excluding those that may be shown to have originally
belonged to the other persons and never belonged to decedent. The Revenue Act of 1918
expanded the definition of estate to include dower, power of appointment, and life insurance.
Many aspects of this definition evolved over time since. Major changes involved the treatment
of jointly owned property, gifts, life insurance and relatively recent legislative and court activity
regarding valuation of certain kinds of assets.

       • Community property/jointly owned property/marital deduction.72 There are nine com-
         munity property states73 where half of all assets acquired while married is the property of
         each spouse — such assets are called community property. Jointly held property is differ-
         ent from the legal point of view — this is anything jointly owned (not necessarily with the
         spouse) except for the community property. The original definition of a gross estate called
         for inclusion of all jointly owned property in the gross estate. As a consequence, residents
  72
    We are grateful to Jon Bakija and Barry Johnson for their help in clarifying these issues.
  73
    Arizona, California, Idaho, Louisiana, Nevada, New Mexico, Texas, and Washington. Wisconsin effectively
became a community property state in 1986.


                                                    40
         of the community property states were treated differently than others. A half of any com-
         munity property was to be reported, while residents of other states had to report and were
         subject to the tax on the full value of jointly held assets. This situation was perceived as
         an important source of the (horizontal) inequity, and the 1942 Act attempted to address
         this issue by requiring that community property be included in the gross estate unless the
         surviving spouse could be shown to have contributed to the acquisition cost. This solution
         was replaced in 1948 by the marital deduction: up to 50% of estate of the first-to-die could
         be deducted from gross estate. In 1976, this rule was modified to allow for a deduction of
         the greater of 50% or $250,000, and in 1981 the unlimited marital deduction was allowed
         for. Until 1976, all of the joint property was included in gross estate.74 After 1976, under
         some conditions, only 50% must be included.75 After 1981, only 50% of joint property
         (without any restrictions) must be included.
         From the point of view of maintaining a consistent definition of gross estate, the 1943-
         1948 period is different than the rest, because the definition of gross estate in community
         property states is broader than in other years. Our data do not provide a fully consistent
         definition over time and across states.76 In Appendix D.5 we do though perform limited
         sensitivity checks by comparing individuals in the community property states to the others
         to see whether their relative shares between 1943-1948 appear unusual. We also discuss
         there the quantitative relevance of changes in the treatment of joint property.

       • Life insurance (receivable either by the executor of the estate or by others under policies
         taken out by the decedent) was to be included in gross estate beginning with the Tax
         Reform Act of 1918. Before 1942, up to $40,000 of life insurance could be excluded from
         the estates. In 1954, rules governing taxation of life insurance were further extended to
         include policies that were given away by the decedent within three years of death or in
         contemplation of death. We can account for changes in the exemption, but not for the
         1954 change in the definition.
         While we observe life insurance payouts, we have no further information regarding con-
         tracts that were their source. For example, we do not know whether the taxpayer held
         a term- or a whole-life policy. This data problem makes it impossible to ascertain the
         exact cash value of life insurance. Motivated by the composition of life insurance in the
         SCF data as reported in Brown (1999), we assume that the life insurance payout is split
         equally between term- and whole-life policies. We further assume that the whole-life part
         has the cash value of 2/3 of the face value, while the term-life part has the cash value equal
         to the expected payout (the mortality rate times the actual payout). We include the so
         defined cash value in our net worth measure but we order individuals based on net worth
         excluding life insurance. Figure A5 shows estimates of the top 1% wealth share when (1)
  74
      Unless it could be shown that it have originally belonged to the other persons and never belonged to decedent.
  75
      However, with unlimited marital deduction available, there is a counteracting incentive to report all unrealized
capital gains as jointly owned property, in which case they are subject to a step-up in basis. The 1976 Act
introduced a “carryover basis” for unrealized capital gains, however this provision never became effective and was
repealed by the Crude Oil Windfall Profits Tax Act of 1980.
   76
      We have no information about community property before 1976 and we have no information about jointly
owned property in 1965 and 1969. We investigated adjusting the definition of gross estate to always include half
of jointly owned property (imputing 1965 and 1969 values), but it had negligible quantitative consequences and
still does not address the community property problem.


                                                         41
       life insurance is excluded, (2) only cash surrender value is included (the baseline case) and
       (3) when the full payout is included. It is evident from these pictures that life insurance
       is small and that both quantitative and qualitative results are very robust to variations in
       its treatment. The importance of life insurance falls with wealth: for example, the cash
       surrender value of life insurance in the top .01% constituted at its peak (1943) just 1.56%
       of net worth and it was usually much lower than 1%.

     • Gifts. The gift tax was introduced in 1924. There was a lifetime exclusion of $50,000
       and an annual exclusion of $500 per donee. The gift tax, as well as the 1924 estate tax
       schedule were retroactively repealed in 1926. In 1932, the gift tax was reintroduced and
       the marginal gift tax rates were set at three-quarters of the estate tax rates and the annual
       exclusion was set at $5000. The next major modification of gift taxation was introduced
       in 1976 when the estate and gift taxation were “unified”. The 1976 Act introduced the
       single unified exemption for combined gifts and estate transferred by the deceased. The
       marginal estate and gift tax rates are set nominally at the same level, However the estate
       tax liability is computed using a tax-inclusive basis while the gift tax liability is obtained
       on a tax-exclusive basis, resulting in a significant tax advantage of gifts.77
       We exclude regular lifetime gifts from our definition of net worth, consistently with our
       objective of computing the total wealth that is effectively controlled by the wealthy. The
       exception here are gifts in “contemplation of death” that were included in the estate since
       the introduction of the tax in 1916. Some of specific rules changed over time to address
       certain avoidance loopholes (e.g., the 1954 change in the treatment of life insurance that
       was discussed earlier). The gross estate is now supposed to include regular gifts made
       within 3 years of death78 (the original limit was two years, increased to three in 1950),
       any transfers with retained life estate (i.e., if the decedent retained an interest), transfers
       taking effect at death, revocable transfers and transfers by the decedent with respect to a
       life insurance policy made within 3 years before death. To the extent that such gifts are
       indeed made in contemplation of death (as the tax law assumes), their inclusion potentially
       reduces the “moral hazard” bias discussed earlier by eliminating one source of the difference
       between decedents and survivors.

     • Valuation. Many types of assets are inherently difficult to value. As discussed by e.g., Schmal-
       beck (2001) and Johnson et al. (2001), certain types of assets are routinely allowed by the
       courts to be valued at a discount. This applies in particular to the situations where
       the estate contains a significant fraction of a certain kind of property (e.g., corporate
       stock) so that its sale would likely result in a significant reduction in price (so called non-
       marketability discounts). Discounts are also granted to minority interests, even in the case
       when the family owns a majority stake in the company. Some difficult to sell assets (such
       as works of art) are also occasionally granted such a treatment. Our data does not allow
       for identifying the extent of such activity. Johnson et al. (2001) found that approximately
       6% of returns claimed minority or lack-of-marketability discounts and that their average
       size was about 10% of gross estate (for those who claimed the discounts), suggesting that
       this does not have a large quantitative impact on the estimates. Poterba and Weisbenner
77
     On the other hand, gifts including any unrealized capital gains do not benefit from the step-up of their basis.
78
     Even those for which a gift tax return was filed


                                                         42
         (2003) pursue this direction further. It is quite possible that the bias resulting from these
         kinds of discounts did not stay constant over time, because many of these approaches are
         relatively new.
         Changes in the approach to valuation are often driven by court cases rather than legisla-
         tive activity. Two provisions were, however, directly enacted by the legislature. Since
         1976, the so-called “special-use” rules allowed estates consisting primarily of a closely held
         business or family farm to be significantly undervalued.79 Because tax returns (and our
         data) contain both the information about the fair market value and the adjusted value
         of such assets, we are able to account for the full (i.e., fair market) value of these assets
         and, therefore, maintain the consistent definition of estate over time. The special-use ad-
         justment is of minor quantitative importance.80 Since 1935, the executor of an estate has
         had an option of using the so-called “alternate valuation”, whereby assets can be valued
         one year after death instead of being valued at the time of death. The alternate valuation
         delay was later reduced to half a year. Our data contain both alternate and date-of-death
         valuations starting in 1962, but we only have the actual for-tax-purposes value between
         1935-1945. As a result, we are unable to have a fully consistent date-of-death definition
         for our whole sample, but we can measure the size of the difference starting in 1962 and
         it is quantitatively small.

Deductions Many deductions for tax purposes from the gross estate are possible (charitable
deductions since 1918, marital deduction since 1948, deductions for funeral and administrative
expenses and so on). Although all of them have tax consequences, they are not relevant for
the purpose of estimating wealth shares. We subtract from the estate only personal debts and
mortgages of the decedents. In particular, funeral expenses, executor’s commissions, attorneys’
fees and other administrative expenses of the estate are not subtracted. Some of these debts
(e.g., medical debts) may not be representative of debts of surviving individuals, our data does
not allow however for any systematic and consistent over time accounting for different kinds of
debts.

Definition of net worth. Net worth is defined as the total gross estate adjusted for the
special use valuation provisions and reduced by debts.81 Gross estates are measured at the
value for tax purposes which is either date of death or the date of alternative valuation. This is
due to lack of information on the date of death valuations between 1935 and 1945. After 1962,
we can observe both date-of-death and alternate valuations. We discuss the magnitude of the
difference between the two types of valuation below.
  79
       Specifically, under certain circumstances, these kinds of assets can be valued at their present rather than best
use.
  80
     With the exception of 1983 tabulations in brackets below the top .25% that are based on a very small number
of observations (see tables A2-A and B, and the further discussion of the estate composition data), in no other
bracket the special use adjustment exceeds the order of 1% of our final figure assigned to net worth. In some of
the thin brackets in 1983, this adjustment is approximately 4%. The special-use adjustment was originally capped
at $500,000. The 2000 (the last year of our data) limit was $780,000. By definition then, this rule can only play
a minor role at the very top.
  81
     Individuals are ordered according to net worth minus the estimated value of life insurance. To the extent
that inclusion of life insurance leads to rank reversal, the share of wealth held by the top percentiles is slightly
underestimated (see sensitivity analysis described above).


                                                           43
Appendix D                Top Wealth Shares
Appendix D.1            Aggregate Net Worth Series
In order to obtain a denominator for our top wealth shares computations, we need to obtain
estimates of total net worth of the household sector in the United States. Net worth will be
defined as the sum of all tangible assets (owner occupied residential land and housing82 and
consumer durables), financial assets (deposits, bonds, equity in corporate and non-corporate
businesses, etc.), net of all liabilities (consumer debt, mortgages, etc.). Our wealth measure
includes only the cash surrender value of pension fund reserves (that is, the value of pensions
that remains upon death). Our wealth measure includes life insurance reserves (as we include
the expected pay-out of life insurance in our estimates). It also excludes social security wealth,
and all forms of human wealth (expected value of future labor earnings). Our wealth definition
corresponds roughly to the definition of wealth W2 in Wolff and Marley (1989).
   Unfortunately, the United States has not developed a consistent set of estimates of household
wealth since 1916. As a result, aggregate net worth series have been computed using various
sources.

Period 1945-2002
    For the period since 1945, detailed official Flow of Funds Accounts (FFA) have been pro-
duced for each sector of the U.S. economy (see Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
(2000)). The FFA presents the detailed balance sheets of Households and Nonprofit Organiza-
tions. They report the amounts outstanding (on December 31st of each year) broken down for
a large number of assets and liability items. Net worth is divided into three broad categories:
Tangible Assets, Financial Assets, and Liabilities. The main difficulty with the FFA is that they
separate the household from the non-profit sector only imperfectly before 1988.
    As only the Cash Surrender Value (CSV) of pensions enters estates, we include only the CSV
of pension fund reserves in our total net worth series. According to Smith (1984) and Wolff
(1989), the CSV of pensions has been traditionally very small in the United States (estimated
around 5%). However, over the last three decades, the development of Defined Contribution
(DC) pension plans, and in particular 401(k) plans since the 1980s, has substantially increased
the CSV of pensions. In general, DC plans vest after a short period of employment (401(k)
employee contributions vest immediately in general) with the same employer and are portable
when an employee shifts to another employer; amounts accumulated in DC plans can be fully
bequeathed at death and thus are fully included on estate tax returns). Therefore, we assume
that all DC pension reserves have 100% CSV. The DC pension plans assets are obtained from
the FFA, Table L119c (Row 1, total financial assets) since 1985. Before 1985, the FFA does not
report the DC plans assets but report the equity shares held by households through DC plans
(Table B100e, Row 13). We assume that the fraction of equity shares in DC plans before 1985
is equal to 40% (which is the fraction in 1985). Before 1955, DC plan assets is less than 5% of
pension reserves. Therefore for the period before 1955, we adopt the Smith-Wolff assumption
  82
     Tenant occupied residential land and buildings with more than four units are included in the business assets
category in the Flow of Funds Accounts and we have followed their methodology although rented land and
residential buildings would appear in large part as real estate on tax returns of decedent owners. This discrepancy,
however, has no effect on our top share and composition estimates.



                                                        44
and we estimate the CSV of pensions as 5% of total pension fund reserves. This approximation
is of little consequence as pension fund reserves are less than 5% of total net worth (and hence
the CSV of pensions is a negligible component of total net worth).
    Pension funds assets are invested in corporate equities and fixed claims assets. We compute
the total amount invested in corporate equities from Table B100e, Row 13 (see above); the
amount of fixed claims assets is then obtained by substraction.
    For the period since 1988, we defined our wealth measure as net worth of households and
nonprofit organizations less the net worth of nonprofit organizations. For the period before
1988, the category tangible assets allows the separation between the household and the nonprofit
sector. The category financial assets does not provide the breakdown and therefore, we have
assumed that the fraction of financial assets in the nonprofit sector has stayed constant and
equal to the fraction for 1988 (the earliest year this estimate is provided). This assumption
seems reasonable because the share of nonprofit for the tangible asset category does not display
a trend and stays around 10% between 1945 and 1988. It is important to note that, in the
FFA, tenant occupied real estate for buildings with more than four units is not included in the
real estate category but included in equity in non-corporate business. We follow the same rule
although it should be noted that tenant occupied real estate (even for buildings with more than
four units) will most likely appear in the real estate category in the estate of the owner.
    The category liabilities is partially broken down between the household and the non-profit
sector for the period 1945 to 1987. Three separate sub-categories (municipal securities, com-
mercial mortgages, and trade payables) are liabilities of the nonprofit sector exclusively. In
the period 1988 to 2002, those three categories represent about 70% of all nonprofit liabilities.
Therefore, for the period 1945 to 1987, we have assumed that the total liabilities of the nonprofit
sector is equal to 1/0.7 times the sum of those three sub-categories.
    In any case, the fraction nonprofit in the FFA of households and nonprofits is between 5%
and 10%, and closer to 5% for the liability and financial assets categories for which we need to
do imputations. Therefore, we expect that errors in our imputations will lead to a very modest
bias in our net worth estimates (no more than 1-2%) for the period 1945-1987.

Period 1916-1944
    Estimating total household net worth in the prewar period is complicated, because there
is no single official source and most sources provide estimates only for some years during the
period. An earlier attempt to compute household wealth from various sources is Wolff (1989).
However, he provides estimates only for years 1900, 1912, 1921, 1922, 1929, 1933, and 1939 for
the pre-1945 period. Our estimates are very close to his W2 series for those years. We build
upon his methodology and the same sources he did to extend our estimates to every year from
1916 to 1944.
    Tangible assets are estimated as follows. For 1925 to 1945, consumer durables are taken
from the FFA series reported in Herman (2000), Table 1, Consumer durable goods column. For
1916 to 1924, we have used Goldsmith et al. (1956), Table W1, p. 14, column 12, Consumer
durables. The earlier Goldsmith series has been pasted (using a constant multiplicative factor)
so that they coincide with the most recent and official FFA series in 1925 (in 1925, Goldsmith
series about 10% higher than the FFA series).
    Residential land series is from Goldsmith et al. (1956), Table W1, p. 15, column (21), non-


                                                45
farm residential land. Owner occupied residential structures is from the Bureau of Economic
Analysis at http://www.bea.doc.gov/bea/dn/faweb/, Table 5.1, col. 14, for the period 1925 to
1945. For 1916 to 1924, we have used Goldsmith et al. (1956), Table W1, p. 14, column 4,
nonfarm residential structures. The Goldsmith series for 1916-1925 have been pasted (using a
constant multiplicative factor) to coincide with the most recent and official BEA series in 1925
(in 1925, Goldsmith series about 20% higher than the BEA series because they include tenant
occupied housing as well).
    Tangible assets are defined as the sum of those three series: consumer durables, non-farm
residential land, and owner occupied residential structures. This series is about 8% higher in
1945 than the tangible assets series from the FFA (see above). Thus, we have reduced uniformly
our tangible assets series by about 8% before 1945 so that they match exactly in 1945.
   Unlike Tangible Assets, there is no annual source available for each of the categories forming
the financial assets and liabilities of the household sector. Goldsmith et al. (1956) provide
detailed estimates of the financial assets, and liabilities of the household sector only for years
1900, 1912, 1922, 1929, 1933, 1939, 1945, and 1949. Wolff (1989) uses the Goldsmith estimates
and reconciles them with the FFA estimates in order to cover the period 1900-1984. We therefore
use the Wolff (1989) estimates available for the years 1912, 1922, 1929, 1933, 1939, and 1945,83
    Financial assets are divided into fixed claimed assets (deposits and currency, federal bonds,
state and local bonds, corporate and foreign bonds) and equity (corporate stock, equity in
farm businesses, equity in non-farm unincorporated businesses, trust equity). The Wolff (1989)
estimates for each of these categories are reported in Table 5, “Final National Balance Sheet Es-
timates for the Household Sector for W2, by Detailed Component, 1900-1983”, in the electronic
data appendix to the paper that Professor Edward Wolff kindly made available to us.
    We start from the Wolff (1989) estimates and we interpolate in between the years as follows.
    For deposits and currency, state and local bonds, corporate and foreign bonds, and liabil-
ities, we have done a straight linear interpolation between each consecutive pair of years for
which Wolff (1989) provides estimates. Each of these items is relatively small and was trending
upward relatively smoothly over the period.
    For federal bonds, we interpolate between the years using the total outstanding Federal Debt
series from Historical Statistics of the United States (Series Y493).84 The interpolation proceeds
as follows: we compute the ratio of federal bonds in household wealth to outstanding federal
debt for the years available in Wolff (1989). In between those years, we assume that this ratio
evolves linearly, and this allows us to estimate the amount of federal bonds in household wealth
for each year.
    We proceed in the same fashion for corporate equity using the S&P500 index end of year
series compiled on line by Robert Shiller at http://aida.econ.yale.edu/ shiller/data.htm. We also
interpolate trust equity and unincorporated non-farm business equity using the same S&P500
index. Finally, we interpolate unincorporated farm business equity using an estimate of the
value of farms from Goldsmith et al. (1956), Table W1, the sum of columns (7) farm structures,
  83
     Wolff (1989) also provides estimates for year 1921 based on King (1927). King (1927) computes estimates
only for year 1921 and is difficult to reconcile with the laterGoldsmith et al. (1956). Therefore, we do not use
the King (1927) and Wolff (1989) estimate for 1921.
  84
     Those series give the amount of debt on June 30th of each year. We estimate end of year amounts of debt in
year t as the average of year t and t+1 from the original series.


                                                      46
(14) livestock inventories, (15) crops inventories, and (20) agricultural land. Contrary to the
FFA series, Goldsmith and Wolff series do not include tenant occupied real estate for buildings
with more than four units in the unincorporated business category. Therefore, in order to be
consistent with FFA, we add tenant occupied residential structures from the Bureau of Economic
Analysis at http://www.bea.doc.gov/bea/dn/faweb/, Table 5.1, col. 15 to the category equity
in unincorporated businesses.85
    Those interpolated series extend Wolff (1989) series for financial assets and liabilities for each
year from 1912 to 1945. In order to paste those series to the series for the 1945-2002 period, we
adjust by a proportional factor each the early series (1912-1945) for fixed claim assets (deposits
and all bonds), corporate equity, non-corporate equity and trusts, and liabilities. For fixed claim
assets, the adjustment is up by about 5%. For corporate equity, the adjustment is up by 10%,
and for unincorporated equity (including tenant occupied housing), the adjustment is down by
about 10%. For liabilities, the adjustment is about 2% up.

   Overall, our series are within 5% of the Wolff (1989) W2 series, and often within 2-3%, with
no trend over the period.86

From end-of-year to average-of-year estimates
    All wealth series from FFA, Goldsmith et al. (1956), and Wolff (1989) are end-of-year esti-
mates (for December 31st of each year). Estates represent wealth of decedents at time of death
and hence are distributed fairly uniformly over the year. Therefore, for our denominator series,
the best would be to obtain estimates of average aggregate wealth over the year. The simple
approximation we use consists in estimating the average for year t as the half-sum of our end-
of-year t − 1 and end-of-year t series. Smith (1984) adopted this method to obtain top wealth
shares for the 1958-1976 period. This approximation will be accurate when wealth is smoothly
increasing or decreasing in between the two end-of-year snapshots.
    The only adjustments we made to this simple method were for corporate stocks for years
1929, 1932, and 1933. This is because the annual average value of stock prices (estimated as the
monthly average of the S&P 500 series) was substantially different than the end-of-year averages
for the corresponding two consecutive years. Thus for those three years, we replaced the simple
end-of-year average by the monthly average over the year.87

Appendix D.2           Estimates Based on Micro-Data: 1916-1945, 1962, 1965, 1969,
                       1972, 1976, 1982-2000
We take advantage of an extraordinary dataset available through the Statistics of Income (SOI)
Division of the IRS.88 The data include information from all of the estate tax returns filed for
  85
     The BEA series are only available since 1925, we extrapolate the series from 1916 to 1925 using Goldsmith
et al. (1956) non-farm residential structures as we did for owner occupied residential structures (see above).
  86
     The only exception is 1972 for which our series derived from FFA are 7% higher than Wolff estimate.
  87
     For all other years, the end-of-year average and the monthly average are very close and we did not do any
adjustment.
  88
     The dataset is confidential and is not released in its raw form. We are extremely grateful to Barry Johnson
of the SOI for his help and patience in explaining the data and facilitating our access to it by running our SAS
programs at the SOI.




                                                      47
deaths occurring between 1916 and 1945,89 all returns filed in 1963, samples of returns filed in
1966, 1970, 1973, 1977 and samples of returns corresponding to years of death between 1982-
2000. For all years however, there is 100% coverage of very large estates (those corresponding
roughly to our top .01% group). A more detailed description of the 1916-1945 data can be found
in McCubbin (1990), while the post-1945 studies are described in Johnson (1994).
    We rely on the relevant year-of-death datasets to characterize wealth distributions for 1916-
1945 and 1982-2000. We use returns filed in 1963, 1966, 1970, 1973, 1977 to construct wealth
percentiles for 1962, 1965, 1969, 1972, and 1976 respectively, regardless of the actual year of
death. For 1962-1976, this choice is motivated by the sample design: in the absence of regular
sampling, no other approach is feasible. Conveniently, this period does not involve any significant
legislative activity and most returns filed in year t+1 correspond the deaths in year t.90 We
always ignore observations for which net worth falls below the filing threshold because not 100%
of estates with net worth below the filing threshold file estate tax returns.91
    We impute estate multipliers when age is missing. Age of the decedent was present on the
tax return beginning with the August 1919 revision of the tax form. As a result, we do not
have age information for most of the decedents dying between 1916 and 1918. We also do not
know age for any of the 1965 observations. We do have age data for 77% of the 1919 decedents,
88% of the 1920 decedents and we have age information for over 90% of our sample in each
of the remaining years (between 1982 and 1995, we have age information for everyone). In
years when age information is available for most observations, imputations are performed by
setting the multiplier equal to the average of the multipliers of the 50 individuals in the wealth
distribution surrounding the one with missing age information. In order to impute multipliers
between 1916 and 1918, we proceed in an identical fashion, but we place each observation in
the 1919 distribution (adjusted for inflation) and base our imputations on the surrounding 1919
observations. Imputations in 1965 are performed similarly by using the joint distribution of 1962
and 1969 returns as the reference distribution.
    Age is coded in the data using two digits. Except for 1982-1983, the age variable is top-coded
at 98, in 1982 the value of 96 stands for “96 or above”, while in 1983 the value of 97 stands for
“97 or above”. Using the top-coded value would lead to overestimation of the corresponding
multiplier, since some of the individuals are in fact older and therefore faced higher mortality
risk than the top-coded value would indicate. To correct this problem, we use as a multiplier
for top-coded observations the average (using population weights) multiplier for those aged at
the top code or above.
    As discussed earlier, the filing threshold and therefore the coverage of our data changed many
times over the years.92 Post-1945, all tax changes went into effect as of midnight December 31st ,
but the earlier reforms generally did not take place on such end-of-year dates. There were four
changes in the filing threshold that became effective in the middle of a year: on 2/26/1926,
6/6/1932, 8/30/1935 and 10/21/1942. The 1926 and 1942 changes increased the threshold,
  89
     Returns filed after 1945 are also included.
  90
     The latest year available is for estate tax returns filed during calendar year 2002. This year contains about
8% of returns for individuals deceased in 2000 and less than 1% for individuals deceased in 1999 or before. We
are therefore confident that extremely few estates for 2000 decedents will be filed in years 2003 or later.
  91
     A number of estates with net worth below the filing threshold do file estate tax returns because the filing
threshold is defined based on gross worth.
  92
     We ignore the issue of inflation effects within a year which makes individuals with the same real net worth
more likely to be subject to the tax if they die later in the year


                                                       48
the other two decreased it. Furthermore, the estate tax was adopted starting September 9th
1916, so that we do not have the full coverage for 1916. In those cases, we naturally re-weight
observations available for part of the year only by the inverse of the part of the year with lower
threshold.93 This amounts to assuming that decedents dying during the part of the year when
the low threshold was effective constitute a representative sample of decedents of similar wealth
dying during the other part of the year.
    Where relevant, we rely on the sample weights provided by the SOI. Post-1945 samples are
stratified samples of returns actually filed. Generally, all returns above a certain high level of
wealth are included in the data ($5 million in most years), while returns below that level are
sampled using a complex design (Woodburn and Johnson, 1994). Certain rare types of returns
(e.g., individuals aged 45 or younger) are included with certainty. In the 1980s, returns were
sampled every year but samples for certain years (1982, 1986, 1989) are significantly larger, with
samples for intermediate years treated as supplementary. This design reflects the fact that at
the time of the studies, one of the main SOI objective was to be able to produce wealth estimates
every three years. Beginning with 1991, the sampling strategy is essentially consistent over time.
    We assign observations to the various top groups as follows. We define the corresponding
population count of an observation as the product of the sampling weight and the multiplier.
We use these weights we compute the rank of an individual in the distribution of net worth. We
then compute the thresholds of the fractiles of interest using the U.S. population over 20 in a
given year estimated from U.S. Bureau of the Census (1975) (series A29-32) and U.S. Bureau of
the Census (2002) (Table 2-12). Individuals who are located on the boundaries of two top groups
contribute to both of them in proportion to their overlap with each. All reported tabulations
are performed using top groups defined in this way.
    For 1916-1945, the data are not equally detailed for all observations. As mentioned, all
returns that were filed are included in the data and they are all subject to the so called “basic
edit,” while only selected observations are subject to the “complete edit.” The former includes
basic information from the tax return such as age, sex, marital status, date of death, state
of residence, gross estate, debts, life insurance and a few other variables. The latter includes
in addition information on the composition of estates. Sub-samples of returns for decedents
who died in 1916-1920, 1928-1930, 1938-1940 and 1944 were subject to the complete edit. In
addition, gross estates above some high threshold were always subject to the complete edit. As
the result, for 1916-45 we are able to construct the complete estate composition series for the top
0.01% based on the complete coverage of decedents, while the composition for lower percentiles
is available only for selected years and is usually based on a sample of returns.
    Column 2 of Table A displays the shares of population that we estimate are covered by our
data in each year. Table D contains basic information about the size and information contained
in our sample, by percentile category. Its first panel lists the number of observations in each
percentile category. When no figure is shown, it indicates that filling out this category would
require including individuals with net worth below the threshold level. The second panel presents
average sample weights in various percentile groups, by year.94 In practical terms, our estimates
  93
     For example, on June 6, 1935 the filing threshold was decreased from $100,000 to $50,000. As a result, we
use only deaths occurring after June 6 to estimate wealth between $50,000 and $100,000 and re-weight those
observations by a factor 365/208 (208 is the number of days between June 6th and the end of the year). We
re-weight all observations in 1916 by a factor 366/114 (1916 was a leap-year).
  94
     The weight can be lower than 1 for observations which span two different categories. By construction, it


                                                     49
of the top 0.01% wealth are based on returns sampled with certainty, while estimates in lower
percentiles are for many years based on samples. It is clear from this table that the data for
1983-1985 and for 1987-1988 is based on the much sparser sampling than those in other years.
The last part of Table D shows the fraction of observations in each category that contain detailed
composition information about asset holdings.

Appendix D.3           Estimates Based on Published Tabulations: 1946-1950, 1953-
                       1954, 1956, 1958, and 1960
For years 1946, 1947, 1948, 1949, 1950, 1953, 1954, 1956, 1958, and 1960, the IRS has not
constructed micro-data files but has published a set of detailed tabulations in U.S. Treasury
Department, Internal Revenue Service (various yearsa). We have used those Statistics of Income
(SOI) tabulations to estimate top wealth shares and composition for those years as well.
   SOI tabulations are always presented by year of filing: as most estates are filed within 9
months of death, we assume that year of filing t corresponds to year of death t − 1.95 The SOI
publication contains cross-tabulations by size of gross estate and age groups (for each of the two
genders) for years 1948, 1949, 1950, 1953, and 1958. For all years but 1958, the age groups are
quite detailed and defined as 0-20, 21-29, 30-39, 40-49, 50-54, 55-59, 60-64, 64-69, 70-74, 75-79,
80-84, and 85+.96
   For each age group and gender cell, we compute the estate multiplier as the product of the
average mortality for the cell97 and the social differential mortality factor from Brown et al.
(2002) (see above). We multiply the number of decedents and the amount of gross estate they
report by the estate multiplier in order to obtain a distribution by gross estate brackets for
the living population. Because the number of observations in the very top brackets is small,
the corresponding multipliers tend to be noisy and vary from bracket to bracket and year to
year. Therefore, for each gender group, we average multipliers for all estates above one million
nominal dollars for years before 1950 and above two million nominal dollars for 1953 and after.
Such estates are very large and always represent less than the top 0.01% which is the smallest
group we analyze in this study.
    We then estimate the thresholds and amounts corresponding to each fractile using the well
known empirical regularity that the top tail of the wealth distribution is very closely approxi-
mated by a Pareto distribution.
    The first step consists then in estimating the income thresholds corresponding to each of the
percentiles Top 2%, Top 1%, ,..., Top 0.01% thresholds, that define our top wealth groups. For
each percentile p, we look first for the wealth bracket [s, t] containing the percentile p. We then
assume that the distribution of wealth is Pareto distributed within the bracket [s, t]. A Pareto
distribution has a cumulative distribution function of the form F (y) = 1 − (k/y)a where k and
a are constants, a is the Pareto parameter of the distribution. We estimate then the parameters
applies to at most two observations in a group.
  95
     Micro-files from the IRS show that this assumption is reasonable although not completely accurate because
many returns are filed late. The overwhelming majority of returns filed in year t are composed by returns for
date of death t − 1 (about two thirds) and date of death t − 2 (about one third).
  96
     For year 1958, the age groups are less detailed: 0-30, 30-39, 40-49, 50-59, 60-69, 70-79, and 80+.
  97
     This average mortality is computed using the mortality tables for the U.S. population by 5 year age and
gender groups available at http://www.demog.berkeley.edu/wilmoth/mortality/states.html



                                                     50
a and k of the Pareto distribution for the wealth bracket [s, t] by solving the two equations:
k = s · p1/a and k = t · q 1/a where p is the fraction of individals above s and q the fraction
of individuals above t. Note that the Pareto parameters k and a may vary from bracket to
bracket.98 Once the density distribution on [s, t] is estimated, it is straightforward to estimate
the income threshold, say yp , corresponding to percentile p.
     The second step consists of estimating the amounts of wealth reported above wealth threshold
yp . We estimate the amount reported between wealth yp and t (the upper bound of the wealth
bracket [s, t] containing yp ) using the estimated Pareto density with parameters a and k. We
then add to that amount the amounts in all the brackets above t. Using the micro-data, we
have checked that this method provide very close estimates of the thresholds and amounts.
     Gross estate is defined as the sum of all assets (including life insurance) before deducting
debts and liabilities, and all other deductions. Therefore, to obtain net worth estimates, we
need to deduct life insurance and liabilities from our gross worth estimates and add back the
cash surrender value of life insurance. We estimate the cash surrender value of life insurance
from the pay-out value using the same method as the one described above for micro-data. For
each fractile, we compute the fraction of life insurance and the fraction of debts relative to gross
worth using the method to estimate composition of wealth described below. We then subtract
from the amounts and thresholds corresponding to each bracket the fraction of debt and life
insurance and we add back the cash surrender value of life insurance.99 This method provides
accurate results when the ranking according to gross estate and the ranking according to net
worth (gross estate less life insurance and debts plus CSV of insurance) are close. Using the
micro-data, we can check that those rankings are close and that our method provides results
very close to the exact computations (both can be computed with the micro-data).100
     Once the corrected amounts and thresholds are obtained, we obtain directly the mean income
above percentile p by dividing the amount by the number of individuals above percentile p.
Finally, the share of income accruing to individuals above percentile p is obtained by dividing
the total amount above yp by our aggregate wealth series (Table A, col. (4)). Average wealth and
wealth shares for intermediate groups (Top 2-1%, Top 1-0.5%, etc.) are obtained by subtraction.
The shares are reported in Table B1, and the thresholds and average wealth levels are reported
in Table B2.

    For years 1946, 1947, 1954, 1956 and 1960, the IRS has not published tabulations by brackets
of gross estate, by age and gender. Therefore, for those years, we apply the multipliers by
brackets obtained above using the closest year. For 1946 and 1947, we use the multipliers from
1948. For year 1954, we use year 1953. For years 1956, we use the average of 1953 and 1958.
For 1960, we use year 1958. This method is acceptable because multipliers by wealth brackets
vary little from year to year.

    For years 1946, 1947, 1948, 1949, 1953, 1954, 1958, and 1960, composition tables published
   98
      If the threshold falls in the top bracket, we estimate the Pareto parameter a for the top bracket using the
fact that the average wealth in the top bracket is equal to a/(a − 1) times the top bracket threshold.
   99
      For each threshold, we subtract the average fraction of debt and life insurance and add back the CSV of life
insurance from the bracket above and the bracket below.
  100
      For years 1950 and 1956, no composition tables have been published. Therefore, we assume the same average
liabilities and life insurance as the average of 1954 and 1958 by bracket for 1956 and years 1949 and 1951 for year
1950.



                                                        51
by brackets of gross estates have been used to estimate the fraction of net worth for each fractile
falling into each of the categories: real estate, bonds, stocks, cash, deposits and notes, other
assets, and debts. The composition of wealth within each group was estimated from these tables
using a simple linear interpolation method. As those composition tables are not published by age
or gender, we assumed that the composition by brackets was the same for the living population
and for decedents. This assumption does not seem to bias our results significantly as we see no
evidence of discontinuity with the years where we can use the micro-data and hence relax this
assumption. The composition estimates are also reported on Table B3.

    As we discussed above and as can be seen in Table D, for a number of years during the period
1916-1945, the micro estate tax data do not provide composition information for returns with
gross estate below a very high threshold for years 1921-1927, 1931-1937, 1941-1943, and 1945.
For all these years, except 1926 and 1945, we have used the published composition tabulations
by size of estate from U.S. Treasury Department, Internal Revenue Service (various yearsa) to
estimate the composition of net worth for our top groups using the same methodology as above.

Appendix D.4         Pareto Extrapolations when Coverage is too Low
As can be seen on Table A, column (3), for a number of years and especially in the 1916-1945
period, the estate tax data does not cover the top 1% of the population (or even the top .5%
for some years). In order to produce top 1% shares for all years, we have used a simple Pareto
extrapolation technique to estimate those shares. We assume that the Pareto coefficient for the
groups for which we do not have enough data is the same as the one for the lowest group fully
covered by our data. For example, in 1918, as the data covers the top 0.571%, the lowest group
covered is the top .5-.25%, and we assume that the Pareto parameter for group 1-.5% is the
same of the Pareto parameter we estimated for the group .5-.25%. This method is acceptable
because the variations in the Pareto parameters are relatively small from one group to the next.
This method can be checked with years with good coverage.

Appendix D.5         Sensitivity to certain data inconsistencies
As discussed earlier, between 1942 and 1948 the gross estate was supposed to include the full
value of community property. This change took place in October 1942. By definition, this
rule affected directly only married individuals, although an effect (with a lag) on widows is
also possible. Its mechanical consequence is a temporary increase in the reported assets of the
married individuals in community property states. As the result, if this change had a significant
effect, it should affect the values of estates of married residents of the community property states
relative to the rest. Figure A6 shows fractions of the top .05% and Top .25-.05% accounted for
by residents of the community property states, by marital status. The mechanical effect should
lead to an increase in the share of community property residents among married individuals in
the top group but not necessarily in the other groups. The evidence of such a change is weak.
The share of married community property residents in the top group indeed increased in 1943
but then fell back to the usual level. The trend is much stronger for single individuals (who
are not affected by the change). In the lower bracket, it appears that the share of community
property residents among the married was indeed increasing relative to other groups, but the



                                                52
effect is the strongest some two years after the change went into effect. Overall, we conclude
that there is no evidence that this source of data inconsistency plays an important role.
    The tax treatment of jointly owned property changed in 1976 and 1981 by allowing to include
only 50% of jointly held assets in the estate of the decedents. Our dataset includes the value
of the includible portion of jointly owned assets as reported on Schedule E for 1962, 1972, 1976
and from 1982 on. Starting with 1992, we can observe both total and the includible part of
assets jointly held with the spouse. Indeed, approximately 50% of the total is included. Assets
held jointly with the spouse constitute more than 80% of all jointly held assets in all wealth
categories. Generally, the importance of jointly owned assets falls with wealth. There is little
evidence of a significant decrease of the value of jointly held assets included in the estate after
1976. In the top .1%, the includible part of jointly held assets was approximately 2.3% of the
total net worth in 1972, 1.1% in 1976 and it fluctuated between .7 and 4% (with the mean of
2.2%) since, with no discernible trend. At lower percentiles, there is similarly no evidence of a
major decrease in the included jointly owned assets (although the importance of jointly owned
assets is much larger: they steadily increase as net worth falls and, e.g., they are more than
10% of net worth around the .5% percentile). Speculating somewhat, because the change in tax
law should have had a mechanical effect of halving the jointly owned property, it suggests that
additional outside assets might have been reported as jointly owned, presumably to benefit from
a step-up while escaping taxation via marital deduction. If so, doubling jointly owned property
after 1976 would lead to a significant overestimation of net worth relative to the pre-1977 period.
In any case, at least at the very top, how jointly owned assets are accounted for would have
no major impact on our shares. Either doubling of the post-1976 jointly owned property or
including a fraction of the pre-1977 would change the shares only in a minor way (in the top
.1%, net worth would change by approximately 2%). Such a change would lead to showing a
slightly stronger recovery in the early 1980s without an effect on trends pre- or post-1976.


Appendix E              Earlier Estimates and Estimates from other Sources
Table C1 reports top 1% wealth share estimates in the United States from previous studies.

Appendix E.1          Lampman Estimates
Lampman (1962) was the first to use in a comprehensive way the U.S. estate tax data to construct
top wealth shares. He focused his analysis on years 1922, 1929, 1933, 1939, 1945, 1949, 1953,
1954, and 1956, for which the IRS published detailed tables by age and gender groups. However,
for all these years, Lampman’s analysis is always focused on all estate tax returns filers as a
whole representing the living population of wealth holders with gross wealth above the filing
threshold. Because of inflation, economic growth and downturns, and changes in the nominal
filing threshold, the adult population represented by estate tax filers has changed dramatically
from less than 0.5% in 1929 to almost 2% in 1956. Lampman’s provides consistent top wealth
1% shares for the adult population (aged 20 and above) from those estimates using a simple
graphical Pareto interpolation method (Table 94 and Chart 32 on pp. 204-205).101 He assumed
 101
   Lampman also provides estimates of the top 0.5% share of the total population (adults and minors) using the
same method. As a result, the top 1% and top 0.5% Lampman series are not comparable.



                                                     53
that the Pareto parameter for all years was equal to the one estimated for 1953 (for which he
provided much detail in the first part of the book).
    Therefore, although Lampman’s study was very detailed and careful in the analysis of the
group represented by all estate tax filers, his derivation of consistent top shares, the most
influential piece in his study, was very rough. Our own estimation method shows that the
Pareto parameters do vary substantially from year to year. The Pareto parameter for year 1953
in the range Top 1-0.5% (which Lampman used for the other years) is equal to about 1.6 but
is lower for pre-war years (around 1.3). Therefore, Lampman’s graphical method might have
introduced non-negligible errors, especially for the years for which the fraction of the population
represented by tax returns is far from 1%. It is also important to note that there are many
other reasons why our estimates might differ from Lampman’s, as his definition of net worth is
not identical to ours, and the social differential mortality rates are also different.
    Nevertheless, overall, Lampman’s estimates (reproduced in Table C1 and graphically dis-
played on Figure 11) are comparable to ours. The downward trend is of similar magnitude. The
main difference is for 1939. Our series suggest than there was a continuous decline in the top
1% from 1933 to 1945, while Lampman’s series displays a rebound in 1939. This discrepancy is
in part explained by differences in our denominator series. Lampman denominator is relatively
low in 1939 (displaying less than a 10% increase from 1933) whereas our denominator increases
by about 20% (in nominal terms). Both Wolff (1989) and Goldsmith et al. (1956) display a
similar 20% increase in nominal terms from 1933 to 1939.

Appendix E.2            Smith Estimates
Smith (1984) constructs top 0.5% and 1% net worth shares for years 1958, 1962, 1965, 1969,
1972, and 1976 using micro estate tax data. He also estimates the composition of wealth for
those two groups. Smith defines the top groups relative to the total population instead of adults
(as we do). Moreover, because of data issues, the top groups are defined by ranking individuals
by gross worth instead of net worth (although shares are computed based on the net worth
concept). Those two features make Smith’s data not directly comparable with our results and
with the previous estimates by Lampman.102

Appendix E.3            SCF and Combined Estimates
Kennickell (2003) and Scholz (2003) have used the Survey of Consumer Finances to construct
top net worth shares. Kennickell (2003) estimates shares and composition of wealth for 5 groups:
the bottom 50% (percentiles 0-50), the next 40% (percentiles 50-90), the bottom half of the top
decile (percentiles 90-95), the next 4% (percentiles 95-99), and the top 1%. Those estimates are
provided for years 1989, 1992, 1995, 1998, and 2001.103
    Scholz (2003) provides wealth shares for the top 10%, 5%, 2%, 1%, and 0.5% for all survey
years available: 1962, 1983, 1989, 1992, 1995, 1998, and 2001. Kennickell (2003) uses the non-
public large SCF data which have a more observations at the very top and which are not included
 102
      The top .5% Smith series, however, can be compared more easily with the top .5% Lampman series for the
total population. See footnote above.
  103
      According to Kennickell, earlier surveys, 1962 and 1983 are not directly comparable due to substantial changes
in the surveying and weighting methodology.



                                                        54
in the publicly available SCF data used in Scholz (2003). This, however, seems to have only a
minor effect on the estimates as Kennickell’s and Scholz’ top wealth share estimates are very
close.
    Wolff and Marley (1989) and Wolff (1994) provides top 1% household wealth shares based on
the previous estimates by Lampman and Smith from estate tax data and more recent estimates
from the SCF.

Appendix E.4           Computations Based on Forbes 400 Richest
Every late September since 1982, Forbes magazine has constructed a list of the richest 400
Americans, along with estimates of their net worth, age, and the main source of their wealth. It
is important to keep in mind that those wealth estimates are not exact measures of net worth as
some of those richest individuals may not be willing to cooperate with Forbes and reveal precisely
their net worth. It is also possible that some of the wealthiest (but not highly visible) Americans
have not been discovered and listed by Forbes.104 This problem was more acute in the early
years of the survey (especially the first year 1982).105 With the years and the incredible success
and publicity of the Forbes 400, most wealthy individuals provide voluntarily information to
Forbes and it is quite unlikely that a significant fraction of the wealthiest Americans has been
able or willing to escape the attention of Forbes magazine.
    We report in columns (1) and (2) of Table C2, the total net worth of the Forbes 400 and the
average wealth of the Forbes 400 in 2000 dollars.
    Because the total adult population has increased by almost 30% over the period, measuring
the share of total net worth of the Forbes 400, might be misleading. In order to provide estimates
robust to population growth, we have constructed series for the top .0002% and top .00005%
wealth shares from 1982 to 2002. We also provide the share of top .0002-.00005% which is
simply the difference of the two former shares. The top .0002% corresponds almost exactly
to the top 400 richest individuals, and the top .00005% to the top 100 richest individuals in
2000 (as there are 201.9 million adults in the population in 2000, see Table A). The top .0002-
.00005% corresponds to individuals ranked 101 to 400 in 2000. The shares are computed simply
by summing the net worth levels of the corresponding individuals on the Forbes list.106 For the
final years (2000, 2001, and 2002), the top .00005% corresponds to a few more individuals than
the top 400. In that case, we use the complementary list of near misses (those individuals who
almost made it to the Forbes 400) to compute our estimates.
    The shares of those three groups are reported in columns (3), (4), (5), and the ratio of the
average wealth to the average wealth in the adult population is reported on columns (6), (7),
and (8) for each of these three groups. Finally, and for comparison purposes, the share of the top
.01% (top 20,000 individuals in 2000) estimated from estate tax returns is reported in column
(9).

 104
     For example, the SCF has found believable interviews of individuals with wealth above the Forbes 400
minimum but not included in the Forbes list (see Kennickell, 2003). Estate tax returns with net worth above the
Forbes 400 minimum have also been found by the IRS (see McCubbin, 1994).
 105
     This is why we do not reproduce very top wealth shares from the Forbes 400 for year 1982, the first year of
the survey, on Figure 12.
 106
     For example, if the top .00005% corresponds to the top 100.5 individuals, we sum the top 100 wealth levels
plus one-half of the wealth of the 101st individual.


                                                      55
References
Adams, Peter, Michael D. Hurd, Daniel McFadden, Angela Merrill, and Tiago
 Ribeiro, “Healthy, wealthy, and wise? Tests for direct causal paths between health and
 socioeconomic status,” Journal of Econometrics, January 2003, 112 (1), 3–56.

Aghion, Philippe and Patrick Bolton, “A Theory of Trickle-Down Growth and Develop-
 ment,” Review of Economic Studies, 2003, 64, 151–172.

Aizcorbe, Ana M., Arthur B. Kennickell, and Kevin B. Moore, “Recent Changes in
 U.S. Family Finances: Evidence from the 1998 and 2001 Survey of Consumer Finances,”
 Federal Reserve Board Bulletin, January 2003, pp. 1–32.

Atkinson, Anthony B., “Top Incomes in the United Kingdom over the Twentieth Century,”
 2002. Oxford Nuffield College, mimeo.

  , “Measuring Top Incomes: Methodological Issues,” 2003. Oxford Nuffield College, mimeo.

  and Allan J. Harrison, Distribution of Personal Wealth in Britain, Cambridge: Cambridge
  University Press, 1978.

Attanasio, Orazio P. and Carl Emmerson, “Differential Mortality in the UK,” Working
 Paper 8241, National Bureau of Economic Research April 2001.

  and Hilary Williamson Hoynes, “Differential Mortality and Wealth Accumulation,” Jour-
  nal of Human Resources, Winter 2000, 35 (1), 1–29.

Bell, Felicitie C., Alice H. Wade, and Stephen C. Goss, “Life Tables for the United
 States Social Security Area,” SSA Pub. No. 11-11536, Actuarial Study 107 August 1992.

Bernheim, B. Douglas, Robert J. Lemke, and John Karl Scholz, “Do Estate and Gift
 Taxes Affect the Timing of Private Transfers?,” Working Paper 8333, National Bureau of
 Economic Research June 2001.

Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Guide to the Flow of Funds Accounts,
 Washington D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office, 2000.

Brown, Jeffrey R., “Are the Elderly Really Over-Annuitized? New Evidence on Life Insurance
 and Bequests,” Working Paper 7193, National Bureau of Economic Research 1999.

  , Jeffrey B. Liebman, and Joshua Pollet, “Estimating Life Tables That Reflect Socioe-
  conomic Differences in Mortality,” in Martin Feldstein and Jeffrey B. Liebman, eds., The
  Distributional Aspects of Social Security and Social Security Reform, Chicago and London:
  The University of Chicago Press, 2002, pp. 447–457.

Cooper, George, A Voluntary Tax? New Perspectives on Sophisticated Tax Avoidance Studies
 of Government Finance, Washington D.C.: The Brookings Institution, 1979.

Deaton, Angus, “Policy Implications of the Gradient of Health and Wealth,” Health Affairs,
 March/April 2002, 21 (2), 13–30.

                                            56
  , “Health, Inequality and Economic Development,” Journal of Economic Literature, March
  2003, 41 (1), 113–158.

   and Christina Paxson, “Mortality, Education, Income, and Inequality Among American
  Cohorts,” Working Paper 7140, National Bureau of Economic Research May 1999.

DeLong, J. Bradford, “Robber Barons,” in Tatyana Maleva and Anders Aslund, eds., Series
 of Lectures on Economics: Leading World Experts at the Carnegie Moscow Center, Moscow:
 Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, 2002.

Duleep, Harriet Orcutt, “Measuring Socioeconomic Mortality Differentials Over Time,” De-
 mography, May 1989, 26 (2), 345–351.

Eller, Martha, Brian Erard, and Chih-Chin Ho, “The Magnitude and Determinants
  of Federal Estate Tax Noncompliance,” in William G. Gale, James R. Hines Jr., and Joel
  Slemrod, eds., Rethinking Estate and Gift Taxation, Brookings Institution Press, 2001.

Feenberg, Daniel R. and James M. Poterba, “Income Inequality and the Incomes of Very
  High Income Taxpayers: Evidence from Tax Returns,” in James M. Poterba, ed., Tax Policy
  and the Economy, Vol. 7, Chicago: National Bureau of Economic Research; Cambridge, Mass.:
  MIT Press, 1993, pp. 145–177.

  and , “The Income and Tax Share of Very High Income Households, 1960-1995,” American
  Economic Review, May 2000, 90 (2), 264–270.

Gale, William G. and Joel Slemrod, “Rethinking the Estate and Gift Tax: Overview,”
 in William G. Gale, James R. Hines Jr., and Joel Slemrod, eds., Rethinking Estate and Gift
 Taxation, Brookings Institution Press, 2001.

Goldsmith, Raymond, Dorothy Brady, and Horst Mendershausen, A Study of Saving
 in the United States, Vol. III, Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1956.

Gordon, Roger H., “Can High Personal Tax Rates Encourage Entrepreneurial Activity?,”
 IMF Staff Papers, March 1998, 45 (1), 49–80.

Greenwood, Daphne, “An Estimation of U.S. Family Wealth and its Distribution from Mi-
 crodata, 1973,” Review of Income and Wealth, March 1983, 29, 23–43.

Harris, C. Lowell, “Wealth Estimates as Affected by Audit of Estate Tax Returns,” National
 Tax Journal, December 1949, 2, 316–333.

Hattersley, Lin, “Trends in life expectancy by social class — an update,” Health Statistics
 Quarterly, Summer 1999, 2.

Herman, Shelby, “Fixed Assets and Consumer Durable Goods,” Survey of Current Business,
 April 2000, pp. 17–30.

Holtz-Eakin, Douglas and Donald Marples, “Distortion Costs of Taxing Wealth Accu-
 mulation: Income Versus Estate Taxes,” Working Paper 8261, National Bureau of Economic
 Research April 2001.

                                            57
Hurd, Michael, Angela Merrill, and Daniel McFadden, “Predictors of Mortality Among
 the Elderly,” Working Paper 7440, National Bureau of Economic Research December 1999.

Johnson, Barry W., “Personal Wealth, 1992-1995,” Statistics of Income Bulletin, Winter
  1997-98, pp. 70–95.

   and Lisa M. Schreiber, “Personal Wealth, 1998,” Statistics of Income Bulletin, Winter
  2002-03, pp. 87–115.

   and Marvin Schwartz, “Estimates of Personal Wealth, 1989.” In Johnson (1994) pp. 287–
  304.

   and R. Louise Woodburn, “The Estate Multiplier Technique: Recent Improvements for
  1989.” In Johnson (1994) pp. 391–400.

  , ed., Compendium of Federal Estate Tax and Personal Wealth Studies, Department of Trea-
  sury, Internal Revenue Service, Pub. 1773 (4-94), 1994.

  , Jacob M. Mikow, and Martha Britton Eller, “Elements of Federal Estate Taxation,”
  in William G. Gale, James R. Hines Jr., and Joel Slemrod, eds., Rethinking Estate and Gift
  Taxation, Brookings Institution Press, 2001.

Joulfaian, David, “Gift Taxes and Lifetime Transfers: Time Series Evidence,” 2003. Office of
  Tax Analysis and George Washington University, mimeo.

Katz, Lawrence and David Autor, “Changes in the Wage Structure and Earnings Inequal-
 ity,” in Orley Ashenfelter and David Card, eds., Handbook of Labor Economics, Amsterdam;
 New York: Elsevier/North Holland, 1999.

Kennickell, Arthur, “Modeling Wealth with Multiple Observations of Income: Redesign of
 the Sample for the 2001 Survey of Consumer Finances,” Working Paper, Survey of Consumer
 Finances 2001.

  , “Using Income Data to Predict Wealth,” Working Paper, Survey of Consumer Finances
  2001.

  , “A Rolling Tide: Changes in the Distribution of Wealth in the United States, 1989-2001,”
  Working Paper, Survey of Consumer Finances 2003.

Kennickell, Arthur B., Martha Starr-McCluer, and Annika E. Sunden, “Family Fi-
 nances in the U.S.: Recent Evidence from the Survey of Consumer Finances,” Federal Reserve
 Board Bulletin, January 1997, pp. 1–24.

King, Willford I., “Wealth Distribution in the Continental United States at the Close of
 1921,” Journal of the American Statistical Association, June 1927, 22, 135–153.

Kitagawa, Evelyn M. and Philip M. Hauser, Differential Mortality in the United States,
 Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1973.




                                            58
Kopczuk, Wojciech and Joel Slemrod, “The Impact of the Estate Tax on the Wealth
 Accumulation and Avoidance Behavior of Donors,” in William G. Gale, James R. Hines Jr.,
 and Joel Slemrod, eds., Rethinking Estate and Gift Taxation, Brookings Institution Press,
 2001, pp. 299–343.

  and , “Tax Consequences on Wealth Accumulation and Transfers of the Rich,” in Alicia H.
  Munnell and Annika Sundén, eds., Death and Dollars: The Role of Gifts and Bequests in
  America, Brookings Institution Press, 2003, pp. 213–249.

Kuznets, Simon, “Economic Growth and Economic Inequality,” American Economic Review,
 1955, 45, 1–28.

Lampman, Robert J., The Share of Top Wealth-Holders in National Wealth, 1922-56, Prince-
  ton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1962.

Lindert, Peter, “Three Centuries of Inequality in Britain and America,” in Anthony B. Atkin-
  son and Francois Bourguignon, eds., Handbook of Income Distribution, Amsterdam; New York:
  Elsevier/North Holland, 2000, pp. 167–216.

Luckey, John R., “A History of Federal Estate, Gift and Generation-Skipping Taxes,” CRS
 Report for Congress 95-444A, Congressional Research Service March 1995.

Madoff, Ray, “Comment on Tax Consequences on Wealth Accumulation and Transfers of the
 Rich,” in Alicia H. Munnell and Annika Sundén, eds., Death and Dollars: The Role of Gifts
 and Bequests in America, Brookings Institution Press, 2003.

Mallet, Bernard, “A Method of Estimating Capital Wealth from Estate Duty Statistics,”
 Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, March 1908, 71, 65–101.

McCubbin, Janet G., “The Intergenerational Wealth Study: Basic Estate Data 1916-1945,”
 Statistics of Income Bulletin, Spring 1990.

  , “Improving Wealth Estimates Derived From Estate Tax Data.” In Johnson (1994) pp. 363–
  369.

McGarry, Kathleen, “Inter Vivos Transfers and Intended Bequests,” Journal of Public Eco-
 nomics, September 1999, 73 (3), 321–51.

Mikow, Jacob M., “Fiduciary Income Tax Returns, 1997,” Statistics of Income Bulletin,
 Winter 2000-01, pp. 77–99.

Pappas, Gregory, Susan Queen, Wilbur Hadden, and Gail Fisher, “The Increasing
 Disparity in Mortality between Socioeconomic Groups in the United States, 1960 and 1986,”
 New England Journal of Medicine, July 8 1993, 329 (8), 103–109.

Piketty, Thomas, “Income Inequality in France, 1901-1998,” Journal of Political Economy,
  October 2003, 111 (5), 1004–1042.

   and Emmanuel Saez, “Income Inequality in the United States, 1913-1998,” Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, February 2003, 118, 1–39.

                                            59
  , Gilles Postel-Vinay, and Jean-Laurent Rosenthal, “Wealth Concentration in a De-
  veloping Economy: Paris and France, 1807-1994,” 2003. EHESS and UCLA, mimeo.

Poterba, James M., “The Estate Tax and After-Tax Investment Returns,” in Joel Slemrod,
 ed., Does Atlas Shrug? The Economic Consequences of Taxing the Rich, New York: Harvard
 University Press and Russell Sage Foundation, 2000.

  , “Estate and Gift Taxes and Incentives for Inter Vivos Giving in the US,” Journal of Public
  Economics, January 2001, 79 (1), 237–64.

   and Scott J. Weisbenner, “Inter-asset Differences in Effective Estate-Tax Burdens,” Amer-
  ican Economic Review, May 2003, 93 (2), 360–365.

Rogot, Eugene, Paul D. Sorlie, Norman J. Johnson, and Catherine Schmitt, “A
 Mortality Study of 1.3 Million Persons by Demographic, Social and Economic Factors: 1979-
 1985 Follow-Up,” NIH Publication 92-3297, National Institute of Health July 1992.

Scheuren, Fritz and Janet McCubbin, “Piecing Together Personal Wealth Distributions.”
  In Johnson (1994) pp. 371–390.

Schmalbeck, Richard, “Avoiding Federal Wealth Transfer Taxes,” in William G. Gale,
  James R. Hines Jr., and Joel Slemrod, eds., Rethinking Estate and Gift Taxation, Brook-
  ings Institution Press, 2001.

Scholz, John Karl, “Wealth Inequality and the Wealth of Cohorts,” 2003. University of
  Wisconsin, mimeo.

Schwartz, Marvin, “Estimates of Personal Wealth, 1986.” In Johnson (1994) pp. 255–270.

   and Barry W. Johnson, “Estimates of Personal Wealth, 1986.” In Johnson (1994) pp. 255–
  270.

Smith, James D., “Trends in the Concentration of Personal Wealth in the United States,
 1958-1976,” Review of Income and Wealth, 1984, 30, 419–428.

   and Stephen Franklin, “The Concentration of Personal Wealth, 1922-1969,” American
  Economic Review, 1974, 64 (2), 162–167.

Smith, James P., “Healthy Bodies and Thick Wallets: The Dual Relation Between Health
 and Economic Status,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, Spring 1999, 13 (2), 145–66.

Stewart, Charles, “Income Capitalization as a Method of Estimating the Distribution of
  Wealth by Size Group,” in “Studies in Income and Wealth,” New York: National Bureau of
  Economic Research, 1939. Volume 3.

Thorelli, Hans Birger, The Federal Antitrust Policy: Origination of an American Tradition,
 Baltimore: Johns Hopkins Press, 1955.

U.S. Bureau of the Census, Historical Statistics of the United States: Colonial Times to
 1970, Washington D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1975.


                                             60
  , Statistical Abstract of the United States: 2002, Washington D.C.: U.S. Government Printing
  Office, 2002.

U.S. Treasury Department, Internal Revenue Service, “Statistics of Income: Estate and
 Gift Tax Returns,” various years. Washington, D.C.

  , “Statistics of Income: Individual and Fiduciary Income Tax Returns,” various years. Wash-
  ington, D.C.

Wolff, Edward N., “Trends in Aggregate Household Wealth in the United States, 1900-1983,”
 Review of Income and Wealth, March 1989, 35 (1), 1–29.

  , Top Heavy — The Increasing Inequality of Wealth in America, The Twentieth Century Fund,
  1994.

  , “Discussant’s Comments on Douglas Holtz-Eakin, ‘The Uneasy Case for Abolishing the
  Estate Tax’,” Tax Law Review, 1996, 51 (3), 517–22.

   and Marcia Marley, “Long-Term Trends in U.S. Wealth Inequality: Methodological Issues
  and Results,” in Robert E. Lipsey and Helen Stone Tice, eds., The Measurement of Saving,
  Investment and Wealth, Vol. 52 of National Bureau of Economic ResearchStudies in Income
  and Wealth, Chicago and London: University of Chicago Press, 1989, pp. 765–839.

Woodburn, R. Louise and Barry W. Johnson, “Analyzing the Weighting Strategy for the
 Statistics of Income 1987 Estate Study.” In Johnson (1994) pp. 87–91.

Zabel, William D., The Rich Die Richer and You Can Too, Morrow, William and Co, 1995.




                                             61
                                           Table 1
          Thresholds and Average Wealth in Top Groups within the Top 2% in 2000

                            Wealth                                               Number of                 Average
   Percentiles             Threshold                  Upper Groups               individuals               Wealth
       (1)                    (2)                          (3)                       (4)                     (5)
                                                       Full Population          201,865,000               $163,161
       2.00%                $729,932                     Top 2-1%                 2,018,650               $920,073
       1.00%               $1,172,896                   Top 1-0.5%                1,009,325              $1,472,456
       0.50%               $1,841,697                 Top 0.5-0.25%                504,663               $2,314,011
       0.25%               $3,067,676                 Top 0.25-0.1%                302,798               $3,989,132
       0.10%               $5,503,678                 Top 0.1-0.05%                100,933               $6,717,885
       0.05%               $8,219,720                 Top 0.05-0.01%               80,746               $12,675,629
       0.01%              $24,415,150                   Top 0.01%                  20,187               $63,564,151


Notes: Computations based on estate tax return statistics (see Appendix Section D).
Wealth defined as total assets less liabilities. It includes the estimated cash surrender value of life insurance.
It excludes annuitized wealth, and future pensions with no cash surrender value, future labor income and
social security benefits. Amounts are expressed in 2000 dollars.
Source: Table A and Table B2, row 2000.
                               Table A: Reference Totals for Population, Wealth, and Inflation, 1916-2002
           Adult population                 Personal Wealth                      Wealth Composition (in percent)                           Inflation
            (1)        (2)                (3)            (4)           (5)         (6)        (7)          (8)       (9)      (10)           (11)
       Population Population        Total Wealth Average Wealth    Real Estate Fixed Claim Corporate Non-Corp.      Life   Liabilities      CPI-U
       (aged 20+) covered by      (billions 2000 $)   (2000 $)    and Durables Assets       Equity       Equity  Insurance               (2000 base)
                      estate                                                                                     Reserves
         ('000s) tax returns

1916     60,063    0.454%             3,011         50,127            24.2       19.5        21.1        38.4        2.7        -5.7       6.324
1917     60,914    0.482%             2,770         45,481            26.5       20.3        17.8        38.4        2.7        -5.7       7.425
1918     60,477    0.571%             2,621         43,346            28.4       21.2        15.3        38.0        2.6        -5.6       8.716
1919     61,758    0.718%             2,709         43,868            29.2       20.5        15.6        37.3        2.3        -5.0       10.015
1920     63,117    0.770%             2,494         39,521            31.2       20.9        14.4        36.2        2.3        -5.0       11.598
1921     64,360    0.718%             2,667         41,432            31.4       23.1        14.3        34.1        2.6        -5.6       10.357
1922     65,237    0.716%             2,895         44,374            29.4       23.9        16.9        32.9        2.7        -5.8       9.704
1923     66,498    0.705%             3,000         45,110            29.8       23.7        17.7        32.2        2.8        -6.2       9.879
1924     67,945    0.734%             3,136         46,153            30.7       23.6        18.4        31.3        3.1        -7.0       9.899
1925     69,137    0.738%             3,298         47,709            30.1       22.8        20.7        30.6        3.2        -7.5       10.146
1926     70,348    0.763%             3,471         49,342            29.9       22.4        22.5        29.9        3.3        -8.0       10.248
1927     71,615    0.389%             3,796         53,005            28.9       21.8        25.2        29.1        3.4        -8.3       10.053
1928     72,882    0.399%             4,314         59,191            26.8       20.2        29.6        28.2        3.3        -8.1       9.922
1929     74,112    0.430%             4,773         64,401            25.1       19.0        34.6        26.1        3.2        -8.1       9.922
1930     75,505    0.380%             4,281         56,701            28.4       21.9        27.6        27.5        3.9        -9.2       9.674
1931     76,620    0.296%             3,892         50,792            31.1       25.7        20.8        27.6        5.0       -10.2       8.823
1932     77,683    0.416%             3,548         45,674            33.4       30.7        13.4        27.5        6.3       -11.4       7.914
1933     78,764    0.420%             3,785         48,052            31.4       29.7        14.8        27.7        6.5       -10.2       7.510
1934     79,915    0.423%             3,917         49,016            30.0       27.4        16.9        28.3        6.4        -9.0       7.766
1935     81,064    0.544%             4,054         50,006            28.8       25.7        18.4        29.2        6.5        -8.5       7.960
1936     82,156    0.608%             4,535         55,205            26.6       22.6        22.0        30.3        6.1        -7.6       8.040
1937     83,216    0.618%             4,417         53,080            28.2       22.2        20.4        30.3        6.4        -7.5       8.329
1938     84,344    0.604%             4,365         51,758            30.3       22.7        17.7        30.1        6.9        -7.8       8.171
1939     85,486    0.620%             4,570         53,464            30.2       21.8        18.1        30.4        7.0        -7.6       8.056
1940     86,832    0.620%             4,627         53,288            31.3       22.6        16.3        29.8        7.3        -7.5       8.137
1941     88,173    0.657%             4,610         52,287            32.9       24.4        13.4        28.9        7.6        -7.2       8.544
1942     89,560    0.663%             4,550         50,802            33.0       25.8        11.8        28.5        7.4        -6.6       9.458
1943     90,999    0.552%             4,867         53,485            31.4       26.8        12.1        28.5        7.0        -5.8       10.035
1944     92,376    0.700%             5,408         58,543            29.8       27.8        12.7        28.2        6.6        -5.2       10.205
1945     93,697    0.827%             6,025         64,306            27.7       28.3        14.4        28.0        6.1        -4.6       10.440
1946     94,933    1.176%             6,221         65,533            27.3       28.0        14.5        29.0        5.9        -4.6       11.328
1947     96,183    1.303%             5,918         61,526            29.4       26.7        12.7        30.7        5.9        -5.3       12.959
1948     97,552    1.341%             5,884         60,320            31.7       25.3        11.6        31.5        5.8        -6.0       13.969
1949     98,941    1.410%             6,233         62,993            33.6       24.4        11.5        31.2        5.9        -6.6       13.830
1950    100,224    1.494%             6,567         65,524            35.3       23.4        12.5        30.3        5.8        -7.4       13.968
1951    101,452                       6,638         65,431            36.5       22.1        13.8        29.7        5.6        -7.8       15.072
1952    102,626                       6,928         67,507            37.5       21.9        14.1        29.2        5.6        -8.3       15.403
1953    103,611    1.884%             7,101         68,539            39.0       22.6        13.5        28.5        5.6        -9.1       15.526
1954    104,623    1.861%             7,432         71,036            39.4       22.5        14.9        27.3        5.6        -9.7       15.604
1955    105,603                       8,037         76,109            39.2       22.1        17.8        25.8        5.4       -10.4       15.542
1956    106,687    2.266%             8,483         79,514            39.5       22.1        19.2        24.9        5.3       -11.0       15.775
1957    107,748                       8,522         79,090            40.5       22.5        18.4        24.9        5.3       -11.5       16.343
1958    108,710    2.611%             8,761         80,595            40.3       22.4        19.2        24.5        5.2       -11.7       16.784
1959    110,223                       9,303         84,398            39.4       22.3        21.6        23.6        5.1       -12.0       16.918
  1960      111,314     2.950%              9,526         85,579              39.7        22.8         22.0        23.1         5.1        -12.7           17.189
  1961      112,450                         9,978         88,733              39.1        22.8         23.4        22.6         5.0        -13.0           17.361
  1962      113,754     2.700%             10,382         91,268              38.7        23.0         24.2        22.4         5.0        -13.4           17.552
  1963      115,096                        10,614         92,215              39.0        23.8         24.2        22.2         5.0        -14.3           17.762
  1964      116,796                        11,108         95,103              38.5        24.2         25.7        21.5         4.9        -14.9           17.993
  1965      118,275     2.923%             11,737         99,231              37.5        24.2         27.5        21.1         4.8        -15.2           18.299
  1966      119,724                        11,963         99,918              38.0        24.9         26.4        21.4         4.8        -15.6           18.830
  1967      121,143                        12,425         102,562             38.1        25.3         26.2        21.2         4.7        -15.6           19.376
  1968      123,507                        13,343         108,037             37.3        24.6         28.5        20.2         4.4        -15.0           20.190
  1969      125,543     4.069%             13,447         107,108             38.6        25.0         26.9        20.4         4.3        -15.1           21.280
  1970      127,674                        13,026         102,028             40.3        26.2         23.7        20.9         4.4        -15.5           22.535
  1971      130,774                        13,420         102,619             40.2        26.4         23.5        21.0         4.2        -15.3           23.527
  1972      133,502     5.343%             14,606         109,410             39.6        25.8         25.0        20.7         4.0        -15.1           24.280
  1973      136,006                        14,885         109,446             41.4        26.1         22.4        21.9         3.8        -15.6           25.785
  1974      138,444                        13,574         98,048              44.4        28.2         15.6        24.8         4.0        -17.0           28.621
  1975      141,055                        13,232         93,809              45.1        29.1         13.4        25.7         4.0        -17.3           31.226
  1976      143,609     6.517%             14,136         98,433              44.5        28.3         15.2        25.1         3.7        -16.8           33.037
  1977      146,305                        14,686         100,378             46.0        28.1         14.2        25.5         3.5        -17.3           35.185
  1978      149,142                        15,125         101,413             48.2        28.0         12.1        26.4         3.4        -18.1           37.859
  1979      152,105                        15,518         102,022             49.1        27.5         11.8        26.8         3.1        -18.3           42.137
  1980      155,268                        15,701         101,122             48.8        26.8         12.8        26.7         2.9        -17.9           47.825
  1981      158,033                        15,739         99,594              49.2        26.9         12.3        26.5         2.7        -17.6           52.751
  1982      160,665     1.966%             15,803         98,360              49.6        27.8         11.5        25.9         2.6        -17.5           56.022
  1983      163,135     1.800%             16,275         99,767              48.8        29.1         12.1        24.9         2.6        -17.5           57.814
  1984      165,650     1.483%             16,737         101,040             49.5        30.7         11.8        23.5         2.5        -18.0           60.300
  1985      168,205     1.178%             17,700         105,231             50.7        32.0         11.9        21.7         2.3        -18.7           62.471
  1986      170,556     1.147%             19,199         112,570             50.8        32.7         13.2        20.4         2.2        -19.3           63.658
  1987      172,552     1.125%             20,086         116,408             50.9        33.3         13.4        19.7         2.2        -19.5           65.950
  1988      174,344     1.046%             20,902         119,890             50.9        33.7         13.5        19.2         2.2        -19.4           68.654
  1989      176,060     1.192%             21,736         123,460             50.5        33.2         14.9        18.5         2.2        -19.3           71.949
  1990      178,365     1.305%             21,588         121,034             50.7        33.6         15.1        18.3         2.3        -20.0           75.834
  1991      180,978     1.312%             21,630         119,519             49.9        33.8         16.6        17.7         2.4        -20.4           79.019
  1992      183,443     1.371%             22,186         120,942             49.0        32.8         19.5        16.6         2.4        -20.3           81.390
  1993      185,685     1.504%             22,478         121,053             48.8        31.9         21.4        16.1         2.5        -20.6           83.832
  1994      187,757     1.541%             22,619         120,472             48.7        31.7         22.0        16.2         2.6        -21.3           86.011
  1995      189,911     1.598%             23,407         123,251             47.8        30.8         24.1        16.2         2.6        -21.5           88.419
  1996      192,043     1.808%             24,908         129,698             45.7        29.2         27.9        15.6         2.6        -21.0           91.072
  1997      194,426     1.930%             26,847         138,082             43.3        27.7         31.9        15.0         2.5        -20.4           93.167
  1998      196,795     2.032%             29,306         148,916             41.6        26.2         35.1        14.4         2.5        -19.8           94.657
  1999      199,255     2.206%             32,183         161,519             40.0        25.0         38.3        13.5         2.4        -19.2           96.740
  2000      201,865     2.072%             32,936         163,161             41.2        24.8         37.9        13.5         2.4        -19.8          100.000
  2001      204,323                        31,510         154,217             45.6        26.5         33.0        14.2         2.6        -21.8          102.846
  2002      206,811                        30,194         146,000             50.8        28.8         26.9        14.9         2.9        -24.2          104.472

Notes: Population estimates based on census data from Historical Statistics of the United States and the U.S. Statistical Abstract.
Population covered by tax returns is defined by the population represented, using the multiplier technique, by estate tax returns with net worth above the filing threshold.
Total wealth is defined as net worth of the personal sector excluding all future social security benefits and human wealth but including life insurance reserves.
Only the cash surrender value of pension reserves is included (such as vested defined contribution and 401(k) accounts).
The series is estimated from the Flow of Funds Accounts since 1945 and from several other sources before 1945. The series estimate average wealth during the
corresponding year (and not end of year estimates). Wealth composition column reports the percent shares of tangible assets (owner occupied real estate and tenant occupied
buildings with four units or less, consumer durables), fixed claim assets (cash and saving deposits, all bonds, mortgages), corporate equity, non-corporate equity (which includes
tenant occupied net real estate for buildings with more than 4 units), and life insurance reserves. Liabilities include all debts (mortgages and consumer credit).
Columns (5) to (10) add up to 100%. The Consumer Price Index (CPI) series is used to express all nominal values into real 2000 dollars.
                                       Table B1: Top Wealth Shares in the United States, 1916-2000

                                       Top groups                                                          Intermediate Groups
             2%       1%       0.50%      0.25%     0.10%     0.05%      0.01%           2-1%     1-.5%     .5-.25%    .25-.1%     .1-.05%     .05-.01%
             (1)      (2)       (3)        (4)        (5)      (6)         (7)            (7)      (8)        (9)        (10)                    (11)
  1916               38.12     32.67      27.44     21.03     16.90       9.69                    5.45       5.23       6.40        4.13         7.21
  1917               35.58     30.17      25.15     19.31     15.47       8.85                    5.41       5.02       5.84        3.84         6.62
  1918               36.80     31.17      25.97     20.02     16.11       9.49                    5.63       5.19       5.96        3.91         6.63
  1923               39.93     33.82      28.42     22.39     18.38      11.32                    6.11       5.40       6.03        4.01         7.06
  1920               37.61     31.65      26.29     20.36     16.61      10.07                    5.96       5.35       5.93        3.75         6.54
  1921               35.22     29.12      23.68     17.54     13.68       7.48                    6.10       5.43       6.15        3.86         6.20
  1922               36.02     29.81      24.11     17.55     13.39       6.38                    6.21       5.70       6.55        4.17         7.00
  1923               35.22     29.49      24.13     17.80     13.66       6.84                    5.73       5.35       6.34        4.14         6.82
  1924               36.70     30.85      25.39     19.00     14.95       8.23                    5.85       5.46       6.39        4.05         6.72
  1925               36.02     30.08      24.77     18.45     14.55       7.79                    5.94       5.32       6.31        3.90         6.76
  1926               35.15     29.75      24.46     18.41     14.59       8.26                    5.40       5.29       6.05        3.82         6.33
  1927               39.21     33.19      27.72     21.28     17.19      10.16                    6.02       5.46       6.45        4.09         7.03
  1928               36.50     31.03      25.93     19.70     15.62       8.87                    5.47       5.10       6.23        4.08         6.75
  1929               36.76     31.84      26.91     20.80     16.65       9.15                    4.92       4.93       6.11        4.16         7.49
  1930               40.29     34.47      29.17     22.85     18.71      10.77                    5.82       5.31       6.31        4.15         7.94
  1931               34.70     29.47      24.63     18.77     14.87       8.25                    5.23       4.84       5.85        3.90         6.62
  1932               28.40     24.04      19.75     14.68     11.50       6.03                    4.36       4.28       5.07        3.18         5.47
  1933               30.31     25.80      21.46     16.28     12.91       6.91                    4.51       4.34       5.18        3.37         6.00
  1934               28.09     23.84      19.76     14.94     11.89       6.57                    4.24       4.08       4.83        3.04         5.32
  1935               27.77     23.76      19.69     14.98     11.88       6.54                    4.01       4.08       4.71        3.10         5.34
  1936               29.70     25.51      21.47     16.63     13.30       7.25                    4.19       4.04       4.83        3.33         6.05
  1937               26.97     22.64      18.73     14.22     11.37       6.14                    4.32       3.91       4.52        2.85         5.23
  1938               27.06     22.70      18.70     14.13     11.21       6.11                    4.36       4.00       4.57        2.93         5.10
  1939               25.95     21.59      17.65     13.18     10.40       5.56                    4.36       3.94       4.47        2.78         4.84
  1940               25.27     20.83      16.87     12.42     9.67        4.96                    4.44       3.96       4.45        2.75         4.71
  1941               25.30     20.74      16.71     12.35     9.67        5.02                    4.56       4.03       4.37        2.67         4.65
  1942               23.74     19.34      15.48     11.31     8.69        4.13                    4.40       3.85       4.17        2.63         4.56
  1943               24.26     19.46      15.35     10.96     8.35        4.23                    4.80       4.11       4.39        2.62         4.11
  1944               25.49     20.35      16.00     11.40     8.64        4.31                    5.14       4.35       4.60        2.76         4.33
  1945               24.65     19.38      15.05     10.54     7.92        3.69                    5.27       4.33       4.51        2.62         4.23
  1946     30.90     24.49     19.06      14.70     10.28     7.61        3.84          6.41      5.43       4.36       4.42        2.67         3.78
  1947     31.07     24.28     18.81      14.57     10.26     7.76        4.07          6.79      5.46       4.25       4.30        2.50         3.69
  1948     29.67     23.04     17.69      13.54      9.45     7.04        3.65          6.63      5.35       4.15       4.09        2.41         3.39
  1949     29.42     22.59     17.25      13.08      9.03     6.69        3.33          6.83      5.34       4.17       4.04        2.35         3.36
  1950     29.53     22.78     17.49      13.34      9.24     6.96        3.49          6.75      5.28       4.15       4.10        2.27         3.48
  1953     30.91     23.77     18.26      13.95      9.73     7.31        3.60          7.14      5.52       4.31       4.22        2.42         3.72
  1954     29.99     23.18     17.89      13.71      9.60     7.31        3.74          6.81      5.30       4.18       4.11        2.29         3.56
  1956     31.49     24.75     19.25      14.89     10.48     7.93        3.99          6.74      5.50       4.35       4.41        2.55         3.94
  1958     31.19     24.18     18.64      14.35     10.06     7.69        4.15          7.01      5.55       4.29       4.28        2.38         3.54
  1960     32.45     25.25     19.50      15.02     10.53     7.99        4.14          7.21      5.75       4.48       4.49        2.54         3.85
  1962     31.01     24.39     19.06      14.74     10.36     7.88        4.03          6.61      5.33       4.32       4.38        2.47         3.86
  1965     30.75     24.70     19.59      15.35     10.85     8.27        4.41          6.05      5.10       4.25       4.50        2.58         3.86
  1969     29.11     22.86     17.84      13.84      9.87     7.64        4.34          6.25      5.02       4.00       3.98        2.22         3.30
  1972     29.52     23.13     18.06      14.03      9.89     7.47        3.99          6.39      5.07       4.02       4.14        2.42         3.48
  1976     25.67     19.32     14.52      10.91      7.45     5.63        2.91          6.35      4.80       3.61       3.46        1.83         2.72
  1982     25.17     19.06     14.36      10.79      7.33     5.40        2.53          6.11      4.70       3.56       3.47        1.93         2.87
  1983     26.96     21.07     15.93      12.06      8.40     6.40        3.19          5.89      5.15       3.87       3.66        1.99         3.21
  1984     26.57     20.95     16.23      12.23      8.60     6.62        3.51          5.62      4.72       4.00       3.63        1.99         3.10
  1985     28.49     22.35     17.43      13.49      9.45     7.25        4.09          6.14      4.92       3.95       4.04        2.20         3.16
  1986     28.80     22.66     17.62      13.63      9.61     7.37        3.91          6.14      5.03       4.00       4.02        2.23         3.46
  1987     27.78     21.57     16.66      12.79      8.98     6.73        3.44          6.22      4.91       3.88       3.80        2.25         3.29
  1988     27.77     21.70     16.85      12.92      8.95     6.80        3.60          6.07      4.86       3.93       3.97        2.15         3.21
  1989     28.04     21.96     17.02      13.13      9.30     7.11        3.79          6.08      4.94       3.89       3.83        2.19         3.32
  1990     27.39     20.86     15.95      12.21      8.73     6.78        3.63          6.53      4.91       3.74       3.48        1.95         3.15
  1991     27.73     21.54     16.56      12.73      8.95     6.79        3.55          6.20      4.98       3.83       3.78        2.16         3.24
  1992     27.23     21.18     16.34      12.66      8.99     6.88        3.72          6.06      4.84       3.68       3.67        2.12         3.16
  1993     27.53     21.31     16.33      12.44      8.69     6.72        3.76          6.22      4.98       3.89       3.75        1.98         2.96
  1994     28.08     21.58     16.63      12.84      9.00     6.96        3.86          6.50      4.96       3.79       3.84        2.04         3.11
  1995     27.74     21.54     16.67      12.91      9.29     7.23        3.99          6.20      4.87       3.76       3.62        2.07         3.24
  1996     27.68     21.45     16.51      12.71      9.08     6.98        3.84          6.23      4.94       3.80       3.63        2.10         3.15
  1997     27.24     21.24     16.41      12.56      8.92     6.91        3.78          6.00      4.83       3.85       3.64        2.01         3.13
  1998     27.67     21.70     16.86      13.08      9.38     7.31        3.99          5.97      4.83       3.78       3.70        2.08         3.32
  1999     27.68     21.68     16.86      13.16      9.40     7.28        3.91          6.00      4.82       3.69       3.76        2.12         3.37
  2000     26.43     20.79     16.27      12.73      9.06     7.00        3.90          5.64      4.51       3.55       3.67        2.06         3.11

Notes: Computations by authors based on estate tax return statistics. See Appendix Section D for details.
Series display the top of total net-worth accruing to each upper wealth group.
Series for Top 2-1% are estimated only for the 1946-2000 period because the tax return population does not cover that group in the pre-war period.
                                Table B2: Top Groups Wealth Levels in the United States, 1916-2000 (in thousands of 2000 dollars)
                                Top groups                                                 Intermediate Groups                                             Thresholds
          2%     1%     0.50%    0.25%    0.10%     0.05%     0.01%        2-1%    1-.5%      .5-.25%   .25-.1%   .1-.05%   .05-.01%   2%      1%    0.50%   0.25%   0.10%   0.05%   0.01%
          (1)    (2)      (3)     (4)       (5)      (6)       (7)          (8)     (9)        (10)      (11)      (12)      (13)      (14)   (15)   (16)    (17)    (18)    (19)     (20)
 1916           1,911   3,275    5,501    10,543   16,947    48,582                 547       1,049     2,140     4,139     9,038             403    773     1,487 3,274 5,536       19,602
 1917           1,618   2,745    4,575    8,781    14,071    40,230                 492        914      1,772     3,490     7,531             368    684     1,264 2,715 4,700       14,964
 1918           1,595   2,702    4,504    8,678    13,968    41,123                 488        900      1,721     3,387     7,180             364    682     1,225 2,611 4,568       13,591
 1923           1,752   2,967    4,987    9,823    16,125    49,643                 536        948      1,763     3,520     7,745             411    727     1,258 2,713 4,966       13,414
 1920           1,486   2,501    4,156    8,046    13,129    39,781                 471        846      1,563     2,964     6,466             348    663     1,123 2,318 3,917       13,185
 1921           1,459   2,413    3,925    7,266    11,334    30,981                 506        901      1,697     3,199     6,422             386    688     1,214 2,501 4,186       12,689
 1922           1,598   2,645    4,279    7,790    11,879    28,314                 551       1,012     1,939     3,701     7,770             414    764     1,379 2,869 5,058       14,498
 1923           1,589   2,660    4,355    8,029    12,327    30,869                 517        966      1,905     3,731     7,692             385    722     1,327 2,919 4,988       13,205
 1924           1,694   2,847    4,687    8,767    13,799    37,993                 540       1,008     1,967     3,734     7,751             398    761     1,374 3,020 4,675       15,048
 1925           1,718   2,870    4,726    8,804    13,888    37,179                 567       1,014     2,007     3,721     8,065             431    774     1,440 2,888 5,025       15,978
 1926           1,734   2,936    4,827    9,084    14,396    40,757                 533       1,044     1,989     3,771     7,806             383    790     1,430 2,921 5,009       14,397
 1927           2,078   3,518    5,878    11,278   18,222    53,853                 638       1,158     2,279     4,334     9,314             483    877     1,590 3,462 5,434       20,334
 1928           2,160   3,673    6,139    11,663   18,491    52,487                 647       1,208     2,456     4,835     9,992             483    902     1,683 3,716 6,477       18,018
 1929           2,367   4,101    6,933    13,398   21,443    58,947                 634       1,269     2,623     5,353     12,067            457    915     1,800 4,055 7,156       25,056
 1930           2,285   3,910    6,615    12,959   21,216    61,043                 660       1,204     2,386     4,702     11,260            498    909     1,659 3,579 6,343       24,560
 1931           1,763   2,994    5,003    9,535    15,105    41,922                 532        984      1,982     3,965     8,401             399    738     1,365 3,090 5,183       15,735
 1932           1,297   2,196    3,609    6,706    10,507    27,540                 398        783      1,544     2,905     6,249             290    570     1,089 2,298 4,008       11,400
 1933           1,456   2,479    4,124    7,821    12,406    33,209                 433        834      1,659     3,237     7,205             319    613     1,165 2,555 4,274       13,565
 1934           1,377   2,337    3,875    7,322    11,660    32,211                 416        799      1,577     2,984     6,523             306    588     1,123 2,348 4,016       11,563
 1935           1,389   2,377    3,938    7,491    11,885    32,722                 401        815      1,569     3,098     6,675             282    595     1,110 2,365 4,211       12,119
 1936           1,640   2,816    4,740    9,182    14,687    40,021                 463        893      1,779     3,678     8,354             338    660     1,229 2,750 5,013       17,301
 1937           1,431   2,404    3,978    7,547    12,072    32,614                 459        830      1,598     3,022     6,936             348    630     1,126 2,372 4,187       12,675
 1938           1,401   2,350    3,872    7,315    11,599    31,615                 452        828      1,577     3,030     6,595             336    631     1,119 2,316 4,060       13,123
 1939           1,387   2,308    3,774    7,048    11,125    29,745                 467        842      1,592     2,972     6,470             352    644     1,139 2,356 3,753       14,481
 1940           1,347   2,220    3,596    6,620    10,305    26,433                 473        845      1,579     2,935     6,273             359    647     1,138 2,289 3,961       12,631
 1941           1,323   2,169    3,495    6,456    10,117    26,267                 477        843      1,522     2,795     6,079             363    652     1,110 2,212 3,775       12,938
 1942           1,206   1,965    3,147    5,747     8,826    20,985                 447        783      1,413     2,668     5,786             343    606     1,033 2,063 3,605       10,222
 1943           1,298   2,082    3,285    5,863     8,927    22,630                 514        878      1,566     2,800     5,501             398    689     1,142 2,262 3,605       10,036
 1944           1,492   2,383    3,747    6,673    10,118    25,220                 602       1,019     1,796     3,227     6,342             468    804     1,327 2,583 4,135       11,435
 1945           1,585   2,493    3,871    6,778    10,181    23,725                 678       1,114     1,933     3,375     6,795             533    886     1,447 2,690 4,656       10,397
 1946   1,013 1,605     2,498    3,853    6,737     9,979    25,145         420     712       1,143     1,930     3,496     6,187      328    559    937     1,458 2,824 4,197       11,098
 1947    956    1,494   2,315    3,585    6,313     9,544    25,017         418     672       1,045     1,766     3,082     5,676      335    540    869     1,335 2,498 3,765       11,085
 1948    895    1,390   2,134    3,267    5,702     8,493    22,003         400     645       1,001     1,644     2,911     5,115      320    519    817     1,267 2,359 3,510       8,892
 1949    927    1,423   2,173    3,296    5,691     8,426    20,969         430     673       1,050     1,699     2,956     5,291      349    548    860     1,311 2,410 3,607       9,383
 1950    967    1,492   2,292    3,496    6,054     9,127    22,850         442     692       1,089     1,790     2,981     5,697      360    562    889     1,379 2,440 3,819       9,552
 1953   1,059 1,629     2,503    3,823    6,669    10,024    24,653         489     756       1,182     1,927     3,314     6,366      401    618    958     1,486 2,669 4,273       10,946
 1954   1,065 1,647     2,541    3,894    6,818    10,380    26,596         484     753       1,188     1,945     3,255     6,326      395    613    961     1,502 2,635 4,232       11,230
 1956   1,252 1,968     3,061    4,737    8,334    12,610    31,747         536     874       1,385     2,339     4,058     7,826      413    707    1,132 1,770 3,259 5,234         13,998
 1958   1,257 1,949     3,004    4,625    8,109    12,388    33,429         565     894       1,383     2,302     3,830     7,128      445    728    1,130 1,762 3,138 4,859         12,902
 1960   1,389 2,161     3,337    5,141    9,010    13,676    35,399         617     985       1,533     2,562     4,345     8,245      487    797    1,238 1,963 3,536 5,469         14,564
 1962   1,415 2,226     3,479    5,380    9,453    14,391    36,757         604     974       1,578     2,664     4,515     8,800      477    777    1,277 2,044 3,658 5,737         15,936
 1965   1,526 2,451     3,889    6,091    10,766   16,413    43,720         601    1,013      1,686     2,975     5,120     9,587      470    795    1,335 2,230 4,205 6,384         17,953
 1969   1,559 2,449     3,822    5,930    10,568   16,376    46,527         670    1,075      1,714     2,839     4,760     8,838      535    863    1,388 2,182 3,921 5,940         15,623
 1972   1,615 2,531     3,952    6,142    10,822   16,338    43,636         699    1,110      1,761     3,022     5,305     9,514      557    901    1,422 2,251 4,336 6,461         17,061
 1976   1,264 1,902     2,859    4,297    7,337    11,075    28,621         625     945       1,420     2,271     3,599     6,689      509    795    1,170 1,789 3,028 4,501         11,384
 1982   1,238 1,874     2,824    4,247    7,208    10,615    24,836         601     924       1,402     2,273     3,802     7,059      492    760    1,159 1,752 3,117 4,774         12,800
 1983   1,345 2,102     3,178    4,813    8,377    12,777    31,869         587    1,027      1,543     2,436     3,978     8,004      447    802    1,279 1,828 3,537 4,950         15,910
 1984   1,342 2,117     3,280    4,944    8,694    13,371    35,510         568     953       1,617     2,443     4,017     7,837      453    738    1,353 1,929 3,386 5,094         14,064
 1985   1,499 2,352     3,669    5,676    9,943    15,251    42,991         646    1,035      1,662     2,832     4,635     8,316      517    837    1,314 2,173 4,014 5,528         14,344
 1986   1,621 2,550     3,968    6,135    10,814   16,603    44,052         691    1,133      1,800     3,016     5,026     9,740      546    908    1,445 2,329 4,076 6,464         16,201
 1987   1,617 2,511     3,879    5,953    10,458   15,675    40,023         724    1,142      1,805     2,950     5,241     9,588      589    921    1,488 2,191 4,284 6,495         16,977
 1988   1,665 2,602     4,040    6,197    10,735   16,310    43,111         727    1,165      1,882     3,172     5,160     9,610      587    935    1,513 2,426 4,384 6,454         17,132
 1989   1,731 2,712     4,203    6,484    11,482   17,552    46,810         750    1,220      1,923     3,152     5,412     10,238     599    975    1,583 2,427 4,337 6,716         18,732
 1990   1,658 2,525     3,862    5,912    10,566   16,403    43,948         790    1,189      1,811     2,810     4,729     9,516      655    985    1,485 2,214 3,828 5,902         18,481
 1991   1,657 2,574     3,958    6,087    10,699   16,230    42,412         740    1,190      1,830     3,012     5,169     9,684      594    957    1,488 2,306 4,210 6,443         17,049
 1992   1,647 2,561     3,952    6,124    10,877   16,632    44,932         732    1,170      1,780     2,956     5,122     9,558      587    947    1,455 2,257 4,176 6,341         17,151
 1993   1,666 2,580     3,953    6,023    10,522   16,263    45,524         753    1,206      1,883     3,023     4,782     8,948      607    969    1,537 2,365 4,060 5,721         16,305
 1994   1,691 2,600     4,006    6,185    10,841   16,776    46,471         783    1,194      1,826     3,082     4,906     9,352      647    979    1,487 2,355 4,184 5,981         16,896
 1995   1,709 2,655     4,109    6,364    11,451   17,811    49,150         764    1,201      1,853     2,972     5,092     9,976      620    975    1,522 2,296 4,106 6,666         16,532
 1996   1,795 2,782     4,283    6,592    11,775   18,114    49,752         808    1,281      1,974     3,137     5,437     10,205     650    1,042 1,642 2,397 4,416 6,829          17,593
 1997   1,880 2,933     4,531    6,937    12,315   19,083    52,167         828    1,335      2,124     3,352     5,547     10,812     663    1,073 1,722 2,644 4,545 6,979          19,146
 1998   2,060 3,231     5,023    7,793    13,970   21,760    59,370         890    1,439      2,252     3,675     6,181     12,357     703    1,160 1,823 2,827 5,045 7,568          23,559
 1999   2,236 3,502     5,446    8,505    15,185   23,532    63,149         969    1,558      2,387     4,052     6,839     13,627     760    1,262 1,974 3,024 5,507 8,960          25,581
 2000   2,156 3,392     5,311    8,308    14,786   22,853    63,564         920    1,472      2,314     3,989     6,718     12,676     730    1,173 1,842 3,068 5,504 8,220          24,415

Notes: All amounts are reported in thousands 2000 dollars.
Computations by authors based on income tax return statistics. All details in Appendix Section D.
Series report the thresholds, and average wealth corresponding to each of the upper groups.
                                                 Table B3: Composition by Sources of Wealth and by Fractiles of Total Wealth in the United States, 1916-2000
                 Top 2%                                             Top 1%                                           Top 0.5%                                           Top 0.25%                                            Top 0.1%
        Real Bonds StockLife Ins Other Debts              Real Bonds StockLife Ins Other Debts             Real   Bonds   StockLife Ins Other   Debts          Real   Bonds   StockLife Ins Other   Debts          Real   Bonds   StockLife Ins Other   Debts
1916                                               1916                                             1916   28.1   35.5    36.4 0.3 7.8           -8.1   1916   23.6   36.5    39.1 0.3 7.2           -6.7   1916   19.7   37.5    41.4 0.3 7.4           -6.3
1917                                               1917                                             1917   29.5   32.3    39.9 0.4 6.2           -8.2   1917   24.8   32.4    44.0 0.3 5.9           -7.4   1917   19.9   31.1    49.4 0.3 5.8           -6.5
1918                                               1918                                             1918   27.7   33.3    40.1 0.5 8.3          -10.0   1918   23.9   33.5    43.5 0.4 8.1           -9.4   1918   19.7   33.4    47.4 0.3 7.7           -8.4
1919                                               1919                                             1919   25.1   29.9    45.3 1.0 9.2          -10.4   1919   21.0   30.0    48.9 0.8 8.9           -9.7   1919   17.1   30.3    52.1 0.7 9.2           -9.4
1920                                               1920                                             1920   24.2   28.1    49.4 1.3 8.8          -11.7   1920   20.1   27.5    53.7 1.1 8.4          -10.8   1920   16.3   26.3    58.8 0.8 7.7          -10.0
1921                                               1921                                             1921   29.9   32.1    42.1 2.0 7.7          -13.7   1921   26.9   32.0    45.7 1.7 8.0          -14.3   1921   23.9   32.0    50.2 1.2 8.3          -15.6
1922                                               1922                                             1922   27.3   32.5    44.0 2.4 7.2          -13.6   1922   24.3   31.8    48.6 2.1 7.3          -14.1   1922   21.4   30.5    54.6 1.4 7.4          -15.3
1923                                               1923                                             1923   25.7   30.6    46.5 2.5 6.9          -12.2   1923   22.4   29.5    51.6 2.2 6.7          -12.5   1923   18.6   28.2    58.4 1.6 6.3          -13.1
1924                                               1924                                             1924   22.5   33.2    45.1 2.4 7.3          -10.6   1924   19.4   32.8    49.1 1.8 7.3          -10.3   1924   15.7   32.4    53.4 1.0 7.3           -9.8
1925                                               1925                                             1925   21.9   31.3    46.7 2.3 8.2          -10.3   1925   19.0   30.3    50.7 1.9 8.3          -10.2   1925   16.1   29.2    56.0 1.2 8.0          -10.4
1926                                               1926                                             1926                                                1926                                                1926
1927                                               1927                                             1927   18.7   28.5    54.7   2.4 6.4 -10.7          1927   16.1   27.2    58.9   2.0 6.3 -10.6          1927   13.2   25.4    64.9   1.2    6.2     -10.9
1928                                               1928                                             1928   17.4   24.1    58.1   2.2 7.9 -9.7           1928   13.9   23.5    62.3   1.7 7.8 -9.2           1928   10.8   21.5    66.4   1.3    7.7      -7.8
1929                                               1929                                             1929   15.6   26.6    58.9   1.6 8.1 -10.7          1929   12.7   26.2    62.1   1.3 7.9 -10.2          1929   10.2   25.1    65.1   1.0    8.1      -9.4
1930                                               1930                                             1930   15.3   29.1    58.1   2.4 7.4 -12.4          1930   13.3   28.1    61.7   1.7 7.7 -12.5          1930   10.7   27.2    65.1   1.5    7.8     -12.3
1931                                               1931                                             1931   17.5   34.4    48.3   4.0 8.0 -12.1          1931   16.0   33.6    50.8   3.4 8.5 -12.3          1931   13.6   32.6    54.8   2.1    9.3     -12.5
1932                                               1932                                             1932   19.1   38.6    42.5   5.1 16.8 -22.0         1932   17.7   36.9    46.0   4.2 19.4 -24.2         1932   15.2   34.9    51.0   2.5   24.3     -28.0
1933                                               1933                                             1933   19.4   40.4    41.9   4.9 9.2 -15.8          1933   17.8   40.2    44.6   3.9 9.8 -16.4          1933   16.1   39.8    48.6   2.5   11.1     -18.2
1934                                               1934                                             1934   17.7   38.5    46.8   4.5 9.4 -17.0          1934   16.2   37.7    50.7   3.7 10.1 -18.3         1934   14.1   36.2    56.9   2.5   11.3     -21.1
1935                                               1935                                             1935   15.8   38.7    43.8   4.3 9.4 -12.0          1935   13.8   37.8    47.1   3.5 10.0 -12.2         1935   10.9   36.5    52.1   2.2   11.2     -13.0
1936                                               1936                                             1936   14.1   36.3    50.3   2.0 6.8 -9.6           1936   11.2   35.5    53.9   1.9 6.9 -9.3           1936    8.1   34.6    58.4   1.4    6.9      -9.4
1937                                               1937                                             1937   15.8   36.3    48.9   2.1 7.4 -10.5          1937   13.2   35.6    52.4   1.9 7.5 -10.6          1937   10.9   35.0    56.3   1.5    7.7     -11.3
1938                                               1938                                             1938   15.2   35.5    45.7   3.0 9.0 -8.4           1938   12.5   35.0    48.8   2.4 9.1 -7.8           1938    9.0   34.8    50.6   1.9    9.4      -5.7
1939                                               1939                                             1939   14.9   34.1    49.3   3.2 7.1 -8.7           1939   12.3   33.9    52.6   2.8 6.4 -8.0           1939    9.2   34.0    56.3   2.1    5.7      -7.2
1940                                               1940                                             1940   16.6   34.4    45.0   3.2 9.3 -8.5           1940   13.9   34.5    48.0   2.6 9.0 -7.9           1940   11.4   34.5    51.7   1.9    8.1      -7.7
1941                                               1941                                             1941   20.9   40.6    45.3   1.3 6.2 -14.3          1941   17.8   40.7    48.9   1.3 6.1 -14.8          1941   14.1   41.5    52.4   1.2    5.6     -14.7
1942                                               1942                                             1942   20.3   35.7    49.4   1.2 6.5 -13.1          1942   17.1   35.1    53.9   1.2 6.4 -13.7          1942   13.6   34.1    59.4   1.1    6.1     -14.1
1943                                               1943                                             1943   19.4   35.1    50.2   1.4 7.9 -14.0          1943   16.4   34.6    55.3   1.4 7.6 -15.3          1943   13.0   34.1    61.7   1.4    7.1     -17.3
1944                                               1944                                             1944   15.2   31.9    46.3   3.2 9.7 -6.3           1944   12.5   31.8    49.8   2.7 8.9 -5.8           1944   10.5   31.5    53.6   2.2    7.2      -4.9
1945                                               1945                                             1945                                                1945                                                1945
1946   25.4   34.1   39.1   0.9    7.4    -6.0     1946   22.5   32.9   42.7   0.9    7.4    -6.4   1946   18.9   32.7    46.9   0.8    7.1      -6.5   1946   16.0   32.7    50.4   0.7    6.5      -6.3   1946   13.2   32.8    53.6   0.5    5.8      -5.9
1947   26.2   34.3   37.8   1.0    8.1    -6.4     1947   23.0   32.9   41.9   0.9    8.1    -6.8   1947   19.4   32.9    46.1   0.8    7.7      -6.8   1947   16.1   33.2    49.5   0.7    7.0      -6.5   1947   13.0   33.5    52.7   0.5    6.3      -5.9
1948   27.0   34.4   37.2   1.0    8.0    -6.5     1948   23.5   32.6   41.7   1.0    8.1    -6.9   1948   19.9   32.4    46.0   0.9    7.9      -7.0   1948   16.5   32.5    49.7   0.7    7.3      -6.8   1948   13.3   32.6    53.3   0.5    6.6      -6.3
1949   27.4   33.2   37.7   1.0    8.2    -6.5     1949   24.0   31.6   42.2   1.0    8.4    -7.1   1949   20.5   31.1    46.7   0.9    8.2      -7.2   1949   17.5   30.9    50.4   0.7    7.8      -7.4   1949   14.6   30.8    54.1   0.6    7.3      -7.4
1950   27.1   33.1   38.4   0.9    8.3    -6.8     1950   23.7   31.5   42.9   0.9    8.4    -7.4   1950   20.3   31.0    47.4   0.8    8.2      -7.7   1950   17.6   30.8    50.9   0.7    7.9      -7.9   1950   15.0   30.7    54.6   0.5    7.4      -8.2
1953   25.4   28.7   42.9   0.9    9.0    -6.1     1953   21.4   27.0   48.2   0.8    8.9    -6.3   1953   17.8   26.4    52.9   0.7    8.5      -6.3   1953   14.4   26.2    57.0   0.6    7.9      -6.1   1953   10.9   26.0    61.1   0.4    7.2      -5.6
1954   25.1   27.7   43.8   0.8    9.1    -5.7     1954   21.1   25.8   49.2   0.8    9.2    -6.0   1954   17.4   25.2    53.9   0.7    8.9      -6.0   1954   14.4   24.5    57.7   0.6    8.5      -5.7   1954   11.2   23.8    61.8   0.4    8.2      -5.4
1956   23.6   26.3   47.0   0.8    8.9    -5.8     1956   19.6   24.7   52.1   0.7    8.8    -5.9   1956   16.2   24.0    56.6   0.6    8.5      -5.9   1956   13.3   23.5    60.3   0.5    8.2      -5.6   1956   10.6   23.1    63.6   0.3    7.7      -5.5
1958   23.8   25.2   48.0   0.7    8.9    -5.9     1958   19.9   23.5   53.1   0.6    8.8    -6.0   1958   16.6   22.7    57.5   0.5    8.6      -6.0   1958   13.8   22.3    61.2   0.4    8.2      -5.9   1958   11.2   22.1    64.4   0.3    7.8      -5.9
1960   21.5   24.6   51.6   0.7    7.8    -5.5     1960   17.9   22.8   56.5   0.6    7.7    -5.5   1960   14.7   22.0    60.6   0.5    7.5      -5.3   1960   12.1   21.4    63.9   0.4    7.3      -5.1   1960    9.3   21.0    67.0   0.3    7.2      -4.8
1962   20.1   23.7   52.9   1.0   10.1    -6.8     1962   17.1   21.1   57.7   1.0   10.1    -6.9   1962   14.6   19.8    62.0   1.0    9.7      -7.1   1962   12.8   19.0    65.7   1.1    9.0      -7.5   1962    9.7   18.8    70.1   0.6    8.3      -7.5
1965   20.3   26.3   53.5   1.3    4.7    -4.9     1965   17.1   23.4   58.9   1.1    4.4    -4.9   1965   14.5   22.1    63.4   0.9    4.1      -4.9   1965   12.4   21.3    66.8   0.7    3.8      -5.0   1965   10.3   20.8    70.0   0.5    3.5      -5.1
1969   23.6   25.9   48.7   2.3   12.4   -10.5     1969   19.9   22.3   53.5   1.8   12.7   -10.2   1969   17.1   21.2    58.0   1.4   12.5     -10.2   1969   14.4   20.3    61.5   1.1   13.1     -10.4   1969   10.8   18.8    65.6   0.8   13.8      -9.9
1972   24.7   27.8   46.3   2.0   10.6    -9.4     1972   21.3   24.3   51.3   1.6   10.6    -9.1   1972   18.8   21.9    56.5   1.3   10.3      -8.7   1972   16.2   20.5    60.3   1.0   10.4      -8.3   1972   13.6   19.1    64.2   0.7   10.3      -7.8
1976   31.7   30.8   35.8   2.3   12.2   -10.5     1976   28.3   27.4   40.4   1.7   12.5   -10.3   1976   24.4   27.4    44.5   1.4   12.3     -10.1   1976   20.0   27.4    48.2   1.1   12.7      -9.5   1976   16.1   26.7    52.9   0.8   13.1      -9.6
1982                                               1982   34.4   23.6   32.1   2.1   18.8   -11.0   1982   31.2   22.4    35.3   1.8   19.3     -10.1   1982   28.4   21.2    38.4   1.5   20.2      -9.7   1982   25.0   19.9    41.7   1.2   21.2      -9.1
1983                                               1983   32.0   23.6   33.0   2.5   18.6    -9.7   1983   28.6   23.1    36.1   2.1   19.1      -9.1   1983   25.1   22.9    41.3   1.3   18.4      -9.0   1983   23.4   19.9    45.4   1.0   20.7     -10.4
1984                                               1984   33.1   25.1   33.5   2.1   18.3   -12.1   1984   31.7   23.8    37.6   1.7   17.8     -12.6   1984   27.7   23.5    40.8   1.1   18.6     -11.8   1984   24.0   21.5    45.1   1.0   20.1     -11.8
1985                                               1985   27.2   24.9   37.2   2.2   17.8    -9.3   1985   25.6   23.5    40.6   1.7   17.7      -9.1   1985   23.3   22.4    44.2   1.4   17.3      -8.7   1985   18.3   21.1    50.5   0.9   16.8      -7.5
1986                                               1986   27.1   24.1   37.5   1.9   19.0    -9.6   1986   24.4   22.8    41.5   1.6   19.0      -9.2   1986   22.6   20.6    45.6   1.3   19.3      -9.4   1986   19.2   18.7    52.1   1.1   18.3      -9.4
1987                                               1987   27.8   24.9   33.5   2.3   20.5    -8.9   1987   25.3   23.4    36.5   2.0   21.4      -8.6   1987   23.0   21.8    40.3   1.5   22.2      -8.9   1987   21.0   20.8    42.7   1.2   23.5      -9.2
1988                                               1988   30.3   26.4   31.9   2.7   17.4    -8.7   1988   28.0   24.9    35.4   2.6   17.6      -8.5   1988   25.2   24.6    38.7   2.3   17.3      -8.1   1988   23.1   22.7    42.6   2.2   17.2      -7.9
1989                                               1989   30.2   25.1   29.0   2.1   22.1    -8.5   1989   28.1   23.7    31.8   1.8   22.9      -8.3   1989   26.2   22.2    34.1   1.4   24.0      -7.9   1989   22.2   21.2    36.6   1.0   25.7      -6.6
1990                                               1990   28.5   28.9   27.8   2.0   21.0    -8.3   1990   26.2   28.2    30.2   1.6   21.9      -8.1   1990   24.5   27.8    32.7   1.2   21.8      -8.1   1990   20.7   27.1    35.4   1.0   23.7      -7.9
1991                                               1991   25.8   28.5   31.8   2.1   20.1    -8.3   1991   24.0   27.4    35.2   1.7   19.8      -8.1   1991   21.7   26.5    38.6   1.4   19.9      -8.1   1991   18.4   24.5    43.4   1.1   20.3      -7.8
1992                                               1992   23.3   25.5   39.7   1.9   16.7    -7.1   1992   21.4   24.3    44.2   1.5   15.7      -7.0   1992   19.1   23.3    47.9   1.2   15.1      -6.6   1992   15.9   22.0    52.8   0.9   13.6      -5.3
1993                                               1993   20.3   26.9   39.7   2.0   17.2    -6.2   1993   17.9   26.3    44.0   1.6   15.9      -5.8   1993   16.0   25.9    47.5   1.4   14.6      -5.4   1993   14.2   22.4    53.9   1.0   13.5      -5.1
1994                                               1994   23.8   29.1   33.5   2.1   18.5    -7.0   1994   21.3   29.2    37.1   1.7   17.7      -6.9   1994   19.2   28.7    40.4   1.4   16.9      -6.5   1994   16.9   27.9    45.7   1.2   14.9      -6.6
1995                                               1995   25.7   25.4   34.6   2.0   19.0    -6.7   1995   23.9   24.6    38.5   1.5   17.9      -6.5   1995   22.7   23.0    42.4   1.1   16.9      -6.2   1995   21.3   21.3    46.5   0.8   15.8      -5.7
1996   24.1   27.5   34.6   2.6   20.9   -7.2      1996   21.9   24.5   38.6   2.0   19.6    -6.6   1996   20.0   24.0    42.8   1.6   18.2      -6.6   1996   18.4   22.9    46.5   1.3   17.3      -6.5   1996   17.0   21.2    51.7   0.9   15.8      -6.7
1997   23.2   26.5   36.8   2.1   20.4   -6.8      1997   20.9   23.8   40.5   1.8   19.4    -6.4   1997   19.0   23.2    44.6   1.4   18.0      -6.1   1997   17.7   22.5    47.9   1.1   16.6      -5.8   1997   16.2   20.7    52.7   0.9   15.6      -6.0
1998   22.5   27.3   40.6   2.3   16.1   -6.4      1998   20.3   24.6   44.5   1.9   14.9    -6.2   1998   18.5   23.7    48.3   1.5   14.0      -6.0   1998   16.9   22.8    51.3   1.1   13.9      -5.9   1998   15.1   21.3    56.1   0.7   12.8      -5.9
1999   22.1   25.3   37.7   2.0   21.0   -6.2      1999   20.0   22.9   41.5   1.4   20.1    -6.0   1999   18.3   22.8    44.4   1.1   19.0      -5.6   1999   17.2   22.8    47.5   0.9   17.2      -5.5   1999   15.1   22.5    51.6   0.6   15.8      -5.6
2000   23.9   23.3   36.9   2.1   22.7   -6.8      2000   22.5   20.8   39.9   1.6   22.0    -6.8   2000   21.0   19.6    43.9   1.2   20.8      -6.6   2000   19.5   20.0    46.2   0.9   20.0      -6.7   2000   17.4   19.8    47.8   0.8   21.0      -6.8
Notes: Wealth is defined as all sources of (non-human) wealth net of debts and liabilities but excludes annuities, and claims on future pensions.
Real is defined as real estate. Bonds is the sum of federal, local, foreign, and corporate bonds. Stock is corporate stock
Cash is currency, deposits, and notes. Other is equity in unincorporated business, and miscellaneous assets
The sums of all sources less debts add up to 100%.
                                                        Table B3: Composition by Sources of Wealth and by Fractiles of Total Wealth in the United States, 1916-2000 (continued)
                       Top 0.05%                                                   Top 0.01%                                                                        Top 2-1%                                           Top 1-0.5%
       Real   Bonds   Stock Life Ins.   Other   Debts               Real   Bonds   StockLife Ins Other   Debts                                             Real Bonds StockLife Ins Other Debts             Real   Bonds Stock Life Ins. Other   Debts
1916   17.2   39.3    41.3    0.2        7.2     -5.2        1916   16.4   42.2    38.4 0.2 8.1           -5.2                                      1916                                             1916
1917   17.6   30.6    52.4    0.3        5.4     -6.3        1917   13.1   28.1    58.8 0.2 5.6           -5.8                                      1917                                             1917
1918   17.9   33.0    49.4    0.2        7.3     -7.9        1918   15.3   33.1    53.0 0.1 5.4           -6.8                                      1918                                             1918
1919   14.8   30.0    54.6    0.5        8.6     -8.6        1919   10.8   29.6    60.3 0.2 8.7           -9.5                                      1919                                             1919
1920   13.9   25.3    61.2    0.6        7.5     -8.5        1920    8.0   23.5    67.7 0.3 6.3           -5.8                                      1920                                             1920
1921   22.8   32.0    52.8    0.5        8.8    -17.0        1921   15.3   36.1    51.0 0.4 5.5           -8.3                                      1921                                             1921
1922   20.2   29.7    58.4    0.7        7.8    -16.9        1922   12.8   33.0    57.9 0.7 10.1         -14.6                                      1922                                             1922
1923   16.5   26.1    64.5    0.9        6.2    -14.2        1923    9.8   25.9    64.0 1.1 5.5           -6.2                                      1923                                             1923
1924   13.5   32.0    56.9    0.4        7.3    -10.0        1924    8.5   31.1    59.0 0.2 7.0           -5.9                                      1924                                             1924
1925   14.6   28.1    59.3    0.6        8.3    -10.9        1925   11.2   26.8    58.0 0.6 9.4           -6.0                                      1925                                             1925
1926                                                         1926   11.3   27.6    63.0 0.5 8.5          -10.8                                      1926                                             1926
1927   11.5   24.3    68.9     0.5       5.9    -11.1        1927    7.8   21.9    73.6 0.3 5.1           -8.7                                      1927                                             1927
1928    9.2   20.1    68.8     1.2       7.2     -6.5        1928    6.1   16.4    74.4 1.0 7.5           -5.4                                      1928                                             1928
1929    8.8   24.8    65.4     0.7       8.5     -8.2        1929    6.3   24.8    65.3 0.4 9.4           -6.2                                      1929                                             1929
1930    9.3   26.4    67.8     0.8       8.3    -12.6        1930    6.2   27.2    71.6 0.4 8.2          -13.5                                      1930                                             1930
1931   12.2   32.0    57.6     0.9      10.3    -13.0        1931    9.4   32.5    55.8 0.5 9.0           -7.2                                      1931                                             1931
1932   13.7   32.8    55.7     1.0      29.3    -32.5        1932    9.8   44.7    44.9 0.7 9.4           -9.4                                      1932                                             1932
1933   16.0   39.7    51.2     1.3      12.4    -20.6        1933    8.0   39.2    48.3 0.8 10.6          -7.0                                      1933                                             1933
1934   13.4   35.1    61.8     1.3      12.7    -24.3        1934    8.4   35.7    55.2 1.2 5.7           -6.2                                      1934                                             1934
1935    9.2   35.4    56.0     1.0      12.5    -14.1        1935    5.9   29.1    58.3 0.6 10.5          -4.3                                      1935                                             1935
1936    6.1   33.8    61.6     1.0       7.2     -9.7        1936    5.1   34.4    59.7 0.9 5.7           -5.7                                      1936                                             1936
1937    9.7   34.3    59.3     1.1       8.0    -12.4        1937    6.5   37.6    56.3 0.7 8.3           -9.4                                      1937                                             1937
1938    7.6   35.6    50.7     1.5       9.6     -5.0        1938    4.6   37.2    49.7 0.8 12.1          -4.3                                      1938                                             1938
1939    7.5   34.1    57.9     1.7       5.3     -6.5        1939    4.6   34.7    60.6 1.2 4.1           -5.2                                      1939                                             1939
1940   10.0   34.2    53.3     1.6       8.3     -7.4        1940    6.3   35.7    54.0 1.0 9.4           -6.4                                      1940                                             1940
1941   12.2   42.8    54.3     1.2       5.4    -15.8        1941    7.1   39.4    53.0 1.0 5.1           -5.6                                      1941                                             1941
1942   11.7   32.7    63.8     1.1       5.7    -15.1        1942   10.7   37.2    53.8 0.9 6.6           -9.2                                      1942                                             1942
1943   11.1   33.2    66.9     1.5       7.0    -19.7        1943    4.5   36.3    59.4 1.6 3.6           -5.4                                      1943                                             1943
1944    9.5   32.3    55.2     1.6       6.2     -4.7        1944    6.8   33.9    57.6 1.0 4.8           -4.0                                      1944                                             1944
1945   10.7   35.7    49.8     1.3       9.8     -7.4        1945    6.4   39.5    53.6 0.9 4.3           -4.7                                      1945                                             1945
1946   11.5   33.0    55.3     0.4       5.3     -5.5        1946    8.4   34.7    55.9 0.2 4.7           -4.0                                      1946   36.5   34.2   25.4   1.1    7.4    -4.5   1946   34.9   33.4   27.9    1.2     8.6     -6.1
1947   11.0   33.9    54.4     0.4       5.8     -5.5        1947    7.9   35.2    55.2 0.2 5.7           -4.2                                      1947   37.8   34.8   23.2   1.1    8.0    -4.8   1947   35.5   33.0   27.3    1.3     9.6     -6.6
1948   11.2   33.3    54.9     0.4       6.1     -6.0        1948    7.7   37.0    55.6 0.2 4.8           -5.4                                      1948   39.0   36.2   21.7   1.0    7.4    -5.4   1948   35.5   33.1   27.5    1.3     8.9     -6.3
1949   12.9   30.9    56.3     0.5       6.9     -7.4        1949   10.5   31.6    58.9 0.3 6.1           -7.5                                      1949   38.8   34.5   22.8   0.9    7.6    -4.6   1949   35.4   33.1   27.7    1.3     9.1     -6.6
1950   13.5   30.7    56.7     0.4       7.1     -8.4        1950   12.5   31.4    58.9 0.2 6.7           -9.6                                      1950   38.7   34.5   23.0   1.0    7.7    -4.8   1950   35.0   33.0   28.3    1.3     9.2     -6.7
1953    9.1   26.2    63.1     0.3       6.7     -5.4        1953    5.3   27.9    66.5 0.2 5.4           -5.2                                      1953   38.7   30.9   25.3   1.0    9.4    -5.4   1953   33.2   28.8   32.8    1.2    10.5     -6.3
1954    9.6   23.2    63.9     0.4       8.1     -5.2        1954    7.0   20.9    68.1 0.2 8.5           -4.7                                      1954   38.8   30.6   25.6   0.9    8.9    -4.8   1954   33.8   27.9   33.3    1.1    10.1     -6.1
1956    9.1   22.9    65.5     0.3       7.6     -5.3        1956    6.9   21.7    68.6 0.1 7.7           -5.1                                      1956   38.1   28.7   28.3   1.0    9.2    -5.3   1956   31.7   27.2   36.2    1.1    10.0     -6.2
1958    9.9   22.0    66.1     0.2       7.7     -5.9        1958    8.3   21.6    68.1 0.1 8.0           -6.0                                      1958   37.2   27.6   30.5   1.0    9.2    -5.5   1958   31.0   26.2   38.2    1.0     9.8     -6.1
1960    7.3   20.7    68.9     0.2       7.2     -4.4        1960    5.0   20.8    69.9 0.1 7.5           -3.3                                      1960   34.2   27.6   34.2   1.0    8.4    -5.4   1960   28.6   25.7   42.7    0.9     8.3     -6.1
1962    8.7   18.6    73.6     0.7       6.5     -8.2        1962    6.3   16.0    79.6 0.3 5.4           -7.6                                      1962   31.0   28.7   35.0   1.1   10.4    -6.2   1962   25.9   25.6   42.4    0.9    11.3     -6.2
1965    9.1   20.6    71.7     0.4       3.4     -5.2        1965    7.9   19.4    74.4 0.2 3.4           -5.3                                      1965   33.8   31.6   31.2   2.4    6.0    -5.0   1965   26.9   28.5   41.7    1.8     5.6     -4.6
1969    9.7   18.0    66.8     0.7      15.0    -10.1        1969    7.3   17.5    65.9 0.4 18.4          -9.5                                      1969   36.9   28.5   31.1   4.0   11.1   -11.6   1969   30.1   26.2   37.5    3.2    13.4    -10.5
1972   12.0   18.2    67.6     0.5       9.3     -7.6        1972    7.4   13.8    73.7 0.3 10.3          -5.5                                      1972   36.9   31.0   28.0   3.6   10.8   -10.4   1972   30.3   32.9   33.1    2.7    11.4    -10.4
1976   13.9   26.1    55.8     0.6      13.4     -9.7        1976   10.6   23.1    57.9 0.3 16.2          -8.1                                      1976   42.0   31.9   21.8   3.9   11.4   -11.0   1976   40.0   27.3   27.9    2.8    12.9    -10.9
1982   23.0   19.9    42.0     1.1      22.8     -8.8        1982   16.0   20.2    44.5 0.5 25.6          -6.9                                      1982                                             1982   44.1   27.3   22.2    3.1    17.0    -13.7
1983   21.1   19.2    47.4     0.8      21.7    -10.4        1983   14.0   16.7    52.5 0.3 23.4          -6.8                                      1983                                             1983   42.6   25.2   23.4    3.7    16.7    -11.7
1984   22.0   20.8    47.6     0.8      20.7    -11.9        1984   17.0   17.9    54.6 0.4 22.2         -12.1                                      1984                                             1984   38.0   29.6   19.5    3.4    19.8    -10.3
1985   14.5   19.7    53.4     0.7      17.3     -5.7        1985   10.1   15.4    60.2 0.2 17.8          -3.7                                      1985                                             1985   32.9   29.6   25.3    4.0    18.4    -10.1
1986   17.5   17.5    55.8     0.8      17.6     -9.2        1986   11.7   15.5    61.7 0.3 17.8          -7.1                                      1986                                             1986   36.4   28.6   23.7    3.2    18.9    -10.7
1987   20.2   20.7    44.9     0.9      22.5     -9.2        1987   15.7   18.4    51.9 0.3 23.0          -9.4                                      1987                                             1987   36.4   29.8   23.2    3.1    17.6    -10.1
1988   22.3   21.1    45.1     2.4      16.6     -7.5        1988   21.7   18.6    49.1 0.7 16.5          -6.6                                      1988                                             1988   38.0   31.7   19.7    3.4    16.7     -9.4
1989   19.5   20.1    37.9     0.7      27.7     -5.9        1989   13.9   15.6    39.8 0.4 34.9          -4.6                                      1989                                             1989   37.6   29.7   19.3    3.3    19.1     -9.1
1990   18.7   27.7    35.4     0.7      24.4     -6.9        1990   13.8   27.9    36.8 0.3 27.3          -6.0                                      1990                                             1990   36.1   31.0   20.0    3.5    18.3     -8.9
1991   17.5   23.2    47.7     0.9      19.3     -8.5        1991   12.9   22.2    52.7 0.3 20.0          -8.1                                      1991                                             1991   31.7   32.4   20.3    3.5    21.0     -8.7
1992   13.4   21.3    57.0     0.7      12.3     -4.7        1992    9.2   17.5    64.7 0.5 12.1          -4.1                                      1992                                             1992   29.9   29.7   24.5    3.2    20.0     -7.3
1993   12.8   21.3    57.1     0.8      13.0     -5.0        1993    8.7   17.5    66.9 0.5 10.5          -4.1                                      1993                                             1993   28.2   29.1   25.4    3.2    21.5     -7.4
1994   16.5   25.0    49.4     0.9      15.0     -6.9        1994   11.7   22.3    58.4 0.6 14.7          -7.7                                      1994                                             1994   32.3   28.7   21.7    3.8    21.0     -7.4
1995   21.1   19.8    48.9     0.5      15.3     -5.6        1995   23.3   14.1    52.4 0.1 15.5          -5.3                                      1995                                             1995   31.6   28.1   21.4    3.5    22.8     -7.4
1996   15.4   20.5    55.6     0.6      14.7     -6.9        1996   12.1   20.1    61.2 0.3 13.3          -7.0                                      1996   31.7   26.1   21.0   4.6   25.5   -8.9    1996   28.2   26.3   24.6    3.6    24.0     -6.8
1997   14.4   19.4    56.9     0.7      14.7     -6.1        1997   10.9   16.0    62.3 0.4 14.7          -4.4                                      1997   31.0   26.6   23.8   3.1   23.9   -8.4    1997   27.5   25.9   26.7    3.0    24.1     -7.3
1998   14.2   20.5    58.0     0.5      12.8     -5.9        1998   11.5   20.4    62.6 0.2 12.0          -6.6                                      1998   30.6   26.2   26.4   3.9   20.4   -7.4    1998   26.4   27.8   31.1    3.3    18.0     -6.6
1999   13.6   20.5    55.6     0.4      15.7     -5.9        1999    9.8   19.8    60.7 0.2 15.9          -6.5                                      1999   29.6   24.9   24.1   3.9   24.4   -6.9    1999   26.2   23.4   31.4    2.4    23.9     -7.4
2000   16.3   19.5    49.3     0.5      21.4     -6.9        2000   12.5   17.8    52.6 0.3 23.4          -6.5                                      2000   29.1   23.0   25.8   3.8   25.2   -7.0    2000   27.9   25.0   25.6    3.0    26.1     -7.6
Notes: Wealth is defined as all sources of (non-human) wealth net of debts and liabilities but excludes annuities, and claims on future pensions.
Real is defined as real estate. Bonds is the sum of federal, local, foreign, and corporate bonds. Stock is corporate stock
Cash is currency, deposits, and notes. Other is equity in unincorporated business, and miscellaneous assets
The sums of all sources less debts add up to 100%.
                                                          Table B3: Composition by Sources of Wealth and by Fractiles of Total Wealth in the United States, 1916-2000 (continued)
                     Top 0.5-0.25%                                              Top 0.25-0.1%                                           Top 0.1-0.05%                                Top 0.05-0.01%                                         Top 0.01%
       Real Bonds Stock Life Ins.   Other   Debts                 Real Bonds Stock Life Ins.   Other   Debts              Real Bonds Stock Life Ins.   Other   Debts          Real Bonds Stock Life Ins.   Other   Debts          Real Bonds Stock Life Ins.   Other   Debts
1916   51.7 30.5 22.3 0.6           10.4    -15.5          1916   36.5 33.1 31.4 0.4            6.9     -8.3      1916    30.2 30.2 41.8 0.6            8.1    -10.9   1916   18.2 35.4 45.2 0.2            6.0     -5.1   1916   16.4 42.2 38.4 0.2            8.1     -5.2
1917   52.9 32.0 19.7 0.4            7.7    -12.7          1917   40.9 36.7 26.0 0.4            6.1    -10.1      1917    29.0 32.9 37.5 0.6            7.5     -7.4   1917   23.7 34.0 43.8 0.3            5.0     -6.9   1917   13.1 28.1 58.8 0.2            5.6     -5.8
1918   47.1 32.2 23.1 0.9            9.3    -12.6          1918   37.8 34.1 30.6 0.9            9.4    -12.7      1918    27.3 34.8 39.0 0.5            9.2    -10.8   1918   21.6 33.0 44.3 0.4           10.0     -9.3   1918   15.3 33.1 53.0 0.1            5.4     -6.8
1919   46.7 29.6 26.1 1.6           10.4    -14.4          1919   35.2 28.9 37.0 1.3            8.0    -10.4      1919    27.7 31.8 40.8 1.4           11.6    -13.3   1919   21.3 30.6 45.6 1.1            8.5     -7.1   1919   10.8 29.6 60.3 0.2            8.7     -9.5
1920   44.1 31.1 28.2 2.2           10.8    -16.4          1920   33.3 31.4 36.2 2.2           10.6    -13.7      1920    26.9 30.9 48.2 1.7            8.8    -16.4   1920   22.9 28.1 51.2 1.1            9.3    -12.6   1920    8.0 23.5 67.7 0.3            6.3     -5.8
1921   42.6 32.5 26.1 3.3            6.5    -10.9          1921   35.7 31.9 33.0 3.2            7.0    -10.8      1921    27.6 32.0 40.8 3.4            6.8    -10.5   1921   31.8 27.1 55.1 0.7           12.7    -27.5   1921   15.3 36.1 51.0 0.4            5.5     -8.3
1922   40.2 35.6 24.3 4.0            7.1    -11.2          1922   32.0 35.4 32.6 3.9            7.0    -10.8      1922    25.3 33.1 42.5 3.4            6.1    -10.4   1922   27.0 26.6 58.9 0.8            5.7    -19.0   1922   12.8 33.0 57.9 0.7           10.1    -14.6
1923   40.7 35.1 23.5 3.9            7.8    -11.1          1923   32.9 33.5 32.5 4.1            8.0    -10.9      1923    25.7 35.0 38.5 3.7            6.6     -9.3   1923   23.2 26.3 65.0 0.8            6.9    -22.3   1923    9.8 25.9 64.0 1.1            5.5     -6.2
1924   36.8 35.0 26.8 5.5            7.7    -11.7          1924   30.4 34.1 36.2 4.0            7.2    -11.8      1924    24.1 33.8 40.8 3.5            7.1     -9.2   1924   19.5 33.1 54.2 0.5            7.7    -15.1   1924    8.5 31.1 59.0 0.2            7.0     -5.9
1925   35.0 36.1 27.6 4.3            7.8    -10.9          1925   27.6 33.4 35.4 3.8            9.4     -9.6      1925    21.8 33.4 43.5 3.3            6.5     -8.6   1925   18.4 29.5 60.8 0.7            7.2    -16.5   1925   11.2 26.8 58.0 0.6            9.4     -6.0
1926                                                       1926                                                   1926                                                 1926                                                1926   11.3 27.6 63.0 0.5            8.5    -10.8
1927   31.9   34.8   33.3   4.5      6.9    -11.4          1927   25.9   33.2    39.1   4.8     6.8     -9.8      1927    20.0   30.4   48.1   4.0      7.4     -9.9   1927   16.9   27.6   62.2   0.9      7.1    -14.6   1927    7.8 21.9 73.6 0.3            5.1     -8.7
1928   34.9   27.3   36.7   4.6      8.5    -12.0          1928   23.7   29.9    49.2   2.7     8.2    -13.7      1928    16.9   27.0   57.4   1.7      9.4    -12.6   1928   13.2   25.0   61.4   1.5      6.8     -7.9   1928    6.1 16.4 74.4 1.0            7.5     -5.4
1929   31.0   28.4   41.5   3.4      9.1    -13.4          1929   21.4   30.2    51.8   2.5     7.0    -12.9      1929    15.7   26.3   63.9   1.9      6.7    -14.5   1929   11.8   24.8   65.4   1.1      7.4    -10.5   1929    6.3 24.8 65.3 0.4            9.4     -6.2
1930   26.4   35.0   38.6   6.2      5.8    -11.9          1930   23.0   31.2    49.2   2.5     7.3    -13.2      1930    16.9   30.8   52.8   4.9      5.8    -11.3   1930   13.5   25.3   62.8   1.3      8.4    -11.3   1930    6.2 27.2 71.6 0.4            8.2    -13.5
1931   25.4   38.2   35.4   6.8      5.7    -11.4          1931   23.6   36.8    37.8   7.4     5.8    -11.5      1931    18.7   35.3   44.2   6.8      5.5    -10.5   1931   15.7   31.3   59.9   1.5     12.0    -20.3   1931    9.4 32.5 55.8 0.5            9.0     -7.2
1932   25.6   46.0   26.7   9.1      4.8    -12.2          1932   24.8   42.7    31.3   9.2     5.3    -13.2      1932    20.7   42.7   34.1   7.9      6.2    -11.5   1932   18.0   19.7   67.5   1.4     51.3    -57.9   1932    9.8 44.7 44.9 0.7            9.4     -9.4
1933   27.4   41.3   28.4   9.7      6.0    -12.8          1933   23.1   41.3    32.1   8.2     6.0    -10.8      1933    16.7   40.3   38.6   7.5      5.9     -9.1   1933   25.1   40.3   54.5   1.8     14.5    -36.2   1933    8.0 39.2 48.3 0.8           10.6     -7.0
1934   25.4   42.8   28.0   8.3      6.3    -10.8          1934   22.5   42.1    31.5   7.5     6.1     -9.6      1934    17.0   40.5   37.9   7.0      6.2     -8.5   1934   19.5   34.4   70.0   1.5     21.3    -46.8   1934    8.4 35.7 55.2 1.2            5.7     -6.2
1935   25.4   42.9   28.0   8.3      6.2    -10.8          1935   22.9   42.2    31.0   7.6     6.1     -9.7      1935    17.4   40.7   37.4   7.0      6.2     -8.7   1935   13.3   43.1   53.2   1.5     15.0    -26.1   1935    5.9 29.1 58.3 0.6           10.5     -4.3
1936   29.4   40.5   31.5   3.0      6.6    -11.0          1936   22.1   38.3    38.3   3.3     6.8     -8.9      1936    15.8   37.9   45.7   3.3      5.7     -8.5   1936    7.4   33.2   63.8   1.0      9.0    -14.4   1936    5.1 34.4 59.7 0.9            5.7     -5.7
1937   28.0   39.8   32.3   2.9      7.1    -10.1          1937   20.5   37.6    40.2   3.4     6.9     -8.5      1937    15.8   37.9   44.2   2.9      6.3     -7.1   1937   13.5   30.3   62.9   1.5      7.6    -15.9   1937    6.5 37.6 56.3 0.7            8.3     -9.4
1938   27.7   37.7   31.3   5.3      8.8    -10.8          1938   23.4   35.7    43.1   4.1     8.1    -14.3      1938    14.6   31.7   50.3   3.4      8.5     -8.5   1938   11.1   33.8   51.9   2.4      6.7     -5.9   1938    4.6 37.2 49.7 0.8           12.1     -4.3
1939   26.5   35.3   34.4   5.3     10.3    -11.8          1939   21.7   33.5    41.7   4.8     8.6    -10.3      1939    15.5   33.6   50.0   3.5      7.2     -9.9   1939   10.8   33.5   54.9   2.3      6.6     -8.0   1939    4.6 34.7 60.6 1.2            4.1     -5.2
1940   28.5   33.8   32.4   5.8     10.3    -10.7          1940   20.7   34.4    37.6   4.4    11.7     -8.7      1940    16.5   35.6   46.1   3.0      7.4     -8.6   1940   13.9   32.7   52.6   2.2      7.0     -8.4   1940    6.3 35.7 54.0 1.0            9.4     -6.4
1941   33.7   40.6   30.4   1.2      6.6    -12.4          1941   28.5   38.4    39.1   1.6     7.6    -15.0      1941    20.7   36.7   45.7   1.2      6.3    -10.6   1941   17.7   46.5   55.6   1.4      5.6    -26.9   1941    7.1 39.4 53.0 1.0            5.1     -5.6
1942   33.2   38.4   31.1   1.4      6.9    -11.0          1942   26.7   37.8    39.1   1.5     7.5    -12.5      1942    19.8   38.4   44.6   1.1      7.1    -11.0   1942   12.6   28.7   72.9   1.2      5.0    -20.3   1942   10.7 37.2 53.8 0.9            6.6     -9.2
1943   30.6   36.9   31.2   1.4      8.8     -9.0          1943   24.8   35.9    39.3   1.3     8.9    -10.2      1943    18.8   36.9   45.3   1.1      7.6     -9.7   1943   17.9   30.1   74.5   1.5     10.4    -34.5   1943    4.5 36.3 59.4 1.6            3.6     -5.4
1944   24.9   32.3   33.6   4.9     12.7     -8.3          1944   17.4   32.6    40.4   4.0    13.4     -7.9      1944    13.8   28.7   48.8   4.0     10.3     -5.6   1944   12.2   30.8   52.8   2.2      7.5     -5.4   1944    6.8 33.9 57.6 1.0            4.8     -4.0
1945                                                       1945                                                   1945                                                 1945   14.4   32.4   46.6   1.6     14.7     -9.7   1945    6.4 39.5 53.6 0.9            4.3     -4.7
1946   28.9   32.8   35.2   1.2      8.9     -7.0          1946   22.4   32.4    43.1   1.1     8.2     -7.1      1946    18.3   32.1   48.7   0.8      7.4     -7.2   1946   14.6   31.4   54.6   0.6      5.9     -7.0   1946    8.4 34.7 55.9 0.2            4.7     -4.0
1947   30.6   32.0   34.4   1.4      9.8     -8.1          1947   23.6   32.4    41.9   1.1     8.8     -7.8      1947    19.1   32.1   47.5   0.9      7.7     -7.2   1947   14.4   32.5   53.4   0.6      6.0     -6.9   1947    7.9 35.2 55.2 0.2            5.7     -4.2
1948   30.8   32.3   33.7   1.3      9.8     -7.9          1948   24.0   32.2    41.6   1.1     8.9     -7.7      1948    19.3   30.5   48.5   1.0      8.1     -7.4   1948   15.0   29.4   54.1   0.6      7.5     -6.6   1948    7.7 37.0 55.6 0.2            4.8     -5.4
1949   29.7   31.7   35.0   1.2      9.2     -6.9          1949   24.0   31.1    42.2   1.1     9.0     -7.4      1949    19.6   30.7   47.6   0.9      8.5     -7.3   1949   15.2   30.1   53.8   0.7      7.6     -7.3   1949   10.5 31.6 58.9 0.3            6.1     -7.5
1950   29.0   31.6   35.9   1.2      9.2     -6.9          1950   23.4   31.1    42.8   1.1     9.0     -7.4      1950    19.4   30.6   48.0   0.9      8.4     -7.3   1950   14.6   30.0   54.5   0.6      7.5     -7.2   1950   12.5 31.4 58.9 0.2            6.7     -9.6
1953   28.9   27.3   39.5   1.1     10.3     -7.1          1953   22.5   26.6    47.6   0.9     9.6     -7.1      1953    16.5   25.5   55.2   0.7      8.5     -6.3   1953   12.8   24.4   59.9   0.5      8.1     -5.6   1953    5.3 27.9 66.5 0.2            5.4     -5.2
1954   27.2   27.3   41.3   1.1     10.1     -6.9          1954   21.7   26.4    48.1   0.9     9.4     -6.4      1954    16.2   25.4   55.2   0.7      8.5     -6.1   1954   12.4   25.7   59.4   0.5      7.6     -5.7   1954    7.0 20.9 68.1 0.2            8.5     -4.7
1956   26.1   25.7   44.2   1.0      9.7     -6.6          1956   19.7   24.3    52.2   0.7     9.2     -6.1      1956    15.4   23.9   57.8   0.6      8.2     -5.9   1956   11.3   24.0   62.4   0.4      7.4     -5.5   1956    6.9 21.7 68.6 0.1            7.7     -5.1
1958   26.0   24.3   45.3   0.9      9.7     -6.2          1958   19.8   22.6    53.7   0.7     9.3     -6.0      1958    15.7   22.6   58.9   0.6      8.0     -5.8   1958   11.8   22.5   63.8   0.4      7.4     -5.8   1958    8.3 21.6 68.1 0.1            8.0     -6.0
1960   23.7   23.9   49.6   0.8      8.1     -6.0          1960   18.6   22.5    56.7   0.6     7.5     -5.8      1960    15.6   21.8   60.7   0.5      7.4     -6.0   1960    9.8   20.7   67.9   0.3      6.8     -5.5   1960    5.0 20.8 69.9 0.1            7.5     -3.3
1962   20.9   22.7   49.4   0.6     12.2     -5.7          1962   20.1   19.5    55.3   2.1    10.8     -7.7      1962    13.1   19.4   58.7   0.3     13.7     -5.2   1962   11.2   21.3   67.4   1.2      7.7     -8.8   1962    6.3 16.0 79.6 0.3            5.4     -7.6
1965   22.0   24.9   50.9   1.5      5.3     -4.6          1965   17.5   22.5    59.1   1.1     4.5     -4.7      1965    14.1   21.4   64.8   0.9      3.7     -4.8   1965   10.4   21.9   68.6   0.6      3.5     -5.0   1965    7.9 19.4 74.4 0.2            3.4     -5.3
1969   26.3   24.4   45.9   2.5     10.2     -9.3          1969   23.3   23.9    51.4   1.7    11.5    -11.8      1969    14.7   21.6   61.5   1.4      9.9     -9.1   1969   12.8   18.6   68.0   1.0     10.4    -10.9   1969    7.3 17.5 65.9 0.4           18.4     -9.5
1972   27.8   26.6   43.2   2.3     10.3    -10.3          1972   22.3   23.9    51.0   1.7    10.4     -9.4      1972    18.4   21.8   53.7   1.2     13.5     -8.6   1972   17.3   23.2   60.5   0.8      8.2     -9.9   1972    7.4 13.8 73.7 0.3           10.3     -5.5
1976   37.7   27.4   33.4   2.2     11.1    -11.8          1976   28.4   28.9    38.1   1.8    12.0     -9.2      1976    23.1   28.5   44.2   1.4     12.2     -9.4   1976   17.4   29.4   53.5   1.0     10.3    -11.5   1976   10.6 23.1 57.9 0.3           16.2     -8.1
1982   39.6   26.3   26.1   2.6     16.5    -11.2          1982   35.7   23.9    31.3   2.0    18.2    -11.1      1982    30.5   19.7   41.1   1.7     16.7     -9.8   1982   29.2   19.6   39.7   1.5     20.4    -10.5   1982   16.0 20.2 44.5 0.5           25.6     -6.9
1983   39.8   23.7   20.0   4.5     21.5     -9.5          1983   28.9   30.0    31.9   1.9    13.1     -5.8      1983    30.7   21.9   38.8   1.7     17.4    -10.6   1983   28.3   21.8   42.4   1.4     20.1    -13.9   1983   14.0 16.7 52.5 0.3           23.4     -6.8
1984   44.0   24.5   27.8   3.3     15.4    -15.1          1984   36.3   28.2    30.7   1.5    15.2    -11.9      1984    30.8   24.1   36.6   1.7     18.1    -11.3   1984   27.7   24.0   39.8   1.2     19.0    -11.6   1984   17.0 17.9 54.6 0.4           22.2    -12.1
1985   33.2   27.3   28.1   3.0     19.1    -10.7          1985   35.2   25.7    29.6   2.3    18.4    -11.3      1985    30.7   25.4   40.8   1.8     15.0    -13.6   1985   20.1   25.3   44.7   1.2     16.8     -8.1   1985   10.1 15.4 60.2 0.2           17.8     -3.7
1986   30.8   30.1   27.5   2.3     17.8     -8.7          1986   30.5   25.1    30.1   2.0    21.6     -9.4      1986    24.8   23.0   39.9   2.0     20.6    -10.3   1986   24.1   19.6   49.0   1.3     17.5    -11.5   1986   11.7 15.5 61.7 0.3           17.8     -7.1
1987   32.8   28.6   23.9   3.7     18.5     -7.5          1987   27.8   24.3    34.6   2.4    19.1     -8.2      1987    23.4   20.9   36.2   2.0     26.6     -9.1   1987   24.8   23.2   37.6   1.4     22.1     -9.1   1987   15.7 18.4 51.9 0.3           23.0     -9.4
1988   37.3   26.1   24.4   3.4     18.6     -9.7          1988   30.2   28.8    29.9   2.4    17.4     -8.6      1988    25.5   27.7   35.0   1.8     19.3     -9.3   1988   23.0   23.9   40.5   4.3     16.7     -8.4   1988   21.7 18.6 49.1 0.7           16.5     -6.6
1989   34.4   29.0   24.0   3.0     19.4     -9.8          1989   36.0   24.6    27.9   2.5    19.9    -10.9      1989    30.9   24.8   32.3   1.9     19.3     -9.1   1989   25.9   25.2   35.9   1.0     19.3     -7.3   1989   13.9 15.6 39.8 0.4           34.9     -4.6
1990   31.9   29.5   22.0   2.8     21.9     -8.2          1990   33.9   29.6    26.1   1.9    17.2     -8.8      1990    27.7   25.2   35.3   1.8     21.2    -11.2   1990   24.4   27.4   33.9   1.3     21.0     -8.0   1990   13.8 27.9 36.8 0.3           27.3     -6.0
1991   31.7   30.3   23.8   2.8     19.6     -8.2          1991   29.5   31.2    27.3   2.0    18.7     -8.8      1991    21.1   28.8   30.0   1.9     23.7     -5.5   1991   22.6   24.2   42.2   1.5     18.5     -8.9   1991   12.9 22.2 52.7 0.3           20.0     -8.1
1992   29.1   27.6   31.6   2.6     17.9     -8.7          1992   27.0   26.4    35.7   1.9    18.6     -9.6      1992    24.0   24.5   39.2   1.7     18.0     -7.4   1992   18.3   25.7   48.0   0.8     12.6     -5.4   1992    9.2 17.5 64.7 0.5           12.1     -4.1
1993   24.1   27.5   32.9   2.3     20.2     -6.9          1993   20.1   34.1    32.6   2.3    17.1     -6.2      1993    19.2   26.0   43.0   1.8     15.5     -5.4   1993   17.9   26.1   44.7   1.2     16.1     -6.0   1993    8.7 17.5 66.9 0.5           10.5     -4.1
1994   28.3   31.1   25.7   2.4     20.5     -8.0          1994   24.4   30.6    27.9   2.0    21.4     -6.3      1994    18.4   37.6   33.1   2.1     14.5     -5.7   1994   22.4   28.4   38.3   1.3     15.4     -5.9   1994   11.7 22.3 58.4 0.6           14.7     -7.7
1995   28.0   30.2   25.0   2.9     21.2     -7.3          1995   26.5   27.3    32.0   2.1    19.7     -7.6      1995    22.0   26.9   38.1   1.6     17.5     -6.1   1995   18.4   26.8   44.5   1.0     15.1     -5.8   1995   23.3 14.1 52.4 0.1           15.5     -5.3
1996   25.2   27.6   30.5   2.3     21.4     -6.9          1996   22.1   27.2    33.5   2.2    21.0     -6.1      1996    22.2   23.5   38.6   1.9     19.5     -5.8   1996   19.5   21.1   48.7   1.0     16.5     -6.8   1996   12.1 20.1 61.2 0.3           13.3     -7.0
1997   23.4   25.4   33.6   2.3     22.4     -7.1          1997   21.3   26.9    36.1   1.8    19.1     -5.2      1997    22.2   25.1   38.3   1.6     18.7     -5.9   1997   18.7   23.5   50.3   1.0     14.6     -8.1   1997   10.9 16.0 62.3 0.4           14.7     -4.4
1998   24.1   26.9   37.8   3.1     14.5     -6.4          1998   21.4   26.6    39.2   2.0    16.6     -5.8      1998    18.2   24.2   49.4   1.5     12.8     -6.1   1998   17.4   20.6   52.5   0.8     13.8     -5.0   1998   11.5 20.4 62.6 0.2           12.0     -6.6
1999   21.9   22.9   33.5   2.1     25.4     -5.8          1999   22.6   23.5    37.0   1.6    20.6     -5.3      1999    20.3   29.3   38.1   1.0     16.0     -4.8   1999   17.9   21.3   49.6   0.7     15.6     -5.1   1999    9.8 19.8 60.7 0.2           15.9     -6.5
2000   26.7   18.1   35.5   2.3     23.7     -6.4          2000   24.6   20.7    42.4   1.1    17.5     -6.4      2000    21.1   20.7   42.7   2.0     19.7     -6.2   2000   21.0   21.5   45.1   0.8     18.9     -7.4   2000   12.5 17.8 52.6 0.3           23.4     -6.5
Notes: Wealth is defined as all sources of (non-human) wealth net of debts and liabilities but excludes annuities, and claims on future pensions.
Real is defined as real estate. Bonds is the sum of federal, local, foreign, and corporate bonds. Stock is corporate stock
Cash is currency, deposits, and notes. Other is equity in unincorporated business, and miscellaneous assets
The sums of all sources less debts add up to 100%.
                                              Table B4: Gender, Age, and Marital Status and by Fractiles of Total Wealth in the United States, 1916-2000
                   Top 2%                                         Top 1%                                        Top 0.5%                                  Top 0.25%                                      Top 0.1%
                    Female       Male                              Female        Male                             Female       Male                            Female        Male                            Female        Male
       Age FemaleMarriedWidowsMarried
                                   Widowers            Age FemaleMarriedWidowsMarried
                                                                                   Widowers          Age FemaleMarriedWidowsMarried
                                                                                                                                 Widowers          Age FemaleMarriedWidowsMarried
                                                                                                                                                                               Widowers          Age FemaleMarriedWidowsMarried
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Widowers
1916                                            1916                                          1916         25                               1916         25                               1916         25
1917                                            1917                                          1917         27                               1917         29                               1917         30
1918                                            1918                                          1918         27                               1918         27                               1918         27
1919                                            1919   54    21                               1919   56 25                                  1919   56 25                                  1919   56 25
1920                                            1920   54    20                               1920   55 23                                  1920   55 23                                  1920   56 25
1921                                            1921   54    20                               1921   55 24                                  1921   56 25                                  1921   57 26
1922                                            1922   54    22                               1922   55 26                                  1922   55 25                                  1922   56 24
1923                                            1923   54    23                               1923   56 28                                  1923   56 27                                  1923   56 29
1924                                            1924   54    23                               1924   56 27                                  1924   56 27                                  1924   56 27
1925                                            1925   54    24    36    40    72    10       1925   56 26 38 42 73 10                      1925   56 25 39 42 74 10                      1925   57 25 41 43 73 10
1926                                            1926   54    24    40    41    72    12       1926   56 27 39 42 74 11                      1926   57 27 41 44 75                 9       1926   58 25 45 41 74 10
1927                                            1927                                          1927   55 25 43 40 78 10                      1927   56 27 43 41 76 10                      1927   56 27 43 42 74 11
1928                                            1928                                          1928   55 24 40 42 77 10                      1928   56 26 40 44 76 10                      1928   56 23 40 49 76 10
1929                                            1929                                          1929   55 27 40 41 76 10                      1929   56 29 38 43 77 10                      1929   56 26 42 43 75 12
1930                                            1930                                          1930   55 25 41 39 79                 8       1930   56 29 43 40 78                 8       1930   57 29 48 39 80                 9
1931                                            1931                                          1931   55 23 43 41 80                 8       1931   57 32 37 43 76 10                      1931   58 31 40 45 76 10
1932                                            1932                                          1932   56 30 40 42 73 11                      1932   56 31 37 44 74 11                      1932   57 32 39 44 76 10
1933                                            1933                                          1933   56 32 38 45 73 11                      1933   57 33 37 46 74 12                      1933   57 30 36 47 70 12
1934                                            1934                                          1934   57 34 40 42 72 11                      1934   57 35 40 41 71 11                      1934   58 35 40 43 71 11
1935                                            1935                                          1935   57 37 37 43 70 12                      1935   57 38 38 43 71 11                      1935   58 35 35 46 73 11
1936                                            1936   55    26    39    41    73    11       1936   57 34 35 45 72 11                      1936   57 34 38 44 73 12                      1936   58 34 43 42 74 11
1937                                            1937   55    29    39    41    73    11       1937   58 37 38 42 72 11                      1937   58 37 39 42 74 11                      1937   58 36 41 41 71 10
1938                                            1938   55    27    40    39    75    9        1938   58 35 36 43 72 11                      1938   58 34 37 43 73 10                      1938   58 35 37 40 68 11
1939                                            1939   55    28    39    42    73    10       1939   58 36 38 44 70 11                      1939   58 35 39 44 71 11                      1939   58 35 40 40 70 12
1940                                            1940   56    29    39    39    75    10       1940   58 36 37 42 73 10                      1940   58 37 37 41 75 10                      1940   59 38 37 42 76 10
1941                                            1941   56    31    37    42    74    10       1941   58 37 35 44 74 10                      1941   58 37 40 43 74 10                      1941   58 38 39 43 73 11
1942                                            1942   55    31    40    41    75    9        1942   57 37 37 43 72 10                      1942   57 38 36 43 71 10                      1942   57 37 37 45 71                 9
1943                                            1943   54    24    44    38    77    8        1943   56 33 39 41 74                 8       1943   56 34 37 41 74                 9       1943   56 34 40 42 70                 9
1944   53    20    49    34    79       6       1944   53    26    39    40    73    8        1944   54 31 40 40 73                 8       1944   55 34 41 39 72                 8       1944   55 32 40 42 73                 8
1945   52    21    41    39    78       7       1945   54    29    39    40    77    8        1945   55 32 41 40 76                 8       1945   55 32 42 40 76                 7       1945   56 34 48 37 77                 8
1946                                            1946                                          1946                                          1946                                          1946
1947                                            1947                                          1947                                          1947                                          1947
1948   54    32                                 1948   54    31                               1948   55    36                               1948   55    26                               1948   56    28
1949   55    31                                 1949   54    31                               1949   55    36                               1949   56    25                               1949   57    29
1950   55    32                                 1950   54    31                               1950   55    36                               1950   56    27                               1950   57    29
1953   55    32                                 1953   55    31                               1953   55    37                               1953   55    29                               1953   57    33
1954                                            1954                                          1954                                          1954                                          1954
1956                                            1956                                          1956                                          1956                                          1956
1958   55    30                                 1958   55    32                               1958   56    38                               1958   57    32                               1958   58    35
1960                                            1960                                          1960                                          1960                                          1960
1962   58    40    43    40    83       7       1962   59    40    44    40    82       7     1962   59    41    45    39    82       7     1962   59    42    48    36    81       7     1962   60    44    53    35    84       6
1965         41                                 1965         43                               1965         42                               1965         42                               1965         44
1969   59    43    38    40    82       7       1969   59    42    42    41    83       7     1969   60    41    44    39    83       7     1969   60    41    48    38    82       7     1969   60    44    46    37    84       8
1972   58    44    39    45    77       8       1972   57    44    37    43    77       8     1972   58    44    40    39    80       8     1972   58    46    40    37    82       8     1972   56    47    38    37    81       7
1976   59    40    36    45    82       6       1976   59    39    38    43    80       7     1976   61    42    37    45    82       7     1976   60    42    40    44    83       7     1976   61    41    43    43    82       7
1982   57    41    44    38    80       8       1982   59    43    47    37    81       7     1982   59    42    48    36    81       7     1982   60    40    50    36    81       6     1982   60    38    51    34    85       5
1983   58    39    42    39    82       7       1983   59    37    52    36    86       7     1983   60    36    51    35    88       6     1983   61    37    47    42    86       5     1983   59    34    61    23    90       3
1984   57    36    64    23    67       9       1984   60    43    58    25    73       9     1984   59    48    64    24    81       6     1984   60    46    66    26    80       7     1984   62    39    51    44    86       8
1985   54    31    44    34    72       8       1985   59    40    46    31    74       6     1985   59    40    45    33    79       6     1985   59    42    50    31    80       7     1985   60    43    46    34    84       7
1986   54    36    47    37    69       8       1986   59    45    49    36    74       8     1986   58    43    49    33    75       6     1986   58    41    53    30    78       5     1986   59    35    53    29    82       4
1987   54    30    43    42    67       9       1987   59    42    49    36    75       7     1987   59    37    54    34    79       6     1987   59    32    59    32    81       5     1987   58    36    63    28    82       4
1988   54    35    43    34    69       9       1988   59    47    44    35    74       6     1988   58    42    47    30    77       5     1988   58    38    47    29    77       5     1988   61    37    53    30    82       6
1989   55    38    50    33    68       7       1989   59    44    52    31    73       7     1989   58    42    55    29    73       6     1989   59    41    60    28    76       6     1989   60    40    61    27    78       5
1990   56    40    49    33    71       7       1990   59    47    52    34    73       7     1990   58    45    54    30    73       7     1990   59    48    59    27    75       7     1990   61    44    58    32    76       7
1991   55    37    42    35    67       8       1991   58    45    45    30    73       8     1991   58    43    47    30    72       6     1991   57    42    46    32    73       5     1991   57    40    48    29    79       5
1992   55    39    44    32    66       6       1992   58    44    46    32    68       6     1992   58    42    47    31    73       6     1992   59    41    49    31    75       6     1992   58    41    46    33    74       6
1993   55    43    47    33    68       8       1993   57    47    47    30    72       6     1993   56    44    46    31    73       6     1993   56    43    46    27    75       5     1993   59    38    51    31    74       6
1994   56    43    47    26    68       7       1994   57    46    50    28    69       6     1994   57    43    52    29    68       5     1994   56    42    45    30    70       5     1994   56    40    43    33    73       6
1995   57    44    49    30    69       7       1995   59    46    50    28    72       7     1995   58    46    48    27    76       7     1995   59    44    49    29    77       6     1995   59    42    49    28    78       6
1996   59    45    51    29    67       7       1996   58    44    52    29    69       6     1996   57    41    50    27    68       6     1996   60    40    48    29    75       6     1996   59    38    50    29    77       5
1997   59    47    46    31    68       7       1997   58    44    48    29    70       6     1997   57    43    48    28    70       5     1997   58    47    46    25    79       6     1997   62    40    54    32    78       7
1998   60    48    48    30    70       8       1998   59    44    49    27    69       7     1998   58    44    49    27    72       6     1998   58    42    48    28    72       7     1998   60    45    48    26    79       6
1999   59    50    46    33    69       8       1999   58    46    47    31    68       6     1999   57    45    50    24    69       5     1999   57    42    54    28    67       6     1999   56    38    54    29    68       5
2000   59    50    41    30    65       8       2000   59    44    40    23    67       5     2000   60    39    54    29    68       7     2000   59    41    56    26    71       6     2000   60    36    55    31    76       7
Notes: The Table reports the average age, the percent female, the fraction married (among females), the fraction widowed (among females), the fraction married (among males),
the fraction widowed (among males) for each wealth fractile.
                                        Table B4: Gender, Age, and Marital Status and by Fractiles of Total Wealth in the United States, 1916-2000 (continued)
                  Top 0.05%                                      Top 0.01%                                                                       Top 2-1%                                     Top 1-0.5%
                    Female       Male                              Female        Male                    Female      Male                             Female        Male                            Female        Male
       Age FemaleMarriedWidowsMarried
                                   Widowers           Age FemaleMarriedWidowsMarriedWidowers                                              Age FemaleMarriedWidowsMarried
                                                                                                                                                                      Widowers          Age FemaleMarriedWidowsMarried
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Widowers
1916         25                                1916         25                                                                     1916                                          1916
1917         30                                1917         25                                                                     1917                                          1917
1918         26                                1918         23                                                                     1918                                          1918
1919   55 26                                   1919   58 16                                                                        1919                                          1919   53    17
1920   57 24                                   1920   56 26                                                                        1920                                          1920   52    17
1921   57 25                                   1921   55 40                                                                        1921                                          1921   53    16
1922   56 23                                   1922   58 20                                                                        1922                                          1922   53    18
1923   57 29                                   1923   57 33                                                                        1923                                          1923   52    18
1924   57 28                                   1924   52 35                                                                        1924                                          1924   53    20
1925   58 28 41 42 70 11                       1925   58 24 59 38             66       11                                          1925                                          1925   53    22    33    39    71    10
1926   59 22 45 45 74 10                       1926   61 21 51 43             72       9                                           1926                                          1926   53    21    41    40    71    13
1927   57 26 51 35 74 12                       1927   57 20 35 45             72       10                                          1927                                          1927
1928   56 21 40 48 76                 9        1928   59 21 41 46             87       7                                           1928                                          1928
1929   56 25 42 46 75 12                       1929   54 24 62 29             73       8                                           1929                                          1929
1930   57 25 48 41 81                 8        1930   56 26 56 31             76       9                                           1930                                          1930
1931   59 30 35 46 75 11                       1931   59 26 36 35             69       10                                          1931                                          1931
1932   57 31 35 48 74                 9        1932   59 35 35 44             75       9                                           1932                                          1932
1933   58 28 35 47 70 12                       1933   56 24 41 35             68       8                                           1933                                          1933
1934   60 35 40 45 73 11                       1934   61 31 42 39             61       13                                          1934                                          1934
1935   59 32 38 48 73 12                       1935   59 27 29 55             67       10                                          1935                                          1935
1936   56 34 44 41 74 11                       1936   57 32 50 38             69       13                                          1936                                          1936   54    18    43    37    75    10
1937   58 35 34 47 71 10                       1937   57 33 34 38             73       7                                           1937                                          1937   53    22    40    40    73    10
1938   58 35 42 39 64 10                       1938   56 35 46 37             60       7                                           1938                                          1938   53    19    44    36    78    8
1939   58 35 34 43 70 12                       1939   53 31 39 49             60       9                                           1939                                          1939   53    21    40    39    76    9
1940   59 40 40 41 77 11                       1940   58 37 42 37             79       11                                          1940                                          1940   54    22    41    37    76    9
1941   59 37 41 45 75 12                       1941   59 39 58 35             76       14                                          1941                                          1941   54    26    39    40    74    10
1942   57 41 43 40 67 11                       1942   56 48 49 36             70       18                                          1942                                          1942   54    24    43    40    78    9
1943   56 38 41 41 69                 8        1943   53 26 36 51             61       7                                           1943                                          1943   52    16    49    35    80    7
1944   57 33 37 44 71 10                       1944   58 32 28 41             63       8                                           1944   54    15    59    29    85       4     1944   51    21    37    39    73    9
1945   56 37 53 31 78                 8        1945   59 42 57 36             80       10                                          1945   50    13    43    38    78       7     1945   53    27    37    40    78    8
1946                                           1946                                                                                1946                                          1946
1947                                           1947                                                                                1947                                          1947
1948   57    30                                1948   61    26                                                                     1948   54    34                               1948   53    26
1949   58    30                                1949   57    35                                                                     1949   55    32                               1949   53    26
1950   58    29                                1950   61    27                                                                     1950   55    33                               1950   54    25
1953   57    35                                1953   57    48                                                                     1953   55    32                               1953   55    25
1954                                           1954                                                                                1954                                          1954
1956                                           1956                                                                                1956                                          1956
1958   58    38                                1958   59    46                                                                     1958   55    29                               1958   55    26
1960                                           1960                                                                                1960                                          1960
1962   60    43    50    38    82       7      1962   61    45    56    29     86       6                                          1962   58    40    43    40    83       7     1962   59    40    43    41    83       8
1965         45                                1965         44                                                                     1965         40                               1965         43
1969   60    47    49    34    83    10        1969   62    48    46    45     83       8                                          1969   59    43    35    39    80    8        1969   59    43    40    44    84    7
1972   55    48    35    43    79    8         1972   59    45    41    43     81       6                                          1972   59    44    41    46    78    9        1972   56    44    34    47    73    8
1976   62    40    44    45    83    6         1976   62    44    31    60     83       6                                          1976   59    40    34    46    84    5        1976   57    37    40    41    78    7
1982   60    38    52    28    87    6         1982   60    31    63    30     89       4                                          1982   56    38    42    40    79    9        1982   59    45    45    38    81    8
1983   60    30    62    19    86    3         1983   58    52    64    22     89       5                                          1983   57    40    32    43    78    8        1983   58    39    53    37    84    7
1984   61    30    37    57    78    13        1984   62    43    68    24     80       9                                          1984   54    29    70    21    62    8        1984   60    38    51    26    65    12
1985   60    35    38    38    85    4         1985   61    33    55    36     73       4                                          1985   49    21    42    37    69    10       1985   59    41    47    29    69    7
1986   59    34    60    27    82    4         1986   57    25    67    33     87       3                                          1986   50    26    45    37    64    9        1986   59    48    48    39    73    9
1987   59    40    65    24    85    4         1987   59    36    71    22     85       4                                          1987   49    19    37    47    58    10       1987   58    46    43    39    72    8
1988   61    38    55    30    85    7         1988   62    40    60    31     91       5                                          1988   50    23    42    33    64    11       1988   59    52    42    40    71    7
1989   60    41    60    28    78    5         1989   59    28    51    39     83       3                                          1989   52    33    48    36    64    8        1989   60    46    49    33    72    8
1990   62    39    52    39    78    6         1990   60    48    55    29     84       7                                          1990   53    33    47    32    69    7        1990   59    48    50    37    73    8
1991   59    36    52    32    83    3         1991   61    46    38    34     87       4                                          1991   52    30    39    40    61    9        1991   58    47    42    31    75    9
1992   57    37    45    34    71    5         1992   61    37    55    34     82       5                                          1992   53    34    42    32    64    7        1992   57    46    44    34    63    6
1993   62    33    47    39    78    5         1993   61    33    29    35     79       5                                          1993   54    39    48    37    64    9        1993   58    50    47    28    71    7
1994   62    38    48    37    81    6         1994   60    29    50    36     87       4                                          1994   55    40    44    24    67    8        1994   56    49    49    27    70    7
1995   57    45    51    24    79    5         1995   62    42    61    32     79       7                                          1995   55    42    48    32    67    8        1995   60    47    52    29    68    7
1996   62    38    59    31    78    5         1996   64    32    51    37     83       5                                          1996   59    47    50    29    65    8        1996   59    47    53    31    70    6
1997   62    37    56    31    81    5         1997   63    35    59    29     89       5                                          1997   60    49    43    33    66    9        1997   59    46    48    30    71    6
1998   61    46    57    26    78    6         1998   58    43    75    17     72       4                                          1998   61    52    46    32    71    9        1998   59    44    49    27    65    7
1999   58    40    56    27    78    6         1999   60    26    51    36     77       9                                          1999   60    53    45    36    70    9        1999   58    48    43    38    67    7
2000   60    36    62    27    82    6         2000   60    35    65    21     88       4                                          2000   59    56    41    37    64    10       2000   57    49    26    17    65    3
Notes: The Table reports (NOT YET WEIGHTED WITH MULTIPLIERS) the average age, the percent female, the fraction married (among females), the fraction widowed (among females), the fraction married (among males),
the fraction widowed (among males) for each wealth fractile.
                                         Table B4: Gender, Age, and Marital Status and by Fractiles of Total Wealth in the United States, 1916-2000 (continued)
               Top 0.5-0.25%                                  Top 0.25-0.1%                                 Top 0.1-0.05%                               Top 0.05-0.01%                                 Top 0.01%
                    Female        Male                            Female         Male                           Female         Male                             Female       Male                           Female         Male
        Age FemaleMarriedWidowsMarried
                                    Widowers           Age FemaleMarriedWidowsMarried
                                                                                   Widowers          Age FemaleMarriedWidowsMarried
                                                                                                                                 Widowers          Age FemaleMarriedWidowsMarried
                                                                                                                                                                               Widowers          Age FemaleMarriedWidowsMarried
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Widowers
1916          25                                1916         25                               1916         25                               1916         25                               1916         25
1917          26                                1917         28                               1917         29                               1917         32                               1917         25
1918          26                                1918         26                               1918         29                               1918         26                               1918         23
1919    55 24                                   1919   56 25                                  1919   57 24                                  1919   55 28                                  1919   58 16
1920    55 23                                   1920   55 22                                  1920   55 25                                  1920   57 23                                  1920   56 26
1921    55 22                                   1921   56 25                                  1921   56 26                                  1921   57 21                                  1921   55 40
1922    55 27                                   1922   55 25                                  1922   56 25                                  1922   56 24                                  1922   58 20
1923    56 29                                   1923   56 26                                  1923   56 29                                  1923   57 28                                  1923   57 33
1924    56 26                                   1924   56 28                                  1924   55 26                                  1924   58 26                                  1924   52 35
1925    55 26 37 41 72 10                       1925   56 24 37 42 75 10                      1925   57 23 42 43 76                 9       1925   58 29 36 43 71 11                      1925   58 24 59 38 66 11
1926    55 28 38 39 72 12                       1926   56 29 38 46 76                 9       1926   57 28 45 37 75 10                      1926   58 23 43 45 74 10                      1926   61 21 51 43 72                 9
1927    54 23 43 39 79 10                       1927   55 27 43 41 77                 9       1927   56 27 34 48 75 10                      1927   57 27 55 33 74 12                      1927   57 20 35 45 72 10
1928    54 21 40 39 78                 9        1928   55 29 41 41 75 10                      1928   56 25 39 50 77 11                      1928   56 21 40 48 73 10                      1928   59 21 41 46 87                 7
1929    54 26 42 40 75 10                       1929   55 30 36 43 78                 8       1929   56 27 42 40 75 12                      1929   57 26 37 50 75 13                      1929   54 24 62 29 73                 8
1930    53 21 38 38 79                 8        1930   55 29 40 40 76                 8       1930   57 33 47 37 80                 9       1930   58 24 46 44 82                 8       1930   56 26 56 31 76                 9
1931    52 14 49 38 84                 6        1931   57 32 35 41 77 10                      1931   57 32 44 44 76 10                      1931   58 31 35 49 77 11                      1931   59 26 36 35 69 10
1932    56 28 43 40 73 11                       1932   56 31 36 44 72 12                      1932   57 34 44 39 78 11                      1932   57 29 35 49 74                 9       1932   59 35 35 44 75                 9
1933    56 30 40 43 72 11                       1933   57 34 37 46 76 12                      1933   57 32 38 47 70 12                      1933   58 30 33 50 71 13                      1933   56 24 41 35 68                 8
1934    56 32 40 43 73 11                       1934   57 36 41 40 71 11                      1934   57 34 39 42 69 11                      1934   59 36 40 46 76 11                      1934   61 31 42 39 61 13
1935    57 36 37 43 68 13                       1935   56 39 39 40 70 11                      1935   57 39 33 45 72                 9       1935   59 33 40 46 75 13                      1935   59 27 29 55 67 10
1936    57 35 32 46 71 11                       1936   57 34 35 45 72 12                      1936   59 34 41 42 74 12                      1936   56 35 43 42 75 10                      1936   57 32 50 38 69 13
1937    57 36 36 42 70 12                       1937   58 38 38 42 76 11                      1937   57 38 47 36 71 10                      1937   59 35 34 49 70 11                      1937   57 33 34 38 73                 7
1938    57 35 36 42 71 11                       1938   58 34 37 45 76 10                      1938   58 35 33 42 71 12                      1938   58 35 41 39 65 11                      1938   56 35 46 37 60                 7
1939    57 36 37 45 70 11                       1939   58 36 38 46 71 10                      1939   57 36 46 37 70 11                      1939   60 36 33 42 73 13                      1939   53 31 39 49 60                 9
1940    57 35 37 42 72 11                       1940   57 37 37 41 75 10                      1940   58 36 34 42 75                 9       1940   59 40 39 42 76 11                      1940   58 37 42 37 79 11
1941    58 36 31 46 74 10                       1941   57 37 40 43 74                 9       1941   57 39 37 41 71 10                      1941   59 36 37 47 75 11                      1941   59 39 58 35 76 14
1942    57 37 37 42 73 10                       1942   57 38 36 42 71 10                      1942   58 34 31 50 75                 8       1942   57 39 41 41 66                 9       1942   56 48 49 36 70 18
1943    55 32 41 40 74                 8        1943   57 34 35 41 77                 9       1943   56 31 39 43 70 10                      1943   56 41 42 38 71                 8       1943   53 26 36 51 61                 7
1944    54 28 40 42 73                 8        1944   54 34 41 37 72                 8       1944   54 32 44 39 75                 7       1944   57 33 39 45 73 10                      1944   58 32 28 41 63                 8
1945    55 32 39 41 77                 8        1945   55 30 38 42 75                 7       1945   57 32 43 43 75                 8       1945   56 35 52 30 78                 8       1945   59 42 57 36 80 10
1946                                            1946                                          1946                                          1946                                          1946
1947                                            1947                                          1947                                          1947                                          1947
1948    54    46                                1948   55    24                               1948   56    27                               1948   56    31                               1948   61    26
1949    54    46                                1949   56    22                               1949   57    27                               1949   58    29                               1949   57    35
1950    55    45                                1950   55    27                               1950   56    28                               1950   57    29                               1950   61    27
1953    54    46                                1953   55    26                               1953   57    31                               1953   56    32                               1953   57    48
1954                                            1954                                          1954                                          1954                                          1954
1956                                            1956                                          1956                                          1956                                          1956
1958    55    45                                1958   57    30                               1958   57    32                               1958   58    36                               1958   59    46
1960                                            1960                                          1960                                          1960                                          1960
1962    59    39    41    42    82       7      1962   58    41    45    36    80       7     1962   59    45    56    32    85       6     1962   60    43    48    40    81       7     1962   61    45    56    29    86       6
1965          42                                1965   0     42    0     0     0        0     1965         42                               1965         45                               1965         44
1969    59    41    39    40    83       7      1969   60    39    49    38    81       7     1969   60    41    42    41    85    6        1969   59    47    50    31    83    10       1969   62    48    46    45    83       8
1972    59    43    40    42    79       8      1972   59    46    42    36    82       8     1972   58    45    40    32    83    6        1972   54    49    34    43    79    9        1972   59    45    41    43    81       6
1976    62    42    33    47    81       7      1976   60    42    38    44    83       7     1976   60    42    43    41    81    7        1976   62    40    47    41    83    6        1976   62    44    31    60    83       6
1982    58    44    47    35    80       7      1982   59    42    49    38    79       7     1982   60    38    50    40    83    5        1982   60    39    49    28    86    6        1982   60    31    63    30    89       4
1983    60    34    56    28    89       8      1983   61    39    38    54    84       6     1983   59    38    60    28    94    2        1983   60    24    62    18    85    3        1983   58    52    64    22    89       5
1984    58    51    62    22    81       5      1984   60    50    76    14    76       7     1984   63    48    65    32    94    2        1984   61    26    29    65    78    14       1984   62    43    68    24    80       9
1985    58    37    41    35    79       4      1985   59    42    53    29    77       7     1985   59    51    53    30    83    10       1985   60    36    34    39    88    4        1985   61    33    55    36    73       4
1986    58    44    45    37    72       7      1986   58    45    53    30    76       6     1986   60    37    46    31    81    5        1986   59    36    58    26    81    4        1986   57    25    67    33    87       3
1987    59    42    49    35    76       8      1987   60    30    56    34    80       5     1987   58    31    62    32    79    4        1987   59    41    63    25    85    4        1987   59    36    71    22    85       4
1988    59    47    46    31    77       6      1988   56    38    44    28    74       4     1988   60    37    50    30    78    5        1988   61    37    54    30    84    8        1988   62    40    60    31    91       5
1989    57    44    50    30    70       6      1989   59    41    60    28    75       6     1989   60    40    62    27    78    5        1989   60    44    62    25    77    5        1989   59    28    51    39    83       3
1990    57    42    49    34    71       6      1990   59    51    59    23    74       7     1990   59    48    65    26    73    7        1990   63    37    51    41    77    6        1990   60    48    55    29    84       7
1991    58    44    49    27    71       7      1991   57    43    45    34    69       6     1991   55    43    44    26    74    6        1991   58    34    55    31    82    3        1991   61    46    38    34    87       4
1992    58    43    45    31    71       5      1992   59    41    52    30    75       6     1992   59    45    46    33    77    6        1992   56    37    43    34    68    5        1992   61    37    55    34    82       5
1993    55    46    47    36    71       6      1993   54    46    42    24    75       5     1993   55    43    56    23    70    6        1993   63    33    51    40    78    5        1993   61    33    29    35    79       5
1994    58    43    58    28    66       5      1994   56    43    47    28    67       5     1994   51    41    37    30    66    5        1994   62    40    48    37    79    7        1994   60    29    50    36    87       4
1995    57    47    47    24    75       7      1995   59    46    49    30    77       7     1995   61    38    48    33    77    6        1995   56    46    48    22    79    5        1995   62    42    61    32    79       7
1996    53    42    53    24    60       6      1996   60    42    47    29    74       6     1996   57    38    42    27    75    5        1996   61    39    61    30    77    5        1996   64    32    51    37    83       5
1997    56    39    51    31    61       4      1997   55    51    41    21    79       6     1997   62    43    52    33    76    8        1997   62    37    55    31    79    5        1997   63    35    59    29    89       5
1998    58    46    50    26    73       6      1998   56    40    48    29    67       7     1998   58    44    39    27    79    7        1998   62    47    53    28    80    6        1998   58    43    75    17    72       4
1999    57    48    47    20    71       5      1999   58    44    53    28    67       6     1999   53    35    53    30    58    4        1999   58    44    57    25    78    5        1999   60    26    51    36    77       9
2000    61    37    53    32    65       9      2000   59    44    56    22    68       5     2000   59    35    49    36    69    8        2000   60    37    61    28    81    6        2000   60    35    65    21    88       4
Notes: The Table reports the average age, the percent female, the fraction married (among females), the fraction widowed (among females), the fraction married (among males),
the fraction widowed (among males) for each wealth fractile.
                    Table C1: Comparing Top 1% Wealth Share with Previous Estimates

  Author     Kopczuk-Saez     Lampman (1962)        Smith (1984)    Wolff-Marley (1989)  Wolff (1995)           Scholz (2003)
   Unit         Adults            Adults             Individuals        Individuals      Households              Households
   Data         Estates           Estates              Estates       Patched Estates Patched SCF-Estates            SCF
  Wealth       Net Worth         Net Worth           Net Worth         Total Assets       Net Worth               Net Worth
                  (1)               (2)                  (3)                (4)              (5)                     (6)

   1922          36.02               31.6                                   34.0                 36.7
   1929          36.76               36.3                                   37.2                 44.2
   1933          30.31               28.3                                   31.3                 33.3
   1939          25.95               30.6                                   38.1                 36.4
   1945          24.65               23.3                                   28.9                 29.8
   1949          22.59               20.8                                   25.7                 27.1
   1953          23.77               24.3                                   28.1                 31.2
   1954          23.18               24.0
   1956          24.75               26.0
   1958          24.18                                  26.6                27.0
   1962          24.39                                  28.2                30.1                 31.8                31.6
   1965          24.70                                  25.4                31.9                 34.4
   1969          22.86                                  27.4                29.0                 31.1
   1972          23.13                                  21.9                28.6                 29.1
   1976          19.32                                  19.2                18.9                 19.9
   1983          21.07                                                                           30.9                31.5
   1986          22.66                                                                           31.9
   1989          21.96                                                                           35.7                30.0
   1992          21.18                                                                                               30.0
   1995          21.54                                                                                               35.3
   1998          21.70                                                                                               34.1
   2000          20.79

Notes: Lampman (1962), Table 94, p. 204, estimates are based on all estate tax returns filers and Pareto interpolation to optain top 1% share.
Smith (1984), Table 1, p. 422, ranks individuals by total assets (not net worth) and defines top 1% group relative to total population
(not only adults), and reports share of net-worth for this group.
Wolff-Marley (1989), Table 6, p. 786, row W2, completed and corrected in Wolff (1995), Table A1, pp. 78-79, col. (1), "Wolff-Marley series".
Top 1% defined relative to total population (not only adults). Estimates based on previous estimates by Lampman (1962) and Smith (1984).
Wolff (1995), Table A1, pp. 78-79, col. (6) "New Household Series" based on previous "Wolff-Marley" series and SCF estimations.
Scholz (2003) based on SCF data.
                                               Table C2: Very Top Shares from Forbes 400 Richest Americans
                                                         Very Top Wealth Shares                                Ratio to Average Wealth                        Top Estate Share
                  (1)              (2)              (3)            (4)             (5)                     (6)             (7)            (8)                        (9)
            Forbes 400       Forbes 400         Top .0002% Top .00005% Top .0002-.00005%               Top .0002% Top .00005% Top .0002-.00005%                   Top .01%
            Total Wealth Average Wealth          (top 404       (top 101    (rank 102 to 404            (top 404        (top 101   (rank 102 to 404                Share
          (billions 2000 $)(millions 2000 $)     in 2000)       in 2000)        in 2000)                in 2000)        in 2000)       in 2000)             (top 20,000 in 2000)

  1982          164.2            411                0.984           0.521             0.510               4,922          10,414             3,400                  2.525
  1983          204.1            510                1.187           0.593             0.593               5,933          11,864             3,957                  3.194
  1984          207.3            518                1.165           0.595             0.570               5,826          11,909             3,799                  3.514
  1985          214.5            536                1.153           0.567             0.586               5,763          11,335             3,905                  4.085
  1986          245.1            613                1.217           0.628             0.589               6,084          12,560             3,926                  3.913
  1987          333.6            834                1.603           0.856             0.747               8,017          17,129             4,979                  3.438
  1988          320.4            801                1.486           0.797             0.689               7,430          15,946             4,592                  3.596
  1989          373.1            933                1.670           0.885             0.785               8,349          17,702             5,232                  3.791
  1990          359.5            899                1.635           0.868             0.767               8,173          17,360             5,110                  3.631
  1991          363.4            909                1.658           0.932             0.726               8,291          18,649             4,839                  3.549
  1992          369.3            923                1.655           0.946             0.709               8,277          18,930             4,726                  3.715
  1993          390.6            977                1.735           1.000             0.735               8,676          20,001             4,901                  3.761
  1994          405.2           1,013               1.799           1.049             0.750               8,994          20,976             5,001                  3.857
  1995          446.0           1,115               1.923           1.142             0.781               9,614          22,841             5,205                  3.988
  1996          514.0           1,285               2.089           1.221             0.868              10,444          24,424             5,785                  3.836
  1997          669.5           1,674               2.537           1.552             0.985              12,687          31,042             6,569                  3.778
  1998          779.3           1,948               2.715           1.751             0.965              13,577          35,017             6,431                  3.987
  1999         1033.0           2,582               3.286           2.268             1.018              16,429          45,355             6,787                  3.910
  2000         1200.1           3,000               3.743           2.510             1.233              18,715          50,202             8,219                  3.896
  2001          925.1           2,313               3.031           1.971             1.060              15,157          39,428             7,066
  2002          860.0           2,150               2.958           1.909             1.049              14,791          38,184             6,993

Notes: Data source is the Forbes 400 Richest American list published annually in October by Forbes Magazine since 1982.
Columns (1) and (2) report the total wealth and average wealth of the Forbes 400 richest (in 2000 dollars, CPI from Table A)
Columns (3) to (5) report the share of total wealth (reported in Table A, col. (3)) for the top .0002%, the top .00005%, and the top .0002-.00005% estimated using the Forbes list.
The top .0002% corresponds to the top 404 richest americans in 2000. The top .00005% corresponds to the top 101 richest americans in 2000.
The top .0002-.00005% corresponds to the americans with wealth rank 102 to 404 in 2000.
Columns (6) to (8) report the ratio of the average wealth in the top .0002%, the top .00005%, and the top .0002-.00005% to the average wealth in the United States
(from col. (4) in Table A).
Column (9) report the top .01% wealth share estimated from tax returns (from Table B1, col. (7)).
                                                      Table D: Sample size, weights, asset details information

                              Sample size                                              Average Weight                                  Fraction subject to a complete edit
Groups   .01% .05-.01% .1-.05% .25-.1% .5-.25%   1-.5% 2-1%           .01% .05-.01%.1-.05% .25-.1% .5-.25% 1-.5% 2-1%         .01% .05-.01% .1-.05% .25-.1% .5-.25% 1-.5%    2-1%
          (1)    (2)     (3)     (4)      (5)     (6)   (7)            (1)    (2)    (3)     (4)     (5)    (6)   (7)          (1)    (2)      (3)    (4)      (5)     (6)    (7)
 1916       57    211      227    681 1,140          55               0.98 0.99 1.00 1.00 1.00 0.99                          100% 93% 64% 44% 32% 42%
 1917      196    673      753 2,211 3,797          661               0.99 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00                          100% 90% 67% 46% 32% 33%
 1918      177    602      794 2,192 3,726       2,297                0.99 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00                          100% 93% 74% 48% 34% 34%
 1919      160    596      708 2,006 3,298       4,366                0.99 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00                          100% 98% 82% 52% 39% 34%
 1920      161    625      715 2,110 3,383       5,506                0.99 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00                          100% 98% 84% 53% 40% 34%
 1921      175    606      727 2,117 3,253       4,801                0.99 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00                          100% 15%         0%      0%       0%      0%
 1922      172    618      758 2,137 3,486       5,258                0.99 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00                          100% 22%         0%      0%       0%      0%
 1923      180    671      775 2,353 3,907       5,020                0.99 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00                          100% 23%         0%      0%       0%      0%
 1924      155    724      736 2,390 3,839       5,463                0.99 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00                          100% 26%         1%      0%       0%      0%
 1925      188    726      852 2,343 3,923       5,746                0.99 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00                          100% 32%         0%      0%       0%      0%
 1926      227    804      927 2,585 2,256          937               0.99 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.81 6.51                          100% 27%         1%      0%       0%      0%
 1927      197    740      849 2,432 3,454                            0.99 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00                               100% 42%         1%      0%       0%
 1928      215    752      916 2,681 3,754                            0.99 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00                               100% 100% 88% 61% 52%
 1929      193    792      904 2,600 3,931         417                0.99 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00                          100% 100% 91% 65% 50% 70%
 1930      175    825      942 2,608 3,590          77                0.99 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 0.99                          100% 100% 85% 59% 54% 75%
 1931      229    840 1,000 2,852 2,291                               0.99 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00                               100% 23%         1%      0%       1%
 1932      244    839 1,035 2,519 2,470             377               0.99 1.00 1.00 1.14 1.76 1.76                          89%      2%      0%      0%       0%      1%
 1933      210    899      992 3,033 4,541          907               0.99 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00                          100% 7%          0%      0%       0%      0%
 1934      276    939 1,057 3,124 4,788             777               1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00                          93%      3%      0%      0%       0%      1%
 1935      260    957 1,127 3,153 4,567             992               0.99 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.16 2.97                          100% 3%          0%      0%       0%      0%
 1936      222    901 1,239 3,385 5,471           4,672               0.99 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00                          100% 16%         0%      0%       0%      0%
 1937      258    997 1,139 3,493 5,603           5,078               1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00                          100% 8%          0%      0%       0%      0%
 1938      241    917 1,180 3,344 5,378           4,729               1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00                          100% 83% 49% 32% 23% 23%
 1939      243 1,074 1,129 3,445 5,502            5,249               1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00                          100% 100% 78% 57% 41% 42%
 1940      252 1,027 1,239 3,477 5,787            5,505               0.99 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00                          100% 78% 47% 32% 21% 21%
 1941      260 1,039 1,193 3,379 5,613            6,537               0.99 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00                          98%      2%      0%      0%       0%      0%
 1942      224    927 1,208 3,201 5,113           5,001               0.99 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.05 1.25                          100% 6%          0%      0%       0%      0%
 1943      278    971 1,121 3,444 5,212           5,123               1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00                          99%      3%      0%      0%       0%      0%
 1944      252    966      998 3,000 4,920        7,240      332      1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00                     100% 89% 51% 33% 25% 20%                        25%
 1945      295    884 1,120 3,033 4,920           8,319    1,555      1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00                     100% 14%         0%      0%       0%      0%     0%
 1962      321 1,290 1,531 4,228 7,001           13,717   25,448      1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00                     100% 100% 100% 100% 100% 100%                   100%
 1965      352 1,356 1,539 4,778 8,000            8,971    8,148      1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.76 3.77                     100% 100% 100% 100% 100% 100%                   100%
 1969      401 1,373 1,636 4,554 6,345            4,430    7,218      1.00 1.00 1.02 1.10 1.25 3.48 4.13                     100% 100% 100% 100% 100% 100%                   100%
 1972      367 1,352 1,702 5,305 8,116            7,197    6,763      1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 2.20 4.72                     100% 100% 100% 100% 100% 100%                   100%
 1976      428 1,715 1,893 5,517 4,824            3,498    5,623      1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.97 4.65 5.84                     100% 100% 100% 100% 100% 100%                   100%
 1982      345 1,317 1,678 4,634 3,153            4,801    5,601      1.02 1.03 1.02 1.09 2.57 3.39 4.48                     100% 100% 100% 100% 100% 100%                   100%
 1983      328    438       21    132      128      289      504      1.07 4.04 60.76 45.24 56.13 61.63 56.54                100% 100% 100% 100% 100% 100%                   100%
 1984      377    550       62    124      182      367      661      1.05 2.54 32.42 38.90 46.32 60.48 40.08                100% 100% 100% 100% 100% 100%                   100%
 1985      407    732       65    241      371      647      613      1.03 2.62 20.92 19.58 24.49 28.94 10.74                100% 100% 100% 100% 100% 100%                   100%
 1986      363 1,209       958 2,630 3,888        2,699    2,071      1.00 1.21 2.01 1.99 2.38 6.89 4.54                     100% 100% 100% 100% 100% 100%                   100%
 1987      421 1,084       184    484      671      967      636      1.00 1.32 10.46 12.89 14.19 19.51 9.15                 100% 100% 100% 100% 100% 100%                   100%
 1988      435 1,248       200    451      790    1,185      956      1.01 1.35 9.12 11.66 12.60 16.58 8.44                  100% 100% 100% 100% 100% 100%                   100%
 1989      405 1,464       930 2,545 4,027        5,000    3,785      1.00 1.05 2.09 2.16 2.24 3.98 3.81                     100% 100% 100% 100% 100% 100%                   100%
 1990      397 1,456       265    579      877    1,109    1,438      1.00 1.27 7.08 9.47 10.71 16.55 13.69                  100% 100% 100% 100% 100% 100%                   100%
 1991      445    858      552 1,317 1,054        1,445    1,605      1.00 1.66 3.38 4.16 9.55 13.71 11.73                   100% 100% 100% 100% 100% 100%                   100%
 1992      431 1,625       794 1,918 1,725        2,502    3,132      1.00 1.00 2.58 3.13 5.60 8.12 6.49                     100% 100% 100% 100% 100% 100%                   100%
 1993      463 1,031       587 1,643 1,189        1,844    2,304      1.00 1.92 3.32 3.43 8.46 11.56 11.98                   100% 100% 100% 100% 100% 100%                   100%
 1994      443 1,036       546 1,739 1,279        1,681    2,398      1.00 1.87 3.24 3.47 8.25 11.63 12.81                   100% 100% 100% 100% 100% 100%                   100%
 1995      501 1,615 1,192 2,227 1,885            2,981    3,932      1.00 1.01 1.96 2.92 5.53 7.53 8.51                     100% 100% 100% 100% 100% 100%                   100%
 1996      544 1,139       754 1,906 1,371        2,206    2,957      1.00 1.61 2.92 3.55 6.67 10.20 14.16                   100% 100% 100% 100% 100% 100%                   100%
 1997      534 1,358       869 1,699 1,959        2,257    3,044      1.00 1.51 2.80 3.48 5.47 10.13 15.83                   100% 100% 100% 100% 100% 100%                   100%
 1998      419 2,048 2,086 2,198 2,887            3,615    4,623      1.00 1.01 1.10 2.98 3.73 6.37 10.71                    100% 100% 100% 100% 100% 100%                   100%
 1999      473 1,446       668 1,455 1,773        1,605    2,659      1.00 1.17 3.13 4.90 5.54 13.65 18.33                   100% 100% 100% 100% 100% 100%                   100%
 2000      458 1,530       600    900      942      998    1,678      1.00 1.20 3.87 7.22 13.72 21.65 29.26                  100% 100% 100% 100% 100% 100%                   100%

Notes: Computations by authors based on estate tax return micro-dataset. See Appendix Section B for details.
The weight numbers represent the inverse of the sampling probability. Complete edit data provides detailed information on estate composition.
                               $180,000                                                                                                                                  100

                               $160,000                 Average Wealth                         Corporate Equity
                                                        Wealth less corp. equity               Consumer Price Index




                                                                                                                                                                               Consumer Price Index (base 100 in 2000)
                               $140,000
      Wealth in 2000 Dollars




                               $120,000

                               $100,000
                                                                                                                                                                         10
                                $80,000

                                $60,000

                                $40,000

                                $20,000

                                    $0                                                                                                                                   1
                                          1916

                                                 1921

                                                         1926

                                                                1931

                                                                       1936

                                                                              1941

                                                                                     1946

                                                                                            1951

                                                                                                   1956

                                                                                                          1961

                                                                                                                 1966

                                                                                                                        1971

                                                                                                                               1976

                                                                                                                                      1981

                                                                                                                                             1986

                                                                                                                                                    1991

                                                                                                                                                           1996

                                                                                                                                                                  2001
                                 FIGURE 1
  Average Real Wealth and Consumer Price Index in the United States, 1916-2002
Source: Table A, columns Average Wealth (in real 2000 dollars) and CPI (base 100 in 2000)
                       45%

                       40%

                       35%

                       30%
        Wealth Share




                       25%

                       20%

                       15%

                       10%

                       5%

                       0%
                             1916

                                    1921

                                           1926

                                                  1931

                                                         1936

                                                                1941

                                                                       1946
                                                                              1951

                                                                                     1956

                                                                                            1961

                                                                                                   1966

                                                                                                          1971

                                                                                                                 1976

                                                                                                                        1981

                                                                                                                               1986

                                                                                                                                      1991

                                                                                                                                             1996
                                             FIGURE 2
                        The Top 1% Wealth Share in the United States, 1916-2000
Source: Table B1, col. Top 1%.
                                  $4,000,000                                                                                                                          $160,000


                                  $3,500,000                        Top 1% average wealth                                                                             $140,000
   Average Wealth of bottom 99%




                                                                    Bottom 99% average wealth




                                                                                                                                                                                 Average Wealth of Top 1%
                                  $3,000,000                                                                                                                          $120,000


                                  $2,500,000                                                                                                                          $100,000


                                  $2,000,000                                                                                                                          $80,000


                                  $1,500,000                                                                                                                          $60,000


                                  $1,000,000                                                                                                                          $40,000


                                   $500,000                                                                                                                           $20,000


                                         $0                                                                                                                           $0
                                               1916
                                                      1921
                                                             1926
                                                                    1931
                                                                           1936
                                                                                  1941
                                                                                         1946
                                                                                                1951
                                                                                                       1956
                                                                                                              1961
                                                                                                                     1966
                                                                                                                            1971
                                                                                                                                   1976
                                                                                                                                          1981
                                                                                                                                                 1986
                                                                                                                                                        1991
                                                                                                                                                               1996
                                FIGURE 3
Average Real Wealth of bottom 99% and top 1% in the United States, 1916-2000
Source: Table B2, columns Top 1%, Bottom 99% computed from Average Wealth (Table A, Col. (4))
and Average Top 1% wealth. Amounts are expressed in 2000 dollars
                   14%

                   12%

                   10%
    Wealth Share




                   8%

                   6%

                   4%

                   2%                                   Top 2-1%            Top 1-0.5%                Top 0.5-0.1%


                   0%
                         1916

                                1921
                                       1926

                                              1931

                                                     1936
                                                            1941
                                                                   1946

                                                                          1951
                                                                                 1956
                                                                                        1961
                                                                                               1966

                                                                                                       1971
                                                                                                              1976

                                                                                                                     1981
                                                                                                                            1986
                                                                                                                                   1991

                                                                                                                                          1996
                                             FIGURE 4
                   The Wealth Shares of Top 2-1%, 1-0.5%, and 0.5-0.1%, 1916-2000
Source: Table B1, columns Top 2-1%, 1-0.5%, and 0.5-0.1%.
Estimates for Top 2-1% are only available from 1946.
                                          A. Wealth share of the top 0.1%                                                                                             B. Wealth share of the top 0.01%
 25%                                                                                                                           12.0%


                                                                                                                               10.0%
 20%

                                                                                                                               8.0%
 15%

                                                                                                                               6.0%

 10%
                                                                                                                               4.0%


  5%
                                                                                                                               2.0%


  0%                                                                                                                           0.0%




                                                                                                                                       1916

                                                                                                                                              1921

                                                                                                                                                     1926

                                                                                                                                                            1931

                                                                                                                                                                   1936

                                                                                                                                                                          1941

                                                                                                                                                                                 1946

                                                                                                                                                                                        1951

                                                                                                                                                                                               1956

                                                                                                                                                                                                      1961

                                                                                                                                                                                                             1966

                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1971

                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1976

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1981

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1986

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                1991

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1996
       1916

              1921

                     1926

                            1931

                                   1936

                                           1941

                                                  1946

                                                         1951

                                                                1956

                                                                       1961

                                                                              1966

                                                                                     1971

                                                                                            1976

                                                                                                   1981

                                                                                                          1986

                                                                                                                 1991

                                                                                                                        1996
                                                                                       FIGURE 5
                                                           The Shares of the Top Wealth Groups in the United States, 1916-2000


Source: Table B1, Columns 0.1%, and 0.01%.
     80%

     70%           Real Estate            Bonds and Cash           Stock              Other

     60%

     50%

     40%

     30%

     20%

     10%

      0%




                                                                                              Top .01%
                   .5-.25%




                                    .25-.1%




                                                     .1-.05%




                                                                           .05-.01%


                                    FIGURE 6
           Wealth Composition of Top Groups within the Top 0.5% in 1929

Source: Table B3, row 1929.
Sum of four categories is 100%. Category debt has been excluded.
                                              Fraction Stock in top .5%                              Fraction Stock in total net-worth

                         70%

                         60%

                         50%
       Fraction (in %)




                         40%

                         30%

                         20%

                         10%

                         0%
                               1916
                                      1921
                                             1926
                                                    1931
                                                           1936
                                                                  1941
                                                                         1946
                                                                                1951
                                                                                       1956
                                                                                              1961
                                                                                                     1966
                                                                                                            1971
                                                                                                                   1976
                                                                                                                          1981
                                                                                                                                 1986
                                                                                                                                        1991
                                                                                                                                               1996
                                   FIGURE 7
 Fraction of Corporate Stock within the Top .5% and total net-worth, 1916-2000
Source: Table A, Column (7) and Table B3, Top .5%, column stock.
                                70

                                60
    Age and percentage female




                                50

                                40


                                30


                                20

                                10                                       Average Age                    Percent Female


                                 0
                                     1916

                                             1921

                                                    1926

                                                           1931

                                                                  1936

                                                                         1941

                                                                                1946

                                                                                       1951

                                                                                              1956

                                                                                                     1961

                                                                                                            1966

                                                                                                                   1971

                                                                                                                          1976

                                                                                                                                 1981

                                                                                                                                        1986

                                                                                                                                               1991

                                                                                                                                                      1996
                                                                  FIGURE 8
                                            Average Age and Fraction Female in Top 0.5%, 1916-2000
Source: Table B4, columns age and fraction female.
    4.5%
                           Capital Income             Capital Gains               Business Income              Salaries
    4.0%

    3.5%

    3.0%

    2.5%

    2.0%

    1.5%

    1.0%

    0.5%

    0.0%
           1916
                   1921
                          1926
                                 1931
                                        1936
                                               1941
                                                      1946
                                                             1951
                                                                    1956
                                                                           1961
                                                                                  1966
                                                                                         1971
                                                                                                1976
                                                                                                       1981
                                                                                                              1986
                                                                                                                     1991
                                                                                                                            1996
                                       FIGURE 9
                  The Top 0.01% Income Share and Composition, 1916-2000
The Figure displays the top 0.01% income share (top curve). Estimates are based on families
 and not individuals.
Taxpayers are ranked by income excluding capital gains but capital gains included in the share.
Interest, Rents, Trusts, etc.),
The Figure displays the composition of those top incomes into Capital Income (Dividends,
Realized Capital Gains, Business Income (Sole Proprietorships, Partnerships, S-Corporations),
and Salaries (Wages and Salaries, Pensions).
Source: Piketty and Saez (2003), series updated to year 2000
                       100%                                                                                                                           25%

                       90%

                       80%                                                                                                                            20%




                                                                                                                                                            Top 0.1% Wealth Share
                       70%
   Marginal Tax Rate




                       60%                                                                                                                            15%

                       50%

                       40%                                                                                                                            10%

                       30%
                                                                        Top 0.1% Marginal Tax Rate                 Top marginal tax rate
                       20%                                                                                                                            5%
                                                                        Top 0.1% Share
                       10%

                        0%                                                                                                                            0%
                              1916

                                     1921

                                            1926

                                                   1931

                                                          1936

                                                                 1941

                                                                         1946

                                                                                1951

                                                                                       1956

                                                                                              1961

                                                                                                     1966

                                                                                                            1971

                                                                                                                   1976

                                                                                                                          1981

                                                                                                                                 1986

                                                                                                                                        1991

                                                                                                                                               1996
                                                FIGURE 10
                        Marginal Tax Rate and Wealth Share for the Top 0.1%, 1916-2000
Notes: Marginal Tax Rate computations are made assuming no deductions beyond the basic exemption.
Effective marginal tax rates are lower due to additional deductions (funeral expenses, spousal bequest
deductions, charitable bequests, etc.)
                             45%

                             40%

                             35%
       Wealth Share (in %)




                             30%

                             25%

                             20%
                                                                  Kopczuk-Saez (Estates)
                             15%                                  Lampman (Estates)
                                                                  Smith (Estates)
                             10%
                                                                  Scholz (SCF)
                             5%                                   Wolff (Estates-SCF)

                             0%
                                   1916
                                          1921
                                                 1926
                                                        1931
                                                               1936
                                                                      1941
                                                                             1946
                                                                                    1951
                                                                                           1956
                                                                                                  1961
                                                                                                         1966
                                                                                                                1971
                                                                                                                       1976
                                                                                                                              1981
                                                                                                                                     1986
                                                                                                                                            1991
                                                                                                                                                   1996
                                                   FIGURE 11
                               The Top 1% Wealth Share: Comparing Various Estimates
Source: Table C1
                              4.0%

                                                           Top .0002% (top 400 in 2000)
                              3.5%
                                                           Top .00005% (top 100 in 2000)
                              3.0%
                                                           Top .0002-.00005% (101 to 400 in 2000)
        Wealth Share (in %)




                              2.5%

                              2.0%

                              1.5%

                              1.0%

                              0.5%

                              0.0%
                                     1983
                                            1984
                                                   1985
                                                          1986
                                                                 1987
                                                                        1988
                                                                               1989
                                                                                      1990
                                                                                             1991
                                                                                                    1992
                                                                                                           1993
                                                                                                                  1994
                                                                                                                         1995
                                                                                                                                1996
                                                                                                                                       1997
                                                                                                                                              1998
                                                                                                                                                     1999
                                                                                                                                                            2000
                                                                                                                                                                   2001
                                                                                                                                                                          2002
                                           FIGURE 12
                  Very Top Shares from Forbes 400 Richest Americans, 1983-2002
Source: Table C2, col. (3), (4), (5), and (9).
Year 1982 has been excluded because, as the first survey year, the Forbes list missed a number of fortunes.
                             60%


                             50%
       Wealth Share (in %)




                             40%


                             30%


                             20%


                             10%
                                                               United States                 United Kingdom                   France


                             0%
                                   1913
                                          1918
                                                 1923
                                                        1928
                                                               1933
                                                                      1938
                                                                             1943
                                                                                    1948
                                                                                           1953
                                                                                                  1958
                                                                                                         1963
                                                                                                                1968
                                                                                                                       1973
                                                                                                                              1978
                                                                                                                                     1983
                                                                                                                                            1988
                                                                                                                                                   1993
                                                                                                                                                          1998
                                FIGURE 13
The Top 1% Wealth Share in the United States, the United Kingdom, and France
Sources: United States, Table B1, column Top 1%
United Kingdom: 1913-1972, Atkinson and Harrison (1978), p. 159, Column Top 1%, England and Wales.
1976-2000: Inland Revenue Personal Wealth (Top 1% Marketable net worth series for adult population,
Table 13.5) http://www.inlandrevenue.gov.uk/stats/personal_wealth/dopw_t05_1.htm
Series 1913-1989 reproduced in Lindert (2000), Table 2, pp. 181-182.
France: Piketty, Postel-Vinay, and Rosenthal (2003), Table 4, Top 1% estate share
(wealth shares not yet available)
                                          Male 25K-50K                       Female 25K-50K
                                          Male 50K+                          Female 50K+
                              120%


                              100%
     Mortality differential




                              80%


                              60%


                              40%


                              20%


                               0%
                                     7


                                         14


                                              21


                                                   28


                                                         35


                                                              42


                                                                   49


                                                                        56


                                                                             63


                                                                                  70


                                                                                       77


                                                                                            84
                           Figure A1
    Ratio of the average mortality to the mortality of the wealthy
                   based on Rogot et. al. (1992)

Note: The graph is based on tables 1 and 7 in Rogot et al. (1992) and shows the ratios of death rates for white
individuals with family incomes above 25,000 and 50,000 of 1980 dollars to the corresponding death rates for the
whole population (Table 1). The annualized death rates for income-age categories are computed by multiplying the
annualized mortality rate for the age category by the ratio of actual and expected numbers of deaths in the income
categories (all of these numbers are reported in Table 7). Deaths in Rogot et al. (1992) are tabulated for age
categories of: 0-14, 15-24, 25-34, 35-44, 45-54, 55-64, 65-74, 75-84, 85+ and the corresponding values of age used
on the graph are 7, 10, 20, 30, 40, 50, 60, 70, 80 and 90. The number of individuals and deaths in the $50,000+
categories is relatively small and the resulting age-pattern is considerably noisier.
                                                   Females                       Males
                                                   Average females               Average males

                                            1960                                                 1971




                            90%                                           90%
   Mortality differential




                            70%                                           70%



                            50%                                           50%



                            30%                                           30%
                                  16



                                       36



                                              56



                                                         76



                                                                     96




                                                                                16



                                                                                         36



                                                                                                   56



                                                                                                        76



                                                                                                             96
                                            1975                                                 1978




                            90%                                           90%
Mortality differential




                            70%                                           70%



                            50%                                           50%



                            30%                                           30%
                                                                                16



                                                                                         36



                                                                                                  56



                                                                                                        76



                                                                                                             96
                                  16



                                       36



                                              56



                                                         76



                                                                     96




                            Figure A2
Ratio of the average mortality to the mortality of the wealthy,
                 over time, based on Buck tables
                                                   Males               Average males

                                            1928                                       1934


                            90%                                 90%
Mortality differential




                            70%                                 70%
                                                                                         \




                            50%                                 50%


                            30%                                 30%




                                                                      16



                                                                              36



                                                                                        56



                                                                                              76



                                                                                                   96
                                  16



                                       36



                                              56



                                                     76



                                                           96                          1948
                                            1944


                            90%                                 90%
Mortality differential




                            70%                                 70%


                            50%                                 50%


                            30%                                 30%
                                                                      16



                                                                              36



                                                                                         56



                                                                                              76



                                                                                                   96
                                  16



                                       36



                                              56



                                                     76



                                                           96




                                            1950                                       1963


                            90%                                 90%
   Mortality differential




                            70%                                 70%


                            50%                                 50%


                            30%                                 30%
                                  16



                                       36



                                              56



                                                     76



                                                           96




                                                                      16



                                                                              36



                                                                                        56



                                                                                              76



                                                                                                   96




                            Figure A3
Ratio of the average mortality to the mortality of the wealthy,
                 over time, based on annuity data
                                                  males                                    females

                              120%


                              100%
     Mortality differential




                              80%


                              60%


                              40%


                              20%


                               0%
                                     0

                                         7

                                             14

                                                  21

                                                       28

                                                            35

                                                                 42

                                                                      49

                                                                            56

                                                                                 63

                                                                                      70

                                                                                           77

                                                                                                84

                                                                                                     91

                                                                                                          98
                                                                      Age




                                                        Figure A4
                                             Socioeconomic mortality differentials

Note: the socioeconomic mortality differentials are based on estimates from Brown, Liebman and Pollet (2002) for
the college-educated population. Values greater than 100% were set to 100%. See the discussion in Appendix B.
                     45%

                     40%

                     35%

                     30%
      Wealth Share




                     25%

                     20%
                                                                             `
                     15%
                                                              No Life Insurance
                     10%
                                                              Cash Surrender Value only
                     5%
                                                              Full Payout Included
                     0%
                           1916

                                  1921

                                         1926

                                                1931

                                                       1936

                                                               1941

                                                                      1946

                                                                                 1953

                                                                                        1962

                                                                                               1982

                                                                                                      1987

                                                                                                             1992

                                                                                                                    1997
                             Figure A5
         The Top 1% Wealth Share: The Impact of Life Insurance

Note: The Series No Life Insurance excludes completely life insurance payments from the numerator. The series
Cash Surrender Value only includes only the cash surrender value of life insurance (as in all our series reported in
Table B1). The series Full Payout includes the full value of life insurance reported on estate tax returns. For all three
series, the denominator is the same and defined as in Table A, and includes life insurance reserves.
                                        Widowed                                                                  Married                                   Single

                    30%



                    25%



                    20%
Fraction (in %)




                    15%



                    10%



                          5%



                          0%
                                     1932


                                                   1933


                                                                 1934


                                                                               1935


                                                                                             1936


                                                                                                       1937


                                                                                                                  1938


                                                                                                                           1939


                                                                                                                                    1940


                                                                                                                                            1941


                                                                                                                                                    1942


                                                                                                                                                           1943


                                                                                                                                                                    1944


                                                                                                                                                                           1945
                               30%

                               25%

                               20%
             Fraction (in %)




                               15%

                               10%

                               5%

                               0%
                                            1932

                                                          1933

                                                                        1934

                                                                                      1935

                                                                                                1936

                                                                                                          1937

                                                                                                                    1938

                                                                                                                             1939

                                                                                                                                     1940

                                                                                                                                             1941

                                                                                                                                                    1942

                                                                                                                                                            1943

                                                                                                                                                                   1944

                                                                                                                                                                           1945




                                                                     Figure A6
                                                   Marital status of top wealth-holders located
                                                        in the community property states
                                                          (Upper panel: top .05%. Lower panel: top .25-.05%)
