NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

PUBLIC DEBT MANAGEMENT IN BRAZIL
Francesco Giavazzi
Alessandro Missale
Working Paper 10394
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10394
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2004

‘

We thank Fernando Blanco and Santiago Herrera who provided valuable information and data on the
Brazilian Economy. We are grateful to Alfonso Bevilaqua and Paulo Levy for insightful discussions on the
effect of GDP growth and inflation on the primary surplus. We thank Carlo Favero for many comments and
suggestions. We also benefited from comments of participants in the seminars at the Brazilian Ministry of
Finance, the Cental Bank of Brazil and IPEA. Marco Aiol6 and Andrea Civelli provided excellent research
assistance. Financial support from the World Bank is gratefully acknowledged. The authors are associated
with Universita di Milano; IGIER-Universita Bocconi, NBER and CEPR, respectively. The views expressed
herein are those of the author and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2004 by Francesco Giavazzi and Alessandro Missale. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Public Debt Management in Brazil
Francesco Giavazzi and Alessandro Missale
NBER Working Paper No. 10394
March 2004
JEL No. E63, H63
ABSTRACT
This paper derives the optimal composition of the Brazilian public debt by looking at the relative
impact of the risk and cost of alternative debt instruments on the probability of missing the
stabilization target. This allows to price risk against the expected cost of debt service and thus to find
the optimal combination along the trade off between cost and risk minimization. The optimal debt
structure is a function of the expected return differentials between debt instruments, of the
conditional variance of debt returns and of their covariances with output growth, inflation,
exchange-rate depreciation and the Selic rate. We estimate the relevant covariances by: i) exploiting
the daily survey of expectations; ii) simulating a small structural model of the Brazilian economy
under different shocks; iii) estimating the unanticipated components of the relevant variables with
forecasting regressions. The empirical evidence suggests that a large share of the Brazilian debt
should be indexed to the price level. Fixed-rate bonds should be preferred to Selic indexed bonds,
while the share of dollar denominated (and indexed) bonds should be further reduced from the
current high level.his paper derives the optimal composition of the Brazilian public debt by looking
at the relative impact of the risk and cost of alternative debt instruments on the probability of
missing the stabilization target. This allows to price risk against the expected cost of debt service
and thus to find the optimal combination along the trade off between cost and risk minimization. The
optimal debt structure is a function of the expected return differentials between debt instruments,
of the conditional variance of debt returns and of their covariances with output growth, inflation,
exchange-rate depreciation and the Selic rate. We estimate the relevant covariances by: i) exploiting
the daily survey of expectations; ii) simulating a small structural model of the Brazilian economy
under different shocks; iii) estimating the unanticipated components of the relevant variables with
forecasting regressions. The empirical evidence suggests that a large share of the Brazilian debt
should be indexed to the price level. Fixed-rate bonds should be preferred to Selic indexed bonds,
while the share of dollar denominated (and indexed) bonds should be further reduced from the
current high level.
Francesco Giavazzi
IGIER
Universita' L.Bocconi
5, via Salasco
20136 - Milano ITALY
and NBER
francesco.giavazzi@unibocconi.it

Alessandro Missale
Dip. di Economica Politica e Aziendale
Via Conservatorio 7
20122 Milano
Italy
alessandro.missale@unimi.it

1. Introduction
There are many diﬀerent views as to the objectives of debt management but in the
case of Brazil the paramount objective of debt management should be that of reducing the
country’s fiscal vulnerability.1 This calls for funding at low cost but also for minimizing
the risk of large interest payments due to unexpected changes in interest rates and/or in
the exchange rate.2 Risk minimization is accomplished, as shown by Goldfajn (1998), by
choosing debt instruments which both ensure a low volatility of returns and provide a hedge
against fluctuations in the primary budget, in the interest payments and in the value of the
other liabilities.
In this paper we present a simple model where debt management helps to stabilize the
debt ratio and thus reduces the probability of a debt crisis. Reducing the uncertainty of the
debt ratio, for any expected cost of debt service, is valuable in that it lowers the probability
that the fiscal adjustment may fail because of a bad shock to the budget.
The optimal debt composition is derived by looking at the relative impact of the risk and
cost of alternative debt instruments on the probability of missing the stabilization target.
This allows to price risk against the expected cost of debt service and thus to find the
optimal combination along the trade oﬀ between cost and risk minimization.
The optimal debt structure is thus a function of the expected return diﬀerentials between
debt instruments, of the conditional variance of debt returns and of their covariances with
output growth, inflation, exchange-rate depreciation and the Selic rate. We estimate the
relevant covariances with three alternative methods. The first approach exploits the daily
survey of expectations on GDP growth, inflation, the exchange rate and the Selic rate. The
second method relies on a small structural model of the Brazilian economy estimated on
monthly data for the period 1999:03-2003:07. The one-year ahead unanticipated components
of the Selic rate, exchange-rate depreciation, inflation and output growth are estimated
as the 12-month cumulated impulse responses of these variables to shocks to inflation,
the output gap and the EMBI spread. The third approach approximates the one-year
ahead unanticipated components of the relevant variables using the residuals of forecasting
regressions run on quarterly data for the period 1995:3-2003:1.
The empirical evidence suggests that a large share of the Brazilian debt should be
indexed to the price level. Price indexation should be preferred to Selic-rate indexation
while the share of dollar denominated (and indexed) bonds should be further reduced from
the current high level.3 These policy prescriptions appear robust to alternative methods
of estimating the optimal debt structure. The share of fixed-rate bonds should also be
increased. Fixed-rate debt avoids large interest payments when the Selic rate rises during
a crisis or reacts to negative supply shocks and thus when debt stabilization is endangered
by slow output growth. Because of their short maturity, below two years, fixed-rate bonds
1

See Missale (1999) for a review of the literature on the objectives of debt management.
See, Garcia (2002).
3
For a similar conclusion in favor of price indexation see Bevilaqua and Garcia (2002). Goldfajn (1998)
also hardly finds an explanation for the high share of foreign-denominated debt.
2

2

ensure a suﬃciently fast reduction of debt servicing costs in the event of a rapid fall in
interest rates. If the term premium required on fixed-rate bonds is not too high, issuing such
bonds in exchange for Selic indexed bonds increases the probability of debt stabilization.
We provide evidence on the term premium which suggests that such a strategy is indeed
optimal.
The empirical evidence strongly supports the funding strategy of Brazilian Treasury
in 2003 of relying heavily on fixed-rate LTN bonds. It also supports its recent decision
to revitalize the market for price-indexed bonds with the new NTN-B program of IPCA
indexation. Although the exposure to exchange rate risk has been reduced in 2003, it is still
large suggesting that more eﬀorts should be made to reduce issuance of bonds denominated
in foreign currencies.

2. The government problem
In this section we present a simple model where debt management helps to stabilize
the debt ratio and thus reduces the probability of a debt crisis. Debt stabilization calls for
funding at low cost but also for minimizing the risk of large payments due to unexpected
changes in interest rates and the exchange rate. Hence, the choice of debt instruments
trades oﬀ the risk and the expected cost of debt service.
Risk minimization is accomplished by choosing debt instruments which both ensure a
low return variability and provide a hedge against variations in the primary budget, and
in the returns of the other liabilities (see e.g. Goldfajn 1998). Reducing the uncertainty
of the debt ratio, for any expected cost of debt service, is valuable in that it lowers the
probability that debt stabilization may fail because of bad shocks to the budget. This
strategy is consistent with the asset-and-liability management approach adopted by the
Brazilian Treasury (see Tesouro Nacional 2003a).
To provide insurance against variations in the primary surplus and the debt ratio, public
bonds should be indexed to nominal GDP. However, this would be a costly innovation.
Indeed, a high premium would have to be paid: for insurance; for the illiquidity of the
market and; for the delay in the release of GDP data and their revisions. Therefore, we
focus on the main funding instruments that are currently available to the Brazilian Treasury:
bonds indexed to the Selic rate (LFT), fixed-rate bonds (LTN), bonds indexed to the IPGM price index (NTN-C) or to the IPCA index (NTN-B), domestic bonds indexed to the
US dollar and external debt denominated in foreign currency. (We refer to the latter two
instruments as dollar denominated bonds in what follows.)
The aim of the government is to stabilize the debt ratio, Bt . To this end, the government decides a fiscal correction taking into account the realization of debt returns, output,
inflation and the exchange rate.4 However, since the outcome of the government’s eﬀorts is
uncertain (and the fiscal adjustment is costly) a crisis cannot be prevented with certainty.
Denoting the outcome of the fiscal adjustment (in terms of GDP) with At+1 − X, a debt
crisis arises if the debt ratio increases:

4

T
− At+1 + X > Bt
Bt+1

(1)

The choice of the government can be modeled by assuming that it wheighs the cost of the adjustment
against the probability of debt default. The formal analysis of the government problem is not carried out
since it does not aﬀect the results for debt management.

3

where At+1 is the expected adjustment, X, denotes the uncertain component of the fiscal
T
is the trend debt ratio, that is, the debt
adjustment, Bt is the debt-to-GDP ratio and Bt+1
ratio that would prevail in period t + 1 in the absence of the fiscal correction.5
Alternatively, X, can be viewed as a shock to the budget that occurs after the fiscal
adjustment has been carried out or as a debt increase due to the discovery of hidden
liabilities –“skeletons in the closet”.
Absent government intervention the debt ratio increases because of the interest payments
on the outstanding debt minus the trend primary surplus and the growth of nominal GDP.
The debt also increases because of the revaluation of the dollar-denominated debt due to
T
T −B
= Bt+1
the depreciation of the domestic currency. Hence, debt accumulation ∆Bt+1
t
is equal to:
T
T
= It+1 Bt + ∆et+1 qBt − St+1
− (∆yt+1 + πt+1 )Bt
(2)
∆Bt+1
where It+1 Bt are the nominal interest payments, et is the log of the nominal exchange rate,
T
is the trend primary surplus, yt+1 is the log of
q is the share dollar-denominated debt, St+1
output and πt+1 is the rate of inflation.
The interest payments depend on the composition of public debt chosen at the end
of period t. The government can choose between bonds indexed to the Selic rate, dollar
denominated bonds, price-indexed bonds and fixed-rate bonds. We take the time period as
corresponding to one year and assume that all bonds have a one-year maturity, since the
relevant decision for the Brazilian Treasury is whether 1-year fixed-rate bonds should be
issued. Focusing on a one-year horizon is a reasonable approximation even if LFT, NTN and
dollar denominated bonds have much longer maturities, because the stochastic component
of their returns is dominated by movements in the Selic rate, the rate of inflation and the
exchange rate. Within a one-year horizon, the nominal rate of return on fixed-rate 1-year
bonds is equal to the long-term interest rate, Rt , at which such bonds are issued. The
nominal return on fixed-rate bonds is thus known at the time of issuance. The return in
Reais on dollar denominated bonds depends on the U S interest rate, RtUS , the risk premium
RPt and exchange rate depreciation. The nominal return on price-linked bonds is equal to
the sum of the real interest rate, RtI , known at the time of issuance, and the rate of inflation,
πt+1 . Finally, the return on Selic indexed bonds is determined by the path of the Selic rate
over the life of the bond and thus between period t and t + 1. The (average) Selic rate over
this period, it+1 , is not known at time t when the composition of the debt is chosen.
The interest payments are equal to
It+1 Bt = it+1 sBt + (RtU S + RPt )qBt + (RtI + πt+1 )hBt + Rt (1 − s − q − h)Bt

(3)

where s is the share of Selic indexed debt, q is the share of dollar-denominated debt and
h is the share of price-indexed debt at the beginning of period t and where the return on
dollar denominated bonds (RtU S + RPt )(1 + ∆et+1 ) has been approximated by RtUS + RPt .
T , is uncertain, since it
Finally, the ratio of the trend primary surplus to GDP, St+1
depends on cyclical conditions and on the rate of inflation as follows

5

T
T
= Et St+1
+ ηy (yt+1 − Et yt+1 ) + ηπ (πt+1 − Et πt+1 )
St+1

(4)

The analysis can be extended to the case the debt ratio must exceed a given threshold for a crisis to
arise by interpreting At+1 as the sum of the expected adjustment and the diﬀerence between the current
debt ratio and its threshold.

4

where ηy is the semi-elasticity of the government budget (relative to GDP) with respect to
output, ηπ is the semi-elasticity of the budget with respect to the price level and Et denotes
expectations conditional on the information at time t.
Hence, the surplus-to-GDP ratio may be higher than expected because of unanticipated
output, yt+1 − Et yt+1 , and inflation, πt+1 − Et πt+1 . While the impact of economic activity
on the budget is well known from a number of studies, inflation also reduces the deficit if
tax systems and spending programs are not fully indexed.6

3. The choice of debt denomination and indexation
The objective of the Treasury is to minimize the probability that debt stabilization
fails because the adjustment eﬀort is unsuccessful; because revenues falls short of expected
and/or spending programs cannot be cut. The government chooses s, q and h to minimize
M in Et P rob[X >

T
At+1 − ∆Bt+1
]

= M in Et

Z ∞

T
At+1 −∆Bt+1

φ(X)dx

(5)

subject to (2), (3) and (4).
where φ(X) denotes the probability density function of X.
Deriving (5) with respect to s, q and h yields
T
)[it+1 − Rt ] = 0
Et φ(At+1 − ∆Bt+1

T
)[RtUS + RPt + et+1 − et
Et φ(At+1 − ∆Bt+1
T
Et φ(At+1 − ∆Bt+1
)[RtI + πt+1 − Rt ] = 0

(6)
− Rt ] = 0

(7)
(8)

T is the planned reduction in the debt-to-GDP ratio and φ(A
T
where At+1 −∆Bt+1
t+1 −∆Bt+1 )
is a function of s, q and h.
The first order conditions (6)-(8) have a simple interpretation: they show that the debt
structure is optimal only if the increase in the probability that stabilization fails, that
is associated with the interest cost of additional funding in a particular type of debt, is
equalized across debt instruments. If this were not the case, the government could reduce
the probability of failure by modifying the debt structure; e.g. it could substitute fixed-rate
bonds for Selic indexed bonds or vice versa.7
To gain further intuition we observe that the diﬀerence between the interest cost of
Selic indexed bonds and fixed-rate bonds is equal to the diﬀerence between the (average)
Selic rate between time t and t + 1 and its value as expected at the time t, minus the term
premium on fixed-rate bonds:

6

it+1 − Rt = it+1 − Et it+1 − T Pt

(9)

The eﬀects on net lending of an increase in output by one percent are reported for OECD countries in
the OECD Economic Outlook (1999) and Van der Noord (2000). With the notable exceptions of Austria,
Denmark, Ireland, the Netherlands and Sweden, OECD countries have elasticities in the 0.4 to 0.7 range.
The eﬀects of inflation on government budgets have not been measured to the same extent, but appear
substantial. For Sweden, Persson, Persson and Svensson (1998) estimate a budget improvement of 0.4% of
GDP on a yearly basis for a one percent increase in the inflation rate.
7
The argument assumes that there are non-negative constraints to the choice of debt instruments.

5

where T Pt is the term premium on fixed-rate bonds and where Et it+1 is the expected average
Selic rate between time t and t + 1.
Equation (9) shows that the expected cost of funding with Selic indexed bonds is lower
than fixed-rate bonds because of the term premium but, ex-post, the cost may be greater
if the Selic rate turns out to be higher than expected. It is also worth noting that equation (9) implicitly assumes that investors’ expectations coincide with the expectations of
the government. If this were not the case, the expected cost diﬀerential relevant for the
government, T Pt , would include an informational spread:
T Pt = T PtI + (EtI it+1 − Et it+1 )

(10)

RtUS + RPt + et+1 − et − Rt = et+1 − Et et+1 − F Pt

(11)

where EtI denotes investors’ expectations and T PtI is the true term premium.
The diﬀerence between the cost of funding with dollar denominated bonds and fixed-rate
bonds depends on the realization of the exchange rate. Between time t and t + 1 the return
on dollar denominated bonds (evaluated in domestic currency) diﬀers from the return on
fixed-rate bonds as follows

where F Pt is the 1-year exchange-rate risk premium which is relevant for the government.
Although the true exchange-rate risk premium is likely to be small, dollar denominated
bonds may enjoy a liquidity premium due to the greater liquidity and eﬃciency of international bond markets. F Pt may also reflect the diﬀerent views of the investors and the
government regarding the exchange rate. If we consider this “credibility spread”, F Pt , is
equal to
(12)
F Pt = F PtI + EtI et+1 − Et et+1
where EtI denotes investors’ expectations and F PtI is the true foreign exchange risk premium.
Finally, the diﬀerence between the interest payments on price-indexed bonds and fixedrate bonds is equal to
RtI + πt+1 − Rt = πt+1 − Et πt+1 − IPt

(13)

where IPt is the inflation risk premium which is relevant to the government and may include,
in addition to the true premium, a spread reflecting the lack of credibility of the announced
inflation target:
(14)
IPt = IPtI + EtI πt+1 − Et πt+1
The return diﬀerentials (9)-(11)-(13) allow us to write the first order conditions (6)-(8)
as follows
T
T
)(it+1 − Et it+1 ) = T Pt Et φ(At+1 − ∆Bt+1
)
Et φ(At+1 − ∆Bt+1

T
T
Et φ(At+1 − ∆Bt+1
)(et+1 − Et et+1 ) = F Pt Et φ(At+1 − ∆Bt+1
)
T
T
Et φ(At+1 − ∆Bt+1 )(πt+1 − Et πt+1 ) = IPt Et φ(At+1 − ∆Bt+1 )

(15)
(16)
(17)

Equations (15)-(17) show the trade oﬀ between the risk and expected cost of debt service
that characterizes the choice of debt instruments.
6

At the margin, the impact on the probability of debt stabilization of assuming more
risk must be equal to the impact of reducing the expected cost of debt servicing. Hence,
the marginal increase in probability can be used to price risk against the expected cost of
debt service and thus find the optimal combination along the trade oﬀ between cost and
risk minimization. For example, equation (15) shows that issuing bonds indexed to the
Selic rate is optimal until the uncertainty of the Selic rate raises the probability of failure
as much as paying the term premium on fixed-rate bonds.
Therefore, the objective of debt stabilization oﬀers a solution to the identification of the
optimal debt structure which is independent of the government’s preferences towards risk.
This is because both the risk and the expected cost of debt service aﬀect the probability of
debt stabilization.
To derive an explicit solution for the the optimal shares of the various types of debt
we must specify the probability density function, φ(X). Since this function cannot be
estimated, we take a linear approximation of φ(X) over the range of bad realizations,
X > 0, of the fiscal adjustment.8 This implies a triangular probability density function
equal to
X̄ − X
(18)
φ(X) =
X̄ 2
where X > 0 and X̄ is the worst possible realization of the fiscal adjustment.
In fact, the triangular density is the linear approximation of any density function decreasing with X (for X > 0); it implies that bad realizations of the fiscal adjustment are
less likely to occur the greater is their size.
Substituting equations (18) and (2)-(4) in the first order conditions (15)-(17) yields the
optimal shares of Selic indexed debt, s∗ , dollar denominated debt, q ∗ , and price-indexed
debt, h∗ :
s∗ =

(ηy + Bt ) Cov(yt+1 it+1 )
Bt
V ar(it+1 )

(ηπ + Bt ) Cov(πt+1 it+1 )
Cov(et+1 it+1 )
− q∗
(19)
Bt
V ar(it+1 )
V ar(it+1 )
√
T )
Cov(πt+1 it+1 )
2P r Et (At+1 − ∆Bt+1
√
− h∗
+ T Pt
V ar(it+1 )
Bt V ar(it+1 )
1 − 2P r

q∗ =

(ηy + Bt ) Cov(yt+1 et+1 )
Bt
V ar(et+1 )

Cov(et+1 it+1 )
(ηπ + Bt ) Cov(πt+1 et+1 )
− s∗
(20)
Bt
V ar(et+1 )
V ar(et+1 )
√
T )
Cov(πt+1 et+1 )
2P r Et (At+1 − ∆Bt+1
√
− h∗
+ F Pt
V ar(et+1 )
Bt V ar(et+1 )
1 − 2P r

h∗ =

(ηy + Bt ) Cov(yt+1 πt+1 )
Bt
V ar(πt+1 )

(ηπ + Bt )
Cov(et+1 πt+1 )
(21)
− q∗
Bt
V ar(πt+1 )
√
T )
2P r Et (At+1 − ∆Bt+1
∗ Cov(πt+1 it+1 )
√
+ IPt
− s
V ar(πt+1 )
1 − 2P r Bt V ar(πt+1 )

8

+

+

+

T
We assume that the fiscal adjustment is expected to stabilize the debt, so that At+1 > Bt+1
− Bt .

7

where V ar(.) and Cov(.) denote variances and covariances conditional on the information
available at time t and P r is the probability of a debt crisis as perceived by the government.
The optimal debt shares depend on both risk and cost considerations. Risk is minimized
if a debt instrument provides insurance against variations in the primary budget and the
debt ratio due to output and inflation uncertainty and if the conditional variance of its
returns is relatively low. This is captured by the first two terms in equations (19)-(21).
Equation (19) shows that floating-rate debt is optimal for risk minimization when the
Selic rate and thus the interest payments are positively correlated with unanticipated output
and inflation. This allows the government to pay less interests when output and inflation
and thus the primary surplus are unexpectedly low. More importantly, since lower output
growth tends to increase the debt ratio, instruments with returns correlated to nominal
output growth help to stabilize the debt ratio, thus reducing the risk of a debt crisis. The
case for indexation weakens as the conditional variance of the Selic rate increases, thus
producing unnecessary fluctuations in interest payments.
Equation (20) shows that the optimal share of dollar denominated debt increases as the
exchange rate co-varies positively with output and inflation. If the exchange rate appreciated at times of unexpectedly low output –-an unlikely event–, cyclical variations in
the government budget could be hedged by dollar denominated debt. To the extent that
exchange rate depreciation is associated with inflation, foreign currency debt helps to stabilize the debt ratio. Clearly, exposure to exchange-rate risk becomes less attractive as the
volatility of the exchange rate increases.
Equation (21) shows that the optimal share of price-indexed debt increases with the covariance between output and inflation. If this covariance is positive, lower interest payments
on price-indexed debt provide an insurance against the cyclical deficit due to unexpected
slowdowns in economic activity. However, inflation-indexed debt would be optimal even if
the covariance between output and inflation were zero. The reason is that price-indexed
debt provides the perfect hedge against an increase in the debt ratio due to lower than
expected nominal output growth.
Risk minimization also depends on the conditional covariances between the returns on
the various debt instruments. For instance, a positive covariance between the returns on
two types of debt makes the two instruments substitutes in the government portfolio. This
is captured by the third and fourth terms in equations (19)-(21).
Leaving aside cost considerations, the government should choose the debt composition
which oﬀers the best insurance against the risk of deflation and low growth. But insurance
is costly; higher expected returns are generally required on hedging instruments, and this
leads on average to greater debt accumulation. Debt stabilization thus implies a trade oﬀ
between cost and risk minimization. The eﬀect of expected return diﬀerentials (or risk
premia) on the optimal debt composition is captured by the last term in in the right-endside of equations (19)-(21). This term increases with the risk premia, T Pt , F Pt and IPt ,
more precisely, with the excess return (as perceived by the government) of fixed-rate bonds
relative to the instrument considered. As shown in equations (15)-(17), the impact of the
excess return on the optimal share depends on the marginal increase in the probability of
a debt crisis. The latter has been written as a function of the expected debt reduction
T ) and the probability of a debt crisis, P r, as perceived by the government.
Et (At+1 − ∆Bt+1
(It is worth noting, that the probability P r also depends on the expected debt reduction, so
8

that the overall eﬀect of a larger debt reduction is to reduce the impact of the expected cost
diﬀerential.) Finally, a greater variance of the return on a given debt instrument reduces
the importance and the impact of interest cost diﬀerentials on its optimal share as much
as it reduces the relevance of its hedging characteristics. For example, equation (20) points
out that the share of bonds denominated or indexed to foreign currencies should increase
with the excess return, F Pt . However, as the variance of the exchange rate increases, cost
considerations become less important for the choice of dollar denominated bonds.

4. Estimating the optimal debt structure
The optimal debt composition depends on the sensitivity of the primary surplus to
unexpected variations in output and inflation, ηy and ηπ , on the reduction in the debt ratio,
and on the probability of debt stabilization as perceived by the government. At the end of
October 2003, mainly because of lower nominal GDP growth, the net public debt was 57.2%
of GDP, one percentage point higher than in 2002. Although the debt ratio is currently
above the “optimistic” scenario presented in “Politica Economica e Reformas Estruturais”
(Ministerio da Fazenda, April 2003), the debt should stabilize next year at around 56% of
GDP. Therefore the expected debt reduction is assumed to be 1%. The probability that
the stabilization plan may fail is tentatively set at 2% which corresponds to a maximum
negative shock to the budget, X̄, equal to 1.5% of GDP. This scenario reflects the lower
interest rates associated with restored market confidence as well as the high primary surplus
targeted by the government.
For the increase of the primary surplus (as a percentage of GDP) due to a 1% growth
in real GDP we rely on the estimate by Blanco and Herrera (2002) who suggest a 0.2
semi-elasticity of the primary surplus with respect to GDP (see also Bevilaqua and Werneck (1997)). Evaluating the eﬀect of unexpected inflation on the primary surplus (as a
percentage of GDP) is a more diﬃcult task. Although the eﬀect should be substantial,
as witnessed by the remarkable budget improvement in the first quarter of 2003, coming
down to a single number is diﬃcult.9 As indirect taxation is the main source of revenues,
these should remain roughly constant in terms of GDP. Public spending should instead fall
relative to GDP because many categories of spending remains constant in nominal terms
as set in the budget.10
Primary public spending is equal to 32% of GDP, but social security benefits and other
components are linked to the inflation rate. This suggests a tentative estimate of the price
elasticity of the primary surplus equal to 0.2, that is, lower than the ratio of primary public
spending to GDP.
4.1 Expected return diﬀerentials
The expected return diﬀerential between fixed-rate bonds and Selic indexed bonds over
one-year horizon, T Pt , is the diﬀerence between the yield at auction of fixed-rate LTN
bonds and the expected return on Selic indexed LFT bonds. The latter can be estimated
as the sum of expected Selic rate from the daily survey of expectations and the discount at
9

The positive eﬀect of inflation is known as “Patinkin eﬀect” (acc. to Eliana Cardoso); it is the opposite
of the Olivera-Tanzi eﬀect.
10
This information was provided by Paulo Levy at IPEA.

9

which 1-year LFT bonds are issued. At the end of October 2003 the average auction yield
on 1-year LTN bonds was 17.7%, the Selic rate expected for the end of October 2004 was
14,8% and LFT bonds were issued at a 0.4% discount. The expected return diﬀerential,
T Pt , can thus be set at 2.5%.
To estimate the expected return diﬀerential between 1-year fixed-rate bonds and dollar
denominated bonds, F Pt , the 1-year yield on LTN bonds must be compared to the expected
return in Reais on US$ Global bonds. At the end of October Global bonds with a 5-year
maturity have been issued at a rate of 9.45% but the yield on bonds with a 1-year maturity
appears much lower; the yield curve shown on the Treasury website points to a 4% 1-year
yield (see Tesouro Nacional December 2003b). In the same period, the expected depreciation
from the daily survey was 9.4%. With an interest rate of 17.7% on LTNs, the expected return
diﬀerential, F Pt , can thus be estimated at around 4.3%.
The premium on price-linked bonds (NTN-C and NTN-B) over 1-year fixed-rate bonds,
IPt , is the sum of an inflation-risk premium and, eventually, a “credibility spread” due to
the higher inflation expected by the market than by the government. The inflation risk
premium can be estimated as the diﬀerence between the interest rate on LTN bonds and
the (real) yield at issue of 1-year price-linked NTN-C bonds augmented by the expected
IPG-M inflation. At the end of October NTN-C bonds with a 3-year maturity were issued
at 9.32% while, according to the daily survey, the expected 12-month ahead IPG-M inflation
was around 6.5%. This implies an inflation risk premium of 1.9% in October. As the real
yield on 1-year bonds might be lower than the yield on 3-year bonds, the cost advantage
of 1-year NTN-C bonds could even be greater than 1.9%. We do not add to this estimate
the diﬀerence between the inflation expected by the market and by the government, i.e. the
“credibility spread”, since there is no oﬃcial target for IPG-M inflation. It is worth noting,
however, that expected IPCA inflation from the daily survey was 6.2%, only slightly higher
than the inflation rate implicit in the projection of the 90th COPOM meeting of November.
4.2 Uncertainty of debt returns
The conditional variance of debt returns and their covariances with output growth and
inflation can be estimated from one-year ahead forecast errors of the Selic rate, inflation,
the exchange rate, inflation and output growth. Ideally, one would like to run forecasting
regressions on yearly data for such variables. Then, the residuals of the regressions could
be taken as the estimates of the one-year ahead unanticipated components of the Selic rate,
the exchange rate, inflation and output growth. Unfortunately, this procedure is precluded
in the case of Brazil both because time series at yearly frequency are not suﬃciently long
and, more importantly, because of the frequent regime shifts experienced over the last two
decades.
To circumvent this problem we consider the following three alternatives. The first approach exploits the daily survey of expectations of GDP growth, inflation, the exchange
rate and the Selic rate. The unexpected components of these variables can be obtained as
the diﬀerence between the realization of the relevant variables and their expectations one
year earlier. The conditional covariances can then be computed as the mean of their cross
products.
The second method focuses on the most recent period of inflation targeting, starting

10

in mid 1999, and relies on a structural backward-looking model of the Brazilian economy
estimated with monthly data. The model, which is presented in Appendix I, is consistent
with that proposed by Favero and Giavazzi (2003) under the hypothesis of “Ricardian fiscal
policy”. As we use monthly data, the one-year ahead unanticipated components of the
Selic rate, the exchange rate, inflation and output growth are estimated as the 12-month
cumulated impulse responses of these variables to shocks of inflation, the output gap and
the EMBI spread.
The third approach approximates the one-year ahead unanticipated components of the
relevant variables using the residuals of forecasting equations estimated on quarterly data
for the period Q3 1995 to Q1 2003. This method requires the extension of the sample
period to include the fixed exchange rate period and the currency crisis of 1999. On the
other hand, the estimated stochastic structure is independent of the modeling strategy.
4.3 Estimating the debt composition from the daily survey of expectations
Table 1 decomposes GDP growth, IPCA inflation, exchange-rate depreciation (relative
to the US dollar), and the Selic rate between its expected and unexpected component for
the years 2000, 2001 and 2002 for which expectations can be obtained from the daily survey.
Except for the first year, when output growth was higher than expected, the Brazilian
economy performed much worse than expected. Output growth was substantially lower in
2001, while inflation and exchange-rate depreciation exceeded expectations in both 2001
and 2002. The Selic rate also turned out much higher than expected. Had the government
issued fixed-rate conventional bonds instead of Selic indexed bonds and dollar denominated
bonds, debt sustainability would not be a problem for Brazil. Hence, prima facie evidence
appears to make a strong case for fixed-rate long-term debt. This depends however on
the specific —short— period considered. If times of unexpected deflation, falling short-term
interest rates and unexpected appreciation, as those experienced in 2003, are as likely as the
events of the period 2000-2002, then issuing fixed-rate bonds paying a high term premium
would be a poor strategy.
To correctly address the issue of the optimal debt composition we must look at the
covariances of debt returns with output and inflation. Table 1 clearly points to a negative
correlation between all types of indexation and unexpected output growth but also shows
that unexpected inflation has been positively associated with higher returns on dollar denominated bonds and Selic indexed bonds. Unexpected inflation has also led to higher
returns on price-indexed bonds. This suggests a role for price-indexation (and, to a lesser
extent, for the other types of indexation) in hedging against unexpected deflation. This
would require, however, that the observed comovements between inflation and debt returns
were a systematic feature of the Brazilian economy and not just an episode confined to the
period under consideration. The qualification makes it clear that policy indications are not
robust when the available evidence is limited to a short period of time as in the present
case.
The conditional covariances of debt returns with output and inflation (relative to the
conditional variance of returns) are presented in Table 2. The covariances of output growth
with all types of indexed debt are negative but small, while inflation displays a strong
positive covariance with the Selic rate and a mild covariance with the exchange rate. Hence,

11

all types of indexation are useful hedges against inflation, although they introduce additional
risk when negative output shocks already impair debt sustainability.
Importantly, the magnitude of these eﬀects is in sharp contrast with evidence from
OECD economies shown in Missale (2001). In the latter countries, a strong negative covariance between short-term interest rates and output growth is observed over the period
1970-1998 while the covariance between short-term rates and inflation is small and not
significant. Only Greece, Portugal and Sweden display a correlation between short-term
rates and inflation as strong as in Brazil. This fact can be explained by the specific shocks
experienced by the Brazilian economy during the short period considered. However, these
correlations could also reflect structural features of the economy and/or the need for a more
flexible approach to inflation targeting in emerging economies exposed to large shocks. In
particular, the low correlation of output with the policy rate may reflect a lower elasticity
of the output gap to such rate or the case for a smoother convergence of the inflation rate
to the target. Quoting the Open Letter sent by Banco Central do Brasil’s Governor to the
Minister of Finance (BCB January 2003): “It is a standard practice among Central Banks
when facing supply shocks of great magnitude to postpone the convergence of current inflation towards the targets over a longer period, avoiding unnecessary costs to the economy.
This was the case faced by Brazil in the last year.”
As the positive correlation of the Selic rate and the exchange rate with inflation dominates their negative but small correlation with output growth, bonds indexed to the Selic
rate, inflation and the exchange rate all provide some insurance against variations in the
primary surplus and the debt ratio due to unexpected changes in nominal output growth.
This is shown in the first Column of Table 3, which reports for each type of debt the optimal
share for risk minimization in the case we abstract from hedging against variations in the
returns of the other instruments. All shares are positive reflecting the fact that variable-rate
instruments have the same distribution of returns.
Column 2 shows the debt composition that allows to minimize both the risk of variations
in the primary surplus and in the returns of the other instruments. As Selic-indexed, priceindexed and dollar denominated bonds are close substitutes in the government portfolio,
variations in their returns should be hedged by holding a long position in Selic indexed
bonds (for example by means of foreign currency swaps).
When cost considerations are introduced into the analysis, the composition of the debt
clearly moves in favor of price-indexed bonds. Column 3 shows that the government should
issue price-indexed bonds in amount far exceeding the total debt and hedge this position by
holding assets denominated in dollars, along with Selic indexed bonds. This result may look
surprising given the cost advantage, 2.3%, of dollar denominated bonds over price-indexed
bonds, but it is worth recalling that expected return diﬀerentials must be normalized by the
conditional variance or returns and the standard deviation of exchange-rate depreciation
has been 3.6 times that of inflation. Since for practical reasons a structure of assets and
liabilities as shown in Column 3 is clearly unfeasible, in Column 4 the share of price-indexed
bonds is estimated in the case the government cannot hold Selic indexed bonds. The case
for price-indexed bonds is again strong.
Evidence from the daily survey of expectations thus suggests price indexation as the
optimal strategy for debt management, thus supporting the policy indications by Bevilaqua
and Garcia (2002). As bonds indexed to the price level currently represent less than 15%
12

of the domestic marketable federal debt (in the hands of the public) this would imply that
funding in the next few years will have to rely on price indexation. It is however important to
realize the risk of a strategy that increases the exposure of the government budget to unexpected output fluctuations. In fact, fixed-rate bonds appear the only available instruments
to insure against the impact of unanticipated output slowdowns on debt sustainability. As
highlighted in the discussion above, the fact that such shocks have played a minor role
compared to variations in the exchange rate and inflation over the period considered does
not mean that they will continue to do so in the future. A debt structure that comprises
fixed-rate conventional bonds along with price-indexed bonds would better balance the risks
that the Brazilian economy may face in the years ahead.
In order to examine whether and how the optimal debt composition depends on the
types of shocks hitting the economy, in the next Section we present results for diﬀerent
shocks identified with a structural model of the Brazilian economy.
4.4 Estimating the debt composition with a structural model
The structural model used to estimate the optimal debt composition is made of five
equations for: (i) the inflation rate; (ii) the output gap; (iii) the Selic rate; (iv) the exchange
rate and; (v) the EMBI spread.
The model is estimated on monthly data for the period 1999:3-2003:7 and is presented
in Appendix I. We consider three types of shocks: a supply shock (in the inflation equation),
a demand shock (in the output-gap equation) and a shock to the EMBI spread. Then, we
compute the 12-months cumulated impulse responses of the Selic rate, the exchange rate,
inflation and output for 1000 extractions from the distribution of each type of shock.11 The
cumulated responses are then used to estimate the ratios of conditional covariances relative
to conditional variances which are shown in Tables 4, 6 and 8 for the demand shock, the
supply shock and the EMBI shock, respectively. The optimal debt composition is reported
in Tables 5 7 and 9 for each type of shock.
4.4.1 Demand shocks
Table 5 shows the debt composition that stabilizes the debt ratio against demand shocks
-i.e. against shocks to the output gap equation. The first Column of Table 5 reports the
shares of each type of debt which are optimal for minimizing the risk of variations in
the primary surplus and the debt ratio, that is, when we abstract from hedging against
variations in the returns of the other instruments. The shares of Selic and price-indexed
bonds are positive and exceed several times the total debt; such bonds oﬀer a valuable
insurance against variations in the primary surplus and the debt ratio. As demand shocks
induce a positive covariance of output and inflation and a strong reaction of the policy rate,
the returns on both Selic and price-indexed bonds are strongly correlated with output and
inflation. As the monetary reaction leads to an appreciation of the exchange rate, the return
on dollar denominated bonds is negatively correlated with both output and inflation. This
explains the large negative share of dollar denominated debt; the government should rather
hold foreign assets to hedge against output shocks.
11

For the exchange rate the response at the 12th month was used instead of the cumulated responses. See
also Appendix I.

13

Column 2 shows the debt composition that minimizes risk when we consider, along with
budget and debt-ratio uncertainty, the role of each instrument in hedging against the returns
of the other instruments. Since Selic and price-indexed bonds are close substitutes in the
government portfolio (they returns covary positively), their optimal shares decrease. The
long position in foreign assets also decreases as Selic and price-indexed bonds are hedged
by dollar denominated bonds.
The risk minimizing debt structure calls for issuing large amounts of indexed instruments
to fund unlimited holdings of foreign assets. Since taking such position is clearly unfeasible,
in Column 3 we restrict the shares of dollar denominated debt and fixed rate debt to be
non-negative. In this case, risk minimization clearly favors price indexation over Selic rate
indexation.
The optimal debt composition does not change when cost minimization is considered
along with risk insurance. Column 4 shows that both Selic and price-indexed bonds should
be issued if large holdings of foreign assets were feasible. However, when the debt shares
are constrained to be non-negative price indexation clearly emerges as the optimal choice:
Column 5 shows that all the debt should be indexed to the price level.
4.4.2 Supply shocks
Table 7 shows the optimal debt composition that stabilizes the debt ratio against supply
shocks, i.e. against shocks to the inflation equation. Column 1 shows that fixed-rate bonds,
Selic rate and price-indexed bonds, all provide insurance against variations in the primary
surplus and in the debt ratio due to lower than expected inflation and output growth. In
particular, more than one third of the debt should be at fixed rate while the other two
thirds should be indexed to the Selic rate and the price level. Although, Selic-indexed and
price-indexed bonds are good hedges against lower than expected inflation, they provide
limited insurance against budget risk, since their returns are now negatively correlated with
output (see Table 6). Since supply shocks lead to a negative covariance of output with both
inflation and the Selic rate, fixed-rate debt helps to stabilize the debt ratio.
Column 2 shows that, when we consider the risk of variations in debt returns along with
budget risk and debt-ratio uncertainty, a role emerges for dollar denominated bonds. The
optimal composition for risk minimization comprises a small share of dollar denominated
bonds and a negative share of Selic indexed bonds. The reason is that, even if dollar
denominated bonds are poor hedges against variations in the primary surplus, they are
good complements of price-indexed bonds. This is because, the exchange rate covaries
negatively with inflation; it appreciates when the Selic rate is raised to counter (negative)
supply shocks. By contrast, the share of Selic indexed bonds becomes negative since such
bonds are close substitutes for price-indexed bonds while they oﬀer a limited insurance
against inflation uncertainty. Finally, fixed-rate bonds still appear to play an important
role in risk minimization; about one fourth of the debt should be at fixed rate.
Although fixed-rate debt helps to stabilize the debt ratio by insulating the budget from
supply shocks, the higher expected cost of such debt has a negative impact on the probability of stabilization. Columns 3 shows the debt composition that maximizes the probability of stabilizing the debt ratio when cost considerations are taken into account. Since
variable-rate bonds have lower expected returns than fixed-rate bonds, their shares increase
substantially leaving no role for fixed-rate bonds; it would even be optimal to hold fixed14

rate assets and fund this position with the other instruments. Finally, Column 4 shows
that, when the optimal shares are constrained to be non-negative, there is a strong case for
price-indexation; more than 80% of the debt should be indexed to the price level with the
remaining part denominated in dollars.
The absence of fixed-rate bonds in the optimal debt structure is partly explained by the
strong complementarity between price-indexed and dollar denominated bonds which arises
because of the exchange rate appreciation that follows an inflation shock. If we abstract
from the insurance provided by dollar denominated debt against the returns of the other
instruments, then some fixed-rate debt is optimal. Column 5 shows that, in this case, fixedrate bonds still account for 16% of the debt in spite of their higher expected return. This
would be the relevant case if negative supply shocks, by inducing a deterioration of the fiscal
position (that our model fails to capture), led to a wider EMBI spread and a depreciation
of the exchange rate. The eﬀects of shocks to the country risk premium are discussed in
the next section.
4.4.3 EMBI shocks
Tables 9 shows the debt composition that stabilizes the debt ratio against shocks to the
EMBI spread. Changes in the country risk premium may capture changes in international
risk factors or in the perception of risk as well as domestic fiscal shocks, for example,
negative shocks to the budget that increase country risk.
The first Column of Table 9 reports the debt composition that stabilizes the debt ratio
against variations in output and inflation, that is, in the case we abstract from hedging
against variations in debt returns. The shares of Selic indexed bonds and dollar denominated
bonds are negative, reflecting the strong negative covariances of their returns with output
growth that are shown in Table 8. In fact, EMBI shocks also lead to both unexpected
inflation and exchange-rate depreciation, but the negative covariances of the Selic rate and
the exchange rate with output dominate their positive covariances with inflation. It follows
that fixed-rate bonds should be issued in amounts exceeding the total debt so as to insulate
the budget from unexpected output contractions.
Column 2 shows that issuing fixed-rate debt is still optimal for risk minimization when we
consider the role of each instrument in hedging against the returns of the other instruments.
The government should issue an amount of fixed-rate bonds larger than the total debt and
hold both foreign assets and Selic indexed bonds. When, as in Column 4, the debt shares
are constrained to be non-negative, the share of fixed-rate debt reaches 93%.
When cost considerations are introduced into the analysis, as in Column 4 an 5, the
optimal debt composition moves towards price indexation, but the share of fixed-rate bonds
remains substantial despite their higher expected return. Column 5 shows that, when debt
shares are constrained to be non-negative, the optimal share of fixed-rate bonds is as high
as 82%.
4.4.4 Policy conclusions from the structural model
Results from the structural model suggest that a large share of the Brazilian debt should
be indexed to the price level. Price-indexed bonds appear to consistently provide a good
hedge against all types of shocks, although their role is limited in the case of EMBI shocks.
Indexation to the Selic rate should be avoided if supply shocks and EMBI shocks prevail
15

while Selic indexed bonds are a worse alternative to price indexation in the case of demand
shocks. Importantly, there appears to be little role for dollar denominated bonds. Exposure
to exchange rate risk should be avoided in case of demand shocks and EMBI shocks while
it should be limited in the case of supply shocks. In particular, the greater volatility of the
exchange rate implies that for dollar denominated bonds to be preferred to price-indexed
bonds their expected return diﬀerential should be much higher than that currently observed.
Whether 1-year fixed-rate bonds should be issued depends on the type of shocks hitting
the economy. While fixed-rate LTN bonds have no role in the case of demand shocks, they
are the best instruments to cope with shocks to the country risk premium. If EMBI shocks
prevail, a share of such bonds substantially higher than that currently observed would be
optimal even after considering their greater expected cost. LTN bonds may also provide
insurance against variations in the primary budget and the debt ratio induced by supply
shocks, but their optimal share is small because of their higher expected return. A stronger
argument for fixed-rate bonds (in exchange for dollar denominated bonds) can be made if
negative supply shocks increase fiscal vulnerability, thus leading to a depreciation of the
exchange rate.
These policy implications obviously depend on the correct specification of the structural model. It is thus important to check whether they continue to hold under diﬀerent
estimation methods.
4.5 Estimating the debt composition with forecasting regressions
In this section the conditional covariances of debt returns, output and inflation are
estimated using the residuals of forecasting equations run on quarterly data for the period
Q3 1995 to Q1 2003. We proceed in two steps. We first run regressions of output, inflation,
the exchange rate and the Selic rate separately on one lag of each variable and take the
residuals as an estimate of the unanticipated component of the dependent variable. Then,
we estimate the ratio of the conditional covariance between, say, output and inflation to
the variance of inflation as the coeﬃcients of the regression of the residuals of output on
the residuals of inflation obtained in the first stage.
Table 10 shows that these ratios are small and not statistically significant except for the
negative covariance of the Selic rate with output. This finding is consistent with the results
from the structural model in the case of supply shocks and shocks to the EMBI spread:
unexpected increases of the Selic rate appear to be associated with significant reductions
in output growth. On the other hand, the Selic rate does not bear any systematic relation
with unexpected inflation. The conditional covariance between inflation and output (and
thus between the returns on price-indexed bonds and output) is negative but small and
not significant. The exchange rate also appears to be uncorrelated with both output and
inflation over the period considered.
Table 11 presents the optimal debt composition. Column 1 reports the shares of the
various types of debt which are optimal for risk minimization, that is, in the case that all
bonds had the same expected return. Column 2 does the same when the debt composition
is computed using only the covariance/variance ratios that are statistically significant. Column 1 and 2 show that, for the purpose of minimizing risk, all the debt should be indexed
to the price level. While dollar denominated bonds play no role, the government should

16

hold assets indexed to the Selic rate and fund this position with fixed-rate bonds. This
is probably the result of including the 1999 currency crisis into the sample. Indeed, the
negative and large share of Selic indexed bonds reflects the negative covariance between
output and the policy rate that characterizes crisis events. This evidence suggests that a
large exposure to floating rates makes the budget vulnerable to high interest rates when
this is less desirable; i.e. at times of output contractions and when credit availability is a
problem.
Although the share of fixed-rate debt in Column 1 and 2 is substantial, such debt is used
to fund the long position in Selic indexed bonds. If the share of Selic debt is constrained
to be non-negative as in Column 3, then fixed-rate bonds should not be issued. Hence,
price-indexed bonds appear the optimal choice for risk minimization. This is because their
returns are unrelated to output fluctuations and provide a natural hedge against lower than
expected inflation.12
Then, the interesting issue is whether diﬀerences in expected returns imply a role for
Selic indexed bonds and dollar denominated bonds in debt stabilization. The optimal debt
shares are shown in Column 4. Cost diﬀerentials make it optimal to issue larger amounts of
indexed and dollar denominated bonds in exchange for fixed-rate debt. However, the share
of Selic indexed debt remains negative while that of dollar denominated debt is positive
but small. Since price-indexd bonds should be issued in amounts exceeding the total debt,
Column 4 also shows a long, though small, position in fixed-rate bonds. Since these large
asset holdings are clearly unfeasible, Column 6 shows the optimal debt composition when
the shares of Selic indexed bonds and fixed-rate bonds are constrained to be non negative.
The case for price indexation is again strong; almost the whole debt should be indexed to
the price level.
Therefore, results from forecasting equations strengthen our previous conclusions: price
indexation should be preferred to Selic rate indexation while the share of dollar denominated
(and indexed) bonds should be drastically reduced from the current high level. Indeed,
the lack of correlation of the Selic rate with inflation and its negative covariance with
economic activity provide strong evidence against Selic rate indexation. These risk-return
characteristics may have changed with the monetary regime and/or reflect the particular
events covered by the sample period. However, if the observed negative correlation between
the Selic rate and economic activity were due to the 1999 currency crisis, policy indications
against floating rate debt would even be stronger.
The results of forecasting regressions strongly support the decision of the Brazilian
Treasury to revitalize the market for price-indexed bonds. It is however worth recalling
that the simulations of the structural model presented in the previous section suggest that
fixed-rate bonds are better instruments than price-indexed bonds to cope with shocks to
the EMBI spread.
Even if we restrict the attention to the results of forecasting regressions there are several reasons why indexing a large share of debt to the price level may not be optimal or
feasible. For instance, while we focus on 1-year bonds, NTN-C and NTN-B bonds are issued at longer maturities, probably, reflecting the preferred holding periods of institutional
12
Note that the debt composition that is optimal for risk minimization does not depend on the covariances
between the returns on the various types of debt, that is, on complementarities and substitutabilities between
debt instruments.

17

investors. Issuing 5- to 20-year bonds at a real 10% interest rate may not be advisable
if the fiscal authorities were determined to carry out the fiscal stabilization. In this case
issuing fixed-rate bonds with a one-year maturity would be a more eﬀective strategy for
cost minimization (at the cost of increasing the exposure to roll-over risk.)
Secondly, it is likely that the amount of price-indexed bonds that the market is willing
to absorb at current interest rates is limited. If the government placed increasing amounts
of such bonds their interest rate would rise. The extent of indexation may also be limited
by reasons of political opportunity: inflation indexation of interest income may give rise to
pressures for extending indexation to other types of income. Moreover, it is often argued
that indexation reduces the cost of inflation and thus the incentives for anti-inflationary
fiscal and monetary policy. Fixed-rate debt may also enhance the eﬀectiveness of monetary
policy in controlling aggregate demand (see Falcetti and Missale 2002). Finally, issuance of
fixed-rate conventional bonds can be motivated by the objective of developing a domestic
market for fixed-rate bonds.
It is worth examining under which conditions substituting fixed-rate 1-year bonds for
dollar denominated bonds and for Selic indexed bonds is optimal, while taking the shares
of the other types of debt constant at the current level. Table 12 shows (for various pairs
of the expected debt reduction and the probability that debt stabilization fails) the interest
rate diﬀerential between 1-year fixed-rate bonds and dollar denominated bonds, F P , below
which it is optimal to issue fixed-rate bonds in exchange for dollar denominated bonds.
Since the current exposure to exchange rate risk (after swaps), considering the net external
debt, is currently as high as 40%, substituting fixed-rate bonds for foreign currency debt
would be optimal even for a very high perceived probability that debt stabilization may fail.
For instance, with the current 4.3% expected return diﬀerential the exposure to exchange
rate risk would be optimal only if the perceived probability that debt stabilization may fail
were as high as 40%.
Table 13 shows the interest rate diﬀerential between 1-year fixed-rate bonds and Selic
indexed bonds, T P , below which issuing fixed-rate bonds in exchange for Selic indexed bonds
is optimal. With an expected debt reduction equal to 2% of GDP, and 6% probability that
the debt ratio would not stabilize, fixed-rate bonds should replace Selic indexed bonds as
soon as the term premium falls below 2.8%. However, if the probability of failure were
lower, say 3%, then fixed-rate bonds should be issued even if the term premium were as
high as 4.6%. Although, these numbers should be regarded as just indicative, they show
the large scope for improvement in the composition of the Brazilian debt.

5. Policy conclusions
In this paper we have presented a framework for the choice of debt instruments that is
relevant for countries where fiscal vulnerability makes debt stabilization the main goal of
debt management.
The optimal debt composition has been estimated by looking at the relative impact
of the risk and cost of various debt instruments on the probability that the government
might miss the stabilization target, which we have defined as a pre-assigned level of the
debt-to-GDP ratio.
The empirical evidence suggests that a large share of the Brazilian debt should be

18

indexed to the price level. Price-indexed bonds appear to consistently provide a good hedge
against all types of shocks, although their role is limited in the case of EMBI shocks. Price
indexation should be preferred to Selic-rate indexation, and the share of dollar denominated
(and indexed) bonds should be drastically reduced. These policy prescriptions are robust
to alternative methods of estimating the optimal debt structure.
Fixed-rate LTN bonds also help to stabilize the debt ratio. Although such bonds have
no role in the case of demand shocks, they are the best instruments to cope with shocks to
the country risk premium. If EMBI shocks prevail, a share of fixed-rate bonds substantially
higher than currently observed would be optimal even after considering their greater expected cost. Fixed-rate bonds can also provide insurance against fluctuations in the primary
budget and in the debt ratio induced by supply shocks, but their optimal share should be
smaller than that of price-indexed bonds because of their higher expected return.
The scope for improving on the current structure of the Brazilian debt is substantial.
In October 2003 the composition of the net public debt in Brazil was still strongly biased
toward debt denominated or indexed to foreign currencies. Once we account for net external
debt and for the foreign currency swaps of the Central Bank, the exposure to the exchange
rate reached 40%. The share of debt indexed to the Selic rate was also as high as 40%.
By contrast the share of debt indexed to the price level was slightly above 10% and the
fixed-rate component was about 8%.
These facts suggest simple policy prescriptions. First of all, the exposure to exchange
rate risk should be reduced. The cost advantage of bonds denominated or indexed to foreign
currency is not suﬃcient to compensate for the high risk of variations in the exchange rate.
The exposure to the exchange rate is so high that betting in the direction of a further
appreciation of the exchange rate is highly risky. One of the reasons such a large share of
the domestic debt is indexed to the dollar is the demand for hedge by the private sector.
In Brazil the only entities that bear exchange rate risk are the government and the Central
Bank: the private sector fully hedges its dollar exposure by entering into swap contracts with
the Central Bank. Such a large amount of outstanding hedge cannot be rapidly reduced:
the currency falls sharply whenever the Central Bank announces that it will not fully roll
over the outstanding stock of hedge. The current account surplus that Brazil is now running
oﬀers an opportunity to reduce the demand for hedge by the private sector. This constraints,
however, does not apply to Treasury funding in foreign currencies, which should be avoided,
thus reducing exchange rate exposure at least on this front. Since vulnerability to exchange
rate risk is valued by investors, a smaller share of dollar denominated debt could lower the
risk premium on the Brazilian debt.
The second advice is to increase issuance of price-indexed bonds. Price indexation,
especially the new IPCA indexation program, provides a natural hedge against the impact
of inflation on both the primary surplus and the debt ratio. In the perspective of the assetand-liability management approach of the Brazilian Treasury, NTN-C and NTN-B bonds do
not only match future revenues but also the risks of price-indexed assets in the government
portfolio (see Tesouro Nacional 2003a). Since NTN-C bonds have a long maturity, they
also insulates the government budget from roll-over risk, thus representing an important
factor of stability for public debt dynamics. Thus, the decision of the Brazilian Treasury to
revitalize the market for price-indexed bonds finds a strong support in our analysis.
How large the share of price-indexed bonds should be, is more diﬃcult to say. Although
19

our analysis suggests that such a share should be large, there are a number of reasons why
this may not be optimal or feasible. The amount of price-indexed bonds that could be
issued may be limited by reasons of political opportunity or by the likely increase in the
expected return that investors require to hold such bonds when their share increases.
The main obstacle against a strategy of price indexation lies, however, in the long
maturity of price-indexed bonds, that would lock in the cost of debt service at real interest
rates as high as 10% for many years ahead. In fact, this could be too high a cost for a
government fully determined to carry out the fiscal stabilization.
A role for nominal debt instruments of short duration emerges if the stabilization program does not enjoy full credibility and long-term interest are too high relative to government expectations of future rates. The decision of the Treasury to rely on bonds indexed
to the Selic rate clearly finds a strong motivation in this argument; floating-rate LFT debt
ensures that a fall in interest rates would be immediately transmitted into a lower debt
service cost. Although our analysis cannot capture such an eﬀect, it points to fixed-rate
bonds with a one-year maturity as an attractive alternative to Selic-rate indexation.
Indeed, the third policy indication that emerges from this paper is to substitute fixedrate bonds for bonds indexed to the Selic rate. Fixed-rate debt avoids large interest payments when the Selic rate rises during a crisis or reacts to negative supply shocks and
thus when debt stabilization is endangered by slow output growth. We find evidence that
issuing fixed-rate bonds in exchange for Selic indexed bonds increases the probability of
debt stabilization even if the 12-month term premium is as high as 4%. Since realistically
the maturity of fixed-rate bonds will have to remain relatively short, within two years, a
greater share of such bonds would not preclude the benefit of a fall in interest rates. The
only objection against such policy is that short maturity debt may expose the Treasury to
a roll-over crisis, an event that we have not been modeled.
Issuance of fixed-rate bonds can bring additional benefits as they play a key role in
the creation of a domestic bond market. The resumption in 2003 of LTN auctions for
maturities longer than one year goes in the right direction. The Treasury should commit to
this strategy by announcing a regular program of fixed-rate bond auctions, since the success
of this strategy hinges on the market perception that the program will not be changed or
interrupted because of unfavorable market conditions.

20

References
Bevilaqua, A.S. and M.G.P. Garcia (2002), “Debt Management in Brazil - Evaluation of the
Real Plan and Challenges Ahead,” International Journal of Finance & Economics
7(1):15-35.
Bevilaqua, A.S. and R.L.F. Werneck (1997), “Fiscal Impulse in the Brazilian Economy, 19891996,” Working Paper No.379, Departamento de Economia, PUC-RIO, October.
Blanco Cosio F.A. and S. Herrera (2002), “The Quality of Fiscal Adjustment and Procyclical Policies in Brazil.” Background Paper for World Bank Country Economic
Memorandum, Brazil. Washington, D.C.
Falcetti, E. and A. Missale (2002), “Public Debt Indexation and Denomination with an
Independent Central Bank,” European Economic Review, 46(10):1825-50.
Favero, C. and F. Giavazzi (2003), “Targeting inflation when debt and risk premia are high:
lessons from Brazil”, this volume.
Garcia, M.G.P. (2002), “Public Debt Management, Monetary Policy and Financial Institutions,” Working Paper.
Goldfajn, I. (1998), “Public Debt Indexation and Denomination: The Case of Brazil” IMF
Working Paper 98/18.
BCB (2003), “Letter sent by Banco Central do Brasil’s Governor to the Minister of Finance”,
January, at http://www.bcb.gov.br.
Ministerio da Fazenda (2003), “Politica Economica e Reformas Estruturais”, April, at
http:// www.fazenda.gov.br.
Missale, A. (1999), Public Debt Management, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Missale, A. (2001), “Optimal Debt Management with a Stability and Growth Pact,” Public
Finance and Management, 1(1): 58-91.
Persson, M., T. Persson and L.E.O. Svensson (1998), “Debt, Cash Flows and Inflation
Incentives: A Swedish Example”, in G. Calvo and M. King, eds., The Debt Burden
and its Consequences for Monetary Policy: 28-62. IEA Conference Volume No.118,
MacMillan Press.
Tesouro Nacional (2003a), “Pubblic Debt: Annual Borrowing Plan 2003, Number 3, January, Brasilia, at http://www.tesouro.fazenda.gov.br.
Tesouro Nacional (2003b), “Divida Publica Federal, Eventos Recentes”, 2 December 2003,
at http://www.stn.fazenda.gov.br.
Tesouro Nacional (2003c), “Public Debt Report,” various issues,
at http://www.tesouro.fazenda.gov.br.
Tesouro Nacional (2003d), “Informe Divida,” various issues,
at http://www.tesouro.fazenda.gov.br.
Van Den Noord, P. (2000), “The Size and the Role of Automatic Fiscal Stabilisers in the
1990s and Beyond,” OECD Economic Department Working Paper No.230.

21

Table 1 - Economic Indicators

2000
2001
2002

π
5.97
7.67
12.53

2000
2001
2002

π
-1.03
3.37
7.73

Realized
∆y
∆e
4.4
9.3
1.4
18.7
1.5
52.3
Unanticipated
∆y
∆e
1.4
0.3
-2.6
16.4
-0.9
26.0

Selic
15.84
19.05
24.90
Selic
-0.81
5.05
7.90

Notes: IPCA inflation, US dollar exchange-rate depreciation,
end-of-period Selic rate

Table 2 - Covariances from Survey of Expectations
Cov(yi)/V ar(i)
Cov(ye)/V ar(e)
Cov(yπ)/V ar(π)
V ar(i)
V ar(e)
V ar(π)

-0.24
-0.07
-0.24
0.30
3.15
0.24

Notes: Variances are multiplied by 100.

Cov(iπ)/V ar(i)
Cov(eπ)/V ar(e)
Cov(eπ)/V ar(π)
Cov(ie)/V ar(i)
Cov(ie)/V ar(e)
Cov(iπ)/V ar(π)

0.89
0.27
3.55
3.25
0.30
1.09

Table 3 - Debt Composition from Survey of Expectations

Selic Rate
Foreign Exchange
Price Index
Fixed Rate

Risk
No hedge
0.88
0.27
1.03
-1.18

Risk

Risk+Cost

-4.14
0.73
2.98
1.43

-1.80
-0.12
2.61
0.08

Notes: The debt composition is derived from equations (19)-(21).

23

Risk+Cost
Fix=Selic=0
0
0.01
0.99
0

Table 4 - Covariances - Structural Model - Demand Shock
Cov(yi)/V ar(i)
Cov(ye)/V ar(e)
Cov(yπ)/V ar(π)
V ar(i)
V ar(e)
V ar(π)

12.9
-10.7
11.3
0.038
0.054
0.049

Cov(iπ)/V ar(i)
Cov(eπ)/V ar(e)
Cov(eπ)/V ar(π)
Cov(ie)/V ar(i)
Cov(ie)/V ar(e)
Cov(iπ)/V ar(π)

0.76
-0.63
-0.70
-0.80
-0.56
0.58

Notes: Variances are multiplied by 1002 .

Table 5 - Debt Composition for Demand Shock

Selic Rate
Foreign Exch
Price Index
Fixed Rate

Risk
No hedge
18.4
-15.3
16.6
-18.6

Risk
7.5
-6.2
7.9
-8.1

Risk
Fix=For=0
-3.3
0
4.3
0

Risk+Cost
8.3
-5.1
8.3
-10.5

Notes: The debt composition is derived from equations (19)-(21).

24

Risk+Cost
Fix=For=0
-3.2
0
4.2
0

Table 6 - Covariances - Structural Model - Supply Shock
Cov(yi)/V ar(i)
Cov(ye)/V ar(e)
Cov(yπ)/V ar(π)
V ar(i)
V ar(e)
V ar(π)

-0.42
0.33
-0.53
0.109
0.172
0.079

Cov(iπ)/V ar(i)
Cov(eπ)/V ar(e)
Cov(eπ)/V ar(π)
Cov(ie)/V ar(i)
Cov(ie)/V ar(e)
Cov(iπ)/V ar(π)

0.64
-0.57
-1.23
-0.96
-0.61
0.89

Notes: Variances are multiplied by 1002 .

Table 7 - Debt Composition for Supply Shock

Selic Rate
Foreign Exchange
Price Index
Fixed Rate

Risk
No hed
0.30
-0.32
0.63
0.38

Risk

Risk+Cost

-0.26
0.06
0.89
0.26

0.03
0.54
1.35
-0.92

Risk+Cost
Fix=Sel=0
0
0.18
0.82
0

Notes: The debt composition is derived from equations (19)-(21).

25

Risk+Cost
No oth
0.37
-0.24
0.71
0.16

Table 8 - Covariances - Structural Model - EMBI Shock
Cov(yi)/V ar(i)
Cov(ye)/V ar(e)
Cov(yπ)/V ar(π)
V ar(i)
V ar(e)
V ar(π)

-2.14
-0.38
-0.95
0.038
1.187
0.194

Cov(iπ)/V ar(i)
Cov(eπ)/V ar(e)
Cov(eπ)/V ar(π)
Cov(ie)/V ar(i)
Cov(ie)/V ar(e)
Cov(iπ)/V ar(π)

1.50
0.27
1.65
3.71
0.12
0.30

Notes: Variances are multiplied by 1002 .

Table 9 - Debt Composition for EMBI Shock

Selic Rate
Foreign Exchange
Price Index
Fixed Rate

Risk
No hed
-0.86
-0.15
0.07
1.95

Risk
-1.24
-0.22
0.80
1.66

Risk
Sel=For=0
0
0
0.07
0.93

Risk+Cost
-0.79
-0.25
0.76
1.28

Notes: The debt composition is derived from equations (19)-(21).

26

Risk+Cost
Selic=For=0
0
0
0.11
0.89

Table 10 - Covariances - Forecasting Regression
Cov(yi)/V ar(i)

V ar(i)

-0.536
(0.002)
0.018
(0.38)
-0.042
(0.81)
0.012

V ar(e)

0.899

Cov(ie)/V ar(e)

V ar(π)

0.013

Cov(iπ)/V ar(π)

Cov(ye)/V ar(e)
Cov(yπ)/V ar(π)

Cov(iπ)/V ar(i)
Cov(eπ)/V ar(e)
Cov(eπ)/V ar(π)
Cov(ie)/V ar(i)

-0.016
(0.93)
-0.017
(0.45)
-1.170
(0.45)
-2.166
(0.19)
-0.027
(0.19)
-0.014
(0.93)

Notes: P-values in parenthesis. Quarterly data. Variances are multiplied by 100.

Table 11 - Debt Composition - Forecasting Regressions
Risk
Selic Rate
Foreign Exch
Price Index
Fixed Rate

-0.72
0.00
1.30
0.42

Risk
Significant
-0.73
0.00
1.36
0.37

Risk
Selic=0
0
0.0
1.35
-0.35

Risk+Cost
Significant
-0.42
0.01
1.56
-0.15

Risk+Cost
Fix=Selic=0
0
0.01
0.99
0

Notes: The debt composition is derived assuming a that the one-year ahead conditional
variances are four times the 3-month ahead conditional variances.

27

Table 12 - Cut-oﬀ Exchange-Rate Risk Premium
Fixed Rate for Foreign Exchange
P rob F ail
20%
25%
30%
35%
40%

Debt − ratio expected reduction
2.5%
2.0%
1.5%
1.0%
18,9
23,7
31,6
47,4
13,5
16,8
22,5
33,7
9,4
11,8
15,8
23,7
6,3
7,9
10,6
15,9
3,8
4,8
6,4
9,6

Notes: Risk premium in percent.

Table 13 - Cut-oﬀ Term Premium
Fixed Rate for Selic Rate
P rob F ail
2%
3%
4%
5%
6%

Debt − ratio expected reduction
2.5%
2.0%
1.5%
1.0%
4,80
6,00
8,01
12,0
3,70
4,63
6,17
9,25
3,04
3,81
5,07
7,61
2,60
3,25
4,33
6,49
2,27
2,83
3,78
5,66

Notes: Risk premium in percent.

28

Figure 1
DEMAND SHOCK
Impulse responses for a shock to output gap equation
.00020

.001

.00016

.000

shock to gap

-.001

.00012

-.002
.00008
-.003
.00004

-.004

.00000

-.005

-.00004

-.006
2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2004

_SELIC (Deviation Mean)

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

_LEXCH (Deviation Mean)

.00024

.024

.00020

.020

.00016

.016

.00012

.012

.00008

.008

.00004

.004

.00000

.000
-.004

-.00004
2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

_INFL (Deviation Mean)

.0025
.0020
.0015
.0010
.0005
.0000
-.0005
2005

2006

2007

2008

_EMBI (Deviation Mean)

2005

2006

2007

2008

_GAP (Deviation Mean)

.0030

2004

2004

2009

2009

Figure 2
SUPPLY SHOCK
Impulse responses for a shock to inflation equation
.00035

.002

.00030

.000

shock to inflation

.00025

-.002

.00020

-.004

.00015
-.006

.00010

-.008

.00005

-.010

.00000
-.00005

-.012
2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

2004

2005

_SELIC (Deviation Mean)

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

2009

2010

_LEXCH (Deviation Mean)

.0004

.0001

.0003

-.0001

.0000

-.0002
.0002

-.0003
-.0004

.0001

-.0005
.0000

-.0006

-.0001

-.0008

-.0007
2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

_INFL (Deviation Mean)

.005
.004
.003
.002
.001
.000
-.001
2005

2006

2007

2008

_EMBI (Deviation Mean)

2005

2006

2007

2008

_GAP (Deviation Mean)

.006

2004

2004

2009

2010

Figure 3
EMBI SHOCK
Impulse responses for a shock to Embi spread equation
.00030

.04

.00025

.03

shock to embi

.00020

.02

.00015
.00010

.01

.00005
.00

.00000

-.01

-.00005
2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

2004

_SELIC (Deviation Mean)

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

_LEXCH (Deviation Mean)

.00030

.0005

.00025

.0000
-.0005

.00020

-.0010

.00015

-.0015
.00010

-.0020

.00005

-.0025

.00000

-.0030

-.00005

-.0035
2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

_INFL (Deviation Mean)

.12
.08
.04

.00
-.04
2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

_EMBI (Deviation Mean)

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

_GAP (Deviation Mean)

.16

2004

2004

2010

2010

Appendix I: The monthly model
The model used in the simulation exercises to obtain the impulse responses to supply,
demand and Embi spread shocks is made of the following equations:
Embi Spread equation
Embit = µ0 + µ1 Embit−1 + µ2 Bt−1 it−1 + µ3 SpBaat + µ4 DU + vembit

(1)

where Embit is the Embi spread, SpBaa is the US Corporate bond spread and DU
is a dummy variable taking the value of 1 for the crisis period 2002:06 -2002:12.
Exchange rate equation
et = δ0 + δ1 et−1 + δ2 (it−1 − iUS
t−1 ) + δ3 Embit + δ4 ∆Embit + vet

(2)

where iU S is the US federal funds rate.
Output gap equation
yt = γ0 + γ1 yt−1 + γ2 yt−2 + γ3 it−6 + γ4 Embit−1 + vyt

(3)

Inflation equation
πt = α0 + α1 πt−1 + α2 yt−1 + α3 (et−6 − et−12 ) + α4 Σ4i=1 Embit−i + vπt

(4)

Selic rate equation
it = ρit−1 + (1 − ρ)[β0 + β1 (πt−1 − πT ) + β2 ∆et−4 ] + vit

(5)

where πT is the inflation target.
The inflation rate, the interest rates, the spreads and the output gap are in
monthly terms and have not been multiplied by 100. The exchange rate et is the
logarithm of the $Real/US-dollar exchange rate. Since the inflation rate is obtained
by computing the annual growth rate of IPCA (see Appendix II) the impulse response
at the 12th month converted in annual terms (instead of the 12-month cumulated responses) is taken as the estimate of the one-year ahead unanticipated component of
the inflation rate. The impulse response of the log of the exchange rate at the 12th
month is taken as the estimate the one-year ahead unanticipated component of the
percentage change of the exchange rate.
An Embi spread shock is a one standard deviation shock to equation (1), a demand
shock is a one standard deviation shock to equation (3) and a supply shock is a one
standard deviation shock to equation (4).
The model is estimated by Iterative Least Squares.

1

Table A1 - Estimated Model, sample 1999:03 2003:07
t − ratio Adj.R2

Coef f

S.E.

µ0

-0.132

0.182

-0.72

0.85

µ1
µ2
µ3
µ4
δ0

0.254
19.78
187.8
0.618
0.032

0.114
11.22
68.34
0.116
0.021

2.23
1.76
2.75
5.32
1.53

0.97

0.036
0.249

1.95

δ1
δ2
δ3
δ4
γ0

0.977
-2.724
0.044
0.215
0.037

0.032
1.010
0.019
0.028
0.013

30.2
-2.69
2.23
7.47
2.79

0.40

0.020
0.026

1.77

γ1
γ2
γ3
γ4
α0

0.465
-0.244
-1.452
-0.020
-0.0005

0.173
0.162
0.680
0.007
0.0002

2.68
-1.50
-2.13
-2.56
-2.04

0.98

0.0004
0.0028

1.44

α1
α2
α3
α4
ρ

0.9470
0.0077
0.0017
0.0002
0.866

0.0370
0.0039
0.0005
0.00004
0.034

25.0
1.99
3.42
5.97
24.9

0.94

0.0006
0.0025

1.04

β0
β1
β2

0.012
1.569
0.025

0.001
0.394
0.013

10.1
3.97
1.97

2

SE eq.
DW
SE dep.va
0.156
2.01
0.406

Appendix II : Data Sources and Definitions
Monthly data for nominal GDP, the Broad National Consumer Price Index (IPCA),
the Reais per US dollar exchange rate, the Selic rate and the net public debt (in
terms of GDP) are taken from the Banco do Brasil website. The series are identified
by the following codes: GDP monthly, current prices (R$ million), Code 4380; IPCA
monthly % change, Code 433; exchange rate R$/US$ (sale), end of period, Code 3696;
Selic accumulated in the month in annual terms, % p.y., Code 4189, net public debt
(% GDP), total, consolidated public sector, monthly, Code 4513.
The monthly inflation rate is obtained by, first, computing the annual growth rate
of IPCA and, then, converting this growth rate into a monthly growth rate. The Selic
is also converted into monthly terms.
The EMBI spread is computed as the diﬀerence between the yield on Brazilian
government bonds in US dollars and the yield on US Treasury bonds. Both yields
are taken from Bloomberg with code 9128273x8 GOVT for Brazilian bonds and code
105756AG5 GOVT for US bonds.
The corporate spread is computed as the diﬀerence between the yield on LEHMAN
US CORPORATE BAA LONG (RED. YIELD) and the yield on US BENCHMARK
10 YEAR DS Government Index (RED. YIELD). Both yields are taken from Datastream with codes LHIBAAL(RY) and BMUS10Y(RY), respectively.
All the financial variables series are constructed by using the last available observation in the month. Interest rates are converted into monthly terms.
Data on the composition of the public debt are taken from the website of the
Tesouro Nacional, http//www.tesouro.fazenda.gov.br, and from Tesouro Nacional
(2003c, 2003d).

1

