NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

TIMELINESS, TRADE AND AGGLOMERATION
James Harrigan
Anthony J. Venables
Working Paper 10404
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10404
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2004

Produced as part of the Globalization programme of the UK ESRC funded Centre for Economic Performance
at the LSE. Thanks to Niko Matouschek and participants in seminars at the LSE, the IMF, University of
Nottingham, City University of Hong Kong, and AEA meetings (San Diego) for helpful comments. The
views expressed in this paper are those of the authors, and do not necessarily reflect the position of the
Federal Reserve Bank of New York, the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, or the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
©2004 by James Harrigan and Anthony J. Venables. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.

Timeliness, Trade and Agglomeration
James Harrigan and Anthony J. Venables
NBER Working Paper No. 10404
March 2004
JEL No. F1, L0, R12
ABSTRACT

An important element of the cost of distance is time taken in delivering final and intermediate goods.
We argue that time costs are qualitatively different from direct monetary costs such as freight
charges. The difference arises because of uncertainty. Unsynchronised deliveries can disrupt
production, and delivery time can force producers to order components before demand and cost
uncertainties are resolved. Using several related models we show that this generates hitherto
unexplored incentives for clustering. If final assembly takes place in two locations and component
production has increasing returns to scale, then component production will tend to cluster around
just one of the assembly plants.
James Harrigan
International Research Department
Federal Reserve Bank of New York
33 Liberty Street
New York, NY 10045
and NBER
james.harrigan@ny.frb.org
Anthony J. Venables
Department of Economics
London School of Economics
Houghton Street
London WC2A 2AE
a.j.venables@lse.ac.uk

1. Introduction
People pay a lot of money to save time. A modern economy is inconceivable
without air travel and air shipment, which are ways of saving time at the expense
of money. For workers in urban areas the main component of commuting costs is
time. For international trade in manufactured goods estimates of the costs of the
time-in-transit range as high as 0.5% of the value of goods shipped, per day
(Hummels 2001). Protagonists of ‘just-in-time’ manufacturing techniques
emphasize the importance of organizing and locating production to ensure timely
delivery of parts and components.
Surprisingly, these observations have had little impact on the economic
analysis of location decisions1. Economists have worked with an aggregate of
‘transport costs’ or ‘trade costs’ to capture the penalty of distance, while simply
remarking that these costs are a shorthand for a wide range of penalties (e.g. Fujita,
Krugman, and Venables 1999). These include freight and other monetary
transactions costs; lack of information about markets and suppliers and about local
institutions and regulations; difficulty in monitoring contracts; the impossibility of
face-to-face contact and communication; and the fact that distance introduces delay
into completion of trades. It is unlikely that summarizing these penalties as a
single value of ‘trade costs’ is adequate for understanding their effects. The
objective of this paper is to contribute to the process of unpacking and evaluating
the different elements of these costs2.
We focus on the costs associated with delivery times and argue that
timeliness is not only a quantitatively important aspect of proximity, but also
For instance, Fujita and Thisse's (2002) lucid and authoritative new book doesn't have "time" in
the index. There is some modeling of the issues in Harrigan and Evans (2002) and Venables
(2001).
2
Previous attempts to evaluate non-monetary trade costs include study of the benefits of face-toface contact, see Leamer and Storper (2001) and Storper and Venables (2003).
1

1

matters qualitatively, creating an incentive for clustering of activities. The context
is the time taken between initiating a project and completing it and making
delivery to the consumer. We suppose that physical distance between stages of the
production and selling process (e.g. between component manufacture and final
assembly, or between production and final sale) slows down that process, and
argue that slowing down matters for several reasons. One reason is discounting
and other analogous factors, such as the physical depreciation or technical
obsolescence that component parts may be subject to during shipment. These costs
will not be the focus of our attention, although we note that they may be large –
computer chips become obsolescent very rapidly, so it is not sensible to ship them
on the slow boat.
Other reasons why delay matters are intimately connected with uncertainty.
One set of arguments has to do with the synchronization of activities; production
cannot be completed until all the parts have arrived, so uncertain arrival times of
components can have a cost that is quite disproportionate to the cost of any single
component. Other arguments arise since uncertainty – about demand or costs –
makes it profitable to postpone production until as much uncertainty as possible
has been resolved. The cost of delivery delay is that it brings forward the date at
which production decisions have to be made, orders placed, and expenditures
incurred. We look at the implications of this when there is uncertainty about the
product characteristics that are demanded, and when there is uncertainty about the
total level of demand or costs.
Of course, saving time is always going to be beneficial, just as is saving
freight charges. To make the point that there may be qualitative (as well as a
quantitative) implications of timeliness, we develop all our models in a very
particular framework that enables us to assess the profitability of clustering
activities together. The framework is one in which there are two locations, each of
2

which has an assembly plant or retailer supplying local final demand. The
assembly process uses a number of component parts, and increasing returns in
production of these components are sufficiently great that each is produced in a
single plant. Where do the component producers locate? Clustered around one of
the assembly plants, or divided between the two locations? We show that the
demand for timeliness in delivery creates a force for clustering of plants around a
single assembler/retailer. This is a previously unexplored agglomeration
mechanism.
We develop this argument in a series of models. Section 3 outlines a
benchmark case in which there are monetary trade costs, but delivery is
instantaneous and component producers do not cluster. In section 4 we look at the
issues raised by the synchronization of delivery of components, and show that
uncertain delivery times will cause clustering of component producers. Sections 5
and 6 show how uncertainty about demand and or about production costs are also
forces for clustering. Section 5 also investigates the role of inventories. However,
before developing these models we briefly connect our to approach to the
extensive management literature on just-in-time (JIT) production.
2. Just-in-time
The just-in-time (JIT) approach was pioneered by Toyota Motors in the
1950s. Its main features are that components are delivered in small but frequent
batches, that minimal stocks are held, and that ‘quantity control is built in’. The
perceived advantages are a reduction in the cost of holding stock, rapid response to
customer orders, and the ability to rapidly detect and fix or replace defective
components. Effective implementation of JIT is thought to require long term
supplier/ customer relationships and, where possible, proximity. In the
management literature on JIT production it has been suggested that the spread of
3

JIT systems might be expected to lead to a geographical reconcentration of
supplier firms and customers (e.g. Dicken 1998).
The importance of proximity is illustrated by the example of General
Electric’s appliances division in their attempt to implement JIT in the 1980s and
90s. They were hampered by the fact that some suppliers were several thousand
kilometres away from GE plants, this causing a 1993 decision to increase inventory
levels (Jones, George and Hill 2000). The US auto-industry has been extensively
studied, although identifying the effects of JIT on supplier location is a tricky
empirical question. Assemblers tend to locate where suppliers are already located,
and in addition there are non-JIT reasons why suppliers may want to be near
assemblers (such as minimizing transport costs irrespective of timeliness
considerations). Klier (1999) assembles a comprehensive dataset on assemblers
and suppliers and shows that, since the advent of JIT, new supplier plants are more
likely to locate near their assembly plant customers than they were before the
advent of JIT. Klier also finds that proximity generally means “within a days
drive”, rather than right next door, which implies that the agglomeration force of
JIT operates at the regional rather than the urban level. This is consistent with the
results of Rosenthal and Strange (2001), who find “...shipping-oriented attributes
(manufactured inputs, resources, perishability) influencing agglomeration at the
state level...” (pg. 193).
Our goal in this paper is to develop some simple models that capture some
of the features referred to in this literature, and to draw out their implications for
the spatial concentration of activity.
3. A timeless model
We develop our ideas in a family of models, each based on two a priori identical
locations A and B, where final assembly occurs and demand is met. Assemblers in
A and B require components, and component suppliers can be located in either A or
4

B. We refer to the final producers as assemblers but the idea is more general:
“assemblers” could be service firms who require a variety of manufactured or
service inputs, or retailers who sell a variety of products.
Assemblers produce with constant returns to scale and the final assembled
product is non-tradeable, so assembly must take place in both locations.
Components are tradeable, although trade typically takes time. The number of
types of components, N, is fixed, and production of each incurs a plant level fixed
cost and then has constant marginal cost. The fixed cost is large enough to ensure
that each component is only produced in one location, either A or B, and our
primary question is to ask where this component production takes place.
In most of the models we develop all components are necessary to
production of the final product, raising the question of how surplus is split between
independent assemblers and component producers. The theory of (noncooperative) bargaining offers no answer to this when there is more than one
supplier (see Sutton 1986, Binmore and Dasgupta 1987). However, it does lead us
to expect that the outcome will be efficient, maximizing the combined returns to all
parties. In our analysis we therefore look merely at the total returns to different
locational patterns, and not at how these might be divided between players. Our
focus on maximizing the total surplus could also be rationalized by assuming that
all a single firm controls all activities, or that both the assembly plants are
controlled by a single firm, and all components produced by a single firm. Nash
bargaining by these two parties over the location of components’ production and
division of the surplus (by setting prices for components) would then lead to the
efficient outcome.
Before we move to our models of timeliness, it is instructive to look briefly
at a timeless case based on ingredients from a standard economic geography
model. In this benchmark model, assemblers in A and B each combine N
5

symmetric inputs in a CES production function to create a unit of final output. The
value of producing one unit of final output in location A is revenue minus the costs
of producing and shipping components,
1

1−σ
VA = p −  N A rA1−σ + N B (τ rB )  1−σ



(1)

The exogenously given price of final output, net of any assembly costs, is p. The
remaining term is the cost of the parts required to produce a unit of output. The
cost function has elasticity of substitution F; NA is the number of components
sourced locally with unit production costs rA, while the remaining NB (NA +NB = N)
come from the other location with unit production cost rB and shipping cost factor

J > 1. Notice that, since we are looking for efficient outcomes, we use the unit
production costs of components, ri, which may not be the same as the prices at
which they are traded. Furthermore, we will henceforth refer to VA as the profits of
assembly in A, noting that it is both the profits of the assembler and profits (before
fixed costs) earned by component producers on supply of parts to A. A similar
equation gives profits in B.
What values of NA and NB maximize total profit, VA + VB? The total number
of component suppliers is fixed at N, so that NA = N - NB, and we let input costs be
the same in each location. Making these substitutions in (1) and taking the
derivative of VA with respect to NB gives
σ
∂VA r (τ 1−σ − 1)
1−σ
1
−
 N + N B (τ − 1)  σ < 0
=
σ −1
∂N B

(2)

2σ −1
∂ 2VA − rσ (τ 1−σ − 1)2
1−σ
 N + N B (τ − 1)  σ −1 < 0
=
2
2
∂N B
(1 − σ )

(3)

These derivatives establish that VA is decreasing and concave in NB: shifting
assembler locations from A to B has an increasingly negative effect on the returns
to assembling in A. The opposite is true for the returns from assembly in B. The
6

point here is that the increasing marginal cost of remoteness implies that the sum
VA + VB is maximized when half of the suppliers locate in each region.
Equivalently, there is a decreasing marginal value to proximity. The point is
illustrated in Figure 1, in which there are 10 components, and the number of
component suppliers located in B is on the horizontal axis3. Curves give profits in
each place, and their sum, VA + VB, is maximized when NA = NB. A lower elasticity
of substitution, F, gives less curvature and a flatter VA + VB schedule, but only in
the limit, when the elasticity of substitution is zero, do the curves become linear,
and their sum horizontal.
This result does not turn on a CES cost function. Quite generally, if the
assembler did not adjust its input quantities as NA and NB changed, then VA would
be the straight line joining values of VA at NA = 0 and NB = 0. The possibility of
adjustment means that VA lies on or above this straight line, as illustrated. More
formally, consider any symmetric unit cost function c(r,r+dr) in which inputs are
partitioned into a group (A) available at price r, the remainder available at price r +
dr (group B). Quantities demanded in each group are xA, xB, xA ≥ xB. The increase
in costs when a product moves from group A to group B is

∂c
dr = x Adr (by
∂r

Shepherd’s lemma). As more products enter group B so xA must increase (in order
that input levels are sufficient to produce the unit of output4), meaning that the cost
of moving inputs from group A to group B is increasing. This increasing marginal
costs gives the convexity of the cost function with respect to NB, and the
consequent concavity of profits.

3

This and other figures are generated by simulation of the models. Parameter values are given
in the appendix.
4
The cross-partial derivatives of a symmetric unit cost function are positive, so raising the price
of some inputs increases demand for other.
7

The conclusion is therefore that, in this benchmark case, there is no
incentive for clustering of activity. The ex ante symmetric locations, A and B, are
also symmetric ex post, as component producers are split in equal numbers
between the locations. With this benchmark in mind we now turn to models where
remote supply incurs a time cost.
4. Synchronization

Our first model of timeliness turns on uncertainty about delivery time, and the
consequent risk that production may be delayed by the late arrival of components
from a distant supplier. We model this by supposing that each assembly firm seeks
to produce a unit of output for delivery at a particular date. Assembly uses labour
to combine N different component parts into final output using a Leontief
production function with unit coefficients. Of course, production cannot be
completed until all the parts needed have arrived.5 For the moment, we assume
that holding stocks of components is infeasible or prohibitively costly. This might
be because of very high storage or depreciation costs, or simply because the exact
specification of the product is unknown prior to the decision to produce, an idea we
pursue in the next section.
Transport of components between locations is costless, but timely delivery
of parts can only be guaranteed if the assembler and parts supplier are located in
the same region. The probability of timely delivery is q < 1 if supplier and
assembler are located in different regions. Assuming that delivery of each part is
iid across suppliers and assemblers, for assemblers located in A,
Pr(all parts arrive on time) = q N B
Pr(at least one part arrives late) = 1 − q N B
5

This production function is formally identical to Kremer’s (1993) o-ring technology.
8

where as before NB is the number of parts suppliers located in B, NA + NB = N.
Clearly, Pr(all parts arrive on time) is decreasing in NB and (importantly, as it turns
out) convex in NB:
∂q N B
= q N B ln q < 0,
∂N B

∂2 q N B
2
= q N B [ ln q ] > 0.
2
∂N B

(4)

This means that each part which changes from being supplied locally to remotely
decreases the probability that all parts arrive on time, but does so at a diminishing
rate. The intuition for this is straightforward: if one part is delayed, it doesn’t
matter if a second part is also delayed.
There are several reasons why delays in completing assembly might be bad
for profits. One is demand decay. Many goods and services have demand which
peaks at a certain time and the price that the assembler can get for the final product
falls unless it is delivered on time. Another is that some assembly costs have to be
met whether production occurs or not. For example, if labor must be hired to
assemble parts, then wages must be paid regardless of whether all parts have
arrived. Think of labour as a cost which must be incurred before the outcome of
the delivery process is known, so that if there are delays, labour must be hired
again once all parts arrive.
To capture these arguments, let final demand be characterized by a
reservation price which is p on the day that demand is realized and p(1-δ) one day
later, δ ∈ (0,1). Profits if all parts are delivered on time are therefore

v 0A = p − β wA − N A rA − N B rB

(5)

where β is the daily unit labour requirement for parts assembly and wA is the wage.
If parts are delivered one day late, the reservation price falls and labour must again
be hired, so profits are

9

v1A = p (1 − δ ) − 2β wA − N A rA − N B rB

(6)

The difference between profits on day 0 and on day 1, *p + $wA, is the penalty
paid by firms who suffer late delivery of parts. Expected profits are just profits if
there is no delay minus the expected cost of delay,

(

)

VA = v 0A − 1 − q N B (δ p + β wA )

(7)

If there are no cost differences between the two locations, then (5) and (7) imply
that expected profits in A are decreasing and convex in NB: the hit to expected
profits of sourcing an additional part from far away gets smaller as the number of
them increases.
Symmetric results apply to expected profits in B, which has the important
implication that total expected profits are maximized at NB = 0 and at NB = N. This
is illustrated in Figure 2. In contrast to the benchmark model of the previous
section, total expected profits are minimized at NB = N/2 = NA: with such a division
of production, neither suppliers in A nor in B get the benefit of reliable deliveries.
This illustrates the increasing marginal value of timeliness: if almost all parts have
guaranteed on-time delivery, an increase in share of timely parts has a bigger effect
on expected profits than if most parts are subject to erratic delays. As a result, there
is an economic force leading to the agglomeration of all suppliers in either A or B.
The point of this simple case is then, that although the locations are ex ante
symmetric, the efficient location of component producers is asymmetric. It is best
to have one assembler operating in a cluster of all the component suppliers and
producing without delay, while the other bears the full cost of the uncertainties
associated with delivery delay. How does this compare to the benchmark model?
In that model, as the elasticity of substitution σ goes to zero the cost function
becomes linear, as it is in this model, and the VA+VB line in Figure 1 becomes flat.
The difference from Figure 2 arises because in the synchronization model of this
10

section there is a fixed cost associated with delay so that (in expected value) there
is a fixed cost associated with not sourcing from nearby suppliers. In the
benchmark model, there is no such fixed cost to sourcing remotely.
Finally, notice that in the synchronization model the difference between
locations shows up as a productivity difference. One of the key facts about
agglomeration is that localized industries have higher measured productivity (see
Rosenthal and Strange, 2003, for a review of the evidence). The model offers an
explanation for this: localized activities benefit from timeliness, which reduces or
eliminates periods when production is interrupted by delayed delivery. If all
suppliers locate in A, then assemblers in A never have to pay labour twice, while
assemblers in B have to pay labour a second time with probability 1 - qN. Since
output is the same in each location, relative productivity in A is given by the ratio
of expected unit costs:
(2 − q N )β w + rN
TFPAB =
>1
β w + rN

(8)

This TFP advantage for assemblers in A is increasing in the probability that at least
one part is delayed and in the importance of assembly labour in total costs. It is
also increasing in the total number of parts, which might be thought of as
complexity6.This is intuitive, since the greater the number of parts the greater the
chance of a delay in having all parts arrive. This result suggests that parts used in
more complex activities have a greater incentive to cluster than do parts used in
simpler activities.

To show this, we calculate the derivative of TFP with respect to N, holding labor’s share in cost
fixed (this requires an offsetting drop in r as N increases so that rN is constant, that is, Ndr + rdN
∂TFPAB
−β w
=
q N log q > 0 .
= 0). The result is
β w + rN
∂N
6

11

5. Inventories and product specification uncertainty.

In the previous section’s model, we ruled out holding parts’ inventories as a
solution to the assembler’s problem. In this section we relax this, and address the
tradeoff between just-in-time ordering and holding inventories. It turns out that
inventories can be a substitute for timely delivery, but only if the cost of holding
inventories is small enough relative to the benefit.
One aspect of demand uncertainty is uncertainty about precisely which final
product is demanded. The assembler’s problem is to quickly produce final output
once the exact specifications of demand are observed, and he can do this in two
ways. The first is to hold large inventories of parts, so that he can assemble
whatever ends up being desired. The second is to have parts’ suppliers right next
door who can quickly produce and deliver the parts needed for the desired final
product. By assumption, faraway suppliers can not deliver quickly enough to fill
orders placed after demand is observed.
As in the previous section, the final good is assembled using N components,
each of which has fixed coefficients in production. However, each component
comes in a continuum of varieties (the unit interval), differentiated in the eyes of
consumers. Thus, car engines come in different sizes, bodywork in different
colours, etc. There is a unit mass of consumers, each consuming one unit of the
good, and their preferences for varieties of each component may be either high or
low, but are unpredictable. We model this unpredictability with the parameter µ ∈
[0,1], which we call “pickiness”. For each component, consumers have high
preference for a subset of measure µ of varieties and low preference for the
remainder 1 - µ. Smaller values of µ correspond to more picky tastes, while larger
values correspond to less discriminating tastes.

12

Consumer tastes are illustrated in Figure 3, in which the horizontal axis is
the measure of varieties for one component. Preferred varieties lie in a set of
measure :; these varieties need not form a connected set although, for simplicity,
this case is illustrated. The vertical axis is quantity, and the rectangle ABCD has
height 1/:. This is the number of units of each high preference variety demanded
by the unit mass of consumers. Thus, the pickier are consumers the narrower is
their set of preferred varieties : and hence the greater the level of demand for each
of these varieties, 1/:. This pattern is repeated for each component, and we
assume that there is no correlation between demand for the varieties of different
components; preferences over engine size are uncorrelated with preferences over
exterior colour.
The assembled final good is valued by consumers as a function of how
closely each of its N component parts match the consumer’s preferences. Products
that are ‘perfect’ – all their components having a high preference variety – have
reservation price p . Those that have k low preference components (k
‘mismatches’) have reservation price pφ ( k ) , φ(0) = 1. We assume that φ(k) is
decreasing and convex in k, implying that the price falls at diminishing rate with
multiple mismatches. This convexity assumption is satisfied if consumers’
willingness to pay for the product as a whole is a standard CES function of the
utility of individual components, as is demonstrated in the appendix. As a
consequence of this convexity, a firm will produce as many perfect products as it
can, concentrating all its mismatched components in as few a products as possible,
rather than spreading its mismatched components over many units of final output.
The problem for assemblers is that consumers are both picky and fickle.
Assemblers know the value of :, but its location (in the unit interval of possible
varieties) is initially unknown. For example, car assemblers know that : exterior

13

colours will be popular, but they do not know which ones. The more picky
consumers are (the smaller is :), the more difficult it is to cater to their whims,
since the popular characteristics are harder to predict.
Delivery of components from remote suppliers takes time, so these
components have to be ordered before the assembler knows the exact specification
of demand – the location of :. This is then revealed, components are ordered from
local suppliers, and delivery and production take place. Any unused components
can be carried over to the next period at a cost, and the production cycle is repeated
indefinitely. This gives the following time line:

Components
ordered from
remote
suppliers

Location of
: revealed

Components ordered
from local suppliers,
delivery of components,
production and sale

Unused stock carried
to next period

Given this timing, what quantities of what varieties of each component should the
assembler in A be holding when production commences? For each locally supplied
component the assembler knows the : varieties that have high preference, and
orders quantity 1/: of each of these. For each remotely supplied component, s
denotes the quantity of each variety ordered in advance and held when production
commences. If s = 1 then only : consumers can be served with their preferred
variety of the component, the remainder (1 - :) having to make do with a low
preference variety; all s = 1 units of each component get used up in production. If

s > 1, then s: consumers get their favorite variety and the remaining (1 - s:) make
do with low preference ones. Since one unit of each component gets used in
production each period, stock of s - 1 is carried into the next production cycle, with
14

new purchases replacing stock used.7 Notice that it is never optimal to have s < 1,
as one unit is required to produce the one unit of output, nor s $ 1/:, as this is
sufficient to perfectly match consumer preferences.
The per-period profit from assembly at A equals the revenue from selling
perfect and imperfect products, minus the cost of carrying inventories over to the
next period, minus the cost of purchased inputs (as before, we ignore the costs of
assembly labour). This profit is

VA = sµ p + (1 − sµ ) pφ ( N B ) − ( s − 1) γ N B − N A rA − N B rB

(9)

The first term says that, with stock level s, s: consumers can receive products that
perfectly match their preference. Other products contain mismatch in all NB of
their remotely supplied inputs, so are valued at pφ ( N B ) . Remaining terms in the
expression give the costs of producing the components and the inventory cost,
where ( is the unit cost of holding stock to the next production cycle, so (s - 1)(NB
is the total cost of inventories.
Efficiency is achieved by choosing s to maximize (9). The problem is linear
in s, so the assembler either chooses s = 1/:, to be able to perfectly match demand,
or chooses s = 1, the minimum required to produce one unit of output regardless of
specification. At s = 1/:, all the products sold by the assembler perfectly match
consumer demands, at the cost of having unused components that are carried
forward into the next period, with carrying charges on these inventories. While at

s = 1 some of the products sold contain low preference components and hence sell
for lower price, but the seller doesn't need to carry inventories forward. Evaluating

VA at these points, we find the profit-maximizing choices are

7

For each of the preferred varieties, stock carried forward is zero. For each of the 1- : low
preference varieties the volume of stock carried forward is s - (1 - s:)/(1 - :) = (s - 1)/(1 - :).
15

s = smax = 1/µ

if

p µ 1 − φ ( N B )  > γ N B
(10)

s = sminx = 1

otherwise

Outcomes are illustrated on figure 4, for the case with rA = rB. The
horizontal axis is NB (NA = N - NB), the intersecting dashed curves give profit when
maximal and minimal levels of stock are held, and the maximized value is the
upper envelope of these curves, max{VA(s=1/:), VA(s=1)} with switch point as
indicated in equation (10). To the left of the switch point maximal stock levels are
held and VA is linear in NB. To the right of the switch point stock holding becomes
too expensive an option, so firms set s = 1, producing a standard range of products
that are not tailored to preferences; in this range VA is convex. The upper envelope
of these curves is convex, and hence their sum, VA + VB, is as illustrated.
Efficiency is achieved by putting all suppliers in one place. One assembler has all
components supplied locally and produces ‘customized’ products that perfectly
match demand; it does this without holding stocks, because it relies on the
proximity of suppliers. The assembler in the other location chooses not to hold
stocks, instead preferring to produce a product range which is less well tailored to
consumer demand.
Under what circumstances does the configuration illustrated in figure 4
apply? For some parameters it is profitable to hold stocks for all values of NB,
since VA(s=1/:) > VA(s=1) over the entire range. In this case the sum VA + VB is
horizontal and the location of component producers is indeterminate. This case
arises only if, evaluating the critical condition at NB = N, p µ 1 − φ ( N )  > γ N . If
this condition is not satisfied then either there is an interior solution, as illustrated,

16

or stockholding is never profitable, VA(s=1) > VA(s=1/:) for all values of NB. In
both these case the sum VA + VB is convex and clustering is the efficient outcome.
The factors that are conducive to clustering are now clear. Clustering occurs
if

N

µ

>

p 1 − φ ( N ) 

γ

. The left hand side measures the quantity of stocks that

ensure the firm can meet demand. It is larger the greater is N, the number of
component types for which stock may have to be held, and the smaller is :, i.e. the
pickier are consumers. The right hand side gives the cost of not holding stocks
relative to the cost of holding them, so a small value of this makes stockholding
less desirable. It is smaller the higher is (, the direct cost of holding stocks, and
the smaller is the return when stocks are not held, p 1 − φ ( N B )  . Convexity of the
function φ(k) is also required for the VA(s=1) function to be convex and for there to
be an intersection of the curves; as in the preceding section, we therefore require
that the first mismatch be more expensive than the second, and so on. The
appendix gives full details for the case of CES preferences.
The model of this section therefore gives two main messages. One is that,
even if the direct costs of holding a unit of stock (() are not that high, the fact that
stocks need to be held over a wide range of varieties of components can make the
stock-holding strategy expensive. The other is that uncertainty about demand
specification coupled with time in transit can generate clustering. Putting these
together, we see that in industries where products are complex (a high N) or
demand is unpredictable (low :), the presence of time in transit will induce an
equilibrium with clustering. One location will contain all the suppliers and
produce customized products; the other has to import components, and produces a
standard range of products. Although physical productivity is the same in both
locations, the output price and hence the value of output per unit of input is higher
17

in the location with the cluster. This will cause measured TFP to be higher in the
cluster.
6. Demand (or cost) uncertainty.

In the preceding models incurring failures (late delivery or mismatched
components) becomes progressively less costly, and it is this that gives the
potential convexity of the profit functions and a motive for clustering. We now
turn to an alternative model in which the mechanism is somewhat different. There
is no uncertainty about the arrival time of components, or about the composition of
demand. Instead, there is simply uncertainty about the level of demand, and the
location of plants affects the extent to which it is possible to react to information
about the position of the demand curve. In this way, we build on the work of
Evans and Harrigan (2002), who examined a model of “lean retailing” and its
implications for international specialization.8 We develop the model with demand
uncertainty, although show at the end of the section that assembly cost uncertainty
has identical effects.
Demand for the output of each assembler can be high or low, represented by
a linear inverse demand curve in which the intercept depends on the state of nature,
so
pi = αs - βyi ,

i = A, B,

s = H, L,

αH > αL

(11)

where pi is price and yi is quantity of final product in region i, and superscript
denotes the state of nature. High demand occurs with probability D. Whether high
or low, demand is fleeting, and falls to zero if not met immediately.

8

This section goes beyond their model in focusing on the location of multiple input suppliers.
18

As before, the production function has fixed unit input coefficients for each
component, and we ignore labour costs in assembly. The assembler in region A
faces the following sequence of decisions. First, she has to choose the quantity xB
of components to order from each of the NB remote suppliers. These have to be
ordered before the state of nature is revealed if they are to arrive in time for
production. The state of nature is then revealed, and firms choose quantities of
components x As from each of the local suppliers. Finally, delivery of all
components takes place and production occurs. This is summarized by the
following time line:
Choose xB: 6 αs revealed: 6 Choose x As : 6 Produce y As = min  xB , x As  .
The assembler’s second stage choice problem (once the state of nature, s =
H, L, is known) is to choose x As to maximize v As , defined as

(

)

v As = x As α s − β x As − N A rA x As ,

s.t. x As ≤ xB ,

s = H , L.

(12)

The maximand is revenue (where we have used the production function and the
inverse demand curve) minus the costs of locally supplied inputs. The constraint
reflects the fact that the assembler will never choose more local components than
the quantity set by the supply of components coming from region B, because of the
fixed coefficient technology. We solve this problem by maximizing the
Lagrangean

(

)

LsA = x As α s − β x As − N A rA x As + λ s  xB − x As  ,

s = H , L.

(13)

The first order condition with respect to x As implies,

λ s = α s − 2β x As − N A rA ,

s = H , L.

(14)

There are two qualitatively different outcomes, depending on parameters including
the level of demand. In one, production is constrained by the quantity of
19

components coming from the remote supplier, so x As = xB and λs > 0. In the other
this constraint does not bind so λs = 0 and x As is solved from (14); some
components ordered from B are unused and freely disposed of.
The assembler’s first stage problem is to choose xB, before the state of nature
is known, to maximize expected profits
VA = ρv AH + (1 − ρ ) v AL − N B rB xB .

(15)

Varying xB changes costs directly, and also changes v AH and v AL via the inequality
constraint in (12). The first order condition for this problem is
∂V A
= ρλ H + (1 − ρ ) λ L − N B rB = 0
∂x B
since the Lagrange multiplier measures the value to the objective of a unit
relaxation of the constraint.
As noted above, there are two cases to study. One we call the no-flexibility
case, in which production in both states is constrained by the quantity of
components supplied by remote producers. Output is therefore the same in both
states, independent of the realization of demand, x AL = x AH = xB , and λH > 0, λL >
0. The other is the flexibility case in which, if demand is high, production is
constrained by the supply of pre-ordered components, so x AH = xB and λH > 0.
However, if demand is low then not all these components are used, so x AL < xB and

λL = 0. There is free disposal of unused components.9 Which regime applies
depends on parameters, including the values of NA and NB. We look first at the
flexibility case, then turn to the no-flexibility case and the boundary between the
regimes.
9

Obviously, it is not profitable to discard components in both the high and the low state. The
assumption of free disposal could be replaced by costly stock holding into a future period.
20

In the flexibility case, solution of first order conditions (14) and (16) gives,
x AH = xB =

1  H
N B rB 
N
r
,
α
−
−
A A
2β 
ρ 

λH =

N B rB

ρ

,
(17)

1
λL = 0.
α L − N A rA < xB ,
2β
Using these equations we can show that the inequality xB > x AL holds providing
x AL =

(

(

)

)

N B rB < ρ α H − α L , this condition defining the boundary of the flexibility regime.

In this flexibility case, how do output levels and profits depend on the
location of input producers? Increasing NB has the effect of decreasing output in
the high demand state and increasing it in the low state, which is to say that output
is less responsive to demand the more components are produced far away.
Formally, using NA = N - NB, setting rA = rB = r and differentiating (17),
r ( ρ − 1)
dy AH
dx
= B =
< 0,
dN B dN B
2 ρβ

dy AL
dx AL
r
=
=
> 0.
dN B dN B 2 ρβ

(18)

The explanation is that higher NB increases the total number of components left
unutilized, and hence the expected cost of production; this reduces the profit
maximizing level of output in the high demand state, y AH . However higher NB also
means that, if the low demand state transpires, a higher proportion of inputs have
zero shadow price (the components from region B which, at the margin, are
discarded); this reduces the marginal cost of production in the low state, so
increasing quantity produced, y AL .
The effects of varying NB on profits are given by differentiating (15). Using
(12), (14) and (17) with rA = rB = r gives (see appendix for derivation):
dVA
dv AH
dv AL
dx
=ρ
+ (1 − ρ )
− N B r B − rxB = r (1 − ρ )  x AL − xB  < 0. (19)
dN B
dN B
dN B
dN B

21

The loss of profits due to a marginal increase in NB is simply the expected cost of
the quantity of this component that remains unused. Using the values of x AL and

xB given in (17), we further derive,
dVA r (1 − ρ )  L
N r
=
α − α H + B  < 0,

dN B
2β 
ρ 

2
d 2VA r (1 − ρ )
=
dN B2
2ρβ

> 0.

(20)

Increasing NB therefore reduces profits at a decreasing rate, by the convexity of VA.
The intuition is that if the country A assembler did not adjust its production plan
then VA would decline linearly, as more types of component are discarded in the
low state. Adjustment raises profits, giving the convexity. As we have seen,
increasing NB decreases output in the high demand state and increases it in the low
state, so reducing the gap between xB and x AL . The implication is that when
parameters are such that firms behave flexibly (that is, sell a different amount
depending on the state of demand), there is a force for clustering of component
suppliers around one of the final assemblers.
In the no-flexibility case, solution of first order conditions (14) and (16)
gives

x AL = x AH = xB =

1
 ρα H + (1 − ρ ) α L − N A rA − N B rB 
2β

λ L = N B rB − ρ (α H − α L )

(21)

λ H = N B rB + (1 − ρ ) (α H − α L )
The first equation gives purchases of components and hence also the level of
output. This is the same in both states, so demand variability goes entirely into the
price. Expected profits, VA, can be computed using (21) in (12) and (15). For
present purposes, the important point to notice is that if rA = rB then output and
sales levels do not depend on location of assemblers (the division of N between NA
= NB, see equation (21)), so neither do profits. In the interior of this regime having
22

more local component suppliers does not induce the assembler to change its
behavior, and profits are constant.
The boundary between the flexible and non-flexible regimes is where the
shadow value of xB in the low state, λL, is zero, i.e. N B rB = ρ (α H − α L ) . This is of
course the same condition that gives the edge of the flexibility regime, where
output levels in the high and low demand states just become equal, as discussed
after equation (17).
The complete picture is illustrated in figure 5. The horizontal axis gives NB,
and the vertical axis gives levels of production and profits of the country A
assembler. The no-flexibility regime is where N B rB > ρ (α H − α L ) ; a sufficiently
large number of components come from remote suppliers that it is very costly to
leave some of each of them unused when the low state occurs. By contrast, when

N B rB < ρ (α H − α L ) then only a small share of component types face the risk of
being left unutilized and discarded. It is therefore worthwhile to order a larger
quantity of each type of remote component, xB, output becomes state contingent,
and the flexibility case applies.
Notice that there are now two distinct arguments creating convexity of
profits, VA , with respect to NB. One is that, within the flexibility regime, profits are
convex, as discussed above. The other arises because of the kink in VA due to the
change in regimes. Intuitively, having more local suppliers is of no value until
some threshold is passed – only then is it worth adjusting production to exploit the
benefits of rapid delivery times. The implication is, once again, that there is an
incentive for all input suppliers to cluster in one location. In such a situation, one
of the assemblers becomes completely flexible, ordering all its inputs from local
suppliers once the level of demand is known. The other is inflexible, as all its

23

inputs take time to be delivered and must be ordered before the state of nature is
known.
Several other remarks are worth making on this model. First, price
variability is lower in the location with the cluster of activity, as quantities are
responding to demand shocks. With linear demands the expected price is the same
in A and B, Epi = ρ piH + (1 − ρ ) piL =
sold, Eyi = ypiH + (1 − ρ ) yiL =

α + Nr
2

, as is the expected quantity

α − Nr
. However, since the region with the cluster
2β

produces more in the higher price state, the average value of output produced

E(piyi)/Eyi is higher in the region with the cluster. Once again, the location with
the cluster has higher measured productivity.
Finally, notice that this structure is isomorphic to a model in which shocks
are on the cost side, rather than the demand side. Suppose that revenue

(

)

x As α s − β x As (equation (12)) were to be replaced by revenue net of labour costs,

(

)

px As − c s + bx As x As where p is an exogenously given price, and cs and b are

technology coefficients, giving the level and slope of average costs. If cs is state
dependent, then this model is evidently identical to the one above, with parameter

"s replaced by parameter p − c s . Uncertainty – in either costs or demand – means
that profits are higher if input decisions can be postponed. The argument of this
section shows that it also generates convexity of profits with respect to the location
of component suppliers, implying that this uncertainty gives rise to clustering.
7. Summarizing the models

In section 3 we presented a standard economic geography model with orthodox
transportation costs but no role for timeliness. In that model, there is no incentive
for suppliers to agglomerate with one of the ex ante identical assemblers; in fact,

24

the contrary holds, with efficiency tending to lead to a 50-50 split of suppliers in
each assembly location.
The models of sections 4, 5, and 6 give the opposite conclusion. In each
model, orthodox transport costs are absent, but a value for timeliness is introduced.
In section 4, the value of timeliness comes from reducing the chance of costly
production delays. In section 5, uncertainty about which products will be
demanded creates a value for timeliness, though in this model we show how
holding inventories may substitute for timely delivery. Finally, the section 6 model
shows how uncertainty about the level of demand creates a demand for timely
delivery.
In each of these three models, the demand for timely delivery creates a
convexity in profits as a function of the location of suppliers, which can be thought
of as an increasing marginal value of timeliness. Because of this convexity, there is
in each model a force for agglomeration: all the suppliers will tend to locate in the
same region as one of the ex ante identical assemblers, giving that assembler full
benefit of flexibility while the other assembler makes due with non-timely
delivery.
8. Policy implications

Governments are perennially interested in regional economic development, and
subsidies have often been used (and even more often proposed) as a means of
sustaining regional economies. In particular, subsidies to manufacturing assembly
plants have been justified in the hope that their presence in a region will trigger
agglomerations of related activities. The benchmark model of section 3 offers
some theoretical support for such a subsidy: starting from a world with one
assembly plant with all suppliers located nearby, establishment of a second
assembly plant elsewhere creates an incentive for some suppliers to move near the
25

new plant. This is because of the decreasing marginal value of proximity in such a
model: the first supplier that moves to the location of the new assembler will
generate greater value as a result.
In contrast, our models of timeliness deliver the opposite conclusion.
Because of the increasing marginal value of timeliness (and hence proximity),
there is no incentive for any supplier to move to the location of a new assembly
plant. If these models apply, we would expect new assembly plants that locate far
from existing plants (for whatever reason) to not be followed by their suppliers. As
shown by Klier (1999), this is what has happened in the US auto industry:
assembly plants established far from the “auto corridor” as a result of government
subsidies (BMW in South Carolina, Mercedes Benz in Alabama) or private
incentives (NUMMI in California) have not been followed by a substantial number
of suppliers.10
9. Concluding comments.

Just-in-time production methods have been researched extensively in the
management literature, but have received almost no attention in economics.11 This
paper has taken a step towards redressing this imbalance. In an uncertain
environment the benefits of securing timely delivery of components alters the
efficient spatial organization of production. In a situation in which conventionally
modeled monetary trade costs would lead to dispersed location of component
suppliers, delay or uncertainty in delivery times cause clustering. The efficient
organization of production requires the concentration of all component plants next
to just one of several assembly plants.
10

The “auto corridor” is the region in the middle of the United States where most auto
production is concentrated. It includes seven contiguous states: Michigan, Ohio, Indiana,
Illinois, Wisconsin, Kentucky, and Tennessee.

26

This a new mechanism for agglomeration. In this paper we have developed
the idea in a simple framework in which the final product is non-tradable, it is
prohibitively costly to have multiple plants producing the same component, and
factor prices are fixed. Each of these assumptions could be relaxed, embedding the
mechanism in a wider economic environment.

11

See Cremer (1995) for a rare exception.

27

Appendix
Parameter values used in figures

Figure 1: rA = rB = 1, F = 5, p = 1.5, J = 1.5, N = 10.
Figure 2: v 0A = 1 , *p + $wA = 1.5, q = 0.9.
Figure 4: rA = rB = 1, : = 0.25, ( = 0.03, p =1, φ(k) CES with F = * = 0.33.
Figure 5: rA = rB = 1, D = 0.45, "H = 20, "L = 12, $ = 1
Section 5: CES preferences over component varieties: Let the price of the final

product be equal to consumer utility, taking the form pφ ( k ) where

 N − k   k 
 + δ
 N   N 

φ ( k ) = 

σ
σ −1 σ −1
σ





where the right-hand side is a CES function over the N components, proportion (N

– k)/N of which are perfect, and proportion k /N mismatched. p is the value of a
perfectly matched component, and * < 1 is the utility loss for each mismatched
component i.e. the loss if a component is a low preference variety rather than a
high preference variety. Clearly, φ(0)=1 and φ(N) = δ. φ(k) is decreasing in k
(since * < 1) and is convex providing F is finite. First and second derivatives are
1
 σσ−1 
σ −1 σ −1
dφ ( k )
σ  δ − 1   N − k   k  σ 
=
+
δ  <0
dk
σ − 1  N    N   N 




2

2 −σ
 σσ−1 
σ −1 σ −1
d φ (k )
σ  δ − 1   N − k   k  σ 
=
>0
 
 +   δ 
2
2


dk
N
N
N
−
1
σ
(
) 

 
2

The condition p µ 1 − φ ( N )  > γ N becomes simply p µ [1 − δ ] > γ N .

28

Section 6: Derivation of equation (19).

Total differentiation of (15) gives
dVA
dv AH
dv AL
dx
=ρ
+ (1 − ρ )
− N B r B − rxB .
dN B
dN B
dN B
dN B
By (12) and (14), this is
H
L
dVA
dx
H dx A
L dx A
= ρλ
+ (1 − ρ ) λ
+ ρrx AH + (1 − ρ ) rx AL − N B r B − rxB .
dN B
dN B
dN B
dN B

Using values of 8 and of x AL and xB from (17) gives equation (19) of the text.

29

References

Binmore, K.G. and P. Dasgupta, (1987) “Nash Bargaining III” in The Economics
of Bargaining K.G. Binmore and P. Dasgupta (eds), Blackwell, Oxford.
Cremer, J. (1995) “Towards an economic theory of incentives in just-in-time
manufacturing” European Economic Review, 39, 432-439.
Dicken, P. (1998) Global shift; transforming the world economy, Chapmans,
London.
Evans, C and J. Harrigan (2003), “Distance, time, and specialization”,
NBER Working Paper no. 9729 (May)..
Fujita, M. P. Krugman and A.J. Venables (1999), The spatial economy: cities,
region and international trade, MIT Press: Cambridge MA
Fujita, M. and J-F Thisse (2001) The economics of agglomeration; cities,
industrial location and regional growth, Cambridge University Press:
Cambridge UK.
Hummels, D. (2001), ‘Time as a trade barrier’, mimeo Purdue University.
Jones, G.R., J.M. George and C.W.L. Hill (2000), Contemporary management,
McGraw Hill, Boston.
Klier, Thomas, 1999, “Agglomeration in the U.S. auto supplier industry”, Federal
Reserve Bank of Chicago Economic Perspectives, issue Q I, pages 18-34.
Kremer, M. (1993), “The O-ring theory of economic development”, Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 108, 3, 551-575.
Rosenthal, Stuart S. and William C. Strange (2001). “The Determinants of
Agglomeration”, Journal of Urban Economics 50, 191-229.
Rosenthal, Stuart S. and William C. Strange (2003). “Evidence on the Nature and
Sources of Agglomeration Economics” in Handbook of Urban and Regional
Economics, eds J.V. Henderson and J-F Thisse, forthcoming.

30

Storper, M. and E. Leamer (2001) “The economic geography of the internet age”,
NBER Working Paper 8450.
Storper, M. and A.J. Venables (2003) “Buzz; face to face contact and the urban
economy”, Centre for Economic Performance discussion paper 598, and
forthcoming Journal of Economic Geography.
Sutton, J. (1986), “Non-cooperative bargaining theory; an introduction”, Review of
Economic Studies, LIII, 709-724.
Venables A.J. (2001) “Geography and international inequalities: the impact of
new technologies” in Annual World Bank Conference on Development
Economics 2001/2, eds B. Pleskovic and N.H. Stern.

31

VA + V B

VA

VB

NB
Figure 1: CES assembly (F = 5)

VA + V B
VA

VB

NB
Figure 2: Arrival uncertainty

A

1/:

B
1 - s:

s
1
C
0

:

Characteristic space
Figure 3: Demand for characteristics

D
1

VA + V B

p:[1-N(NB)]=(NB
VA (s = 1)

VA( s = 1/:)

NB
Figure 4: Inventory choice

VA

xA H = xB

N B rB = ρ (α H − α L )

x A H = x A L = xB
xA L
flexibility

no-flexibility

Figure 5: Demand level uncertainty

NB

