                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                           DOES THE MARKET VALUE R&D
                        INVESTMENT BY EUROPEAN FIRMS?
                 EVIDENCE FROM A PANEL OF MANUFACTURING FIRMS
                         IN FRANCE, GERMANY, AND ITALY

                                            Bronwyn H. Hall
                                             Raffaele Oriani

                                          Working Paper 10408
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w10408


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      March 2004




We are grateful to participants in the DRUID conference, Elsinore, June 2003, the EEA-ESEM conference,
Stockholm, August 2003, the AiIG Conference, Bergamo, October 2003, and seminar participants at
University of Bologna, European University Institute, Universitat Pompeu-Fabra, Carnegie-Mellon
University, and Economicum, Helsinki for comments. Thanks also to Jim Powell for advice on the sample
selection model, Federico Munari for suggestions on the ownership data, Lucia Piscitello and Maurizio
Sobrero for helpful comments on previous versions of this paper. Raffaele Oriani gratefully acknowledges
the support of Andrea Generale and other colleagues at the Research Department of the Bank of Italy and the
funding of the COFIN 2001 grant (prot. 20011097179-003) by the Ministero dell’Istruzione, Università e
Ricerca (MIUR). The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2004 by Bronwyn H. Hall and Raffaele Oriani. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
Does the Market Value R&D Investment by European Firms? Evidence from a Panel of
Manufacturing Firms in France, Germany, and Italy
Bronwyn H. Hall and Raffaele Oriani
NBER Working Paper No. 10408
March 2004
JEL No. H21, H24
                                      ABSTRACT


Several studies based on US and UK data have used market value as an indicator of the firm’’s

expected R&D performance. However, there exist no investigations for the continental countries in

the European Union, partly because the analysis is complicated by data availability problems. In this

paper we take a first step towards filling this gap using a newly constructed panel dataset of firms

that are publicly traded in France, Germany, and Italy. Controlling for either permanent unobserved

firm effects or sample selection due to the voluntary nature of R&D disclosure, we find that the

relative shadow value of R&D in France and Germany is remarkably similar both to each other and

to that in the US or the UK during the same period In contrast, we find that R&D in publicly traded

Italian firms is not valued by financial markets on average. However, when we control for the

presence of a single large shareholder, we find that both French and Italian firms have high R&D

valuations when no single shareholder holds more than one third of the firm, but that R&D is

essentially not valued in the other firms.

Bronwyn H. Hall
University of California at Berkeley
Department of Economics
549 Evans Hall, #3880
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and NBER
bhhall@econ.berkeley.edu

Raffaele Oriani
University of Bologna
Department of Management
Piazza Scaravilli, 2, 40126
Bologna, Italy
raffaele.oriani@mail.ing.unibo.it
Hall and Oriani                                                                                    March 2004



1. Introduction

The question of how R&D investments affect the performance of the firm is of considerable
interest to economists and other researchers. A number of empirical studies, beginning with
the seminal contribution of Griliches (1981) and based on US firm-level data from the
Compustat database, have used market value as an indicator of the firm’s expected economic
results from investing in R&D (among others, Hirschey 1982; Jaffe 1986; Cockburn and
Griliches 1988; Hall 1993a, 1993b).2 These analyses generally show a positive relationship
between R&D investments and the market value of the firm, even though the R&D
coefficient is volatile between and even within studies.3 Recent analyses in the same spirit
conducted for the UK (Blundell et al. 1999; Toivanen et al. 2002) have also found a positive
relationship between R&D investments and the market value of the firm. However, to our
knowledge there exist no investigations into this subject for other countries in the European
Union, including G8 economies such as France, Germany, and Italy.

Lack of such studies is unfortunate, because there is considerable evidence that capital
markets and corporate governance systems in these countries are different in several
important ways from those of Anglo-Saxon countries such as the US and the UK (see for
example Franks and Mayer 1990; Hall 1994; Hall et al. 1999; La Porta et al. 1999). The basic
idea is that some features as interlocking directorates and ownership structures (see Figure 1
on the percentage of share ownership held by institutional investors in France, Germany,
Italy, the UK and the US), large-scale and stable relationships with banks and relatively
looser discipline exerted by public stock markets may lead firms in the continental European
countries to have a higher propensity for long-term investments, due to the lack of stringent
oversight by financial capital markets. This could be for the good (in the case of profitable
long term investments that might not be undertaken by firms with short horizons) or the bad
(if it implies that rate of return tests might not be imposed on these investments, or that
projects might be continued too long when they have been demonstrated to be unsuccessful).
Under the admittedly strong assumption of efficient capital markets, these differences should




2
    The NBER R&D database based on Compustat is described in detail in Hall (1990a).
3
  See Hall (2000) for a review and Oriani and Sobrero (2003) for a meta-analysis of the main results of these
studies.


                                                       2
Hall and Oriani                                                                       March 2004

also imply market valuations of capital and R&D investments that may be either higher or
lower on average than those in the US.

--- Insert Figure 1 about here ---

Recent empirical literature seems to confirm that the UK stock market has a more short-term
orientation than countries with different corporate governance regimes, such as Germany and
Japan (Black and Fraser, 2000). This evidence is consistent with previous work on the effect
of financial constraints on firms’ investments. In particular, Bond et al. (2003), estimating a
set of investment equations, show that cash flows or profits have a higher and more
significant effect on investments in the United Kingdom than in other European countries,
such as Belgium, France and Germany. In the same spirit, Mulkay et al. (2000) find that cash
flows or profits have a much larger impact on both R&D and investments in the US than in
France.

Greater sensitivity to cash flow or profitability shocks is only one of the ways in which
financial markets may affect investments and their market value. In a series of studies, La
Porta and colleagues (1998, 1999, 2002) have shown that countries with a civil law system,
such as France, Germany and Italy, protect external investors less than countries with a
common law system, such as the United Kingdom and the United States. Thus higher
ownership concentration in the countries of Continental Europe, together with poorer
protection of minority investors, can lead to a lower market valuation of the firms. On the
other side, other studies suggest the existence of potential benefits from block ownership, due
to alliances between the firm and its corporate owner, alleviation of financial constraints, and
more effective board monitoring.

Therefore, an investigation of the relationship between R&D investment and market value in
European countries could be important at several different levels of analysis. At the firm
level, a better understanding of the expected value created by spending on R&D could lead to
better choices of the amount of resources to be allocated to R&D activities. With respect to
innovation policy, a more thorough analysis of private returns to R&D could improve the
assessment of the incentives for industrial research. This issue is particularly relevant if we
consider that the analyzed countries adopt significantly different balances among the different
kinds of government incentives for business R&D expenditures (see Hall and Van Reenen,
2000; Parisi and Sembenelli, 2001).




                                                3
Hall and Oriani                                                                       March 2004

Analysis using data on French, German, and Italian firms is complicated by several specific
problems that are closely related to the differences in capital market structure themselves.
First, in these countries disclosure of annual R&D expenditures is not required by the
national accounting laws and regulations. Therefore, not all the companies report the amount
of R&D expenditures in their financial statements, creating problems in sample selection.
Second, stock markets in European countries are smaller compared to those of the US and the
UK and many firms are not publicly traded. This problem is particularly severe for Italy,
whose industrial system is mainly based on Small and Medium-sized Enterprises (SMEs) that
have credit relationships with financial intermediaries and where only few hundred
companies are publicly traded at the Milan stock exchange. Third, as indicated above, many
of the firms in these continental economies are part of a larger entity via interlocking
ownership, so that the reported market value is established via trading in a minority subset of
the shares of the company. These difficulties lead to smaller samples and limited data
availability.

Nevertheless, in this paper we aim to explore some of the questions about the relationship
between R&D and market value using the data that is available. For this purpose, we have
created an original database including firm-level accounting and financial data for a panel of
manufacturing firms that were publicly traded in France, Germany and Italy in the period
from 1989 to 1998. This database was obtained by combining different national and
international sources of information. Moreover, in order to analyze the differences between
these three countries and the “Anglo-Saxon” countries, we also gathered data for comparable
samples of manufacturing firms traded in the United Kingdom and the United States. Using
these data we estimated the market value-R&D relationship using a variety of econometric
methods, both ordinary least squares as well as methods that correct for the sample selection
bias arising from the lack of R&D data for some of the firms. We also explored the use of
models incorporating firm-specific effects, both fixed (correlated) and random (uncorrelated).

We report a number of interesting findings: first, there is no selection bias in the valuation
equation induced by the fact that some firms choose not to report R&D for any of the
countries. Second, although there seem to be omitted firm effects that are correlated with
R&D in the UK and US data, there are no such fixed effects in the data for our three countries
of interest, and therefore no bias from this source in the cross section results. Finally and
more substantively, we find that looking across all firms, R&D is valued similarly in France,
Germany, and the U.S. during this period, roughly twice as high in the U.K., and not at all in


                                                4
Hall and Oriani                                                                         March 2004

Italy. But when we separate the firms into those with a major shareholder and those without,
we obtain the interesting and suggestive result that R&D is valued highly, closer to the U. K.
level, in French and Italian firms with no major shareholder. However, in firms with a major
shareholder, there is a positive premium for such control, but the market places zero value on
the R&D in such firms.

In the next section of the paper, we discuss the valuation model we use, which is the familiar
hedonic model pioneered by Griliches (1981) in this setting. Then we describe our new
dataset and variables and present some descriptive statistics. The next section first presents
our basic regression results, and then the various econometric investigations we undertook in
order to verify the robustness of our results. We conclude with some discussion of our
findings and suggestions for future research.


2. R&D investments and market value: Remarks on the estimation model

Several authors have tested the relationship of different types of innovation investment with
firm-level performance measures based on the stock market. The studies analyzing in
particular the relationship between knowledge stock and market value implicitly or explicitly
assume that the stock market values the firm as a bundle of tangible and intangible assets
(Griliches 1981; Hall 2000). The treatment here follows Hall’s (2000) survey. In equilibrium,
the market valuation of any asset results from the interaction between firms’ demand for
investment and the market supply of capital for that specific asset (Hall 1993b). Using this
idea, it is possible to represent the market value V of firm i at time t as a function of its assets:

Vit = V (Ait, Kit, Iit1,…, Iitn)                                                [1]

where Ait is the book value of tangible assets, Kit is the replacement value of the firm’s
technological knowledge and Iit j is the replacement value of the jth intangible asset. If single
assets are purely additive, it is possible to express the market value of the firm as a multiple
of its assets:

Vit = b (Ait + γ Kit)σ                                                          [2]

where b is the market valuation coefficient of firm’s total assets reflecting its differential risk
and monopoly position, γK is the relative shadow value of knowledge capital to tangible
assets, and the product bγ is the absolute shadow value of the knowledge capital. In practice,
bγ reflects the investor expectations on the overall effect of Kit on the discounted value and



                                                 5
Hall and Oriani                                                                                     March 2004

present and future earnings of the corporation, while γ expresses the differential valuation of
the knowledge capital relative to tangible assets. The expression [2] can be interpreted as a
version of the model that is known in literature as a hedonic pricing model, where the good
being priced is the firm and the characteristics of the good are its assets, both tangible and
intangible.

Taking the natural logs of both the sides in [2], assuming constant returns to scale (σ=1), and
subtracting log Ait from both sides, we obtain the following expression:4

log(Vit Ait ) = log b + log(1 + γ K it Ait )                             [3]

The ratio V/A is a proxy for average Tobin’s q, the ratio of the market value of tangible
assets to their physical value. The estimation of [3] allows one to assess the average impact of
a euro or dollar invested in knowledge on the market value of a firm at a particular point in
time. Hall and Kim (2000), Bloom and Van Reenen (2002), Hall et al. (2004) estimate [3]
using non-linear least squares (NLLS). Other authors applying the same model have used the
approximation (1+x) ≈ x, obtaining the equation below, which can be estimated by ordinary
least squares (Griliches 1981; Jaffe 1986; Cockburn et al. 1988; Hall 1993a, 1993b):

log(Vit Ait ) = log b + γ K it Ait                                       [4]

In order to investigate the appropriateness of equation [3] or [4] for our model, we explored
the use of semi-parametric estimation for the simple Tobin’s q-R&D capital relationship by
means of kernel regression using data for the United States. The results of this exploration are
reported in Appendix A. Briefly, we found that the relationship resembles a logistic curve,
with zero and very small amounts of R&D capital (less than about one per cent of tangible
assets) having no effect on Tobin’s q, a roughly linear relationship until K/A=1, and a flatter
relationship thereafter. Above K/A value of one per cent, the relationship is somewhat better
described by equation [3] than equation [4], although we have explored the use of both
specifications in this paper.5




4
 The assumption of constant returns to scale (homogeneity of degree one) in the value function has been
confirmed repeatedly in the literature, at least for cross sections of firms.
5
 The lack of effect for small values of K/A implies that these levels are not “material” in the accounting sense,
and we included them in the nonresponse category, which includes firms that do not perform R&D. There were
only a few such observations.


                                                        6
Hall and Oriani                                                                                    March 2004

The estimation of equations [3] and [4] also raises two econometric problems, one due to our
failure to observe R&D for many firms and one due to the possibility of left-out variables that
are correlated with R&D. We first address the problem of sample selection bias, which, as
discussed above, could be particularly severe for the countries we are analyzing because of
the limited R&D and market data availability.6 We investigate the potential for problems
arising from this source in two ways: by checking the representativeness of our sample with
respect to the whole manufacturing firms population and then by estimating a probability
model for the reporting of R&D and using the results to control for the bias. In particular, we
adopt the censored regression model with a stochastic threshold described by Maddala (1983:
Ch. 6) where our basic linear regression equation is jointly estimated with a Probit equation
whose dependent variable is a dummy equal to one when R&D investment is reported.7 This
model allows estimation of the correlation of the disturbances the two equations; if they are
uncorrelated, there is no bias in the estimated coefficients of the market value relationship. In
fact, we find very little evidence of such bias.

We therefore turn to the investigation of the second potential problem with our model, which
is that the relationship may include firm- and time-specific effects that are correlated with the
R&D stocks. Previous empirical analyses on R&D and market value have accounted for time
effects by adding a full set of year dummies (Griliches 1981; Hall 1993a; Blundell et al.
1999) and we follow this practice, which amounts to measuring the log market value-assets
ratio relative to the market as a whole. It would also be possible to control for unobserved
firm-specific components using the fixed-effects (within) or first differenced estimators (see
Toivanen et al. 2002, for an application to the questions under discussion). However,
although the fixed-effects estimators account for unobserved firm-specific heterogeneity, they
greatly reduce the degrees of freedom, and can introduce substantial downward bias from
measurement error (Hausman and Griliches 1986). Like the pooled estimator, the within
estimator also tends to have residuals with substantial serial correlation, which implies that




6
 Note that because R&D is an independent variable in our equation rather than a dependent variable, if the
process generating observed R&D is not related to the disturbance in the market value equation, no bias in this
equation will be introduced by selection, even if it generates a nonrandom sample of observed R&D; we will
merely have fewer observations on R&D with which to work. Selection bias will occur only when the
disturbance in the “presence of R&D” equation is correlated with the disturbance in the valuation equation.
7
 Work in progress explores the semi-parametric treatment of this same model using U. S. data, along the lines
suggested by Das, Newey, and Vella 2003, incorporating also the potential endogeneity of the right hand side
variables.


                                                       7
Hall and Oriani                                                                                       March 2004

the standard error estimates are incorrect, whereas the differenced estimator is known to have
more severe downward bias. The downward bias is particularly problematic in this case,
because R&D is a somewhat permanent characteristic of firms that changes rather slowly
(Hall et al. 1986). In addition, the fact that R&D is merely predetermined rather than
endogenous means that estimators which control for firm effects may be misspecified.8

For these reasons, in previous work on R&D and market value, a random-effects model has
sometimes been estimated along with the fixed-effects model (Munari and Oriani, 2002). In
the case of the random-effects model, the firm-specific component is treated as a random
variable with mean ν and variance σ ν2 . As is well known, however, consistency of the
random-effects estimator requires that the effects, which in this case can be interpreted as
permanent profitability differences, be uncorrelated with the right hand side variables. In
order to check the assumption of no correlation, we use the Hausman (1978) specification test
of the null hypothesis that there are no systematic differences between fixed-effects and
random-effects coefficients. In general, we find insignificant differences when
heteroskedastic-consistent standard errors are used, largely because the first-differenced
estimators are very imprecise. Therefore we cannot reject the random effects model in favor
of the fixed effects model, at least for the continental economies.


3. Data

Sample
Our sample consists of manufacturing companies publicly traded in France, Germany, Italy,
the United Kingdom and the United States. For all the countries, the period of observations
goes from 1989 to 1998. Firms have been classified into 22 different industries at the quasi 2-
digit level using 1992 SIC codes, mainly according to the previous classification of Hall and
Vopel (1996). For the European countries, we added the public utility industry (2-digit
SIC=49) because of its importance in these countries. All the accounting data of Italian firms



8
  The misspecification takes different forms depending on whether the within or differenced estimator is used. In
the former case, it occurs because the means over time are subtracted from right and left hand side variables, and
is attenuated as the number of time periods involved grows. In our case, the number of periods can be quite
small, implying bias, and the procedure introduces substantial serial correlation in the errors within firm, so that
the standard error estimates are also biased. In the case of first differenced estimation, the serial correlation is
less of a concern (see the Durbin-Watson statistics in Table 6), but the coefficient estimates can still be biased if
the lagged disturbance in the market value equation is correlated with the current R&D investment choice. Such
bias is not reduced by increasing the number of observations per firm.


                                                         8
Hall and Oriani                                                                                      March 2004

have been gathered from Centrale dei Bilanci, a broad database including financial
statements of about 40,000 Italian companies, which is available at the Research Department
of Bank of Italy. The source for accounting figures in France, Germany and the United
kingdom is Datastream International, which covers more than 75% of the public companies
from European countries. Market capitalization for all the European firms has been retrieved
from Datastream International. For the U.S. firms we used accounting and market data drawn
from the COMPUSTAT database, described by Hall (1999a). To increase the comparability
of the samples, we removed very small firms from the U.K. and the U.S. database.9

As a result, our final dataset consists of an unbalanced panel of 2,156 publicly traded firms,
127 from France, 283 from Germany, 86 from Italy, 592 from the United Kingdom and 1,366
from the United States. The lower number of Italian firms in the sample is mainly due to the
very small size of the Italian stock market as compared to the stock market of the other
European countries.10

Finally, we have collected industry-level data (ISIC 3rd revision) on the total output from the
STAN database and on the R&D expenditures from the ANBERD database. The two
databases are compatible and are both released and maintained by OECD.

R&D expenditures: Accounting regimes, data sources and selection problems

One of the main problems we had to deal with in building the dataset is the accounting
treatment of the R&D investments. One potential issue is the capitalization of R&D
expenditures. In this respect, R&D capitalization regimes are very similar for all the selected
countries. Annual R&D costs are normally expensed when they occur. Only applied research
and development expenditures can be capitalized, and these only if particular conditions are
satisfied.11




9
  The active venture capital/IPO market in the United Kingdom and above all in the United States, coupled with
the R&D reporting requirement, means that there are many more smaller firms that do R&D and list on the
stock market in the U.S. than in the other countries.
10
   Most Italian firms are small- and medium-sized and rely on bank credit in order to finance their activities (see
for example Angelini et al. 1998).
11
   These conditions are consistent with the prescription of GAAP accounting standards that allow some costs
related to R&D activities to be appropriately capitalized and carried forward as assets only if they have
alternative future uses. Moreover, according to IAS 38 principle .”.. it follows from the recognition criteria that
all expenditure on research should be recognised as an expense” (ww.iasb.org.uk). See KPMG (1995), Lev and
Sougiannis (1996) and Alexander and Archer (1998) for further information.



                                                         9
Hall and Oriani                                                                                    March 2004

R&D disclosure represents instead a severe problem because, unlike in the United Kingdom
and the United States, it is not compulsory in any of the country in the Continental Europe we
analyze. In fact, the accounting regulation of the European Union does not explicitly require
the disclosure of R&D expenditures.12 This situation makes it very difficult to obtain data on
firm-level R&D investments and potentially creates sample selection bias due to the firms’
opportunistic behavior in disclosure decisions (Belcher 1996). A synopsis of the R&D
accounting regimes in the countries we analyze is reported in Table 1.

--- Insert Table 1 about here ---

Because of the difficulty of obtaining information on the firms’ R&D investments in the
analyzed countries, data on R&D expenditures have been obtained integrating Datastream
International with two more databases: Worldscope and Global Vantage. In addition, for
Italian firms only, we had access to several other sources to gather the information on firm-
level R&D investments: Centrale dei Bilanci; the survey of Mediocredito Centrale, the
previously State-owned investment bank, on the investments of Italian manufacturing firms;13
INVIND, the annual survey on the investments of Italian manufacturing firms performed by
the Central Bank of Italy; R&S, an annual publication by Mediobanca, a main Italian
merchant bank that reports information on the major Italian companies; AIRI, the Italian
Association for Industrial Research; and information available on the corporate web sites.

In the end we were able to gather R&D data for only some of the firms in the sample.
Moreover, for most firms data were available only for selected years. Table 2 reports the total
number of observations by country, and broken down by industry and by whether R&D data
are available. The problem of R&D disclosure appears to be particularly severe for Germany,
where we do not have data on R&D investments for 88% of the total observations, whereas it
is less important for Italy, where the 65% of observations do not have firm-level R&D data.
Clearly, in all the European countries the percentage of observations reporting R&D
investments is quite a bit lower than in the United States, where only 36% of total




12
  The accounting regulation of the European Union (Fourth Directive) does not require the disclosure of R&D
expenditures. The only obligation is a general description of research and development activities must be
included in the annual report (Fourth Directive, art. 46, 1978). This description does not imply a requirement to
indicate the annual amount of R&D costs (see KPMG, 1995).
13
   This survey has been performed in 1992 (for the years 1989-1991), 1995 (for the years 1992-1994) and 1998
(for the years 1995-1997). Each survey refers to a sample of about 4,500 companies.


                                                      10
Hall and Oriani                                                                       March 2004

observations do not report R&D data. We define a dummy variable RDDUM equal to 1 if
R&D expenditures are reported and 0 otherwise.

--- Insert Table 2 about here ---

The distribution of the firms and the observations with R&D data availability by country and
industry is also reported in Table 2. We have 51 firms and 308 observations for France, 79
firms and 339 observations for Germany, 40 firms and 239 observations for Italy, 304 firms
and 2005 observations for the United Kingdom and 866 firms and 6995 observations in the
United States. For many of the firms we have R&D during only some of the years; this is
especially notable in Germany and the UK. The distribution reflects the different industrial
structures of the countries. All the countries in Continental Europe have a high percentage of
observations in the motor vehicles industry (10.6% in France, 12.7% in Germany and 10.9%
in Italy). Nearly a quarter of the observations in the German sample (24.8%) are concentrated
in the machinery industry. A substantial share of the observations in the United States
(21.6%) is in the electronics industry, whereas the United Kingdom shows a more even
distribution among industries.

The problems related to the size of the stock markets and to the R&D data availability raise
some concerns about the ability of our sample to effectively represent the population of
manufacturing firms in the three countries. Therefore, we tried to assess the
representativeness of the samples with respect to an aspect critical to our analysis, that is
R&D investments. To this purpose, we have computed, as shown in Table 3, the ratio of the
total R&D investments of the firms in our sample to the total R&D investments of all the
manufacturing firms and utilities in the country. In spite of their small numbers, the firms in
the sample seem to be representative of the population of manufacturing firms. In particular,
in 1998 the R&D investment of the firms in our sample represent 50.6% of total business
R&D of manufacturing firms and utilities in France, 63.6% in Germany, and 71.2% in Italy.
These values are very similar to the ratio obtained for the US sample (57.8%), even though
they are lower than the ratio obtained for the United Kingdom (92.2%). The conclusion is
that even though reporting R&D is not required in Continental Europe, in fact a fairly large
share of major R&D-doers actually report it. A second conclusion is that in Continental
Europe, as in the United States and United Kingdom, most industrial R&D is performed in
publicly traded firms.

--- Insert Table 3 about here ---


                                                11
Hall and Oriani                                                                     March 2004

Variables

In equations [3] and [4] our dependent variable is the natural log of the ratio between the
firm’s market value, V, and the total tangible assets, A. The total market value should be
calculated as the sum of the market capitalization of the firm and the market value of its debt.
However, the data on the market value of debt are often not available. Some of the studies on
US samples have computed the market value of debt using data on the book value reported by
the firm and observed prices in the corporate bond market (see for example Hall 1990a). This
solution is not feasible for European samples because of the very limited development of
corporate bond markets. Therefore, according to previous similar analyses on UK data
(Blundell et al. 1992, 1999), we have calculated the market value of the firm in all the
European countries, including the United Kingdom, by simply adding the nominal value of
outstanding debt to the market capitalization. For the United States we used the market value
of long term debt, computed as described in Hall (1990a). We removed observations from the
sample when the ratio of market to book value was greater than 20 or the debt to assets ratio
was greater than 5. This trimming affected the US and UK samples only.

Because R&D investments, as explained above, are not normally capitalized in the firm’s
balance sheet, we computed the R&D capital, K, as a perpetual inventory of the past and
present annual R&D expenditures, R, with a constant depreciation rate, as described in detail
by Griliches and Mairesse (1984) and Hall (1990a). A constant annual depreciation (private
obsolescence) rate of δ = 15% has been used and a constant annual R&D growth rate of g =
8% has been assumed to compute the R&D capital at the first year of firm R&D data
availability. In order to check the validity of the assumptions on R&D depreciation and
growth, we have recalculated the R&D capital for different values of g, for France, Germany
and Italy only. In particular, using the ANBERD database maintained by OECD, we have
determined the annual growth rates of R&D expenditures by country and industry from 1979
to 1998. We have then calculated the first year R&D capital taking a g equal for any country
and industry to the average growth rate of R&D investments in the previous five (K5) or ten
years (K10).

Our regression equations also include other firm-specific variables, specifically the book
value of intangible assets and the logarithm of sales. We obtained I, a measure of intangible




                                               12
Hall and Oriani                                                                                     March 2004

assets, from the firm’s balance sheet; it is mainly composed of goodwill and trademarks.14 We
included the total sales of the firm, S, in logarithmic form, in order to allow for nonconstant
returns in the value function. A full set of year dummies was added to the regressions to
account for overall time-specific components due to macro-economic market effects.

Lack of R&D data for our firms can mean one of two things: either the firm did not do R&D
or it did not report R&D. Because we are unable to distinguish these two reasons, we use a
“reduced form” approach where a single Probit equation describes the probability of
observing R&D. We include both firm-level and industry-level variables in this equation.
Following the evidence provided by Hall (1990b), which shows a negative association
between firm’s debt level and R&D investments, we create a leverage variable, calculated as
the ratio between total financial debt, D, and total tangible assets, A. Two industry level
variables are also used: industry-level R&D intensity, INDRD, defined as the ratio between
R&D expenditures from ANBERD database and gross output from STAN database for each
industry in our sample, and the annual growth rate of the industry gross output, INDGR.

Descriptive statistics

Table 4 shows descriptive statistics for observations with and without R&D data availability.
We used a one-tailed t-test to statistically compare the differences in the mean values of the
variables between the two different groups. A striking difference appears in the mean values
of total sales, S, and total assets, A between the two groups. The observations for which R&D
expenditures are reported present much higher values for both the variables in all the
countries (the differences are always significant at 1% level). This evidence suggests that
R&D performance and disclosure is strongly related to firm size. The ratio V/A is higher for
the observations with R&D data in France, the United Kingdom and the United States,
whereas it is lower in Germany. In Italy there is no statistically significant difference. In
addition, both in France and Germany the observations with R&D availability have higher
mean values of the ratio I/A (the difference is significant at 1% level), whereas opposite
evidence is shown for Italy and the United States (where the difference is significant




14
  Goodwill often arises when an acquisition is made, as the difference between the price paid for a firm and the
book value of its assets added to the balance sheet. It may therefore include the purchased results of R&D done
by an acquired firm. On the other hand, intangibles will not generally include assets created by a firm’s own
R&D. In fact, as said above in this section, R&D investments can be capitalized in all the countries only if very
specific conditions subsist.


                                                       13
Hall and Oriani                                                                        March 2004

respectively at the 10% and the 1%). In the United Kingdom this difference is not statistically
significant.

With respect to the industry variables, the observations with R&D data availability have
higher mean values of INDRD (all the differences are significant at 1% level) and INDGR
(the difference is not statistically significant in Italy). This evidence shows that there could be
differences across industry in R&D performance and reporting decisions along with firm-
specific factors. We will account for this in our sample selection model.

For the observations for which R&D expenditures are reported, on average Italian and British
firms have a significantly lower R&D intensity (respectively .033 and .029 vs. .042 in France,
.045 in Germany, and .049 in the United States). As a consequence, Italian and British firms
also have lower stocks of R&D relative to their tangible assets (K/A respectively .189 and
.126 vs. .368 in France, .395 in Germany, and .529 in the United States). This conclusion
does not change substantially when we replace K/A with either K5/A or K10/A.

--- Insert Table 4 about here ---

If we look at the time patterns of the main variables defined above, we can discern some
interesting features. Figure 2 shows that the ratio V/A is erratic over time and follows a
similar pattern in all the countries analyzed. However, the US sample is characterized on
average by higher values as compared to the other countries (mainly Germany and Italy).

--- Insert Figure 2 about here ---

Figure 3 illustrates that the ratio of annual R&D expenditures to tangible assets, R/A, is
increasing over time in the United States, is relatively steady in France and the United
Kingdom, whereas it is decreasing in Germany and Italy. The anomalous peak in Germany
between 1989 and 1990 is most likely explained by the entry of new firms in the sample.

--- Insert Figure 3 about here ---

Naturally, the trend of R/A is reflected into the dynamics of the ratios K/A and K5/A illustrated
in Figure 4. In France, both K/A and K5/A increase over time exhibiting a very similar trend.
In Italy the values of the two ratios appear to be relatively flat and to clearly converge after an
initial difference. Finally, in Germany K/A and K5/A follow a more unsteady pattern and
present a greater difference, but they both monotonically decrease after 1995.

--- Insert Figure 4 about here ---



                                                14
Hall and Oriani                                                                         March 2004

Finally, Figure 5 shows that the ratio I/A notably increases over time in all the countries. The
growth is more accentuated in France, the United Kingdom and the United States.

--- Insert Figure 5 about here ---


4. Results

In this section we discuss the results obtained by the estimation of the models reviewed in
Section 2. Because the focus of this paper is on the hitherto unstudied R&D-market value
relationship in France, Germany and Italy, we begin by reporting the results of OLS and
NLLS regressions for these countries and comparing them to results for the United States and
the United Kingdom. Results using alternative measures of R&D capital (K5 and K10) appear
in Appendix B. We then investigate the presence of sample selection bias in our estimates,
finding that it is negligible provided we control for differences in the ownership structures of
continental firms versus those from the “Anglo-Saxon” economies. Based on this result, we
turn our attention to the estimates that control for left out firm effects, but not for selection
bias.

Basic results

In Table 5 the results of the OLS estimation of equation [4] and the NLLS estimation of
equation [3] are presented. The first set of five columns show the basic equation for all five
countries in our dataset estimated using ordinary least squares. The results show that in
France and Germany the R&D capital is positively valued by the stock market. The
coefficients of K/A are positive (.28 in France and .33 in Germany), statistically significant at
the one per cent level and have very similar values, similar also to those for the United States.
However, they are considerably less than the equilibrium value of unity and are significantly
lower than the coefficient estimated for the United Kingdom (0.88). Furthermore, they are
lower than some of the coefficients obtained by similar analyses on the United States (e.g.,
Hall 1993a, 1993b) or the United Kingdom (e.g., Blundell et al. 1999) for earlier observation
periods, although they are in agreement with results obtained by Hall (2000) using US data
for the same period as here. The results for Italian firms are completely different from the
others and imply that the valuation of R&D stock in these firms is not statistically different




                                                 15
Hall and Oriani                                                                        March 2004

from zero. These results do not change substantially when we use K5/A or K10/A instead of
K/A to measure the firm’s R&D capital.15

With respect to the other variables, in all the countries the intangible assets recorded on the
balance sheet have a positive and significant coefficient, which is close to the unity for the
three continental economies and somewhat lower for the United States and the United
Kingdom. Finally, the coefficients of log sales suggest that there is a small decreasing returns
size effect in all the continental economies and an increasing returns effect for the United
States and the United Kingdom, although this is not very significant for France.

The next five columns in Table 5 report the results of the NLLS estimation of equation [3].
Note that the slope coefficients are not directly comparable with the OLS estimates. In the
former case the shadow value of the relevant variable is equal to its coefficient, whereas in
the latter, the shadow value is the coefficient divided by the sum of one plus the capitals
weighted by their coefficients:

 ∂ log Q                     bK
          =
∂ ( K / A) 1 + bK ( K / A) + bI ( I / A) + bS log S

The results of computing the above expression at the variable means is shown below the
coefficient estimates, and the results of averaging the estimated slope coefficient for each
firm are shown below that. For the US, UK, and Germany, these values are typically
somewhat higher than the OLS estimates and lower than the NLLS coefficient estimate, as
we would expect if the linear model placed too much weight on large K/A values. For France,
they are about the same, but for Italy they are slightly higher, although insignificantly so.

Similarly to R&D capital, the coefficients of I/A are positive, statistically significant, and
higher in all of the countries except Italy, where the coefficient falls slightly. The scale
coefficient is now insignificantly different from zero for France, Italy, and the UK, although
still small and negative for Germany and it has increased for the US.

---- Insert Table 5 about here -----




15
     See the appendix for the details of these estimates.


                                                            16
Hall and Oriani                                                                                March 2004

R&D and the control premium or discount

Table 6 shows the result of our investigations into the reasons for the extremely small and
insignificant coefficient of R&D capital for Italian firms. As remarked in the introduction,
one possible explanation for the results we obtained for Italy is related to the ownership
structure in this country, which is typically nested. Several traded firms have a main
shareholder (a family, another firm or the State) holding directly or indirectly more than 50%
of the voting rights (see for example Faccio and Lang, 2002). Recent studies of the
relationship between corporate governance and equity values have noted that it may be
affected by the agency problem between the controlling shareholders and the minority
shareholders (Gomes, 2000). Empirical evidence shows contrasting results. On the one hand,
some studies report that shareholders with the majority of the voting rights are protected from
takeover threats and monitoring activities, which has a negative effect on the market value of
equity which has a greater magnitude when legal systems do not protect minority
shareholders (La Porta et al., 1998, 1999, 2002). In the case of Italy and even France, the
diffused presence of traded firms controlled by large shareholders, joint with a legal system
offering a weak protection to external investors (La Porta, 1998), could generate underpricing
phenomena (indeed, as the mean value of the ratio V/A in Table 3 would suggest) that,
ceteris paribus, could lead to K/A being underpriced.

On the other hand, other studies have highlighted the benefits deriving from the presence of
block ownership. In this respect, Allen and Phillips (2000) show that the stock prices of target
firms increase when corporate block purchases by nonfinancial corporations are announced,
suggesting potential benefits from alliances between the target firm and the new corporate
owner, alleviation of financial constraints, and more effective board monitoring. This
situation could also apply to Italy, where several traded firms are controlled by another
corporation within business group structures.

In order to explore this issue, we created a dummy variable (CONTROL) that is equal to
unity when the main shareholder holds a control stake higher than 33% and there is no other
shareholder with a stake higher than 20%.16 We used the database of Faccio and Lang (2002)



16
   The database of Faccio and Lang (2002), on which our analysis is based, only reports those shareholders
having a stake greater than 20%. We explored the use of a number of other versions of CONTROL, two based
on 40% and 50% cutoffs, and one where the largest 2 shareholdings summed to 50%. In general, the results
were almost identical, with the exception of those for France, which suffered slightly from a small sample


                                                    17
Hall and Oriani                                                                                 March 2004

that reports this information for all the publicly traded Western European firms in 1996 (these
data were drawn from the official Stock Exchange ownership files). This variable is one for
slightly over half of the R&D-doing firms. A similar variable was created for firms from the
other continental countries (France and Germany).

We included the dummy variable CONTROL in the market value equation both by itself and
interacted with K/A; the results for both OLS and NLLS estimation are shown in Table 6 for
our three continental countries. In the case of Germany, the variable makes little difference to
the OLS results, although it does appear that R&D is valued less in firms with a majority
shareholder. In the NLLS results for Germany, having a majority shareholder gives a
premium of 11 per cent, but reduces the valuation of R&D substantially. For France and Italy,
the results are very striking, whether we look at OLS or NLLS. R&D capital in firms without
a majority shareholder is valued the same way as it is in the other countries (or even slightly
higher), whereas R&D capital in firms that have a single shareholder with a more than 33%
share is essentially not valued at all, although control itself is positively valued. The sum of
the two K/A coefficients for these firms is 0.15 (0.10) for France and -0.10 (0.13) for Italy.
The differences between the two types of firms are quite significant. In the next section we
explore this result further, hypothesizing that the reporting of R&D itself may be determined
by the nature of the ownership structure of the firm.

---- Insert Table 6 about here -----

Sample selection estimation

In Table 7 we show the results of the sample selection model, where equation [4] is jointly
estimated with a Probit model for the probability of reporting R&D. The method of
estimation is maximum likelihood, with the two equations allowed to be correlated, as in
Bound et al. (1984). That is, we allow the error in predicting R&D reporting to be correlated
with the error in the valuation equation, as it will be if the nonrandomness of the sample
affects valuation. The model that we estimate is written as follows:




problem in the 33 to 50% range. Because we found that the 33% cutoff produced the most consistent set of
results we have chosen to report those here.


                                                     18
Hall and Oriani                                                                                       March 2004

                                      di = 1( Z iδ + ε1i > 0)
                                      yi = di i( X i β + ε 2i )
                                       ε1i    0   1            ρσ 2  
                                        ~ Ν   ,                        
                                       ε 2i   0   ρσ 2         σ 22  

where di is a dummy equal to one when R&D is reported and yi is the value of Tobin’s q (the
market to book ratio). For this model, it can be shown that the regression of y on X for the
observed data has the following form:

                  E[ yi | di = 1, X i ] = X i β + E[ε 2i | ε1i > − Z iδ ] = X i β + ρσ 2 λ ( Z iδ )

where λ(.) is the inverse Mills’ ratio for the normal distribution. Note that the last term drops
out when the correlation ρ is zero. The well-known Heckman two-step estimator for this
model involves estimating δ using a Probit equation, forming the estimated λ, and including it
in the equation with the other regressors. Although we use maximum likelihood for
estimation because it is more efficient, we use the Heckman estimator to test for the validity
of the normality assumption, by including two additional terms in the regression above: the
product of the inverse Mills’ ratio with its associated probability p that R&D is observed and
with p squared (see Lee 1982; Newey 1988, or Das, Newey, and Vella 2003). This test is
reported in the bottom row of Table 7, and it shows that although the US sample violates the
normality assumption, the samples for all the other countries do not.

Turning to the results, the top panel of Table 7 presents the results of the estimation of the
probability of reporting R&D jointly with the regression equation. With the possible
exception of the debt to assets ratio, our predictor variables have a fair amount of explanatory
power in the expected directions, with size, industry R&D intensity, and industry growth all
being positive for performing and reporting R&D, with the exception of industry growth for
France and Italy. We also included CONTROL in this regression, on the grounds that
reporting R&D might be affected by being part of a larger entity. Other things equal, we find
that having a majority shareholder reduces the probability of reporting R&D slightly in
Germany and Italy, but has not effect in France.

The bottom panel of Table 7 reports the estimates of the regression equation in the sample
selection model. For all the countries, the correlation of the error terms in the two equations is
not significantly different from zero, which implies that there is no bias arising from sample
selection in the estimates of Tables 5 and 6. This result is confirmed when we look at the



                                                        19
Hall and Oriani                                                                        March 2004

coefficient estimates, which are almost identical to those in Table 6. Thus the conclusion
from our sample selection estimation is that although we observe R&D for only a subset of
the R&D-doing firms in the French, German, and Italian economies, we are still able to
estimate the valuation-R&D equation consistently.

------- Insert Table 7 about here -------

Panel model estimates

In Table 8 we show the results of the first differences and of the fixed (within) and random
effects estimation of equation [4] for all the countries. For France, Germany, and Italy, we
included the CONTROL variables in the model; in the case of the model with fixed effects,
only the interaction term is identified, since CONTROL is the same in every year within firm.
Estimating model [4] with the first differences of the variables decreases the precision of the
estimates considerably in France and Italy, and somewhat in the UK. Overall, the R&D
capital coefficients are insignificantly different from zero but with large standard errors. In
contrast, the German and U.S. results are similar to those obtained in levels. When we
estimate fixed- and random-effects specifications we find that there exist significant
permanent differences across firms in all the samples but that these differences do not appear
to be correlated with the regressors for the continental firms. The data do reject a random
effects model in favor of fixed effects for the US and UK firms. Note that this contrast may
simply be due to sample size. When conventional standard errors rather than robust estimates
are used, random effects is rejected in favor of fixed effects for Germany and Italy as well.
This implies that the average value-R&D relationship varies across firms with differing R&D
intensities in a “permanent” way.

These results are confirmed by the coefficient estimates of the within and the random effects
estimators: for France (respectively .26 and .38), Germany (respectively .27 and .30), Italy
(respectively .74 and .65) and even the U.S. (respectively .15 and .22, but with much smaller
standard errors), they are still significant and roughly consistent with those shown in Table 6.
Thus controlling for firm effects makes little difference to the estimates (other than increasing
the standard errors). The puzzle is now the UK, where R&D is valued very highly in the cross
section, but zero within firm. That is firms can have permanently higher market value due to
their R&D strategies, but changing those strategies has little impact. Note also that after
controlling for firm effects, intangible assets are still valued roughly at unity in France (.66),




                                                20
Hall and Oriani                                                                      March 2004

Germany (1.56) and Italy (1.77), while they have a substantially lower valuation in the UK
(.24) and the US (.35).

Our tentative conclusion from this investigation into the presence of firm fixed effects in the
valuation relation is that they do not seem to be important for the continental economies. For
Germany, we can have some confidence in this conclusion, but for the other two countries,
the sample sizes are probably too small to produce a definitive test.

---- Insert Table 8 about here ------


5. Discussion and conclusions

In this paper we have addressed questions related to the market valuation of R&D
investments in the European countries through a comparison with the Anglo-Saxon countries
(United Kingdom and United States). To our knowledge, this is the first in-depth empirical
analysis of the valuation of firms’ R&D expenditure by the stock market in European
countries other than the United Kingdom, such as France, Germany and Italy. We believe
such an investigation is important for several reasons: the importance of these economies, the
specificity of their corporate governance systems as compared to Anglo-Saxon countries, and
the differences in the schemes of the public incentives to private R&D.

In our analysis we dealt with two main difficulties limiting data availability in the analyzed
countries: the fact that R&D disclosure is not compulsory, drastically reducing the number of
observations for which R&D is reported; and the small size of the stock markets, as compared
to the United Kingdom and the United States, restricting the number of publicly-traded firms
that could be included in the sample.

Starting from the existing models on R&D and market value reviewed in Section 2, we tried
to correct the potential biases arising from the problems discussed above, by applying two
estimation methods that have not been widely used in valuation analysis. First, we built a
sample selection model in which the probability that a firm discloses R&D investments was
modeled as a Probit function of firm size and leverage as well as industry-specific variables
(R&D intensity and output growth). Second, we used panel techniques in order to account for
left out unobserved firm-specific effects.

The results we obtained exhibit several interesting features. German and French samples
show a statistically significant and robust positive evaluation of the R&D capital by the stock



                                               21
Hall and Oriani                                                                      March 2004

market. Moreover, when we correct for fixed effects, the valuation of the R&D capital in the
countries is very similar. However, all the estimated coefficients of the R&D capital are
considerably less than unity, and are significantly smaller than the coefficients reported by
previous studies on the U.S. and the UK. Nevertheless, when we correct for firm effects, we
find similar results also for the Anglo-Saxon countries, suggesting in line with previous
contributions (Hall 1993a, 1993b 2000; Oriani and Sobrero 2003) that the market valuation of
R&D expenditures has decreased in all the countries over time. In addition, the very narrow
gap observed between the R&D coefficients across countries is consistent with the anecdotal
evidence of a progressive alignment of the European financial markets to the Anglo-Saxon
ones within the last two decades (Rajan and Zingales, 2003)

An interesting finding is that the UK sample shows a substantially greater valuation of the
R&D investments in the cross section. From the perspective of the financial investors, this
means that a currency unit spent in R&D by a company in the United Kingdom has on
average an impact whose magnitude is nearly three times bigger than in France and Germany.
The fact that Bond et al (2002) find much higher productivity of this R&D in the UK than in
Germany confirms that our result is probably real.

A second interesting finding is that in France and Italy, only firms without large shareholders
place a significantly positive value on R&D spending, even though there are quite a few firms
controlled by a major shareholder that spend positive amounts on R&D. In some cases,
especially in France, this may be because the large shareholder is the government (e.g., Bull,
which is in our sample). In other cases, it may simply be that majority holders do not respond
to market pressures that signal low values for their investment strategies. One avenue for
future research could be further exploration of the relationship between the types of large
shareholders (governments, families, or other firms) and R&D strategy.

The evidence presented in this paper poses important questions to managers and policy
makers. First, if we assume the financial markets are efficient, a coefficient of the firms’
R&D capital lower than unity in the analyzed countries suggests that firms disclosing R&D
expenditure are investing a non-optimal amount of resources in R&D. In particular, they may
be investing too much, because the assets they are creating are worth less than they paid for
them. Alternatively, the low valuation could imply that the private depreciation rate we used




                                               22
Hall and Oriani                                                                                 March 2004

(15 percent) is too low, and that the value of R&D depreciates considerably faster.17 This
interpretation moves the focus to the reasons why these investment are depreciating so
quickly. One possibility is that the pace of competition in some industries is leading to more
rapid obsolescence of the results of any particular firm’s innovative activities. Our data for
the continental European countries is insufficient to investigate this question in a detailed
manner but it might be possible to explore the issue more thoroughly using data for the
United States.

On the other hand, it is possible that lack of an R&D disclosure obligation in these countries
has a negative effect on R&D evaluation, exacerbating the information asymmetries between
firms and investors that critically concern R&D investments (see for example, Aboody and
Lev, 2000). Seaton and Walker (1996) have shown that the introduction of the requirement to
disclose corporate R&D investments somewhat reduced the financial constraints faced by
British traded firms for innovation. From this perspective, it would be interesting to analyze
the possible effects of a reform in national accounting rules making R&D disclosure
compulsory on the market value of R&D in the other European countries. But it is important
to note that for France and Germany at least, the undervaluation of R&D is at the same level
that it is for the United States, which makes this explanation less likely here.

Alternatively, the focus could be on the effectiveness of the R&D investments. In fact, the
lower evaluation of firms’ R&D capital in the countries analyzed as compared to the Anglo-
Saxon countries could be explained by lower expected economic returns. This problem would
relate to the management of R&D at the firm level. In particular, it would be interesting to
search for inter-firm differences in the value of the R&D capital that could be explained by
firm-specific variables related to the nature and the orientation of the company innovation
activities. The results presented in this paper show that the valuation of R&D investments is
affected by corporate ownership structure. This is especially true for Italy, for which we
found a positive relationship between R&D and market value only after controlling for the
eventual control by the major shareholder. This evidence would require a further
investigation on the effect of corporate control dynamics on the innovation activities at the
firm level.




17
  A “back of the envelope” computation suggests a depreciation rate of about 50 percent per year. The shadow
value is roughly 0.35, which is the ratio of (g + δ) = (.08+.15) to (.08+.55).


                                                     23
Hall and Oriani                                                                       March 2004

However, low values for R&D investment could also result from public incentives to
business R&D, both subsidies and tax credits. Previous empirical literature has shown that
the R&D performed through government funding yields lower returns than company-
financed R&D (see Hall 1996, for a review). In fact, the goal of government-funding is
usually to produce just this result. Accordingly, it would be interesting to investigate the
nature and the characteristics of the publicly funded firms’ R&D investments in the analyzed
countries, in order to disentangle the differences in their expected economic returns as
compared to privately financed investments. This theme is particularly relevant in the case of
Italy, since the empirical analysis of Parisi and Sembenelli (2001) shows for this country a
very high R&D elasticity to public incentives as compared to other countries.

Finally, if we relax the assumption of market efficiency, the research could address the
question of the short-termism of the stock market, with particular respect to the
underestimation of the firms’ R&D investments, whose existence has already been suggested
by the previous empirical studies of Lev and Sougiannis (1996) and Chan et al. (2001).

This study, which has explored the valuation of R&D for firms in previously unstudied
European countries and provided new and sometimes puzzling evidence, can stimulate the
actual debate on R&D financing in the European Union and represent a first step into a
deeper investigation of the interactions between firms, markets and institutions in countries
where the corporate governance regime is significantly different from that of the United
States or the United Kingdom.




                                               24
Hall and Oriani                                                                  March 2004

                                        References

Aboody D., Lev B. 2000. “Information Asymmetry, R&D, and Insider Gains.” Journal of
Finance, 55: 2747-2766.
Alexander D., Archer S. 1998. European Accounting Guide, Harcourt Brace: San Diego.
Allen J. W., Phillips, G. M. 2000. “Corporate Equity Ownership, Strategic Alliances, and
Product Market Relationships.” Journal of Finance, 55: 2791-2815.
Angelini P., Di Salvo R., Ferri G. 1998. “Availability and Cost of Credit for Small
Businesses: Customer Relationships and Credit Cooperatives.” Journal of Banking &
Finance, 22: 925-954.
Belcher A., (1996), “R&D Disclosure: Theory and Practice.” In Belcher A., Hassard J.,
Procter S. (Eds.), R&D Decisions: Strategy, Policy and Disclosure, Routledge: London.
Black AJ, Fraser P. 2000. “International Comparisons on Stock Market Short-Termism: How
Different Is the UK Experience?.” Manchester School, 68(supplement): 38-50
Bloom N., Van Reenen J. 2002. “Patents, Real Options and Firm Performance.” Economic
Journal, 112: 97-116
Blundell R, Bond S, Devereux M, Schiantarelli F. 1992. “Investment and Tobin's Q.” Journal
of Econometrics, 51: 233-257
Blundell R, Griffith R, Van Reenen J. 1999. “Market Share, Market Value and Innovation in
a Panel of British Manufacturing Firms.” Review of Economic Studies, 66: 529-554.
Bond S., Harhoff D., Van Reenen, J. 2002. “Corporate R&D and Productivity in German and
the United Kingdom,” IFS, Oxford University, University of Munich, and London School of
Economics: manuscript.
Bond S., Elston J., Mairesse J., Mulkay B. 2003. “Financial Factors and Investment in
Belgium, France, Germany and the UK: A Comparison Using Company Panel Data,” Review
of Economics and Statistics, 85: 153-177.
Bound J., Cummins C., Griliches, Z., Hall, B. H., Jaffe, A. 1984. “Who Does R&D and Who
Patents?,” in Griliches, Z. (ed.), R&D, Patents, and Productivity, Chicago: Chicago
University Press.
Chan L. K. C., Lakonishok J., Sougiannis T. 2001. “The Stock Market Valuation of Research
and Development Expenditures”, Journal of Finance, 56: 2431-2458.
Cockburn I., Griliches Z. 1988. “Industry Effects and Appropriability Measures in the Stock
Market's Valuation of R&D and Patents.” American Economic Review, 78: 419-423.
Das, M., Newey, W. K., Vella, F. 2003. “Nonparametric Estimation of Sample Selection
Models,” Review of Economic Studies 70: 33-58.
Faccio M., Lang L. P. H. 2002. “The Ultimate Ownership of Western European
Corporations.” Journal of Financial Economics, 65: 365-414
Franks J., Mayer C. 1990. “Capital Markets and Corporate Control: A Study of France,
Germany and the UK.” Economic Policy, 10: 189-232.
Gomes A. 2000. “Going Public without Governance: Managerial Reputation Effects.”
Journal of Finance, 55: 615-646
Griliches Z. 1981. “Market Value, R&D and Patents.” Economics Letters, 7: 183-187.


                                             25
Hall and Oriani                                                                   March 2004

Griliches Z., Hausman JA. 1986. “Errors in variables in Panel Data.” Journal of
Econometrics, 31: 93-118.
Griliches Z, Mairesse J. 1984. “Productivity and R&D at the Firm Level.” In Z Griliches
(Ed.), R&D, Patents, and Productivity. The University of Chicago Press and NBER: Chicago.
Hall B. H. 1990a. “The Manufacturing Sector Masterfile: 1959-1987”, National Bureau of
Economic Research Working Paper 3366: Cambridge, MA
Hall B. H. 1990b, “The Impact of Corporate Restructuring on Industrial Research and
Development”, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity. Microeconomics: 85-135.
Hall B. H. 1993a. “Industrial Research During the 1980s: Did the Rate of Return Fall?.”
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity. Microeconomics: 289-343
Hall B. H. 1993b. “The Stock Market's Valuation of R&D Investment During the 1980's.”
American Economic Review, 83: 259-264.
Hall B. H. 1994. “Corporate Restructuring and Investment Horizons in the United States,
1976-1987.” Business History Review, 68: 110-143
Hall B. H. 1996. “The Private and Social Returns to Research and Development.” In Smith
B., Barfield C., (Eds.). Technology, R&D and the Economy. AEI-Brookings Institutions:
Washington, DC.
Hall B. H. 2000. “Innovation and Market Value.” In Barrell, Ray, Geoffrey Mason, and Mary
O’Mahoney (eds.), Productivity, Innovation and Economic Performance, Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press
Hall, B. H., Griliches Z., Hausman J. A. 1986. “Patents and R&D: Is There a Lag?.”
International Economic Review, 27: 265-83.
Hall B. H., Jaffe A. B., Trajtenberg M. 2004. “Market Value and Patent Citations,” Rand
Journal of Economics, forthcoming. Also in Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic
Research Working Paper 7741 (2000).
Hall B. H., Kim D. 2000. “Valuing Intangible Assets: The Stock Market Value of R&D
Revised”, Working Paper, University of California at Berkeley and Harvard University,
Berkeley, CA and Cambridge, MA.
Hall B. H., Mairesse J., Branstetter L., Crepon B. 1999. “Does Cash Flow Cause Investment
and R&D: An Exploration Using Panel Data for French, Japanese, and United States
Scientific Firms.” In A.R. Thurik (Ed.), Innovation, Industry Evolution, and Employment.
Cambridge University Press: Cambridge
Hall B. H., Van Reenen J. 2000. “How Effective Are Fiscal Incentives for R&D? A Review
of the Evidence.” Research Policy, 29: 449-469.
Hall B. H., Vopel K. 1996. “Innovation, Market Share and Market Value”, Working Paper,
University of California at Berkeley and University of Mannheim: Berkeley, CA and
Mannheim
Hausman J.A. 1978. “Specification Tests in Econometrics.” Econometrica, 46: 1251-1272.
Hirschey M. 1982. Intangible Capital Aspects of Advertising and R&D Expenditures.
Journal of Industrial Economics, 30: 375-390
Jaffe A. B. 1986. “Technological Opportunity and Spillovers of R&D: Evidence from Firms'
Patents, Profits, and Market Value.” American Economic Review, 76: 984-1001.


                                             26
Hall and Oriani                                                                   March 2004

KPMG. 1995. TRANSACC. Transnational Accounting. Macmillan: London.
La Porta R., Lopez-De-Silanes F., Shleifer A., Vishny R. 1998. “Law and Finance.” Journal
of Political Economy, 106: 1113-1135
La Porta R., Lopez-De-Silanes F., Shleifer A., 1999. “Corporate Ownership Around the
World.” Journal of Finance, 54: 471-516
La Porta R., Lopez-De-Silanes F., Shleifer A., Vishny R., 2002. “Investor Protection and
Corporate Valuation.” Journal of Finance, 57: 1147-1170.
Lee, L. F. 1982. “Some Approaches to the Correction of Selectivity Bias," Review of
Economic Studies 49: 355-372.
Lev B., Sougiannis T. 1996. “The Capitalization, Amortization, and Value-Relevance of
R&D.” Journal of Business, Accounting & Economics, 21: 107-138.
Maddala G. S. 1983. Limited-Dependent and Qualitative Variables in Econometrics.
Cambridge University Press: Cambridge.
Mulkay B., Hall B. H., Mairesse J. 2000. “Firm Level Investment and R&D in France and the
United States: A Comparison”, National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 8038:
Cambridge, MA.
Munari F., Oriani R. 2002. “Privatization and R&D Performance: An Empirical Analysis
Based on Tobin’s q”, FEEM Working Paper 63.2002: Milan.
Newey, W. K. 1988. “Two-Step Series Estimation of Sample Selection Models,” MIT:
Working Paper.
Oriani R., Sobrero M. 2002. “Assessing the Market Valuation of Firms’ Technological
Knowledge in a Real Options Perspective”, Presented at the Academy of Management
Annual Conference, August, Denver, CO
Oriani R., Sobrero M. 2003. “A Meta-Analytic Study of the Relationship between R&D
Investments and Corporate Value”, in Calderini M., Garrone P., Sobrero M., (Eds),
Corporate Governance, Market Structure and Innovation, Edward Elgar: Cheltenham.
Parisi M. L., Sembenelli A. 2001. “Is Private R&D Spending Sensitive to Its Price? Empirical
Evidence on Panel Data for Italy”, Boston College Working Paper in Economics 493:
Boston.
Rajan R. G., Zingales L. 2003. “Banks and Markets: The Changing Character of the
European Finance”, National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 9595:
Cambridge, MA.
Seaton J., and I. Walker. 1996. “R&D in UK Quoted Companies: The Effects of Disclosure
and Finance”. In Belcher A., Hassard J., Procter S., (Eds.), R&D Decisions. Strategy, Policy
and Disclosure, Routledge: London.
Silverman B. W. 1986. Density Estimation for Statistics and Data Analysis, London:
Chapman and Hall.
Toivanen O., Stoneman P., Bosworth D. 2002. “Innovation and Market value of UK Firms,
1989-1995”, Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics, 64: 39-61.




                                             27
Hall and Oriani                                                                      March 2004


                                         Appendix A

                          Kernel Regression Estimation
This appendix describes an exploration of the functional form of the Tobin’s q-R&D
relationship using semi-parametric methods and data for the United States, where the sample
size is large enough to use this methodology. The kernel regression of a variable y on a
variable x is the conditional expectation of y given x, estimated in the following way:
                                                  N
                                                            x − xi 
                                                 ∑ y κ 
                                                       i
                                                               h 
                                                                    
                                    f ( y | x) = i =1N
                                                           x − xi 
                                                   ∑i =1
                                                         κ
                                                           h 
                                                                   

where κ(.) is a kernel function, usually the normal density, and h is the bandwidth, which
may be varied to obtain curves with varying degrees of smoothness. Silverman (1986)
showed that the following bandwidth had good mean squared error properties:

                                           h = h0 0.9 N −0.2

where h0 is the standard deviation of the x variable and N is the sample size.

Figures A1 and A2 show the results for a kernel regression of logQ on K/A, plotted as a
function of K/A and then as a function of log(K/A) so that the lower end of the distribution
can be seen. In computing these regressions, we first removed the average value of logQ in
each year from the observations in that year. This was necessary in order to make our
regression simple; kernel regressions with many variables are difficult to compute and plot.

The figures show that the relationship between logQ and K/A has a shape that is
approximately logistic. Up until a value of K/A equal to approximately .05 (a log of -3), the
log of Tobin’s q is not a function of K/A, suggesting that the firm’s R&D capital is not
“salient” to investors when it is very small. From .05 to around 1 (a log of 0), the relationship
is approximately linear. The curvature gradually flattens for values of K/A above 1, so that
there are diminishing returns to having a very R&D-intensive firm.

Our conclusion from the kernel regression results is that the nonlinear model provides a
pretty good approximation to the data, since it has the necessary flattening of curvature at




                                                  28
Hall and Oriani                                                                    March 2004

higher K/A ratios. These results also suggested that we treat small values of K/A as zeroes (or
missing), which is what we did.



------Insert Figure A1 about here -------

------Insert Figure A2 about here -------




                                              29
Hall and Oriani                                                                                         March 2004

                                                       Appendix B

OLS: When K5/A and K10/A are introduced in the equation in the place of K/A, we observe
some minor changes in the results. The coefficient of K5/A is a bit lower in France (.21
instead of .28) and Germany (.25 instead of .34), where it is still significant respectively at
five and one percent. The coefficients of K10/A in the two countries is closer to that of K/A
(.27 in France and .29 in Germany). In Italy the two coefficients are negative and not
statistically significant, as in the original estimation.



                                                 TABLE B1
                                   OLS results (Dependent variable: ln V/A)

                     France Germany           Italy    France Germany       Italy    France Germany      Italy

     K/A              .28***       .34***      -.15
                       (.08)        (.05)     (.12)
     K5/A                                               .21**    .25***     -.18       .
                                                        (.07)     (.04)     (.14)
     K10/A                                                                           .27**    .29***     -.21
                                                                                     (.08)     (.04)     (.14)

     I/A              .87***       .99**      .78**    .89***    .90***     .78**    .87***   .96***     .77**
                       (.11)       (.18)      (.26)     (.11)     (.18)     (.26)     (.11)    (.18)     (.26)

     ln (S)                -.03    -.06***   -.07***    -.02     -.05***   -.07***    -.02    -.06***   -.06***
                          (.02)     (.01)     (.01)     (.02)     (.01)     (.01)    (.02)     (.01)     (.01)

     Const.               .57*     .77***    1.04***    .58*     .70***    1.05***    .58*    .72***    1.05***
                          (.25)     (.19)     (.22)     (.25)     (.19)     (.22)    (.25)     (.19)     (.22)

     Observations         308       339       267       308       339       267       308      339       267
     Adjusted R2          .22       .25       .18       .21       .26       .18       .21      .26       .18

                    ***
                          p < .001; ** p < .01; * p < .05; † p < .1; standard errors in parentheses
                                 All equations include a complete set of year dummies.




                                                            30
Hall and Oriani                                                                      March 2004

                                          FIGURE 1
                  Percentage of domestic shares held by institutional investors


  80

  70

  60

  50

  40

  30

  20

  10

    0
         1990     1991      1992    1993     1994       1995       1996   1997    1998   1999
                                                 Year
                         France        Germany             Italy          UK        US




Source: OECD, Institutional Investors database




                                                 31
Hall and Oriani                                                                                             March 2004

                                               FIGURE 2
                                Average V/A ratio (only R&D-doing firms)
        3.4
        3.2
        3.0
        2.8
        2.6
        2.4
        2.2
 V/A




        2.0
        1.8
        1.6
        1.4
        1.2
        1.0
        0.8
        0.6
                1989    1990      1991       1992       1993          1994       1995        1996    1997      1998
                                                               Year
                                  France             Germany             Italy          US          UK




                                               FIGURE 3
                                Average R/A ratio (only R&D-doing firms)
         0.16

         0.14

         0.12

         0.10
  R/A




         0.08

         0.06

         0.04

         0.02

         0.00
                 1989    1990      1991       1992      1993          1994       1995        1996   1997      1998
                                                               Year
                                         France       Germany           Italy      US          UK




                                                         32
Hall and Oriani                                                                                                         March 2004

                                                FIGURE 4
                                 Average K/A ratio (only R&D-doing firms)
       0.7


       0.6


       0.5


       0.4
 K/A




       0.3


       0.2


       0.1


        0
                 1989    1990        1991       1992          1993           1994             1995          1996        1997       1998
                                                                      Year
                                France                 Germany                        Italy                        France - K5
                                Germany - K5           Italy - K5                     US                           UK




                                                FIGURE 5
                                 Average I/A ratio (only R&D-doing firms)
        0.35


         0.3


        0.25


         0.2
  V/A




        0.15


         0.1


        0.05


             0
                  1989   1990        1991      1992        1993            1994        1995          1996      1997         1998
                                                                    Year

                                     France           Germany                 Italy             UK            US




                                                            33
Hall and Oriani                                                                                                 March 2004




                                                          Figure A1
                                  Kernel regression for log Q on K/A (year means removed)
                2



                1
        Log Q




                0



                -1



                -2



                -3
                 0.0        0.5           1.0        1.5          2.0            2.5        3.0       3.5       4.0
                                                                      K/A


                                                      Figure A2
                                          Kernel Regression of LogQ on Log(K/A)
           2



           1
Log Q




           0



          -1



          -2



          -3
                       -9   -8       -7         -6     -5        -4         -3         -2    -1   0         1
                                                            Log (K/A)




                                                                  34
Hall and Oriani                                                                                           January 2004



                                                   TABLE 1
                               Accounting regimes for R&D expenditures: Summary
                                                        Applied Research and
                                 Basic research           Development costs             Disclosure of Annual R&D
           Country               capitalization             capitalization                     Expenditures
                                                    Allowed under certain
           France               Forbidden           conditions                         Not compulsory
                                                    Forbidden (they can be treated
                                                    as special manufacturing costs
           Germany              Forbidden           if related to a specific order)    Not compulsory
                                                    Allowed under certain
           Italy                Forbidden           conditions                         Not compulsory
                                                    Allowed only for certain
           United Kingdom       Forbidden           development costs                  Compulsory (since 1989)
                                                    Allowed under certain
           United States        Forbidden           conditions                         Compulsory (since 1972)
                           Source: KPMG (1995); Hall and Van Reenen (2001); Alexander and Archer (1998)




                                                           35
Hall and Oriani                                                                                                                                                              January 2004




                                                                       TABLE 2
                                         Firms and observations by country and industry (R&D-doing firms only)
                                          France                      Germany                         Italy                      United Kingdom                   United States
   Industry                      Firms     Obs.    Obs. (%)   Firms    Obs.     Obs. (%)      Firms   Obs.    Obs. (%)   Firms       Obs.     Obs. (%)    Firms       Obs.        Obs. (%)
   Food & tobacco                 5         31      10.1%      0         0       0.0%          3       23      9.6%       18          119         5.9%     23         174          2.5%
   Textiles & apparel             1         8       2.6%       2         4       1.2%          1       3       1.3%       10           72         3.6%     13         105          1.5%
   Wood & furniture               0         0       0.0%       0         0       0.0%          0       0       0.0%       5            34         1.7%     20         165          2.4%
   Paper & publishing             0         0       0.0%       0         0       0.0%          0       3       1.3%       13           66         3.3%     28         220          3.1%
   Chemicals                      1         10      3.2%       5        29       8.6%          4       19      7.9%       18          145         7.2%     61         490          7.0%
   Pharmaceutical                 3         15      4.9%       4        19       5.6%          3       19      7.9%       12           64         3.2%     49         379          5.4%
   Personal care                  3         6       1.9%       1         1       0.3%          0       0       0.0%       5            27         1.3%     14         125          1.8%
   Oil                            3         25      8.1%       3        15       4.5%          2       9       3.8%       5            32         1.6%     21         176          2.5%
   Rubber & plastics              1         7       2.3%       3        11       3.3%          2       15      6.3%       5            31         1.5%     24         196          2.8%
   Building materials             2         11      3.6%       5        14       4.2%          2       7       2.9%       12           84         4.2%     14         121          1.7%
   Primary metals                 0         0       0.0%       1         2       0.6%          3       13      5.4%       10           77         3.8%     39         313          4.5%
   Refined metals                 3         10      3.2%       5        10       3.0%          0       0       0.0%       20          116         5.8%     42         333          4.8%
   Machinery                      6         18      5.8%       20       84       24.9%         7       39      16.3%      41          241         12.0%    86         711          10.2%
   Computer                       1         9       2.9%       4        14       4.2%          2       16      6.7%       8            64         3.2%     76         568          8.1%
   Electrical                     4         29      9.4%       3        15       4.5%          3       16      6.7%       25          160         8.0%     48         386          5.5%
   Electronics                    5         23      7.5%       6        31       9.2%          2       15      6.3%       46          309         15.4%   186         1494         21.4%
   Motor vehicles and parts       3         30      9.7%       4        16       4.7%          1       6       2.5%       6            50         2.5%     36         293          4.2%
   Other transport,aerospace      2         6       1.9%       0         0       0.0%          1       4       1.7%       9            63         3.1%     16         133          1.9%
   Medical & optical instr.       4         33      10.7%      9        43       12.8%         3       25      10.5%      10           81         4.0%     60         459          6.6%
   Other manufacturing            3         29      9.4%       3        25       7.4%          1       10      4.2%       12           67         3.3%     19         154          2.2%
   Utilities                      1         8       2.6%       1         4       1.2%          0       0       0.0%       14          108         5.4%     0            0          0.0%

   Reporting R&D in all years     22       208      67.5%      10       100      29.7%         26     182      76.2%     110          838         41.7%   866        6,980         99.8%
   Reporting R&D in some years    29       100      32.5%      69       237      70.3%         14      57      23.8%     195         1,172        58.3%    4          15            0.2%

   Total for R&D-doers            51       462                 79       741                    40     306                305         2,571                870         7,006
   Total non-R&D Doers            76       683                204      1,947                   46     379                287         2,152                496         3,886

   Total                         127      1,145               283      2,688                   86     685                592         4,723                1,366      10,892




                                                                                         36
Hall and Oriani                                                                         January 2004




                                            TABLE 3
                  Total R&D for the sample and the population of manufacturing
                                    and utility firms in 1998
                                                    manufacturing & Sample as a share
                  Country                Sample      utility firms+   of population
                  France*                 7,897          15,601           50.6%
                  Germany*               18,180          28,577           63.6%
                  Italy*                  3,631           5,096           71.2%
                  United Kingdom**        7,753           8,411           92.2%
                  United States***       109,102        188,644           57.8%
                  +Source: ANBERD database, OECD.
                  *Millions of euros
                  **Millions of pounds sterling
                  ***1997, Millions of US dollars




                                                    37
Hall and Oriani                                                                                                                                             January 2004




                                                                           TABLE 4
                                                Descriptive statistics for R&D and non-R&D reporting firms
                                 France                         Germany                          Italy                       UK                       US
                                            Non-                           Non-                              Non-                     Non-                  Non-
     Variable            R&D                R&D         R&D                R&D         R&D                   R&D     R&D              R&D     R&D           R&D
     S*                  1,591      ***      340        1518      ***       175         975       ***         225     218    ***        59     472    ***    283
     A*                   956       ***      204         868      ***       101         822       ***         223     208    ***        60     268    ***    154
     V/A                  1.75      ***      1.43        1.02     ***       1.42        1.07      ***        1.11     1.38   ***       1.06    2.75   ***    2.11
     I/A                 0.246      ***     0.126       0.066     ***      0.043       0.072       **        0.098   0.065            0.060   0.130   ***   0.150
     D/A                 0.421      ***     0.376       0.244              0.253       0.412        *        0.377   0.209    *       0.196   0.976   ***   0.920
     INDRD               0.035      ***     0.026       0.038     ***      0.015       0.022      ***        0.005   0.030   ***      0.013   0.055   ***   0.023
     INDGR               0.036       **     0.026       0.034     ***      0.012       0.062                 0.055   0.051   ***      0.040   0.052   ***   0.039
     Control>33%         0.573      ***     0.674       0.465     ***      0.650       0.552      ***        0.686     --               --      --            --
     R/S                 0.042                --        0.045                --        0.033                   --    0.029              --    0.049           --
     K/A                 0.368                --        0.395                --        0.189                   --    0.126              --    0.529           --
     K5/A                0.392                --        0.479                --        0.175                   --
     K10/A               0.358                --        0.439                --        0.162                   --

     Observations        308                 837        337                2,351       239                    446     2005             2689    6995          3897
     Share of obs.      26.9%               73.1%      12.5%               87.5%      34.9%                  65.1%   42.7%            57.3%   64.2%         35.8%
     *Geometric mean; units are as reported (millions of € for European firms; millions of $ for US firms)
     t-tests with unequal variances for differences in the mean between R&D and non-R&D observations: *** p < .01; ** p < .05; * p < .1




                                                                                         38
Hall and Oriani                                                                                                                                           January 2004




                                                                          TABLE 5
                                              Basic market value regression with dependent variable = log (V/A)
         Model                                                     OLS                                                          NLLS
                                       U.S.          U.K.         France       Germany           Italy      U.S.      U.K.     France    Germany      Italy

         K/A                        0.33***        0.88***       0.28***       0.33***           0.01     0.80***    1.92***   0.41***   0.36***       -0.14
                                     (0.02)         (0.10)        (0.08)        (0.04)          (0.12)     (0.04)     (0.25)    (0.13)    (0.08)      (0.12)
         Slope wrt K/A at                                                                                   0.42      1.36      0.26       0.42        0.14
         averages                                                                                          (0.02)    (0.15)    (0.07)     (0.08)      (0.12)
         Average slope wrt                                                                                  0.46      1.45      0.28       0.44        0.14
         K/A                                                                                               (0.11)    (0.27)    (0.06)     (0.07)      (0.01)

         I/A                        0.60***        0.60***       0.87***       0.97***          1.09***   1.70***    1.15***   1.49***   1.09***     1.08***
                                     (0.04)         (0.08)        (0.13)        (0.15)           (0.23)    (0.09)     (0.19)    (0.32)    (0.19)      (0.27)

         ln (S)                     0.024***       0.07**         -0.02*       -0.06***      -0.06***     0.042***   0.008*     0.003    -0.025***   -0.010**
                                     (0.005)       (0.01)         (0.01)        (0.01)        (0.02)       (0.004)   (0.005)   (0.009)    (0.003)     (0.005)

         Observations                 6995           2005           308           337            239       6995       2010      308        337         239
         Durbin-Watson                 0.28          0.21          0.20          0.23            0.29       0.56      0.19      0.19       0.24        0.23
         Adjusted R-squared           0.167         0.176         0.217          0.252           0.200     0.185      0.144     0.197     0.217       0.113
         All equations include a complete set of year dummies.
         *** p < .01; ** p < .05; * p < .1; heteroskedastic-consistent standard errors in parentheses




                                                                                           39
Hall and Oriani                                                                                                                           January 2004




                                                                    TABLE 6
                                            Market value regression with control for ownership structure
                  Model                                                   OLS                                      NLLS
                                                    France             Germany                  Italy   France    Germany       Italy

                  K/A                              0.56***              0.38***             0.71***     0.66***   0.56***     0.94***
                                                    (0.13)               (0.03)              (0.27)      (0.22)    (0.10)      (0.30)

                  K/A*D(control)                   -0.40**                -0.12             -0.82***    -0.56**   -0.37***    -1.00***
                                                    (0.17)               (0.10)              (0.30)      (0.27)    (0.12)      (0.31)
                  I/A                              0.69***              0.94***             1.18***     1.24***   0.99***     1.10***
                                                    (0.14)               (0.15)              (0.21)      (0.29)    (0.18)      (0.24)

                  ln (S)                             0.02              -0.06***             -0.06***     0.004    -0.026***   -0.019***
                                                    (0.02)              (0.01)               (0.02)     (0.008)    (0.004)     (0.005)

                  D (control>33%)                  0.46***                -0.03             0.23***     0.42***     0.11      0.32***
                                                    (0.10)               (0.07)              (0.07)      (0.09)    (0.07)      (0.07)
                  Test for control                 13.1***               3.04**             5.25***     27.2***   11.2***     19.0***
                  variables (p-value)#              (.000)               (.049)              (.006)      (.000)    (.004)      (.000)
                  Observations                        308                 337                  239        308        337         239
                  Durbin-Watson                       0.22                0.24                 0.31       0.21       0.23        0.30
                  Adjusted R-squared                 0.276               0.260                0.221      0.269      0.247       0.188
                  All equations include a complete set of year dummies.
                  *** p < .01; ** p < .05; * p < .1; heteroskedastic-consistent standard errors in parentheses
                  #The test is an F-statistic in columns 1 to 3, and a chi-squared in columns 4 to 6.




                                                                                           40
Hall and Oriani                                                                                                                                           January 2004



                                                                             TABLE 7
                                                                      Sample selection estimates
                                                         France              Germany                  Italy+                 UK              USA
                  Observations                            1145                 2688                     685                  4694           10892
                  Number reporting R&D                     308                  337                     239                  2005            6995
                  Share reporting R&D                    26.9%                12.5%                   34.9%                 42.7%           64.2%
                                                                  Probit equation for reporting R&D#

                  Debt to assets                       .092 (.051)*        .050 (.022)***          -.059 (.081)          -.041 (.048)      .002 (.009)
                  Log sales                          .081 (.008)***        .052 (.003)***        .112 (.011)***        .085 (.004)***    .050 (.003)***
                  Industry R&D/sales                  1.46 (.32)***         1.58 (.13)***         4.28 (.91)***         4.55 (.41)***     3.19 (.12)***
                  Industry growth                       -0.04 (.38)         0.34 (.11)***           0.41 (.27)          .75 (.14)***      .72 (.10)***
                  D (control>33%)                       0.01 (.03)           -.02 (.01)**        -0.09 (.03)***               --                --
                  Scaled R-squared                        0.177                 0.254                 0.300                  0.234           0.143
                                                     Regression equation with dependent variable Log (V/A)
                  K/A                                0.68 (.19)***          0.38 (.03)***        0.73 (.26)***           .90 (.11)***     .33 (.02)***
                  K/A * D(control)                   -0.49 (.20)**            -0.17 (.10)        -0.89 (.21)***                --               --
                  I/A                                0.69 (.14)***          0.94 (.14)***        1.17 (.28)***           .59 (.08)***     .60 (.04)***
                  Log (sales)                          0.08 (.06)           -.06 (.02)***        -0.05 (.01)***          .08 (.02)***     .02 (.01)***
                  D (control>50%)                    0.49 (.11)***            -0.04 (.07)        0.23 (.07)***                 --               --

                  Estimated correlation                0.53 (.37)             0.00 (.20)            0.05 (.14)             .08 (.17)        -.05 (.06)
                  Estimated std. error               0.52 (.09)***          0.37 (.02)***         0.32 (.02)***          .68 (.01)***     .66 (.01)***

                  Log likelihood                         -768.2                 -834.8                -404.7               -4,714.1        -13,300.0
                  quasi-F-test for normality
                  (num df=2, p-value)                3.18 (.043)**           1.59 (.206)           2.07 (.128)            1.21 (.299)    70.8 (.000)***
                  Likelihood ratio test for
                  control variables (df=2)           25.4 (.000)***         6.3 (.043)**         10.9 (.004)***                --              --
                  #Dp/Dx, the change in probability for a unit change in x, and its standard error is shown.
                  ***
                     p < .01; ** p < .05; * p < .1; heteroskedastic-consistent standard errors in parentheses
                  +the estimates for Italy converged to the boundary of the parameter space for rho.
                  The specification test for normality is based on the two-step estimator with additional Mills' ratio terms included.
                  All equations include a complete set of year dummies.



                                                                                         41
      Hall and Oriani                                                                                                                                                  January 2004




                                                                              TABLE 8
                                                Panel fixed and random effects estimation (Dependent variable: ln V/A)
                                         First Differences                                      Within (Fixed Effects)                                 Random effects
                     Germany      France       Italy      UK         USA       Germany      France        Italy      UK        USA      Germany    France     Italy     UK        USA
Observations             251       256         199       1653        6124         337            308      239       2005       6995       337       308       239       2005      6995
No of firms               67        47          39        280         869          79             51       40       304         870       79        51        40         304       870
K/A                     0.26***   -0.61        -0.16      0.16      0.31***     0.27***          0.26     0.74      -0.01     0.15***   0.30***     0.38      0.65     0.50***   0.22***
                        (0.04)    (0.62)      (1.12)     (0.21)     (0.05)       (0.07)         (0.24)   (0.51)    (0.15)     (0.04)     (0.07)    (0.24)    (0.46)    (0.07)    (0.02)
K/A * D(control)         0.01     -0.63        -0.28         --        --        -0.55*          0.12     0.34       --         --       -0.27*     -0.09     -0.40      --        --
                        (0.23)    (0.64)      (1.32)                             (0.33)         (0.30)   (0.76)                          (0.15)    (0.26)    (0.52)
I/A                     0.85***   0.42**      1.53**     0.19**     0.31***     1.56***     0.66***      1.77***   0.24**     0.35***   1.32***    0.70***   1.63***   0.35***   0.42***
                        (0.28)    (0.17)      (0.62)     (0.08)     (0.04)       (0.21)         (0.16)   (0.47)    (0.12)     (0.04)     (0.18)    (0.12)    (0.28)    (0.07)    (0.03)
ln (S)                   -0.06     0.11        0.10     -0.51***    0.31***      -0.09          -0.02     0.01     -0.27***   0.18***   -0.07***    0.03      -0.04     -0.01    0.05***
                        (0.13)    (0.14)      (0.11)     (0.08)     (0.04)       (0.11)         (0.14)   (0.08)    (0.04)     (0.03)     (0.02)    (0.03)    (0.02)    (0.02)    (0.01)
D (control>33%)           --        --          --           --        --          --             --       --        --         --        0.05      0.27      0.20       --        --
                                                                                                                                         (0.10)    (0.16)    (0.13)
Durbin-Watson            1.33      1.57        1.68       1.62       2.15         1.10           0.93     0.99      0.89       0.91       0.23      0.20      0.28      0.18      0.27
Adjusted R2             0.258     0.164        0.295     0.217       0.121       0.768          0.799    0.712      0.800     0.715      0.225     0.251     0.173      0.115    0.152
Hausman test for
correlated effects                                                                8.48           8.09     3.17     80.4*** 107.5***
(p-value)                                                                        (.292)         (.044)   (.673)     (.000)  (.000)
*** p < .01; ** p < .05; * p < .1; heteroskedastic-consistent standard errors in parentheses.
All equations include a complete set of year dummies.




                                                                                                   42
