                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   ASYMMETRIC SOCIAL INTERACTION IN ECONOMICS:
                        CIGARETTE SMOKING AMONG YOUNG
                       PEOPLE IN THE UNITED STATES, 1992-1999

                                            Jeffrey E. Harris
                                   Beatriz González López-Valcárcel

                                          Working Paper 10409
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w10409


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       April 2004




Supported in part by grant PR2002-0134 from the Ministerio de Educación Cultura y Deporte, España. This
work is the authors’ sole responsibility, and does not necessarily represent the opinions of the Massachusetts
Institute of Technology, the University of Las Palmas de Gran Canaria, or any other organization. The views
expressed herein are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

©2004 by Jeffrey E. Harris and Beatriz González López-Valcárcel. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Asymmetric Social Interaction in Economics:
Cigarette Smoking Among Young People in the United States, 1992-1999
Jeffrey E. Harris and Beatriz González López-Valcárcel
NBER Working Paper No. 10409
April 2004
JEL No. I12
                                         ABSTRACT


We analyzed cigarette smoking among people aged 15 - 24 in approximately 90,000 households in

the 1992 - 1999 U.S. Current Population Surveys. We modeled social influence as an informational

externality, in which each young person’s smoking informs her peers about its “coolness.” The

resulting “family smoking game,” with each sibling’s smoking endogenous, may have multiple

equilibria. We found that the pro-smoking influence of a fellow smoker markedly exceeded the

deterrent effect of a non-smoking peer. The phenomenon of asymmetric social influence has

implications for financial markets, educational performance, criminal behavior, and other areas of

inquiry where peer influence is important.

Jeffrey E. Harris
Department of Economics
MIT
Cambridge, MA 02139
and NBER
jeffrey@mit.edu

Beatriz González López-Valcárcel
Department of Quantitative Methods in Economics
University of Las Palmas de Gran Canaria
Campus de Tafira
35017 Las Palmas
Spain
bvalcarcel@dmc.ulpgc.es
Harris-Gonzalez                     18-March-2004                              Page 3


                                     I. INTRODUCTION

       Economists have devoted considerable theoretical and empirical attention

to the study of social interactions, but few have inquired whether such

interactions might be asymmetric.

       Glaeser, Sacerdote, and Scheinkman [1996] observed, for example, that

rates of larceny and auto theft in a neighborhood influence the propensity of

young residents to commit such crimes. One might further ask, could the

deterrent effect of a decrease in the neighborhood crime rate be absolutely larger

or smaller than the crime-enhancing effect of an increase in the crime rate? Clark

and Oswald [1996] found that workers’ job satisfaction was significantly

negatively correlated with their co-workers’ income. One might similarly ask,

could the disutility of a high-income coworker be greater or smaller than the

utility of a low-income colleague? Kindleberger [1989], Bikhchandani ,

Hirshleifer, and Welch [1992, 1998] and Lux [1998] and others have studied the

“contagion of opinion” in financial markets, where investors follow the behavior

of other fellow traders to form expectations about future prices. One might

further inquire, do investors make different inferences when they see their peers

buy, rather than sell, securities? Only in the literature on school performance, it

appears, have Sacerdote [2001], Hoxby [2002], and Winston and Zimmerman

[2003] formally inquired whether a low achiever gains more by being in a class

(or dorm room) with a high achiever than a high achiever loses by being with a

low achiever.
Harris-Gonzalez                     18-March-2004                                Page 4


       Numerous authors have similarly observed a young person’s decision to

smoke is influenced by peers’ smoking practices. (See, for example, Flay et al.

[1994], Wang et al. [1995], Engels et al. [1997], Norton, Lindrooth, and Ennett

[1998], DeCicca, Kenkel, and Mathios [2000], Wang, Eddy, and Fitzhugh [2000],

Gaviria and Raphael [2001], Alexander et al. [2001], Simons-Morton et al. [2001],

Norton, Lindrooth, and Ennett [2003].) Yet no one, to our knowledge, has

explicitly raised the possibility such peer influence might be asymmetric, too.

       Our task in this paper is to do just that. We focus sharply on social

interactions within the household unit, rather than larger peer groups, such as

those at school or work. We find, in fact, that the pro-smoking influence of one

fellow smoker markedly exceeds the deterrent effect of a non-smoking peer.

       The implications of asymmetry in social interactions are extensive. If the

positive effect of a high-performing peer exceeds the negative effect of a low

performer, then mixing good and bad workers or students might enhance overall

group performance. Conversely, if the deterrent effect of a non-smoking peer is

weaker than the pro-smoking effect of a fellow smoker, then rules that segregate

smokers will reduce overall smoking rates. What is more, when peer effects are

nonlinear, tracking or clustering may create positive externalities only when the

number of peers reaches a critical mass. (See Hoxby [2002].)

       It is well known that social interactions can create multiplier effects

(Glaeser, Sacerdote, and Scheinkman [2002]), and such a phenomenon has not

been lost on researchers who have studied teenage smoking (Lewit, Coate, and
Harris-Gonzalez                     18-March-2004                                Page 5


Grossman [1981], Harris and Chan [1999], Gruber [2000], and Krauth [2001]). In

the presence of positive social externalities, an increase in the price of cigarettes

(or, for that matter, a change in any exogenous factor that influences smoking

rates) will have a larger aggregate effect than the sum of the effects on each

individual separately. This “social multiplier” effect has, in fact, been used to

explain why teenagers seem to have higher price elasticities of demand than

adult smokers.

       But if social interactions are asymmetric, then social multipliers can be

asymmetric, too. In that case, an increase in the price of cigarettes could have a

different absolute effect on the rate of teenage smoking than a decrease in price.

Such a phenomenon, in fact, may underlie the observation that teenage smoking

rates rebounded sharply after the 1993 premium brand price war, but have

declined only sluggishly in times of price hikes (Gruber [2001]). In the context of

financial markets, asymmetric social multipliers might offer an explanation for

slow, modulated booms and rapid busts.

       In the next section, we define the scope of our problem. In Section III, we

propose a simple model of informational externalities that guides our empirical

analysis. In Section IV, we analyze the resulting “family smoking game,” in

which each young person’s smoking is endogenous, and where multiple Nash

equilibria can obtain. Section V then details our econometric methods. Finally,

sections VI and VII present our results and conclusions.
Harris-Gonzalez                    18-March-2004                               Page 6


                                 II. THE PROBLEM

       Table 1 shows the prevalence of current cigarette smoking among persons

aged 15–24 years in relation to the smoking status of other young people, aged

15–24, who reside in the same household. The cross-tabulation is based upon

122,010 individual responses to the Tobacco Use Supplements (TUS) that were

appended to the U.S. Current Population Surveys during three waves:

September 1992 – May 1993; September 1995 – May 1996; and September 1998 –

May 1999. (See U.S. Bureau of the Census [1996, 1998].) Each cell in Table 1

shows the proportion who currently smoke, as well as the sample size, the

number of households, and the log-odds of current smoking.

                           [INSERT TABLE 1 ABOUT HERE.]

       As Table 1 shows, a young person (call her “Bea”) who resides in a

household with no other young people has a 19 percent probability of currently

smoking. Although the pattern is not completely consistent in the largest

households, where the sample sizes are small, the inclusion of nonsmoking

housemates appears to decrease Bea’s probability of smoking, while the addition

of more smokers appears to increase her probability of smoking. Thus, if only

one young nonsmoker also resides in the household, then Bea’s probability of

smoking falls to 12 percent, and if there is a second young nonsmoker in

residence, then Bea’s probability of smoking falls further to 8 percent. On the

other hand, if only one young smoker resides in the household, then Bea’s

probability of smoking rises from 19 to 50 percent, and if a second smoker is
Harris-Gonzalez                     18-March-2004                               Page 7


resident, then Bea’s probability of smoking rises further to 63 percent. What is

more, the quantitative effect of including one more smoking housemate appears

to exceed the effect of including one more nonsmoking housemate. For example,

if Bea started out with no young housemates, then adding two nonsmokers

would reduce her log-odds of smoking by 0.99, while adding two smokers

would increase her log-odds by 1.98.

       Although the data in Table 1 suggest the presence of strong social

influences within the household, we need to be wary of the possibility of self-

selection, that is, Bea simply chose to cohabit with housemates who had

compatible smoking habits. In the TUS sample, however, only 4 percent of

young persons residing in the same household were unrelated. In all likelihood,

most young people had little choice but to live with their parents and other

siblings. For convenience, in what follows, we shall use the terms “sibling” and

“young housemate” interchangeably.

       Quite apart from self-selection, we need to be concerned that the observed

concordance of smoking among young people is simply the result of other

common, observable family influences. It is well known, for example, that

smoking prevalence is inversely related to family income (e.g., Harris and Chan

[1999]). Since variations in retail cigarette prices are largely determined by state

excise tax rates, residents of the same family are likely to face nearly identical

prices. The presence or absence of smoking adults may similarly influence the
Harris-Gonzalez                    18-March-2004                               Page 8


smoking practices of young people in a household. In some households,

smoking is not permitted.

       It is also possible that unobserved common influences, or common shocks,

within the same household underlie the patterns observed in Table 1. While the

TUS explicitly asked respondents whether smoking was permitted in the home,

there may be an unstated family rule that nobody should smoke in the presence

of an infirm, elderly relative. Or perhaps the underage siblings in the same

household may obtain cigarettes from the same source in the schoolyard.

       Even if we properly took account of self-selection, observed characteristics

and unobserved common shocks, we would still be faced with the conundrum of

two-way causation, what Manski [1993] has called the reflection problem. Suppose

that 18-year-old Bea has a 19-year-old brother Jeff who lives in the same

household and does not smoke cigarettes. We observe that Bea likewise does not

smoke. Now consider an otherwise identical two-sibling household, endowed

with the same income, facing the same retail cigarette prices, caring for the same

sick grandmother. In this clone household, 18-year-old Bea has a 19-year-old

brother Jeff who does smoke cigarettes, and we observe that Bea likewise

smokes. Do we conclude that Jeff’s smoking practices influenced Bea’s? Or is it

the other way around?

       If we could perform such an experiment, then we could at least measure

the two-way social interaction between Bea’s and Jeff’s smoking. Beyond that,

we would have to impose strong restrictions to infer one-way causation. We
Harris-Gonzalez                     18-March-2004                              Page 9


could posit, for example, that if Jeff began to smoke before Bea, then Jeff caused

Bea to smoke, but not vice versa. Such a restriction is dubious because Bea’s

smoking, even if she began after Jeff started, may also be keeping Jeff from

quitting.

       When we observe households with three or more young people, however,

we can impose restrictions that follow naturally from the organization of the data

in Table 1. Suppose that we observed another household, with Bea and Jeff as

above, which differed from the first clone in that there was a third sibling, 20-

year-old Pepe. The combined influence of Bea’s two housemates on Bea’s

smoking, we posit, depends only on the number of smoking siblings, and not

their identity. In that case, all other things equal, Bea’s probability of smoking

when Jeff does smoke and Pepe doesn’t is the same as her probability of smoking

when Jeff doesn’t and Pepe does. When we impose such a restriction, and when

we use the data on both the two-sibling and three-sibling households together,

then as we will see below, we can identify the one-way causal effect of one

young person’s smoking on all the remaining sibs.

       Even if we could confront the reflection problem, there is still one more

knot to untie. Return to our two-sibling household with only Bea and Jeff. Let’s

assume that if Jeff smokes, then with 100% probability Bea will smoke, too.

Likewise, if Bea smokes, then with certainty Jeff will smoke, too. In that case,

there are two equally logical outcomes: both Bea and Jeff do not smoke; both Bea

and Jeff do smoke. In this example, we know everything about the household,
Harris-Gonzalez                    18-March-2004                             Page 10


including the one-way effect of Jeff’s smoking or Bea and vice versa. Yet we

cannot make an unequivocal, unique prediction about who smokes and who

doesn’t. This indeterminacy is what Tamer [2002, 2003] has called the problem of

incoherence. In effect, we have a static binary game between Bea and Jeff, in

which there are two Nash equilibria. And in families with more than two

siblings, it is not hard to imagine that there can be more than two such equilibria.

As we will see below, one way to address the problem of incoherence is to

specify additional rules that determine which equilibrium will obtain.

       Before we squarely confront the above-noted problems of common

shocks, reflection and incoherence, we first need to specify a model that

elucidates why Bea’s smoking decision might actually depend on Jeff’s. For this

purpose, we could simply make the ad hoc assumption that Bea’s utility from

smoking depends on the group average smoking rate (e.g., Brock and Durlauf

[2001], Lindbeck, Nyberg, and Weibull [1999]). Or we could specifically assume

that Bea gets greater utility from smoking when she and Jeff smoke together.

Such notions of joint production especially make sense in the context of illicit

drug use, where heroin users share syringes and other paraphernalia, or where

cocaine users congregate in crack houses. We might point out, for example, that

Jeff, as an experienced smoker, teaches the technology of consumption to Bea the

novice (Jones [1994].) Alternatively, we could also model peer influence as a

network externality, a phenomenon that seems apt for drug users, too. In what

follows, we devise a model of peer influence that relies on informational
Harris-Gonzalez                     18-March-2004                              Page 11


externalities in a manner similar to that used by analysts of financial markets

(Bikhchandani , Hirshleifer, and Welch [1992, 1998]).


                              III. A LEARNING MODEL

       We think of each young person as uncertain whether smoking cigarettes

is, on the one hand, a safe, non-addicting and socially acceptable thing to do, or

on the other hand, a dangerous, addicting and socially passe practice. Such a

young person draws inferences from her peers’ smoking to resolve this

uncertainty. Although her peer group is likely to be much larger than her

household, her siblings’ practices provide important data that she relies upon to

revise her prior beliefs about the likelihood that smoking is, in fact, the “cool”

thing to do. In what follows, we use “cool” as a shorthand term for safe, non-

addicting and socially acceptable, while “uncool” is short-hand for dangerous,

addictive and passe.

       A stylized version of the decision faced by such a young person, whom

we call “Bea,” is shown in Figure 1 below. At the square choice node, Bea

decides whether or not to smoke. We assume that Bea does not take account of

the possibility that her own smoking may influence its social desirability in her

peer group. Thus, her subjective probability ϕ that smoking is “cool” does not

depend on her own smoking decision. Since we observe only the smoking

practices of individual household members and not those of her larger peer

group, we refrain from any rational-expectations assumptions that relate Bea’s
Harris-Gonzalez                           18-March-2004                            Page 12


subjective probability ϕ to the actual prevalence of smoking in the larger peer

group. Since our focus is on social interactions, we sidestep questions as to

whether Bea makes a myopic short-run decision or formulates a long-run

lifetime plan. (See Becker and Murphy [1988], Becker, Grossman, and Murphy

[1994].)

                                [INSERT FIGURE 1 ABOUT HERE.]

       We model uncertainty about the “coolness” of smoking by the circular

chance nodes emanating from both the “smoke” and “not smoke” branches in

the figure. Associated with each (action, state of nature) pair is a terminal utility.

Thus V1 is the utility of smoking when it turns to be “cool,” while V2 is the

utility of smoking if it turns out to be “uncool.” V3 is the utility of refraining

from smoking when it turns to be “cool,” while V4 is the utility of not smoking

when it turns out to be “uncool.” We assume that B = V1 − V3 > 0 . That is, Bea

experiences a positive benefit B from smoking when it is “cool” to smoke.

Conversely, we assume that C = V4 − V2 > 0 . That is, she experiences a cost C of

lighting up when it is “uncool” to do so.

       The difference between the expected utility of smoking, ϕ V1 + ( 1 − ϕ) V2 ,

and the expected utility of not smoking, ϕ V3 + ( 1 − ϕ) V4 , is



(1)               ϕ V1 + ( 1 − ϕ) V2   − { ϕV3 + ( 1 − ϕ) V4 } = ϕ ( B + C ) − C
Harris-Gonzalez                         18-March-2004                           Page 13


Bea smokes so long as this difference in expected utility is non-negative. Let us

denote Bea’s smoking behavior by the binary variable y 1 , where y 1 = 1 if Bea

smokes and y 1 = 0 if not. Then Bea smokes so long as her subjective probability

ϕ is no less than a threshold value ~
                                    ϕ , that is,


                                                          C
(2)               y 1 = 1 if ϕ − ~
                                 ϕ   ≥ 0 , where ~
                                                 ϕ=          ; and
                                                        B +C
                  y 1 = 0 otherwise



The pair (ϕ, ~
             ϕ) thus describes Bea’s subjective beliefs about the coolness of

                                                                    ~) . Denoting
smoking (ϕ) and her perceptions of its relative costs and benefits (ϕ

        ϕ                  ~
                              ϕ 
µ = ln      and ~
                    µ = ln    ~  as the log-odds transformations of ϕ and ~
                                                                              ϕ,
        1− ϕ              1− ϕ

respectively, we can rewrite the condition (2) as


(3)               y 1 = 1 if µ − ~
                                 µ ≥ 0 , where ~
                                               µ = ln C − ln B ; and
                  y 1 = 0 otherwise



       We now inquire how information about a peer’s smoking practices can

influence Bea’s own decision to smoke. In particular, we assume that Bea has a

point prior distribution on ϕ and, in Bayesian fashion, updates this prior when

she learns whether or not her brother Jeff smokes cigarettes. Let λ denote the

probability that Jeff would smoke if it were “cool” to do so, and let ω denote the

probability that Jeff would refrain from smoking if it were “uncool.” If we think

of Jeff’s smoking as a diagnostic test of the “coolness” of smoking, then λ is the
Harris-Gonzalez                           18-March-2004                                 Page 14


test’s sensitivity, while ω represents the test’s specificity. When the sensitivity λ

is high, Bea thinks, “My brother Jeff would definitely smoke if it were the cool

thing to do.” When specificity ω is high, the Bea thinks, “My brother Jeff

wouldn’t be caught dead with a cigarette if it weren’t cool.” When λ +ω > 1 ,

Jeff’s smoking is informative about its “coolness.” By contrast, when λ +ω = 1 ,

Jeff’s smoking is entirely uninformative, and knowledge of Jeff’s smoking would

have no effect on Bea’s prior ϕ .

       If Jeff in fact smokes, then by Bayes’ rule, the log-odds of Bea’s posterior

probability that smoking is “cool” becomes


(4)               µ + ln λ − ln( 1 − ω)


If Jeff does not smoke, then the log-odds of Bea’s posterior probability that

smoking is “cool” becomes


(5)               µ + ln( 1 − λ) − ln ω

       Let us similarly denote Jeff’s smoking behavior by the binary variable y 2 ,

where y 2 = 1 if Jeff smokes and y 2 = 0 if not. Then, in light of the information

about Jeff’s smoking, Bea’s decision to smoke can be described by the rule


                                        λ              1−λ
(6)               y 1 = 1 if µ − ~
                                 µ + ln       y 2 + ln    ( 1 − y 2 ) ≥   0 ; and
                                        1 − ω           ω 
                  y 1 = 0 otherwise
Harris-Gonzalez                      18-March-2004                                Page 15



                                                                               λ 
When Jeff’s smoking is informative, that is, λ + ω > 1 , the coefficient ln    
                                                                             1−ω

will be strictly positive, which means that his smoking ( y 2 = 1) will reinforce

Bea’s decision to smoke. Similarly, when Jeff’s smoking is informative, the

                  1−λ
coefficient ln      will be strictly negative, which means that Jeff’s abstaining
                 ω 

( y 2 = 0) will reinforce Bea’s decision to refrain.

       Jeff’s influence on Bea, however, has a built-in asymmetry. That is, the

                                            λ 
reinforcing effect of Jeff’s smoking, ln     , is not necessarily equal to and of
                                          1−ω

                                                                   1−λ
opposite sign to the dissuading effect of Jeff’s abstaining, ln      . When the
                                                                  ω 

                                                    λ        1 − λ  > 0 . So long as
former is stronger than the latter, we have ln        + ln       
                                                 1 − ω      ω 

Jeff’s smoking is informative ( λ + ω > 1 ), this condition is equivalent to ω > λ ,

that is, the specificity of Jeff’s smoking exceeds its sensitivity. Conversely, the

dissuading influence of Jeff’s abstaining exceeds the reinforcing influence of his

smoking when ω < λ . Only when ω = λ would symmetric social influence

prevail.

       Generalizing across an arbitrary number n > 1 of young persons in a

household, we now let (µ i , ~
                             µ i ) denote the prior beliefs and preferences of young

person i , while we let y i be the binary variable representing that person’s

smoking practices. For now, we make the simplifying assumption that each
Harris-Gonzalez                            18-March-2004                                      Page 16


young person views the smoking practices of each of her siblings as independent

information about the “coolness” of smoking. Thus, if Bea had another brother,

Pepe, she would not dismiss the fact of Pepe’s smoking as uninformative simply

because he might copy his brother Jeff.

       Once young person i observes the smoking habits of all of her siblings

{ y j ; j ≠ i } , her posterior probability that smoking is “cool” is (in log-odds form)



                                                 n                                 n
(7)               µi   +   {ln λ − ln( 1 − ω) } ∑ y j    +   {ln( 1 − λ ) − ln ω} ∑ ( 1 − y j )
                                                j ≠i                              j≠ i


                     λ                  1−λ
We write κ = ln        > 0 and α = ln     < 0 for compactness of notation.
                  1 − ω                 ω 

                                     exp(κ) − exp(κ + α )           exp(κ ) − 1
(The inverse mapping is λ =                               and ω =                  .) We
                                       exp(κ) − exp(α )           exp(κ) − exp(α )

also denote u i = (µ i − ~
                         µ i ) . Then each young person’s smoking is described by

the rule

                                     n           n
(8)               y i = 1 if u i + κ ∑ y j + α ∑ ( 1 − y j ) ≥ 0 ; and
                                    j≠ i        j ≠i
                  y i = 0 otherwise



Letting θ = κ − α , we can rewrite the rule (8) as


                                                 n
(9)               y i = 1 if u i + α( n − 1) + θ ∑ y j   ≥ 0 ; and y i = 0 otherwise
                                                j ≠i
Harris-Gonzalez                             18-March-2004                         Page 17


for all i = 1, K , n . Since κ > 0 and α < 0 , we know that θ > 0 . The coefficients

κ and α , respectively, gauge the effects of importing a young smoker or

importing a young nonsmoker into the household. By contrast, the coefficient θ

measures the net effect of a young person’s switching from a nonsmoker to a

smoker in a household with a fixed number n of young people.

       In equation (8), the term u i = (µ i − ~
                                              µ i ) captures each young person’s prior

beliefs (µ i ) about the “coolness” of smoking, as well as the perceived net benefits

of smoking ( − ~
               µ i = ln Bi − ln C i ) . The former can depend on other social

influences, such as the smoking practices of adults and peers outside the

household, or any other information about the perceived dangers or acceptability

of smoking. The latter can depend on the price of cigarettes, income, age,

gender, and other personal or household characteristics. In anticipation of the

empirical analysis below, we therefore specify the linear link function


(10)              ui   = X i β + Zγ + ε i



for all i = 1, K , n , where X i is a vector of observable personal characteristics, Z

is a vector of observable household characteristics, (β, γ) is a parameter vector,

and ε i is a disturbance term that captures unobservable factors. We have


                                                         n
(11)              y i = 1 if X i β + Zγ + α( n − 1) + θ ∑ y j + ε i   ≥ 0 ; and
                                                        j≠ i
                  y i = 0 otherwise
Harris-Gonzalez                             18-March-2004                            Page 18




for all i = 1, K , n . For now, we need assume only that the unobserved factors are

random variables (ε 1 , K , ε n ) with a common mean of zero and a joint

cumulative distribution function F . In what follows, it will be helpful to

abbreviate W i = X i β + Zγ + α(n − 1) for all i = 1, K , n , so that (11) becomes


                                     n
(12)              y i = 1 if W i + θ ∑ y j + ε i   ≥   0 ; and y i = 0 otherwise
                                     j ≠i




       So long as we assume that each young person views the smoking practices

of each of her siblings as independent information about the “coolness” of

smoking, the parameters α and θ in equation (11) will remain constant and

independent of the total number of siblings n in the family. However, if Bea

recognizes the interdependence of the smoking practices of her brothers Jeff and

Pepe, then the additional observation that Pepe smokes may be more or less

informative than the initial observation that Jeff smoked. In that case, we expect

the parameter θ to vary with n . While we continue to assume that α and θ are

constant in the upcoming discussion of the equilibria of the system (12), we shall

relax this assumption in our econometric analyses later on.


                               IV. THE FAMILY SMOKING GAME

       We can think of the system (12) as delineating the strategies of each player

in an n-person static, binary, simultaneous-move game. In this “family smoking
Harris-Gonzalez                         18-March-2004                             Page 19


game,” as we will call it, each young person’s decision to smoke (that is, y j = 1 )

enhances the propensity of the others to follow suit (that is, y i = 1 ). Our family

smoking game differs from the market entry games studied by Bresnahan and

Reiss [1990], Berry [1992], and others, where the entry of a rival firm j into the

market (that is, y j = 1 ) makes it less profitable for firm i to be in the market (that

is, y i = 1 ). It also differs from the binary game studied by Tamer [2003], in

which y j = 1 makes it more likely that y i = 1 , but y i = 1 makes it less likely

that y j = 1 . However, like the market entry game and Tamer’s game, the family

smoking game can have multiple Nash equilibria in pure strategies.

       To illustrate the point, consider a family with two young people, where

Bea is young person #1, while her brother Jeff is young person #2. The system

(12) becomes


(13)              y 1 = 1 if   W1 + θ y 2 + ε 1   ≥ 0 ; y 1 = 0 otherwise

                  y 2 = 1 if W 2 + θ y 1 + ε 2    ≥ 0 ; y 2 = 0 otherwise



When ε 1 ≥ − W 1 , smoking cigarettes is a dominant strategy for Bea, that is, she

will smoke whether or not Jeff does. Conversely, when ε 1 < − W 1 − θ , abstaining

from smoking is a dominant strategy for her. But when − W 1 − θ > ε 1 ≥ − W 1 ,

Bea will choose to smoke only if Jeff does, too. In the region of the (ε 1 , ε 2 ) plane

where − W 1 > ε 1 ≥ − W 1 − θ and − W 2 > ε 2 ≥ − W 2 − θ , there will be two
Harris-Gonzalez                             18-March-2004                                        Page 20


equilibria: ( y 1 , y 2 ) = (0 ,0 ) ; and ( y 1 , y 2 ) = ( 1,1) . The situation is illustrated in

Figure 2 below, which plots the different pure-strategy equilibria in the (ε 1 , ε 2 )

plane.

                                 [INSERT FIGURE 2 ABOUT HERE.]

         The 3-sibling family smoking game, involving Bea, Jeff, and Pepe (sibling

#3), entails similar rules:


(14)              y 1 = 1 if    W1 + θ ( y2 + y 3 ) + ε1      ≥ 0 ; y 1 = 0 otherwise

                  y 2 = 1 if W 2 + θ ( y 1 + y 3 ) + ε 2      ≥ 0 ; y 2 = 0 otherwise

                  y 3 = 1 if W 3 + θ ( y 1 + y 2 ) + ε 3      ≥ 0 ; y 3 = 0 otherwise



         While we do not display all possible equilibria in the (ε 1 , ε 2 , ε 3 ) plane for

this game, we do show in Figure 3 the equilibria in the (ε 2 , ε 3 ) subspace where

− W 1 − θ > ε 1 ≥ − W 1 − 2 θ , that is, were Bea smokes only when both of her

siblings smoke, too.

                                 [INSERT FIGURE 3 ABOUT HERE.]

         In the lower right rectangle in the figure, where the disturbances

(ε 1 , ε 2 , ε 3 ) satisfy {− W 1 − θ > ε 1 ≥ − W 1 − 2θ ; ε 2 ≥ − W 2 ; − W 3 − 2 θ > ε 3 } ,

smoking is a dominant strategy for Jeff (sibling #2), while abstinence is a

dominant strategy for Pepe (sibling #3). Bea (sibling #1) will therefore abstain,

too, and the sole equilibrium is ( y 1 , y 2 ,y 3 ) = (0 ,1,0 ) . In the rectangle
Harris-Gonzalez                           18-March-2004                                    Page 21


immediately above that one, where (ε 1 , ε 2 , ε 3 ) instead satisfies

{− W 1 − θ > ε 1 ≥ − W 1 − 2θ; ε 2 ≥ − W 2 ; − W 3 − θ > ε 3 ≥ − W 3 − 2 θ }, smoking
remains Jeff’s dominant strategy. However, Bea will smoke only if Pepe does,

too, and vice versa. Thus, we have two equilibria in pure strategies:

( y 1 , y 2 ,y 3 ) = (0 ,1,0 ) and (1,1,1). In the central rectangle where no sibling has a

dominant strategy, the two Nash equilibria are: ( y 1 , y 2 , y 3 ) = ( 0 ,0,0 ) and (1,1,1).

                                                                                            n
       In market entry games, the number of entrants, that is, the quantity                ∑ yi ,
                                                                                           i =1


is uniquely determined even when there are multiple equilibria. Thus, in the 2-

firm market entry game, there is a region of the (ε 1 , ε 2 ) plane where both

( y 1 , y 2 ) = (1 ,0) and ( y 1 , y 2 ) = (0 ,1) are equilibria. In that case, we can still say

that there will be exactly one entrant into the market, even if we cannot specify

which firm. In the family smoking game, however, we cannot uniquely

determine the number of smokers. In the center rectangle in Figure 2, there can

either be 0 or 2 smokers, and in the center rectangle of Figure 3, there can be 0 or

3 smokers.

       While the 2- and 3-sibling games have at most two pure-strategy

equilibria, this is not generally the case. Consider a 4-sibling smoking game in

which both Bea (#1) and Jeff (#2) will smoke if just one sibling does, too (that is,

− W i > ε i ≥ − W i − θ ; i = 1 ,2 ), while Pepe (#3) and Silvia (#4) will each smoke

only if at least 3 siblings do, too (that is, − W i − 2 θ > ε i ≥ − W i − 3θ ; i = 3, 4 ). Then
Harris-Gonzalez                            18-March-2004                                     Page 22


there are three pure-strategy equilibria: ( y 1 , y 2 ,y 3 , y 4 ) = (0 ,0 ,0,0 ) ; (1,1,0,0); and

(1,1,1,1).

           In those regions of the (ε 1 , ε 2 , K , ε n ) space where multiple pure-strategy

equilibria prevail, the family smoking game does admit a unique mixed strategy

equilibrium. For example, when (ε 1 , ε 2 ) belongs to the central rectangle in

Figure 2, the mixed strategy equilibrium entails Bea’s smoking with probability

    W2 + ε 2                                                 W1 + ε1
−              and Jeff’s smoking with probability −                    . When n > 2 and no
       θ                                                         θ

player has a dominant strategy, the mixed strategy equilibrium entails sibling i

                                 1                                  
                                                       n
smoking with probability              ( W i + ε i ) − ∑ ( W j + ε j )  . In the context of youth
                                 nθ                                  
                                                     j ≠i            

smoking initiation, we find it difficult to devise a realistic interpretation for such

mixed strategies. Nor do we see any appeal in a Stackelberg solution, as

explored in other contexts by Kooreman [1994], Bjorn and Vuong [1997],

Hiedemann [1998], and Chao [2002]. If Jeff is older than Bea, then his smoking

can exert a greater influence on her than vice versa, but this does not imply that

Jeff “pre-commits” to smoking. As discussed below, sensitivity analyses of

alternative model specifications indicated that the net influence parameter θ did

not depend significantly on a sibling’s age.
Harris-Gonzalez                            18-March-2004                                      Page 23


                                  V. ECONOMETRIC METHODS

        As Tamer [2002, 2003] has explained, the structural parameters of models

such as that specified in equations (11) and (12) can sometimes be identified even

when the model itself is rendered “incomplete” by the existence of multiple

equilibria. In the case of the family smoking game, with sufficiently rich data on

the observables { X , Z , y} , we should in principle be able to distinguish between

exogenous effects (β, γ) , and the endogenous effect θ . Moreover, if we study

households of different sizes n , then we can identify the parameter α as well.

        Although Tamer [2002, 2003] has suggested several novel strategies for

estimation, we resort to a more practical approach. In particular, we assume that

in those regions of the (ε 1 , ε 2 , K , ε n ) space where multiple pure-strategy

equilibria prevail, the observed equilibrium is the outcome of a random trial

governed by mixing probabilities that we estimate as incidental parameters.

        The case of the two-sibling family illustrates our approach. Let us assume

that the disturbances (ε 1 , ε 2 ) are joint normally distributed with zero means,

unit variances, and correlation coefficient ρ . The probability that (ε 1 , ε 2 ) lies in

the center region of Figure 2, where there are multiple equilibria, is


(15)

R = Φ( W 1 + θ , W 2 + θ, ρ) − Φ ( W 1 + θ , W 2 , ρ) − Φ ( W 1 , W 2 + θ , ρ) + Φ( W 1 , W 2 , ρ)
Harris-Gonzalez                            18-March-2004                                Page 24


where Φ( u , v , ρ) is the corresponding bivariate cumulative normal cumulative

distribution function. We assume that when the pair (ε 1 , ε 2 ) lies in the center

region in Figure 2, the observed equilibrium is the outcome of a Bernoulli trial,

with probability π of the all-smoker equilibrium (1,1), and probability 1 − π of

the all-nonsmoker equilibrium (0,0). If both Bea and Jeff are observed to smoke,

that is, ( y 1 , y 2 ) = ( 1,1) , then the contribution of such an observation to the

likelihood function is


(16)              l( 1,1) = Φ( W 1 + θ, W 2 + θ , ρ) − ( 1 − π)R



If both Bea and Jeff do not smoke, that is, ( y 1 , y 2 ) = (0 ,0 ) , then the contribution

of such an observation to the likelihood function is


(17)              l( 0,0 ) = Φ( −W 1 , −W 2 , ρ) − πR



If Bea smokes but Jeff does not, that is, ( y 1 , y 2 ) = (1 ,0) , then the contribution of

such an observation to the likelihood function is


(18)              l( 1,0) = Φ( W 1 , − W 2 − θ , − ρ)



Similarly, if Bea does not smoke but Jeff does, that is, ( y 1 , y 2 ) = (0 ,1) , then the

contribution of such observation to the likelihood function is


(19)              l( 0,1) = Φ ( −W 1 − θ, W 2 , − ρ)
Harris-Gonzalez                     18-March-2004                                Page 25


With sufficiently rich data, we can estimate not only the structural parameters

but also the incidental parameters (ρ, π) by maximizing the likelihood function

defined in (15) through (19).

       The main drawback of the mixing-probability approach is that the number

of incidental parameters increases nonlinearly with family size. For example, in

the 3-sibling family described in part in Figure 3, we would in principle need one

distinct mixing parameter for each of the four regions in which there are two

equilibria. In this 3-sibling case, we can economize on incidental parameters by

assuming that there is a single mixing parameter π , which represents the

probability that the equilibrium with the larger number of smokers, that is, the

larger value of y 1 + y 2 + y 3 , will prevail. With four or more siblings, however,

the number of potential incidental parameters can become unwieldy, and the

choice of economizing restriction is less obvious.

       Fortunately, as shown in Table 1, the vast majority of households in our

data set contained no more than 3 young people. In both 2- and 3-sibling

households, as we shall see below, our maximum likelihood estimates of the

structural parameters were robust with respect to alternative specifications of the

mixing probabilities, even though such mixing probabilities could not be

estimated with precision. Put differently, at the maximum likelihood estimates,

the density of the region of multiple equilibria (which, in the 2-family case,

corresponds to the quantity R in equation (15)) turned out to be quite small.
Harris-Gonzalez                            18-March-2004                                      Page 26


       Expanding on the specification in equation (11), we denote the smoking

behavior of young person i in household h , which contains n h young people,

by the binary variable y ih , where



(20)              y ih = 1 if X ih β + Zh γ + α( n h − 1) + θYih + ν h + δ ih   ≥   0 , and

                  y ih = 0 otherwise,


              nh
where Yih = ∑ y jh denotes the number of siblings of young person i who
             j ≠i


currently smoke; each ν h is independently identically normally distributed with

mean 0 and variance ρ ∈ [ 0 ,1] ; each δ ih is independently identically normally

distributed with mean 0 and variance 1 − ρ ; and { θ, α , β, γ, ρ } are unknown

parameters. Under this random-effects error structure, each combined

disturbance term ε ih = ν h + δ ih is normally distributed with zero mean and unit

variance. Moreover, E[ε ih ε jh ] = ρ for i ≠ j , that is, the disturbances { εih } may be

correlated within the household, even if they are independent across households.

       Our estimation and testing strategy proceeded from the particular to the

general. We first estimated the structural model (20) for the subset of 2-sibling

families alone under the assumption, detailed above, that in cases of two possible

equilibria, there was a probability π that the equilibrium with the larger value of

Yih would prevail. With fixed n h = 2 , this case permitted us to estimate the
Harris-Gonzalez                       18-March-2004                            Page 27


structural parameter θ , but not the parameter α , which is indistinguishable

from the constant term implicit in the vector ( X ih , Z h ) .

       Second, we estimated the structural model (20) for the subset of 3-sibling

families alone under the equivalent assumption that in cases of two possible

equilibria, there was a probability π that the equilibrium with the larger value of

Yih would prevail. In the 3-sibling analysis, the likelihood function is analogous

to that shown for the 2-sibling family in equations (15) through (19), and the

relevant multivariate probit integrals can be computed by standard quadrature

methods. Again, with fixed n h = 3 , this case provided us with a separate

estimate of the parameter θ , but not the parameter α .

       Third, our maximum likelihood analyses of 2-, and 3-sibling households,

which constituted the vast majority of multi-sibling households, gave imprecise

point estimates of the parameters π and ρ . We therefore investigated the

robustness of our estimates of the structural parameters ( β, γ, θ ) with respect to

the values of π and ρ . For subsequent models that included households with 4

or more siblings, whose estimation was computationally burdensome, we then

specified the fixed values of π and ρ that yielded the most conservative

estimates of peer influence.

       Fourth, in pooled analyses of all households with 1 to 4 siblings, we were

able to identify not only the parameter θ , but also the parameter α . From this

information, we could also recover the parameter κ = θ + α . Since κ > 0 and
Harris-Gonzalez                              18-March-2004                                       Page 28


α < 0 , the null hypothesis of symmetric social influence would mean that

κ + α = 0 or, equivalently, θ + 2α = 0 . To test this null hypothesis against the

two-sided alternative, we computed the ratio of the likelihood for the

constrained version of model (20), where θ + 2α = 0 , divided by that for the

unconstrained version of (20).

        Fifth, in our pooled samples of households with 4 or fewer siblings, we

formally tested the hypotheses that that the peer-influence parameters θ and α

depended on family size. In particular, we assumed the linear link functions:

θ = θ 0 + θ 1 ( nh − 1) and α = α 0 + α 1 ( n h − 1) , so that the specification in equation

(20) becomes


(21)              y ih = 1 if


X ih β + Z h γ + α 0 ( n h − 1) + α 1 ( n h − 1) 2 + θ 0 Yih + θ 1 ( n h − 1) Yih + ν h + δ ih   ≥   0,

                 and y ih = 0 otherwise,



From the parameter estimates in (21), we could then recover the dependence of

the parameter κ on family size as well, that is, κ = ( θ 0 + α 0 ) + ( θ 1 + α 1 ) ( n h − 1) .

In this context, to test the null hypothesis of symmetric social influence against

the two-sided alternative, we computed the ratio of the likelihood for the

constrained version of model (21), where both θ 0 + 2 α 0 = 0 and θ 1 + 2 α 1 = 0 ,

divided by that for the unconstrained version.
Harris-Gonzalez                             18-March-2004                    Page 29


       Sixth, for our pooled samples, we estimated the reduced-form version of

the model (20), in which we assumed that both θ = 0 and α = 0 . That is,


(22)              y ih = 1 if X ih β + Z h γ + ν h + δ ih   ≥   0 , and

                  y ih = 0 otherwise,



This special case corresponds simply to a random-effects probit model in which

the parameter ρ is estimated. Comparison of the estimated parameters (β, γ)

from the reduced form model in equation (22) with those from the structural

model (20) permitted us to assess the “social multiplier” associated with within-

family peer influence. In this context, we focused specifically on the contrast

between the structural effect and the reduced-form effect of an increase in the

real price of cigarettes.

       Finally, we performed a number of sensitivity analyses. We analyzed a

pooled sample of families with 2 to 4 siblings, excluding households with only

one young person. We studied an alternative model to (21) where the peer-

influence parameter θ depended on a young person’s age. We also estimated

the model of equation (20) under the dubious assumption that the variable Yih ,

the number of siblings of young person i who currently smoke, was exogenous.


                                      VI. EMPIRICAL RESULTS

       In separate analyses of 2- and 3-sibling households, our estimates of the

peer-influence parameter θ were always positive and statistically significant. In
Harris-Gonzalez                       18-March-2004                                Page 30



12,632 two-sibling households alone, we obtained θˆ = 0.521 with a 95%

confidence interval of [0.488, 0.554], while in 1,786 three-sibling households

alone, we observed θˆ = 0.445 with a 95% confidence interval of [0.277, 0.613]. In

both cases, the maximum likelihood estimates of the probability of multiple

equilibria were quite small. In the 2-sibling case, the estimated probability that

the disturbances (ε 1 , ε 2 ) were contained in central rectangle in Figure 2 was only

0.013. In the 3-sibling case, the combined probability that the disturbances

(ε 1 , ε 2 , ε 3 ) were contained in one of the analogous regions in Figure 3 was 0.040.

Empirically, the existence of multiple equilibria did not turn out to be a

statistically significant problem but, as a result, our data were uninformative

about the values of the parameters π and ρ . While the point estimates were

πˆ = 1 and ρˆ = 0 , the corresponding 95% confidence intervals included virtually

all values in the feasible intervals (that is, 0 ≤ π ≤ 1 and 0 ≤ ρ ≤ 1 ). Put differently,

the likelihood function was nearly flat when projected onto the ( π, ρ) subspace.

       Despite the uncertainty in π and ρ , we found that the estimates of the

structural parameters (including, for example, the effect of cigarette prices) were

nonetheless quite robust. The robustness for the peer-influence parameter θ is

specifically depicted in Figure 4 below. In the Figure, we re-estimated the model

(including the parameters ( β, γ , θ , ρ ) ) for various fixed values of the mixing

parameter π . In both 2- and 3-sibling households, the estimates θ̂ displayed

only a relatively small degree of dependence on π . Moreover, the estimated
Harris-Gonzalez                     18-March-2004                                 Page 31


values of θ were lowest when the parameter π was fixed at the maximum

likelihood estimate of πˆ = 1 .

                            [INSERT FIGURE 4 ABOUT HERE.]

       Since the assumption that π and ρ equaled their respective point

estimates πˆ = 1 and ρˆ = 0 gave conservative estimates of the key parameter θ ,

we retained this assumption in our subsequent analyses. In particular, for 308

four-sibling families alone, we obtained θˆ = 0.396 with a 95% confidence interval

of [0.318, 0.473], while in 50 five-sibling households alone, we observed θˆ = 0.241

with a 95% confidence interval of [0.080, 0.402].

       The column identified as equation (20) in Table 2 shows our estimates of

the parameters θ and α in equation (20), as well as the estimated coefficient γ

for cigarette price, in a pooled sample of 49,898 households with 1 to 4 siblings.

Given maximum likelihood estimates of θˆ = 0.479 and αˆ = −0.150 , we computed

κˆ = θˆ + α
          ˆ = 0.329 . As Table 2 further shows, the null hypothesis of symmetric

peer influence, namely, κ + α = 0 , was strongly rejected ( P < 10 −6 ). At the

sample means of the right-hand side variables, each additional smoking sibling

raised the probability of smoking by an estimated 7.6 percent, while each non-

smoking sibling lowered the probability by an estimated 3.5 percent. Thus, the

pro-smoking influence of a sibling who smokes is more than twice the deterrent

effect of a non-smoking sibling.
Harris-Gonzalez                       18-March-2004                                   Page 32


       The results for equation (20) in Table 2 permitted us to recover the

remaining parameters in our learning model of Section III. In particular, the

sensitivity λ of a peer’s smoking as a test of its “coolness” was an estimated

0.366 (approximate 95% confidence interval, 0.335–0.397), while the specificity ω

was an estimated 0.737 (approximate 95% confidence interval, 0.701–0.772). Put

differently, if smoking is “uncool,” then Bea believes that there is about a 74%

probability that her brother Jeff will not smoke. But if smoking is “cool,” then

there is only about a 37% probability that Jeff will smoke.

                         [INSERT TABLE 2 ABOUT HERE.]

       In our analysis of subsets of households of different size, we found that

the estimated values of θ were inversely related to the number of young people.

We therefore investigated a model, specified in equation (21), wherein both the

peer-influence parameters θ and α depended on family size through the linear

link functions θ = θ 0 + θ 1 ( nh − 1) and α = α 0 + α 1 ( n h − 1) . The parameter

estimates for the resulting model, based upon the pooled sample of 49,898

households with 1 to 4 siblings are also shown in Table 2. We found that while

the parameter θ declined with the number of siblings, the parameter α did not.

Thus, as the number of siblings in the household increased, the pro-smoking

influence of any one smoking sibling was diluted, while the anti-smoking

influence of a non-smoking sibling was not clearly dependent on family size. In

particular, in a two-sibling family (that is, n h = 2 ), the estimated values of θ and
Harris-Gonzalez                     18-March-2004                               Page 33


α were 0.513 and − 0.127 , respectively, and the corresponding values of the

sensitivity λ and specificity ω were 0.297 and 0.798, respectively. In a four-

sibling family, the estimated values of θ and α were 0.387 and − 0.153 ,

respectively, and the corresponding values of the sensitivity λ and specificity ω

were 0.442 and 0.650, respectively. As in equation (20), our likelihood ratio test

strongly rejected the null hypothesis of symmetric peer influence in the pooled

sample of families all sizes. Moreover, the values of θ in models where the

parameters were estimated separately for subsets of households of different sizes

were indistinguishable from the values estimated from equation (21) in the

pooled sample of households of all sizes. (Results not shown.)

       By way of sensitivity analysis, we found that the influence parameter θ

did not vary significantly with each sibling’s age. (Results not shown.) When we

used standard random-effects probit methods to estimate equations (20) and (21)

under the dubious assumption that the number of smoking siblings Yih was

exogenous, we obtained estimates of θ ≈ 0.90 and α ≈ −0.22 , values that (in

absolute terms) significantly overstated those shown in Table 2. (Detailed results

not shown.)

       The right-most column of Table 2 shows the estimate of the coefficient for

cigarette price in the reduced-form model of equation (22). The estimated

coefficient of price in the reduced form model was 1.6 times the value derived

from the structural models of (20). At the sample means of the right-hand side

variables, each $1-increase in the real price of a carton of cigarettes (or 10-cent
Harris-Gonzalez                    18-March-2004                             Page 34


increase in the price per pack) reduced the probability of smoking in the

reduced-form model (20) by 0.0060, while it reduced the probability of smoking

in the structural model (21) by only 0.0038. Thus, we found that the marginal

deterrent effect of a price increase on the probability of smoking, as derived from

the reduced form model, was likewise about 60 percent greater than the marginal

effect of price derived from the structural model. This comparison gives us an

estimate of the social multiplier effect of peer influence within the household.

       The full set of parameter estimates for equations (20) through (22) in Table

2 are shown in the Results Appendix. In particular, we found that the effect of a

household adult’s smoking is only about two-thirds that of a younger peer’s

smoking. In separate sensitivity analyses, we rejected the possibility that older

siblings had more influence than younger ones. (Results not shown.) We also re-

estimated our pooled analyses with a subset of 14,781 families with 2, 3, or 4

siblings, but the results were not markedly different from those reported here.

(Results also not shown.)




                        VII. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS

       Our analyses of smoking practices among young people aged 15–24 in a

large nationwide sample of U.S. households polled during the 1990s strongly

confirmed the hypothesis of asymmetric social influence. We found that the pro-

smoking influence of a sibling who smokes is more than twice the deterrent
Harris-Gonzalez                     18-March-2004                               Page 35


effect of a non-smoking sibling. Moreover, the pro-smoking influence of any

particular smoking peer was partially diluted in households with larger numbers

of young people, but even in households with up to 5 young residents, the pro-

smoking social influence of a smoker continued to dominant the deterrent effect

of a nonsmoker.

       Our results can be interpreted in terms of a model of information

externalities, in which each young person, who is uncertain about the risks and

benefits of smoking, learns about such risks and benefits from peers’ smoking

practices. In particular, a young person employs the information contained in

each of her peer’s smoking practices to update her prior probability that smoking

is safe, non-addictive, and the socially acceptable, in short, the “cool” thing to do.

In this process of Bayesian updating, each peer’s smoking becomes, in effect, a

diagnostic test with its own sensitivity and specificity. In this context, we

estimated that, on average, the sensitivity of a peer’s smoking was 37 percent,

while the specificity was 74 percent. Put differently, young Bea believes that if

smoking were in fact “uncool,” then there would be only about a one-in-four

chance that her brother Jeff would smoke anyway. But if smoking were in fact

“cool,” then she believes that there would be a nearly two-thirds chance that Jeff

could still be a nonsmoker.

       The dilution of a smoker’s influence in large families can likewise be

expressed in terms of sensitivity and specificity. If Jeff were Bea’s only sibling,

then we estimated that Bea would attach about a 30-percent sensitivity and an
Harris-Gonzalez                     18-March-2004                                Page 36


80-percent specificity to his smoking. By contrast, if Jeff were just one of Bea’s

three siblings, then the sensitivity of Jeff’s smoking would rise to about a 44

percent, while the specificity would fall to about 65 percent. In the medical

literature, repeated testing alters an individual test’s accuracy when the tests are

not independent, often because the populations of persons with and without the

disease are heterogeneous (Dendukuri and Joseph [2001], Qu and Hadgu [1998],

Torrance-Rynard and Walter [1997]). In the present context, our findings

concerning diluted influence suggest that young people in fact understand the

interdependence of their peers’ smoking practices. Thus, if Pepe already smokes,

Jeff’s smoking is less influential for Bea because she recognizes that Jeff is

smoking, at least in part, because Pepe is.

       Our model of asymmetric information externalities could be applied to

many other fields, especially financial markets, where traders infer good and bad

news from the upward and downward price movements of securities

(Bikhchandani , Hirshleifer, and Welch [1992, 1998] and Lux [1998]). It has

obvious applications in other contexts, including local crime rates (Glaeser,

Sacerdote, and Scheinkman [1996]) and school performance (Sacerdote [2001],

Hoxby [2002], and Winston and Zimmerman [2003]). In the classroom, for

example, the behavior of good students who “set an example” may be highly

informative about the value of regular studying and attendance, while the

behavior of poor students may be uninformative. In the present context, our

analysis cautions those who might distinguish too sharply between “peer
Harris-Gonzalez                    18-March-2004                                Page 37


influence” and “knowledge” theories of youth smoking initiation (U.S.

Department of Health and Human Services [1994]).

       Comparing the results from a reduced form model to our structural

estimates, we estimated that the aggregate deterrent effect of an increase in

cigarette price on youth current smoking prevalence was approximately 60

percent greater than the sum of the deterrent effects on each individual

separately. Our analysis thus provides an important explanation for the

apparently large price responsiveness of youth smoking found by numerous

researchers (e.g., Chaloupka and Pacula [1999], Chaloupka and Wechsler [1995],

Emery, White, and Pierce [2001], Harris and Chan [1999], Lewit and Coate

[1982]). Although the static equilibrium model employed in this paper (the

“family smoking game”) allowed for asymmetric peer influence, it did not by

itself generate asymmetric social multipliers. While we might consider more

complex static models, or even dynamic models of youth smoking, we leave the

modeling and estimation of such asymmetric social multipliers to later work.

Nonetheless, asymmetric social multipliers may be an important source of

asymmetric responses of demand to increases and reductions in cigarette taxes

and other measures intended to reduce youth smoking.

       Our structural model of peer influence entailed a system of simultaneous

equations in discrete endogenous variables. While this approach permitted us to

address a number of problems in the analysis of peer effects, particularly the

problem of reflection (Manski [1993]), such models are known to be susceptible
Harris-Gonzalez                    18-March-2004                              Page 38


to the problem of multiple equilibria. Fortunately, in our applied work with

households of 2 and 3 young people, which constituted the vast majority of those

in our sample, those regions within the disturbance space where multiple

equilibria could obtain had too small a probability to influence our estimates of

the key structural parameters. Our results thus offer an illustration of a theorem

by Tamer [2002] that when the data are sufficiently rich, parameters can be

identified even when the model is, strictly speaking, incomplete.

       Other researchers have attempted to apply non-Nash equilibrium

concepts to the analysis of small-group data (e.g., Chao [2002], Bjorn and Vuong

[1997], and Kooreman [1994]). In the context of a couple’s decision about

contraception, studied by Chao [2002], for example, there is a natural asymmetry

between man and woman (and the contraceptive pill and male condom) that

lends itself to a Stackelberg specification, in which one “player” can commit to

moving first. In our context, one might conjecture that an older sibling could

pre-commit to cigarette smoking by virtue of its addictive propensity. However,

there is evidence that addiction to cigarettes develops gradually along a

continuum during youth (Harris and Chan [1999]) and, in any case, we found no

evidence that older siblings had a greater peer influence than younger ones.

       Our empirical analysis is subject to a number of limitations. We were able

to attach specific cigarette prices from the ACCRA database to only about 64

percent of the households polled about smoking in the Current Population

Survey. However, we have no evidence that the excluded households differed
Harris-Gonzalez                     18-March-2004                              Page 39


materially with respect to any factor that might determine youth smoking rates.

We are conscious that state-level cigarette prices may be endogenous because the

overall prevalence of smoking among adults (as well as young people) in a state

may influence the political acceptability of a hike in the state cigarette excise

taxes. However, we see the ACCRA prices, which are specific to metropolitan

areas and non-metropolitan counties, as less susceptible to such criticism.

       We are likewise aware that the Tobacco Use Supplements to the CPS

during the 1990s contained more than 30 percent of proxy responses. Since the

CPS is designed so that one proxy typically answers for multiple respondents in

the same household, we see potential biases in proxy responses primarily as a

“common shock” within the household, which we specifically addressed in our

mixed-effects error specification. What is more, we assumed that while youth

smoking was endogenous within the household, the smoking practices of adults

were exogenous. While there is a literature on the influence of parental quitting

on youth smoking (e.g., Farkas et al. [1999]), less is known about the reverse.

Thus, the peer influence of adults in the household could have mediated some of

the social influence among young people that we measured here. Moreover, our

data did not permit us to address the global influence of peer groups outside the

home. We have confirmed only that, at least within the household, peer effects

can be highly local.

       In our econometric analyses of 2- and 3-sibling households, we were able

to compute maximum likelihood estimates even when the disturbance space
Harris-Gonzalez                    18-March-2004                               Page 40


contained regions with multiple equilibria, and even when the disturbances were

not independent. In these small households, the number of such regions and the

variety of multiple equilibria were limited, and the multivariate probit integrals

could be computed reliably by quadrature methods. However, as the number of

players in the “family smoking game” increased beyond three, the rapidly

growing computational burden forced us to impose restrictions on the possible

equilibria. For larger groups with very large numbers of possible equilibria,

simulation methods, such as those suggested by Krauth [2001] and Tamer [2002,

2003] may prove necessary.

       Nonetheless, our results validate the use of statistical methods that

properly account for the endogeneity of peer behaviors. Thus, when we

estimated our structural model under the dubious assumption that siblings’

smoking practices were exogenous, we obtained estimates of peer influence that

substantially exceeded those obtained when we treated such behaviors as

endogenous. Our results thus illustrate why economists cannot ignore the

problem of reflection, originally articulated by Manski [1993], in studies of peer

effects.

       The implications of asymmetry in social interactions for the study of

youth smoking and other fields of economic inquiry are substantial. If the pro-

smoking social influence of a smoker exceeds the deterrent influence of her

nonsmoking counterpart, then policies to segregate smokers will reduce overall

smoking rates. If the effects of price changes are asymmetric, then the price war
Harris-Gonzalez                    18-March-2004                            Page 41


in the early 1990s in the highly concentrated U.S. cigarette market may have

enhanced youth smoking, dollar for dollar, more than the price increases

effectuated by excise tax hikes or settlement payments later in the same decade.

What is more, those who would seek to deter youth smoking through higher

cigarette taxes, antismoking messages, or other restrictions need to ensure that

such policies are sustained.
Harris-Gonzalez                              18-March-2004                            Page 42




                                               TABLES



       Table 1. Prevalence of Current Cigarette Smoking among Young People,
         Aged 15-24, in Relation to Current Smoking Status of Other Young
                        Household Members, Aged 15-24 a,b,c


                            Number of Siblings, Aged 15-24, Who Do Not Smoke
                                0              1              2                3
                                    19%            12%             8%               5%
                        0
                                62,817         37,561          7,646            1,724
                                62,817         18,781          2,549              431
                                 -1.45          -1.99          -2.44            -2.94

                                    50%            34%            28%              17%
                        1
Aged 15-24, Who Smoke




                                 8,859          1,746              366                72
 Number of Siblings,




                                 4,430            582                92               14
                                  0.00          -0.66             -0.94            -1.59

                                    63%            49%            54%               0%
                        2
                                     808            201             39               16
                                     269              50             8                3
                                    0.53           -0.04          0.16                -

                                    73%            53%         100%                    -
                        3
                                     121             30              4
                                      30              6              1
                                    0.99           0.12              -
Harris-Gonzalez                     18-March-2004                                Page 43


Notes to Table 1


a. Source: Combined Tobacco Use Supplements of the CPS during September

   1992 – May 1993, September 1995 – May 1996, and September 1998 – May

   1999. (U.S. Bureau of the Census [1996, 1998]).



b. The four entries in each cell are, respectively: the percentage of young people,

   agd 15–24, who are current smokers; the total number of young people in the

   cell; the total number of households in the cell; and the log odds of the

                                                p 
   prevalence of current smoking, that is, ln         , where p is smoking
                                                1 − p  

   prevalence.




c. A current smoker is a respondent who answered “some days” or “every day”

   to the question, “Do you smoke cigarettes some days, every day, or not at

   all?” Among 126,352 respondents with known smoking status, we excluded

   3,809 who resided in families where the smoking status of at least one other

   sibling was unknown. Not shown are the data for another 533 respondents

   who resided in families with more than 3 nonsmoking siblings or more than 3

   smoking siblings.
Harris-Gonzalez                          18-March-2004                              Page 44




   Table 2. Estimates of the Peer-Influence Parameters and the Coefficient of
  Cigarette Price in a Pooled Sample of 49,898 Households with 1 to 4 Siblings.

                                                       Social                 No Social
                                                     Interaction             Interaction
Parameter           Description              Eq. (20)          Eq. (21)        Eq. (22)
    γ               Coefficient               -0.016            -0.016          -0.026
                      of Price           [-0.023, -0.010] [-0.023, -0.010] [-0.036, -0.016]
     θ            Coefficient of Yh            0.479
              (# Smoking Sibs in          [0.455, 0.503]
                  Household)
     α           Coefficient of              -0.150
               n h − 1 (# Sibs in        [-.170, -0.130]
                 Household)
    θ0            Intercept of                                 0.576
              θ = θ 0 + θ 1 ( n h − 1)                     [0.517, 0.635]
    θ1               Slope of                                   -0.063
              θ = θ 0 + θ 1 ( n h − 1)                     [-0.098, -0.027]
    α0            Intercept of                                  -0.114
              α = α 0 + α 1 (n h − 1)                       [-.161, -0.067]

    α1              Slope of                                   -0.013
              α = α 0 + α 1 (n h − 1)                      [-.037, 0.011]

     κ                  θ+α                  0.329
                                         [0.308, 0.350]
    κ0                θ0 + α 0                                 0.462
                                                           [0.410, 0.514]
    κ1                θ 1 + α1                                  -0.076
                                                           [-0.104, -0.048]
LLR* Test                                 LLR= -52.75       LLR=-61.92
     for                                   χ 2 =105.5        χ 2 =123.84
Symmetric                                     (1df)              (2df)
 Influence                                 P < 10 −6          P < 10 −6

*LLR = log Likelihood Ratio
Harris-Gonzalez                       18-March-2004                                    Page 45




FIGURES


                                        ϕ             “Cool to Smoke” (V1 )


                  Smoke
                                      1–ϕ            “Uncool to Smoke” (V2 )



                                                      “Cool to Smoke” (V3 )
                                        ϕ
                  Not
                  Smoke

                                      1–ϕ             “Uncool to Smoke” (V4 )



              Figure 1. Young Person’s Smoking Decision Tree




          (0,1)                                        (1,1)

                                                                          ε 2 = − W2

                           (0,0) or (1,1)


                                                                          ε 2 = −W 2 − θ

          (0,0)                                        (1,0)


              ε 1 = −W 1 − θ            ε 1 = −W 1


        Figure 2. Equilibria in the (ε 1 , ε 2 ) Plane in the 2-Sibling
                          Family Smoking Game
Harris-Gonzalez                            18-March-2004                               Page 46




                                 (0,0,1)
               (0,0,1)             or                                   (1,1,1)
                                 (1,1,1)
                                                                                    ε 3 = − W3


                                           (0,0,0)
                                             or                                     ε 3 = −W 3 − θ
                                           (1,1,1)                      (0,1,0)
                                                                          or
                                                                        (1,1,1)
                                                                                    ε 3 = −W 3 − 2θ

               (0,0,0)                                                  (0,1,0)


                   ε 2 = −W 2 − 2 θ    ε 2 = −W 2 − θ      ε 2 = −W 2


            Figure 3. Equilibria in the (ε 2 , ε 3 ) Plane in the 3-Sibling
              Family Smoking Game When − W 1 − θ > ε 1 ≥ − W 1 − 2 θ


θ̂
     .7



     .6
                                                                             n=2

     .5

                                                                             n= 3
     .4



     .3                                                                                     π
          0                  .25                .50               .75                1.00

          Figure 4. Relation between the Mixing Parameter π and the Estimate of
          θ for Households with 2 and 3 Siblings. (Error bars represent 95%
          confidence intervals.)
Harris-Gonzalez                     18-March-2004                                 Page 47


                                  DATA APPENDIX

       We analyzed data from the Tobacco Use Supplements (TUS) to the

Current Population Survey (CPS), a nationally representative household-based

survey of the U.S. population aged 15 years or more (U.S. Bureau of the Census

[1996, 1998] ). The TUS has an extended history of use in the economic analysis

of cigarette smoking. (See, e.g., Marcus et al. [1989], Shopland et al. [1996],

Gerlach et al. [1997], Arday et al. [1997], Ohsfeldt, Boyle, and Capilouto [1998],

Hersch [2000], Sweeney et al. [2000], and Shopland et al. [2001]. For TUS-based

studies of adolescent and young-adult smoking, see also Cummings and Shah

[1995], Gilpin et al. [1999], Farkas et al. [1999], Anderson and Burns [2000], and

Gilpin et al. [2000].) During the 1990s, the TUS was administered during nine

monthly installments of the CPS, which we grouped into three successive

“waves” as follows: (1) September 1992, January 1993 and May 1993; (2)

September 1995, January 1996 and May 1996; and (3) September 1998, January

1999 and May 1999.

       To determine an individual’s current smoking status, the TUS asked each

self-respondent or, if unavailable, a proxy respondent, “Has … smoked at least

100 cigarettes in his/her entire life?” If the answer was affirmative, then the TUS

further queried, “Does … now smoke every day, some days, or not at all?” A

current smoker answered “yes” to the first question and either “every day” or

“some days” to the second, while a non-smoker answered either “no” to the first

question or “not at all” to the second.
Harris-Gonzalez                   18-March-2004                             Page 48


       Out of 1,037,644 individual TUS records for all three waves combined, a

total of 145,783 (or 14 percent) represented persons aged 15–24 years. Of these,

126,352 records (or 87 percent) gave informative responses to the two

aforementioned questions about smoking status. (Virtually all of the remaining

19,431 non-responses came from proxy respondents.) This data set of 126,352

responses among young person served as the basis for the calculations shown in

Table 1.

       Among the 126,352 young people with known current smoking status, the

overall prevalence of current smoking was 18.6 percent, with 14.2 percent

smoking “every day” and 4.4 percent smoking “some days.” The prevalence of

current smoking was 21.2% among self-respondents and 14.3% among proxy

respondents, who constituted 36.9 percent of the responses with known current

smoking status. Of the 126,352 young people with known current smoking

status, we then excluded 3,809 individuals (3 percent) who resided in households

where the current smoking status of one or more siblings was unknown. That

left a universe of 122,543 respondents in 81,662 households where each young

person’s smoking status was known.

       Because the CPS was a household-based survey, we were thus able

observe the smoking practices of all young people residing in each living unit. In

contrast to other studies where only one subject self-reports the smoking habits

of his peers, we could thus make inferences about the reciprocal influences of the

peer group on each of its members. The Teenage Attitudes and Practices Survey,
Harris-Gonzalez                     18-March-2004                               Page 49


analyzed by Krauth [2001], asked the respondent, “How many of your four best

friends smoke?” The respondent’s “best friends,” however, were unlikely to be

in the sample. Both the U.K. General Household Survey and the British Health

and Lifestyle Survey, analyzed by Jones [1989, 1994], asked the respondent to

report whether there are “other smokers” in the household, but it is unclear

whether these “other smokers” participated as well. By contrast, the National

Education Longitudinal Study, a school-based analyzed by Gaviria and Raphael

[2001], asked each tenth-grader about his own smoking, drinking and illegal

drug use. Gaviria and Raphael then inquired whether a student’s risky

behaviors were related to the average for those schoolmates, from 5 to 43 in

number, who also participated in the survey. Farkas et al. [1999] used the 1992–

1993 wave of the TUS to test the hypothesis that 15-17-year-olds were less likely

to smoke when their parents had quit. In the Health and Retirement Survey,

Lahiri and Song [2000] related the respondent’s smoking status to his spouse’s

smoking.

       Although the CPS contained information on each subject’s gender, age,

educational attainment, work status, ethnicity, income, and other individual and

family characteristics, it did not include data on cigarette prices. For this

purpose, we used data from contemporary surveys of retail cigarette prices

collated by ACCRA [2000], formerly the American Chamber of Commerce

Researchers’ Association. Other studies relying on ACCRA cigarette price data

have included Chaloupka and Wechsler [1995] and Arcidiacono, Sieg, and Sloan
Harris-Gonzalez                    18-March-2004                             Page 50


[2001]. The ACCRA data represented the retail prices, including all applicable

excise and sales taxes and promotional discounts, of a specific premium-priced

brand of cigarettes. Although discount cigarettes claimed a market share

exceeding 25 percent during 1992–1999, such non-premium brands were rarely

the choice of young smokers (Centers for Disease Control [1994, 2000]).

       In contrast to the annual state-level prices compiled originally by the

Tobacco Institute (TI) and updated by Orzechowski and Walker [2002], the

ACCRA prices were sampled quarterly for metropolitan statistical areas (MSAs)

and non-metropolitan areas of population 50,000 or more within each state. We

were thus able to match each respondent with the retail price prevailing in the

metropolitan or non-metropolitan area of the household’s location and in the

calendar quarter in which the survey was performed. (For households residing

outside of MSAs, the CPS recorded only the state of residence. Those households

were assigned the average price for all non-metropolitan areas in the state.) Our

tests of the concordance of the TI state-level prices and ACCRA retail prices gave

correlation coefficients between 0.89 for 1992 and 0.95 for 1998. For a given year,

the between-state variability of the ACCRA prices was slightly lower than that of

the TI prices. This finding may reflect the more complete inclusion of

promotional discounts in the ACCRA retail price data.

       We did not make any adjustments for cross-border shopping. In attempts

to take account of this phenomenon, some researchers have included

neighboring states’ prices (Baltagi and Levin [1986]). Others have computed a
Harris-Gonzalez                    18-March-2004                             Page 51


weighted-average of the local price and the lowest nearby price (Chaloupka

[1991]). Still others have limited the sample to respondents living at least 20

miles from states with lower taxes (Lewit and Coate [1982], Wasserman et al.

[1991], Chaloupka and Wechsler [1995], Pacula and Chaloupka [1999]), or have

made other adjustments (Chaloupka and Pacula [1999]). Studies of teenagers

and college students have found little effect of such price adjustments on the

estimated demand for cigarettes, perhaps because such young people have lower

mobility.

       Because the geographic areas covered by the ACCRA price survey did not

entirely overlap those covered by the CPS, we could not assign a price to each

young person in the TUS sample. In particular, ACCRA provided price data on

only 194 out of the 280 MSAs that the CPS surveyed. Out of 122,543 subjects

who lived in households where each young person’s smoking status was known,

we could therefore assign prices to 78,038 (or 63.7 percent). The coverage was

62.8 percent of the CPS-surveyed residents of MSAs and 69.1 percent of the

residents of non-metropolitan areas. The prevalence of current smoking among

the 78,038 remaining subjects in our pooled cross-sectional sample was 18.5

percent, while the smoking prevalence among the excluded individuals was 18.6

percent.

       Of the 78,038 young people with known smoking status, known sibling

smoking status and known ACCRA-based price, we excluded an additional

10,570 subjects (or 13.5%) who had missing data on any of the remaining
Harris-Gonzalez                    18-March-2004                             Page 52


explanatory variables used in the analysis. This left a total of 67,468 complete

observations in our analytical sample. In that sample, 34,557 individuals (or

51.2%) lived in households with no other young people (that is, n h = 1 in

equation (20) above). A total of 25,743 individuals (or 38.2%) lived in 2-sibling

households; 5,519 (or 8.2%) lived in 3-sibling households; 1,275 (or 1.9%) lived in

4-sibling households; 264 (or 0.4%) lived in 5-sibling households; and 110 (or

0.2%) lived in households with 6 or 7 young people.

       The variables employed in our analysis are shown in Appendix Table A1.

In addition to current smoking status (corresponding to y ih in equation (20)

above), we have classified the explanatory variables as individual-level

(corresponding to X ih ), and household-level (corresponding to Z h ). The latter

subset included variables included area-level prices and wave-specific temporal

variables. Attempting to distinguish between age-related, cohort and

contemporaneous effects, we tried various combinations of respondent’s age and

dummy variables for the respondent’s year of birth and the date of interview.

Other variables, such as sex, academic achievement, employment status,

ethnicity, are well documented in the literature. Other researchers have

measured the influence of adult smoking (Farkas et al. [1999], Lahiri and Song

[2000]), as well as restrictions on smoking at home (Proescholdbell, Chassin, and

MacKinnon [2000], Farkas et al. [2000]).
Harris-Gonzalez                    18-March-2004                             Page 53


       In Table A1, we specifically included a measure of the 3-year lagged price

of cigarettes for young people aged 18–24 years in the 1995-96 wave, who would

have been aged 15–21 in the 1992-93 wave. (See Douglas and Hariharan [1994]

for a similar use of past cigarette prices that prevailed during the prime years of

smoking initiation.) We did not include a measure of future prices, as might be

suggested by theories of “rational” or non-myopic addiction (Becker, Grossman,

and Murphy [1994]). As noted by Pacula and Chaloupka [1999] and Gruber

[2001], young people appear to make myopic smoking decisions because they

have high discount rates or do not fully appreciate the future health

consequences of smoking. In any case, it is difficult to see how a non-myopic

teenager interviewed in the first two months of wave 1 (September 1992 – Jan

1993) could have forecast the industry-wide price war that brought retail prices

down later in 1993. Nor is it obvious how a “rational” teenager interviewed in

waves 1 or 2 could have forecast the subsequent avalanche of lawsuits,

culminating in the Master Settlement Agreement of 1998, that pushed prices up

in wave 3.
Harris-Gonzalez                      18-March-2004                               Page 54


    Table A1. Sample Means and Standard Deviations of Variables for the 67,468
          Individuals, Aged 15–24, in Whom All Variables were Observed


Variable                                                  Sample              Sample
                                                           Mean              Standard
                                                                             Deviation
 Individual-level variables
Current smoker (binary)                                      0.183
Age (years)                                                 19.332                 2.942
Sex female (binary)                                          0.514
Married (binary)                                             0.125
Did not finish high school (binary)                          0.086
Full-time student (binary)                                   0.429
Currently working (binary)                                   0.519
Unemployed (binary)                                          0.076
No parent at home (binary)                                   0.352
Restrictions on smoking at work (binary)                     0.181
Proxy respondent (binary)                                    0.359

  Household-level variables
Number of siblings (integer)                                 0.626                 0.770
Black (binary)                                               0.122
Asian (binary)                                               0.030
Hispanic (binary)                                            0.122
Number of persons aged >24 in                                0.428                 0.663
household who smoke (integer)
ln (Real family annual income)¶                              9.706                 0.984
Real price per 10-pack carton ¶                             13.105                 2.549
1995-96 Wave (binary )                                       0.265
1998-99 Wave (binary)                                        0.312
Lagged real price §                                         -0.030                 0.778

¶ Deflated to constant 1992 dollars based on the Consumer Price Index.
§ For respondents who were ≥ 18 years old in the 1995-96 Wave, this variable is
               p     − pt 
 computed as  t −3        , where p t is the current real price and p t −3 is the 3-
                   p       
                    t− 3  
 year lagged real price. For all other respondents, the variable equals 0.
Harris-Gonzalez                    18-March-2004                                Page 55




                                RESULTS APPENDIX

           Table B1 shows the complete results for the three models (that is,

   equations 20, 21 and 22) described in Table 2 in the main text. Each cell

   contains the corresponding maximum likelihood parameter estimate, below

   which is shown the asymptotic standard error in parentheses.
Harris-Gonzalez                    18-March-2004                              Page 56


             Table B1. Detailed Estimates of Equations (20), (21) and (22)


                                                      Social            No Social
                                                    Influence           Influence
Variable or Parameter                         Eq. (20)     Eq. (21)      Eq. (22)
Age (years)                                       .0454         .0459         .0659
                                                (.0028)       (.0028)       (.0041)
Sex female (binary)                              -.1424        -.1411        -.2022
                                                (.0125)       (.0125)       (.0175)
Married (binary)                                 -.2350        -.2441        -.3437
                                                (.0195)       (.0196)       (.0301)
Did not finish high school (binary)               .5114     .5119554          .7128
                                                (.0204) (.0203588)          (.0301)
Full-time student (binary)                       -.2973        -.2974        -.4057
                                                (.0143)       (.0143)       (.0207)
Currently working (binary)                        .2688         .2667         .3808
                                                (.0160)       (.0160)       (.0231)
Unemployed (binary)                               .4338         .4319         .5979
                                                (.0230)       (.0230)       (.0331)
No parent at home (binary)                        .3251         .3239         .5196
                                                (.0179)       (.0179)       (.0272)
Restrictions on smoking at work (binary)         -.2197        -.2199        -.2993
                                                (.0181)       (.0181)       (.0256)
Proxy respondent (binary)                        -.1846        -.1855        -.2524
                                                (.0147)       (.0147)       (.0210)
Black (binary)                                   -.6331        -.6304        -.9636
                                                (.0226)       (.0226)       (.0360)
Asian (binary)                                   -.3627        -.3603        -.5463
                                                (.0409)       (.0409)       (.0619)
Hispanic (binary)                                -.5827        -.5789        -.8524
                                                (.0219)        (.0219       (.0343)
Number of persons aged >24 in                     .3139         .3154         .4852
household who smoke (integer)                   (.0093)       (.0093)       (.0155)
ln (Real family annual income)¶                  -.1305        -.1304        -.2112
                                                (.0070)       (.0070)       (.0112)
Real price per 10-pack carton ¶                  -.0164        -.0163        -.0261
                                                (.0032)       (.0032)       (.0050)
1995-96 Wave (binary )                            .0127         .0141         .0280
                                                (.0191)       (.0191)       (.0285)
1998-99 Wave (binary)                             .1000         .1006         .1487
                                                (.0158)       (.0158)       (.0244)
Harris-Gonzalez                       18-March-2004                                Page 57




                                (Table B1 continued)

                                                          Social            No Social
                                                        Influence           Influence
Variable or Parameter                             Eq. (20)     Eq. (21)      Eq. (22)
Lagged real price §                                  -.0832        -.0762        -.0355
                                                    (.0602)       (.0603)       (.0826)
Constant term                                        -.4525        -.4745        -.4454
                                                    (.0924)       (.0926)       (.1398)
θ (eq. 20) or θ 0 (eq. 21)                            .4791         .5758
                                                    (.0124)       (.0181)
θ 1 (eq. 21)                                                       -.0629
                                                                  (.0181)
α (eq. 20) or α 0 (eq. 21)                           -.1501        -.1135
                                                    (.0103)       (.0240)
α 1 (eq. 21)                                                       -.0131
                                                                  (.0120)
Correlation Coefficient of Within-                         0            0          .5222
Household Disturbances*                                                          (.0125)

¶ Deflated to constant 1992 dollars based on the Consumer Price Index.
§ For respondents who were ≥ 18 years old in the 1995-96 Wave, this variable
                  p     − pt 
  is computed as  t −3       , where p t is the current real price and p t −3 is the
                      p       
                       t− 3  
  3-year lagged real price. For all other respondents, the variable equals 0.
* For equations (20) and (21), the correlation coefficient was set equal to zero,
based on separate maximum likelihood estimates for 2- and 3-sibing
households.
Harris-Gonzalez                     18-March-2004                               Page 58




                                    REFERENCES

ACCRA, ACCRA Cost of Living Index Manual(Arlington VA: ACCRA, 2000).

Alexander, C., M. Piazza, D. Mekos, and T. Valente, "Peers, schools, and

       adolescent cigarette smoking," J Adolesc Health, 29 (2001), 22-30.

Anderson, C., and D.M. Burns, "Patterns of Adolescent Smoking Initiation Rates

       by Ethnicity and Sex," Tobacco Control, 9 (2000), 114-118.

Arcidiacono, P., H. Sieg, and F. Sloan. 2001. Living Rationally under the Volcano?

       An Empirical Analysis of Heavy Drinking and Smoking. Cambridge MA:

       National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 8602.

Arday, D.R., S.L. Tomar, D.E. Nelson, R.K. Merritt, M.W. Schooley, and P.

       Mowery, "State Smoking Prevalence Estimates: A Comparison of the

       Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System and Current Population

       Surveys," American Journal of Public Health, 87 (1997), 1665-1669.

Baltagi, B.H., and D. Levin, "Estimating Dynamic Demand for Cigarettes Using

       Panel Data: The Effects of Bootlegging, Taxation, and Advertising

       Reconsidered," Review of Economics and Statistics, 68 (1986), 148-155.

Becker, Gary S., Michael Grossman, and Kevin M. Murphy, "An empirical

       analysis of cigarette addiction," American Economic Review, 84 (1994), 396-

       418.
Harris-Gonzalez                     18-March-2004                             Page 59


Becker, Gary S., and Kevin M. Murphy, "A theory of rational addiction.," Journal

       of Political Economy, 96 (1988), 675-700.

Berry, Steven T., "Estimation of a Model of Entry in the Airline Industry,"

       Econometrica, LX (1992), 889-917.

Bikhchandani , Sushil, David Hirshleifer, and Ivo Welch, "A Theory of Fads,

       Fashion, Custom, and Cultural Change as Informational Cascades,"

       Journal of Political Economy, C (1992), 992-1026.

Bikhchandani , Sushil, David Hirshleifer, and Ivo Welch, "Learning from the

       Behavior of Others: Conformity, Fads, and Informational Cascades,"

       Journal of Economic Perspectives, 12 (1998), 151-170.

Bjorn, P.A., and Q.H. Vuong, "Modeles d ’equations simultanees pour variables

       endogenes fictives: Une formulation par la theorie des jeux avec

       application a la participation au marche du travail.," L'Actualite

       Economique, 73 (1997), 161-205.

Bresnahan, Timothy F., and Peter C. Reiss, "Entry in Monopoly Markets," Review

       of Economic Studies, LVII (1990), 531-553.

Brock, William A., and Steven N. Durlauf, "Discrete Choice With Social

       Interactions," Review of Economic Studies, LXVIII (2001), 235-260.

Centers for Disease Control, "Changes in the Cigarette Brand Preferences of

       Adolescent Smokers - United States, 1989-1993," Morbidity and Mortality

       Weekly Report, 43 (1994), 577-581.
Harris-Gonzalez                     18-March-2004                              Page 60


Centers for Disease Control, "Youth Tobacco Surveillance, 1998-1999," Morbidity

       and Mortality Weekly Report, 49 (SS-10) (2000), 12-13.

Chaloupka, F.J., "Rational Addictive Behavior and Cigarette Smoking," Journal of

       Political Economy, 94 (1991), 722-742.

Chaloupka, F.J., and R.L. Pacula, "Sex and Race Differences in Young People's

       Responsiveness to Price and Tobacco Control Policies," Tobacco Control, 8

       (1999), 373-377.

Chaloupka, F.J., and H Wechsler, Price, Tobacco Control Policies and Smoking

       Among Young Adults(Cambridge MA: National Bureau of Economic

       Research Working Paper No. 5012, February, 1995).

Chao, Li-Wei, "A comparison of consensus and nonconsensus approaches to

       modeling contraceptive choice behavior," Health Economics, 11 (2002), 599 –

       622.

Clark, Andrew E., and Andrew J. Oswald, "Satisfaction and comparison

       income.," Journal of Public Economics, 61 (1996), 359-381.

Cummings, K.M., and D. Shah, "Trends in Smoking Initiation among

       Adolescents and Young Adults - United States, 1980-1989," Morbidity and

       Mortality Weekly Report, 44 (1995), 521-525.

DeCicca, Philip, Donald Kenkel, and Donald Mathios, "Racial Difference in the

       Determinants of Smoking Onset," Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, 21 (2000),

       311-340.
Harris-Gonzalez                     18-March-2004                             Page 61


Dendukuri, N., and L. Joseph, "Bayesian Approaches to Modeling the

       Conditional Dependence Between Multiple Diagnostic Tests," Biometrics,

       57 (2001), 158-167.

Douglas, S., and G. Hariharan, "The Hazard of Starting Smoking: Estimates from

       a Split Population Duration Model," Journal of Health Economics, 13 (1994),

       213-230.

Emery, S., M.M. White, and John P. Pierce, "Does Cigarette Price Influence

       Adolescent Experimentation?," Journal of Health Economics, 20 (2001), 261-

       270.

Engels, Rutger C. M. E., Ronald A. Knibbe, Maria J. Drop, and Ypie T. de Haan,

       "Homogeneity of Cigarette Smoking Within Peer Groups: Influence or

       Selection?," Health Education and Behavior, 24 (1997), 781-811.

Farkas, Arthur J., Janet M. Distefan, Won S. Choi, Elizabeth A. Gilpin, and John

       P. Pierce, "Does Parental Smoking Cessation Discourage Adolescent

       Smoking?," Preventive Medicine, 28 (1999), 213-218.

Farkas, Arthur J., Elizabeth A. Gilpin, M.M. White, and John P. Pierce,

       "Association Between Household and Workplace Smoking Restrictions

       and Adolescent

Smoking," Journal of the American Medical Association, 284 (2000), 717-722.

Flay, Brian R., Frank B. Hu, Ohidul Siddiqui, L. Edward Day, Donald Hedeker,

       John Petraitis, Jean Richardson, and Steve Sussman, "Differential Influence

       of Parental Smoking and Friends' Smoking on Adolescent Initiation and
Harris-Gonzalez                     18-March-2004                              Page 62


       Escalation of Smoking," Journal of Health and Social Behavior, 35 (1994), 248-

       265.

Gaviria, Alejandro, and Steven Raphael, "School-Based Peer Effects and Juvenile

       Behavior," Review of Economics and Statistics, LXXXIII (2001), 257–268.

Gerlach, K.K., D.R. Shopland, A.M. Hartman, J.T. Gibson, and T.F. Pechacek,

       "Workplace Smoking Policies in the United States: Results from a National

       Survey of More than 100,000 Workers," Tobacco Control, 6 (1997), 199-206.

Gilpin, Elizabeth A., Won S. Choi, Steven T. Berry, and John P. Pierce, "How

       Many Adolescents Start Smoking Each Day in the United States?," Journal

       of Adolescent Health, 25 (1999), 248-255.

Gilpin, Elizabeth A., F.A. Stillman, A.M. Hartman, J.T. Gibson, and John P.

       Pierce, "Index for State Tobacco Control Initial Outcomes," American

       Journal of Epidemiology, 152 (2000), 727-738.

Glaeser, Edward L., Bruce Sacerdote, and Jose A. Scheinkman, "Crime and Social

       Interactions," Quarterly Journal of Economics, CXI (1996), 507-548.

Glaeser, Edward L., Bruce Sacerdote, and Jose A. Scheinkman, "The Social

       Multiplier," HIER Discussion Paper 1968, Harvard University, 2002.

Gruber, J. 2001. Risky Behavior Among Youths: An Economic Analysis,

       Introduction. In Risky Behavior Among Youths: An Economic Analysis, edited

       by J. Gruber. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Harris, J. E., and S. W. Chan, "The continuum-of-addiction: cigarette smoking in

       relation to price among Americans aged 15-29," Health Econ, 8 (1999), 81-6.
Harris-Gonzalez                     18-March-2004                               Page 63


Hersch, J., "Gender, Income Levels, and the Demand for Cigarettes," Journal of

       Risk and Uncertainty, 21 (2000), 263-282.

Hiedemann, B., "Stackelberg model of social security acceptance decisions in

       dual career households," Journal of Economic Behavior and Organizationi, 34

       (1998), 263 –278.

Hoxby, Caroline, "The Power of Peers: How Does the Makeup of a Classroom

       Influence Achievement," Education Next, 2 (2002), 56-63.

Jones, Andrew M., "A Double-Hurdle Model of Cigarette Consumption," Journal

       of Applied Econometrics, 4 (1989), 23-39.

Jones, Andrew M., "Health, addiction, social interaction and the decision to quit

       smoking," Journal of Health Economics, 13 (1994), 93-l 10.

Kindleberger, Charles P., Manias, Panics, and Crashes: A History of Financial

       Crises(London: MacMillan, 1989).

Kooreman, Peter, "Estimation of Econometric Models of Some Discrete Games,"

       Journal of Applied Econometrics, 9 (1994), 255-268.

Krauth, B. 2001. Simulation-Based Estimation of Peer Effects: Working Paper,

       Simon Fraser University, November 27.

Lahiri, K., and J.G. Song, "The Effect of Smoking on Health Using a Sequential

       Self-selection Model," Health Economics, 9 (2000), 491-511.

Lewit, E. M., and D. Coate, "The Potential for Using Excise Taxes to Reduce

       Smoking," Journal of Health Economics, 2 (1982), 121-45.
Harris-Gonzalez                     18-March-2004                               Page 64


Lewit, E. M., D. Coate, and M. Grossman, "The Effects of Government Regulation

       on Teenage Smoking," Journal of Law and Economics, XXIV (1981), 545-69.

Lindbeck, Assar, Sten Nyberg, and Jorgen Weibull, "Social Norms and Economic

       Incentives in the Welfare State," Quarterly Journal of Economics, CXIV

       (1999), 1-35.

Lux, Thomas, "The socio-economic dynamics of speculative markets: interacting

       agents, chaos, and the fat tails of return distributions," Journal of Economic

       Behavior & Organization, 33 (1998), 143-165.

Manski, Charles F., "Identification of Endogenous Social Effects: The Reflection

       Problem," Review of Economic Studies, LX (1993), 531-542.

Marcus, A.C., D.R. Shopland, L.A. Crane, and W.R. Lynn, "Prevalence of

       Cigarette Smoking in the United States: Estimates from the 1985 Current

       Population Survey," Journal of the National Cancer Institute, 81 (1989), 409-

       414.

Norton, E. C., R. C. Lindrooth, and S. T. Ennett, "How measures of perception

       from survey data lead to inconsistent regression results: evidence from

       adolescent and peer substance use," Health Econ, 12 (2003), 139-48.

Norton, Edward C., Richard C. Lindrooth, and Susan T. Ennett, "Controlling for

       the Endogeneity of Peer Substance Use on Adolescent Alcohol and

       Tobacco use," Health Economics, 7 (1998), 439 - 453.
Harris-Gonzalez                      18-March-2004                                   Page 65


Ohsfeldt, R.L., R.G. Boyle, and E.I. Capilouto, Tobacco Taxes, Smoking Restrictions,

       and Tobacco Use(Cambridge MA: National Bureau of Economic Research

       Working Paper No. 6486, March, 1998).

Orzechowski, and Walker, The Tax Burden on Tobacco, Historical Compilation,

       Volume 36, 2001(Arlington VA, 2002).

Pacula, R.L., and F. Chaloupka, The Effects of Macro-level Interventions on Addictive

       Behavior(Chicago: University of Chicago at Illinois, Working Paper,

       December, 1999).

Proescholdbell, R.J., L. Chassin, and D.P. MacKinnon, "Home Smoking

       Restrictions and Adolescent Smoking," Nicotine and Tobacco Research, 2

       (2000), 159-167.

Qu, Y., and A. Hadgu, "A model for evaluating sensitivity and specificity for

       correlated diagnostic tests in efficacy studies with an imperfect reference

       test," Journal of the American Statistical Association, 93 (1998), 920-928.

Sacerdote, Bruce, "Peer Effects With Random Assignment: Results for Dartmouth

       Roommates," Quarterly Journal of Economics, CXVI (2001), 681-704.

Shopland, D.R., K.K. Gerlach, D.M. Burns, A.M. Hartman, and J.T. Gibson,

       "State-Specific Trends in Smoke-Free Workplace Policy Coverage: The

       Current Population Survey Tobacco Use Supplement, 1993 to 1999,"

       Journal of Occupational and Environmental Medicine, 43 (2001), 680-686.

Shopland, D.R., A.M. Hartman, J.T. Gibson, M.D. Mueller, L.G. Kessler, and W.R.

       Lynn, "Cigarette Smoking among U.S. Adults by State and Region:
Harris-Gonzalez                     18-March-2004                             Page 66


       Estimates from the Current Population Survey," Journal of the National

       Cancer Institute, 88 (1996), 1748-1758.

Simons-Morton, B., D. L. Haynie, A. D. Crump, S. P. Eitel, and K. E. Saylor, "Peer

       and parent influences on smoking and drinking among early adolescents,"

       Health Educ Behav, 28 (2001), 95-107.

Sweeney, C.T., D.R. Shopland, A.M. Hartman, J.T. Gibson, C.M. Anderson, K.B.

       Gower, and D.M. Burns, "Sex Differences in Workplace Smoking Policies:

       Results from the Current Population Survey," Journal of the American

       Medical Womens Association, 55 (2000), 311-315.

Tamer, Elie, "Empirical Strategies for Estimating Discrete Games with Multiple

       Equilibria," mimeo, Princeton University, 2002.

Tamer, Elie, "Incomplete Simultaneous Discrete Response Model with Multiple

       Equilibria," Review of Economic Studies, LXX (2003), 147-166.

Torrance-Rynard, V. L., and S. D. Walter, "Effects of dependent errors in the

       assessment of diagnostic test performance," Stat Med, 16 (1997), 2157-75.

U.S. Bureau of the Census, Current Population Survey, January 1996: Tobacco Use

       Supplement Technical Documentation(Washington DC: Bureau of the

       Census, 1996).

U.S. Bureau of the Census, Current Population Survey, September 1998: Tobacco Use

       Supplement Technical Documentation(Washington DC: Bureau of the

       Census, 1998).
Harris-Gonzalez                       18-March-2004                            Page 67


U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Preventing Tobacco Use among

       Young People: A Report of the Surgeon General(Atlanta GA: U.S. Department

       of Health and Human Services, Public Health Service, Centers for Disease

       Control and Prevention, Office on Smoking and Health, 1994).

Wang, M. Q., E. C. Fitzhugh, R. C. Westerfield, and J. M. Eddy, "Family and peer

       influences on smoking behavior among American adolescents: an age

       trend," J Adolesc Health, 16 (1995), 200-3.

Wang, Min Qi, James M. Eddy, and Eugene C. Fitzhugh, "Smoking Acquisition:

       Peer Influence and Self-selection," Psychological Reports, 86 (2000), 1241-

       1246.

Wasserman, J.W., W.G. Manning, J.P. Newhouse, and J.D. Winkler, "The Effects

       of Excise Taxes and Regulations on Cigarette Smoking," Journal of Health

       Economics, 10 (1991), 43-64.

Winston, Gordon C., and David J. Zimmerman. 2003. Peer Effects in Higher

       Education. In College Decisions: How Students Actually Make Them and How

       They Could, edited by C. Hoxby. Chicago: University of Chicago Press &

       National Bureau of Economic Research, in press.
