                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  LIFE INSURANCE SAVINGS AND THE
             AFTER-TAX LIFE INSURANCE RATE OF RETURN




                         Mark Warshawsky




                      Working Paper No. 1040




               NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                     1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                        Cambridge MA 02138


                          December 1982



This work started as a joint enterprise with Martin Feldstein, who
assumed chairmanship of the President's Council of Economic
Advisers before it was finished. My sincere appreciation goes to
him, as well as to Jim Weber of Phoenix Mutual Life, Benjamin
Wurzburger of John Hancock Mutual Life, Andrew Lo, and to the
American Council of Life Insurance for help with data. The
research reported here is part of the NBER 's research program in
Taxation and project in Government Budget. Any opinions expressed
are those of the author and not those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
                                                   NBER Working Paper #1040
                                                        December 1982

                  Life Insurance Savings and the After-Tax
                        Life Insurance Rate of Return

                                    Abstract

           This paper presents a calculation of the time series of the

after-tax rate of return to whole life insurancy. When compared to the

after—tax return on an alternative portfolio of similar risk, more than 60%

of the decline in life insurance savings (suitably defined) in the past two

decades can be attributed to a widening after-tax rate of return differen-

tial.

           Both the existence and importance of this result depend on the

characteristics of life insurance savings. Life insurance saving is inti-

mately connected to life insurance coverage and therefore is long—term and

quasi—contractual in nature. Furthermore (and, in part, because of the

above characteristics), the interest earned on the fixed income portfolio

of life insurance intermediaries has been taxed under a special set of

rules. From 1958 to 1981   ,   these rules have taken the rather complicated

form of the Menge formula. This formula is very sensitive to changes in

nominal interest rate levels and in particular, during inflationary periods

it acts so as to dramatically increase the tax burden of life insurance

savings.

           Life irsurance savings is therefore an example of the non-

neutrality of monetary policy. This is important for studies of flow of

funds and capital accumulation using the historical record.

                                         Mark Warshawsky
                                         National Bureau of Economic Research
                                         1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                         Cambridge, MA 02138

                                          (617) 868—3941
                   LIFE INSURANCE SAVINGS AND THE AFTER-TAX

                          LIFE INSURANCE RATE OF RETURN




            The relative place of life insurance in United States household

savings has declined since the mid 1950s and indeed this decline has acce—

lerated in recent years.1 Combined dth the phenemona of the increased use

of policy loans, the net savings flow through the life insurance intermediary

as a percentage of personal disposable income has been reduced.


                                    Table 1

               LIFE INSURANCE SAVINGS AS A PERCENTAGE OF INCOME


 Year         Gross (%)     Net of Policy Loans (%)   Premium Savings(%)*
  1952—56       1.14               1.07                    0.43
  1957—61       0.92               0.79                    0.17
  1962—66       0.96               0.82                    0.18
  1967-71       0.80               0.56                    0.07
  1972-76       0.75               0.58                    0.06
  1977-81       0.70               0.44                    0.05

 *Defined in text.


            Any explanation of the reasons for, and financial/non-financial

effects of this decline must, at least in part, depend on the peculiar

characteristics of life insurance savings. As will be explained in this

paper, life insurance savings are intimately connected with the provisions

of the permanent life insurance policy. Namely, it is a policy that pro-

vides life insurance coverage in addition to savings, is quasi—contractual

in nature and whose return is taxed (through the intermediary) under a

special set of rules known as the Menge formula. As a result of these

peculiarities, among possible reasons for the decrease in life insurance
are decreased demand for the life insurance coverage component of an indi-

vidual life insurance policy. Decreased insurance demand might be due to

sociological considerations such as smaller family size and the increased

economic independence of women, or to increased exogeneous insurance

protection in the form of group life insurance from employers, and sur-

vivors benefits from the Social Security Administration.
                                                           Alternatively,
the increased exogeneous provision of contractual savings in the form of

pensions aiid Social Security retirement benefits lessens the need for

savings of the type connected with the life insurance contract.
                                                                   Finally,
any increase in the after tax rate of return differential between alter-

native endogenous savings vehicles and life insurance savings such as might

occur due to differential tax treatments (and in particular, as will be

explained, under the Menge formula in inflationary periods) can be a reason

for the decline in life insurance savings.

          While there is an element of truth in all three explanations of

life insurance's relative decline, this paper exphasizes and explicitly

tests for the effect of differential taxation of life insurance savings.

There are two reasons for this choice. One is practicability. With a

proper understanding of the life insurance intermediary and its
                                                                  taxation,
it is possible to specify the after-tax return on life insurance savings

and compare it to the returns on alternative forms of household savings.2

It is much more difficult to explicitly formulate and test models incor-

porating the first two explanations. The second reason is a judgment,

based in part on some casual empiricism and in part on econometric evidence

presented in the last part of the paper, that the trend and variability in
                                    —2—


the after—tax rate differential explains the major share of the trend and

variability of the propensity to save through life insurance. An example

of casual empiricism debunking the decreased life insurance coverage demand

theory is the introduction (in 1965) and subsequent popularity of term

(pure) life insurance coverage policies.

          The reasons for the decline in life insurance savings should have

more than parochial or academic interest. Shifts in savings patterns

affect the term structure of interest rates and the configuration of port-

folios, thus indirectly and directly affecting the size and nature of capi-

tal formation. This has been shown to hold especially in the case of life

insurance savings.3 If life insurance savings has been subject to

increased (differential) taxation, there are further implications. Before—

tax long—term interest rates, ceterus paribus, should rise4, thereby

lowering optimal debt/equity ratios and capital formation.   Finally, if

increased (differential) taxation caused a reduction in life insurance

savings and if life insurance is the only endogeneous contractual
                                                                    savings
contract available to households, then in addition to the above occurences,

there will have been a drop in the savings rate of the economy and there-

fore in the steady—state capital labor ratio.5   The magnitudes of these

effects, of course, depend on the relevant magnitudes of life insurance and

other savings flows.
                                        -3-

     as        Reasons for Life Insurance Savings
           Along with commercial banks, life insurance companies were the

first financial intermediaries in the American economy.6 There were, no

doubt, many reasons why this form of intermediation occurred in the late

1800's and early 1900's, some of which may     still   exist today (see below).

Even if the positive economic reasons for life insurance savings no longer

exist, however, life insurance companies would continue to have an impor-

tant place in personal savings simply by virtue of their previous

existence. Thus if the industry is flexible in its reactions to economic

changes, and   is   not impeded by any competitive disadvantages imposed exter-

nally, there is sufficient reason to explain the phenomenon of savings

through life insurance by institutional factors alone.       Implicit in any

institutional explanation of nonatomization and status quo is the indus-

trial organization theory of high initial start—up costs and scale eco-

nomies. These costs, in the case of financial intermediation, may       include
gaining a trustworthy reputation, forming consumer habits, necessary scale

economies in the assumption of financial risk, and scales in production of

inside financial information and transactions. The implication of this

non-specific approach is that explanations for variations, trends, and/or

structural changes in life insurance savings are the same as those for

changes in the economy-wide savings rate --    national   income (in a Keynesian

interpretation), after—tax interest rates (in a classical interpretation)

and other variables that come up in the life cycle—liquidity constraint

context.
                                     —4-


          Before mentioning the possible specific economic reasons for life

insurance savings it will be helpful to go over some of the particulars of

life insurance contracts. The following 2x2 matrix exhibits the four main

categories of policy contracts.


                                  Table 2


                            PARTICIPATION STATUS

                     Participating         Non-Participating


                     Participating      Non—Participating
          Saving       Permanent            Permanent
                     (Cash—Value)         (Cash—Value)
SAVINGS
STATUS
                     Participating     Non-Participating
      Non-Saving        Term                 Term




          A life insurance policy is a contract between the policyholder

and the life insurance company that entitles the holder to certain benefits

under certain life contingencies in exchange for a premium payment to the

company. Under a constant term life policy, the insurance company agrees

to pay a fixed amount (the face value of the policy) to the named benefi—

ciary upon the death of the insured, in exchange for payment of a premium

that increases with the age of the insured. The increases represent

increasing mortality probabilities. There are no other benefits and in

particular no cash value. A permanent life policy provides in addition to

death benefits, the lifetime benefit of a cash value.    In return for
                                    —5—


payment of a usually constant premium, the insurance company agrees to pay

a fixed amount (the face value) to the named beneficiary upon the death of

the insured, to pay an accumulating cash value (less than the face value

until the policy's maturity) anytime the policyholder lapses the policy, or

to lend up to the accumulated cash value to the policyholder if the policy

remains in force and interest payments are paid at an interest rate as set

forth and fixed in the policy at the time of sale. The most fruitful way,

therefore, of looking at a permanent life policy is as a combination of an

accumulating savings account and a declining term life insurance contract.

Part of each premium pays for term insurance and part enters a savings

account. Since the cash value of the policy and the amount that corres-

ponds to actual term life insurance always add up to the fixed face value,

as the amount in the savings account accumulates, the term component must

decline. Therefore, as a permanent policy ages, it becomes more and more a

savings account.

          Still another categorization is used for life insurance

contracts, in a participating policy, the holder participates in improve-

ments in the company's mortality experiences and interest income via

payments of dividends by the company. In a non—participating policy, the

implicit interest and mortality rates are fixed at the time of the policy

sale and no payments are ever made to reflect improvements in these rates.

Most permanent policies are participating.7
                                        —6—


            The close institutional connection between the term life insur-

ance ad savings components of a permanent life contract uggest several

positive economic reasons for savings through life insurance. Since term

life insurance premiums are paid annually (or even more frequently), from

the point of view of both policyholder and insurance
                                                           company, average
transaction costs can be reduced if a savings plan is tacked onto the life

insurance policy. More specifically, the policyholder economizes on time,

effort, and check clearance costs if he invests at the same time as he pays

his insurance premiums. The marginal costs for the insurance company of

initial bookkeeping record maintenance, and investing premium payments

(both direct brokerage costs and financial research-management fees) are

almost zero once a term life contract has been made. Therefore the life

insurance company can afford to (implicitly) charge less for its investment

sevices than other financial intermediaries and certainly less than direct

investment bonds with high commercial brokerage fees. This argument is

especially true for small investors.

            A second reason for saving through life insurance is economic

self—control.8 In other words, permanent life insurance operates as the

life—cycle version of a Christmas Club. The features of a permanent life
policy ——   constant,   periodic required payments whose neglect results in the

cancellation of life insurance protection —— mesh well with      the   charac—

tistics of a forced life cycle savings plan ——    highly   regular installments

with a large penalty for disruption. While other long—term private savings

plans can be designed, any enforcement besides cancellation of a service

connected with the regular payment is probably illegal. In the case of
                                    -7—


life insurance the penalty of temporary lapse of insurance protection is

augmented by the possibility that through the usual underwriting process,

subsequent life insurance will be impossible or more expensive to obtain.

There is also a further fianncial penalty for
                                                early lapsation, as will be
mentioned below. Of course, it is possible to maintain life insurance

coverage, avoid lapsation and still disrupt the savings plan by borrowing

against one's cash value via a policy loan. There are no legal or other

restraints against doing so, and when interest rates are above the policy

loan rate, there are addi tional interest and tax arbitrage incentives to

such behavior. Such an occurrence has become more commonplace, but con-

sidering, for example, the rate differential between a 5% policy loan rate

and 15% yield on LU bonds in 1981, it is remarkable that such behavior is

not more widespread.9

          The first two reasons for the relative attractiveness of saving

in a life insurance company- depend on the peculiar existence of the life

insurance component of the contract. It is also possible that the

existence of the savings component reduces the cost and ensures the exis-

tence of the pure life insurance coverage. It has been recognized that the

singular problem of competitive insurance markets is anti—selectjon.1O A

company may offer term insurance at the average mortality rate for a parti-

cular age—sex combination in the population, only to have low risk indivi-

duals avoid the purchase of insurance or drop it soon after purchase, and

high-risk individuals rush in to buy and maintain the favorably priced

policies. The result, of course, is that the insurance company will lose

money and there is a distinct possibility that the entire market will dis—
                                        -8-


appear. The theoretical mechanism proposed to ensure an insurance equi—
librjum ——   the   simultaneous control of insurance price and quantities

allowed to be purchased ——    is   subject to two attacks, however.ll It is not

robust to all forms of strategic behavior and does not seem to be empiri-

cally founded. Rather, the real world devices of underwriting (thereby

removing the underlying informational asymmetry), high pressure sales,

group insurance and permanent insurance have arisen. It is relatively easy

to see why the device of high pressure sales helps alleviate the problem of

anti—selection. If insurance is "sold," instead of "bought," a more repre-

sentative mortality sample is thereby assured. This is confirmed when it

is noted that those companies who most carefully underwrite their policies

have the lowest key "soft sell" sales teams.12 To
                                                       explain why permanent
insurance alleviates the problem of anti—selection, more background is

needed. Due to a large initial commission paid to the agent upon the sale

of a permanent policy and the savings with penalty nature of the plan,

legal and competitive conditions allow insurance companies to delay the

natural accumulation of cash value several years into the life of the

policy. In other words, a policyholder is severely penalized if he lapses

his permanent policy early in its lifetime. Thus permanent policyholders

are less likely than term policyholders to lapse their policies either

after a hard sale or after further information about one's om mortality

prospects becomes available. In this manner, anti-selection is avoided and

the existence of life insurance markets is ensured (at lower average cost).
                                    —9—


          It should be parenthetically remarked that life insurance savings

have a slight advantage over other forms of savings as a bequest. Since

1840, the law provides that the proceeds of a policy made out to a widow as

beneficia.y would be paid to her and are exempt from claims of creditors.

          The implication of this highly specific approach is that short

of examining trends in relative transaction costs, the psychological

necessity for self—control, the existence of other forms of contractual

savings such as pensions, or the complicated issue of variation in mor-

tality risk within demographic groups, the close connection between life

insurance savings and life insurance coverage indicates that explanations

for variations, trends and/or structural changes in life insurance savings

are the same as those for life insurance coverage demand. These variables

might include life insurance—in—force under Social Security, real income,

and sociological considerations such as number of children and their age

distribution, future prospects for the widow (or widower), extended family

structure, an& so on.

          While both the non-specific and the above—mentioned specific

approaches to life insurance savings are interesting and appropriate, we

look at another aspect of the problem here. We investigate the after—tax

return to life insurance savings and compare it to the after-tax return on

a "home—made" bond fund of similar maturity and risk. This is a specific

approach that can be specified. Furthermore, if there are no other savings

instruments available in the economy that have the characteristics of a

quasi—forced savings plan with low transaction costs, it is clear that a

change in the third specific characteristic —— the after—tax interest rate
                                       —10-


differential ——   will   result in a one-for—one corresponding change in the

savings rate.

          There are three reasons why there would be an after-tax interest

rate differential between buying a permanent life insurance policy with

full expectations of keeping it in force and buying a series of long—term

bonds.

     1)   The interest rate implicit in the life insurance policy differs

          from that available in the long-term bond market.     By law and by

          conservative business practice, life insurance companies them-

          selves buy bonds for their portfolios. Therefore, any interest

          rate difference as perceived by the prospective life insurance

          investor must be due to the institutional practices of the life

          insurance intermediary. In particular, when someone purchases a

          life insurance policy, he receives the current average rate of

          return on the company portfolio, and not the marginal rate of

          return on new money. When market rates suddenly increase and the

          average maturity of the company portfolio is fifteen years, a

          small wedge appears between the return from purchasing the life

          policy and paying premiums for the next twenty years and con-

          structing one's own bond portfolio by periodic purchases over the

          next twenty years. Furthermore, if the life insurance company is

          constrained to earn below market rates on part of its portfolio

          even in the future (for example, on policy loans), the wedge is

          enlarged.
                                  —1 •1 —




2)   The interest rate differential may also be due to differences in

     costs. While we mentioned several reasons why transaction costs

     might be lower for life insurance, there are other costs to con-

     sider. In particular, sales agents receive a large initial sales

     commission and smaller renewal commissions for the life of the

     policy, as long as they work for or are vested with the life

     insurance company.

3)   Finally, an after—tax interest rate differential might appear if

     the two forms of investment are taxed differently. Interest

     income on directly held bonds is taxed under the individual

     income tax. Interest income on life insurance is exclusively

     taxed through the company under the federal life insurance

     company income tax acts (we study the 1952 and 1959 Acts) and

     state premium   taxes.   It is not surprising that there should be

     a difference arising from these different forms of tax treat-

     ments. In fact, the difference is large and has changed

     dramatically over time.
                                                  —12—


2. Sone Actuarial Mathematics

                   Our goal is a variable defined as the after—tax interest differ-

ential between paying premiwns on a permanent life insurance policy for

twenty years and. similar investment in a AAA long—term bond fund. We

introduce some actuarial notation that will be helpful in approaching the

life insurance rate of return computation. The standard references for

actuarial mathematics are Kellison (1970) and Jordan (1975).

                    -   the   effective rate of interest; that is, the amount of money
                        that $1 invested at the beginning of the year will earn during

                        the year, where interest is paid at the end of the year.



    =     ____
          1 +1
                    - discount      factor
               c
d         i v
           C
                    —   effective    rate of discount


           i+v+v2+...+v1 - n-year certain annuity—due
a—1

           =



x                               -age
                                -
(x)                                 person of age x
s(x)                            -
                                    probability   that a new life, aged 0, will survive to
                                    attain x.

      = Ics(x)

(where k0)                      -   number from a cohort of £ initial members surviving
                                    to age x

      =
          xx+1                  — number of deaths in the th year
                                                               —13—

w                               -    the      first age at which there are no survivors; that

                                     is, w is the smallest x for which
                                                                                             wioO in
                                    most life tables




                        j       Commutation Functions
D='
N=Dt
     X       x+j                    w—1
     V+V           9         +..e+        £
a=                     X+1                    w-1   -       a life annuity-due payable annually by (x)

                                                    —       a series of annual payments of $1 com-

                                                         mencing at the beginning of one year and

                                                            continuing throughout his lifetime;
                                                         = N
                                                               xI   x



     x t=Ovd÷                                           —   the     present value of a payment of $1 at

                                                            the end of the year of the death of (x);

                                                         the present value of permanent (whole

                                                         life) insurance;
                                                         = M
                                                              x/ x

P =A /a
x x x                                               —    net    level premium required so that the

                                                         present value of the sequence of net

                                                        premiums. equal the present value of the
                                                 —14-


                                              insurance

It   can be shown   that Px =      _____ + P


where

                                                             sw_x I
               (1-..
                    sw_x   I
                               )c+(1_..
                                      s_       )c+1+...+(1_..           )c1
                                                                 sw—x

                                                   x
i.e.,   that the net level premium is a combination of a savings fund level

premium and a premium for decreasing term insurance.




t I x+t-Px   ax+t                             the insurer's net obligation at time t for
 V =A                                     —
                                              a insured at age x ——      or   the policy

                                              reserve ——   the    excess of the present

                                              value of the future benefits over the

                                              present value of the future net premiums.



             A"
txx+tx a+                                 -   the policy's cash value
                                              —1 5—



where

       A +E'
  A_ x
Px
        a
            x
E'                                     -   initial    loading for expenses. A policy's

                                           value is therefore close to its reserve

                                           amount, especially in the later years of

                                           the policy.



It can also be shown that




t+ivx _(1+j)tv=p(l+j)_X+tl_v)
                                x+ t



that is, the real change in reserves equals premiums paid at the beginning

ofthe period (both for the savings fund and for the declining term

insurance) accumulated at interest less the cost of insurance based upon

the net amount at risk for the (t+i)th year. The total real change in

insurance reserves is the real change for the aggregate of all groups I

insured.




                            w
      v -   (1+i   )  zv= v -(1+i ) v
t+1                ct 0t+lx      ctx

Therefore, if the "life insurable" (adults with families) population is

growing at a constant and savings through life insurance is a constant
                                          —16—


positive function of income, then the total real change in insurance

reserves (premium   savings)   would be




where in is the differential growth rate between the life insurable popula-.

tion and the income producing population, and a is the life insurance

savings rate. If all life insurance were term      insurance,    then a would be
zero.

          In this paper, c, the current after—tax life insurance rate of

return is calculated based on Imowledge of the current average earnings

rate on investments as reported to the National Association of Insurance

Commissioners (NAIC) and the federal tax law in effect.         It is hypothesized
that a is a behavioral function of the after—tax interest rate differen-

tials mentioned above. In other words, net premiums paid for permanent

life insurance, depend on alternative after—tax yields. (Life insurance is

assumed actuarially fair and in   is   assumed constant.) The rate differen-

tial, which is really the heart of the paper, derives from the
                                                                        pcted
after—tax level effective life insurance return, as computed below, and the

expected after—tax level effective long—term bond return, also computed

below.
                                    -17-


3. A History of Life Insurance Company Taxation

          Even though our study starts in the 1950's, it will be useful to

review the trends in life insurance company taxation from 1921 forward.

The account here derives from Valenti (1957). The main issues that legis-

lators have had to deal with are whether life insurance is a service (and

thus should be taxed like other businesses) or a savings institution (and

therefore should be taxed similar to banks), whether mutual (participating)

life insurance companies are profit making ventures or not, how to deal

with for—profit stock (non—participating) companies, how to tax the income

from new life insurance company products (e.g. pensions, health insurance,

term life), and how to recognize the long—run nature of the business. From

1921 to 1941, the "free investment income" tax approach was used. The

assumptions were that there could be no true   underwriting   income since, in
the aggregate, from any group of policies the premiums collected would

actuarially be sufficient Only to meet loading costs (administrative and

acquisition costs) and present and future claims under this group of pol-

icies. (Correct actuarial procedures and either competitive pricing or

fair participating dividends are assumed.) The only taxable income was

investment income after deduction of i) investment expenses and 2) addi-

tions to policy reserves of interest earnings on such reserves. The inter-

est income deductible was 4% applied to the mean of the reserve amounts for

the years 1921 to 1931 and 3—3/4% for 1931 to 1941.   Any interest earned
above that amount was taxed at regular corporate tax rates. This formula

eliminated underwriting profits completely, as was reasonable when most

life insurance companies were participating. In point of fact almost no
                                    -18-


federal taxes were paid throughout this period due to a retroactive legal

ruling in 1928 and low market interest rates for the rest of the period.

          The "industry ratio" method was used in the tax formulas applic-

able to the years 1942 through 1957. Under this method, the allowance for

interest requirements was computed as the product of the company's net

investment income (excluding tax-exempt interest) and a percentage either

fixed by statute (as in 1951 through 1957) or determined according to a

formula specified in the law (the "Secretary's ratio" for 1942—1950). The

Secretary's ratio increased slowly from 92% in 1943 to 96% in 1946, but

then suddenly it rose to over 100% in 1947 and 1948; i.e. life insurance

companies paid no federal tax for the years 1947 and 1948.   Although the
1942 formula remained on the books as the "permanent" tax formula through

1957, it was superseded on a year to year basis after 1948 by various stop-

gap measures. In the formula applicable to the years 1951 through 1957,

the allowance for interest requirements permitted each company was, in

effect, 87—1/2% of its investment income.

          In 1958 and continuing until 1982, a new, more complicated,

method of taxation was adopted. It is basically an "adjusted reserve"

method. The adjusted reserve is determined by adjusting the company's

total reserves to the amount of reserves which would have been held using

the interest rate on which the statutory credit for reserve interest is to

be based (while retaining the use of the mortality and morbidity tables

actually employed by the company). Thus, if the statutory credit is based

on the assumption that, on the average, 3% reserves are being held, each

company would compute its credit as the product of (i) 3% and (ii) the
                                    —19—


amount of reserves it would have held if all of its reserves had been based

on a 3% interest assumption. By providing for this sort of adjustment of

reserves before the application of the interest deduction rate, the

"adjusted reserve" method corrects one of the principal deficiencies of the

"free interest" method: the defect that companies with otherwise similar

operations might pay significantly different amounts of tax solely because

of differences in the average reserve interest
                                                 rates employed. In particu—
lar, it eliminated the differential tax treatment of
                                                       participating (low
reserve interest rate) and non—participating (higher reserve interest rate)

permanent policies.

          Obviously, if the "adjusted reserve" method were to be applied on

an exact basis, a company would have to make one valuation for annual

statement purposes and another for federal income tax purposes. There is,

however, an actuarial rule of thumb which can be used in approximating

changes in reserves arising from changes in the assumed interest rate.

This rule provides that for typical distributions of life insurance poli-

cies by plan, age at issue, and policy year, an increase (decrease) of 1%

in the reserve interest rate will result. in a decrease (increase) of 10% in

the amount of the reserve. Under this rule, known as the "ten—for—one" or

"Nenge" rule, if the average required interest rate for a company's

reserves is 2-1/2%, for example, the amount of reserves which would have

been held on a 3% interest assumption can be approximated by multiplying

the reserves actually held by 95% (100% minus 1/2 of 10%). For small dif-

ferences in interest rates, the condition prevailing in the 1950's, the

rule works well. As the difference increases, the approximation becomes
                                   —20—


less and less accurate. For large differences the poor approximation can

result in a very heavy tax assessment. This certainly occurred in the

1970's since the interest rate used under the "adjusted reserve" method is

defined as a function of the individual company's
                                                    interest earnings rate,
which increased dramatically from the interest used in the original reserve

calculations.
                                     —21—


4. The 1959 Life Insurance Company Income Tax Act

          A mathematical representation of the 1959 tax law was first given

by Fraser (1962). The main results are reproduced here. Tinder the law, a

tax at the regular corporate rates is imposed on the company's "life insur-

ance company taxable income." This taxable income is the sum of three

parts, called phases in the law, as. follows:



  i) mm   [T,G]
 ii) 1/2 (G—T) < o

iii)W

T is the Taxable Investment Income

C is the Gain from Operations, and

W is the Amount Withdrawn from the Policyholders' Surplus Account.

          T is basically computed under the "adjusted reserve" approach.

In regard to C, the aggregate deductions for dividends to policyholders and

for certain other items have been limited to $250,000 plus the excess, if

any, of the Gain from Operations C (before taking account of these deduc-

tions) over the Taxable Investment Income T (i.e. the underwriting gain,

U), C   T + U — $250,000.
                           Thus, under the 1959 law, a mutual company gen-

erally is not able, by increasing the amount of dividends paid to policy-

holders, to reduce its taxable income below Taxable Investment Income minus

$250,000. For most mutual companies, therefore, the "life insurance com-

pany taxable income" will, under present conditions (i.e. reasonable divi-

dends), be equal to the T - $250,000.   For a stock company, 1/2(G-T) <   0,
is also taxed, and the other half is added to the policyholders' Surplus
                                          —22—


Account. Additions to      the, Surplus   Account are not treated as taxable

income until withdrawn from this account either to pay dividends to stock-

holders or to reduce the amount held in the account to the maximum per-

mitted under the law. In point of fact, no Phase 3        tax   has ever been

levied. Furthermore, we will only investigate Phase 1 taxation, since only

nominal amounts of interest income are taxed under Phase 2.

          T =               1nt -
                [I(cs)T              <

Where:

I         is the Investment Yield, which is equal to the company's gross

          investment earnings less the deductions permitted for investment

          expenses and taxes, real estate depreciation, etc. Investment

          Yield includes fully and partially tax-exempt interest and all

          dividends received on corporate stocks.

(cs)T     is the Company's Share (defined below).
1nt       is the amount of tax—exempt interest and the tax—exempt portion

          of dividends received on corporate stocks.

S         is the small business deduction, which is m,in        (.ii,   $25,000).
            i'V' +   iP   + K
(cS)T=1
Where:

I         is the current earnings rate and is computed by dividing the

          company's Investment Yield by the mean of the company's "assets"

          at the beginning and end of the year. (Except for taxes and
                                           —23—



         certain         accounting differences, it is identical to i    used in the
         actuarial calculations above.)

         is the adjusted reserves rate; it is the smaller of (a) the

         current earnings rate and (b) the average of the current earnings

         rate for the present year and those for the four preceding years.
P        is the mean amount of pension plan reserves.

V1       is the amount        of   adjusted life insurance reserves other than pen-

         sion plan reserves (see below).

K        is the amount of direct interest paid during the year.

I        is the Investment Yield.


               =   v(i   + 10 r— lOi')


Where:


V        is the mean amount of life insurance reserves other than pension

         plan reserves.

         is the average assumed interest rate for such life insurance

         reserves; it is equal to


              Vk rk
         I
         Ic




Where:

V        is the mean amount of reserves valued at the rate
                                                                   rk.

         (rIc depends on the rate allowed in the state non—forfeiture law

         in effect at the time the policy is issued. It has hardly

         changed over time.)
                                              -24-


            For example, if the adjusted reserves rate is 6% and the average

valuation interest rate is 3%, the adjusted life insurance reserves would

be equal to v[i +    lo(.03)   —
                                   lo(.o6)]    = .7V.   It will be recognized that

this reserve adjustment represents an approximate adjustment based on the

"Menge"   rule.
           The tax   function is homogeneous in the first degree, aside from

the constant statutory deductions and limitations.            Therefore, a company
that is, say, exactly twice the size of another company in the same tax

situation will pay exactly twice the tax (except to the extent of the tax

effects attributable to the constant statutory deductions and limitations).

This is a fortunate result; it means that we can aggregate over different

size companies without having to know the size distribution of companies to

compute the effective after—tax life insurance return.
                                         —25—


5.  Formulas for Current and Expected Future
Life Insurance Rates of Return

          Under the following assumptions T, taxable investment income,

simplifies.

          a) The company correctly assigns interest and tax liability to

its pension and non—pension accounts.       Therefore, we can ignore P
in the formula.

          b) The company does not invest in tax—exempt securities. Until

recently, it would not have done so, since the marginal after-tax

return from taxed securities was higher than the marginal after-

tax return from tax—exempt securities. (This is due to a quirk

in the law, as can be shown.)

          c) S and K can be ignored.

          d) I =   i(v+)   =   iA.   Assets defined in the 1959 law include

assets resulting from surplus funds and other life insurance com-

pany obligations, such as incurred expenses, mandatory reserves

for fluctuations in security values and insurance premiums paid

in advance. These assets are denoted by .        The ratio V/V+ is

assumed to be constant throughout the period studied at .85.

This assumption is supported by examining the life insurance

industry balance sheet.
                                                        —26—


            e) t is the corporate tax rate. Therefore




                 T =
                           t[iA(1.x         i'V(l+lOr_lOi'))]


                      =    t[iA      —
                                          i'V(l+lO—loI')].
            The current after—tax life insurance return is


                          = I—T      =   IA—tiA+ti'\T(l+lQr_lQj')
                                                        A

                                     =      —   ti + ti'.(1+1Or—1Oj')
                                     =   i ti
                                            —       +
                                                        .85ti'(l+lO_lOi')
If we further assume a steady—state result

            f) 1' =

then
                       =   i   —     .15t±      +   8.5ti       —   8.5ti2
The marginal after—tax return with respect to a steady state increase in i is:

                 di
                               1 —       .15t   +   8.5t    —       17ti

                                                                                 di
If t =   .50,   = .03 and i
                                            .12, then the elasticity is      =        = .0599,
that is an increase in interest rates, has at the margin and under reason—

able conditions, a much less than one for one proportional increase in the

current life insurance rate of return.

            We have found the i to be used in the construction of the depen-
                                                       -27-


dent variable. It is possible to proceed from here to the construction of

i, the expected level after-tax life insurance rate of return on a policy

held for twenty years, or 80 quarters.l3 The approach taken is to solve for

implicit        that satisfies S                     = bT, where bT has been calculated by
                                          80    1



algorithm. This is done numerically, as an explicit analytical solution of

an 80—degree polynomial is imposible. It is done for every quarter

(denoted T) from 1952:1 to 1982:2, based on the interest and tax rates then

prevailing and expected to prevail.14


           It is probably easiest to write out the algorithm explicitly and

explain the assumptions afterwards.




(1)        i =

           .T   =
                     (i
                     .T
                             -   .002)(1 -                 +
                                                               (iPIYLt)(et)       -60 t -1

                     1NAIC

                =
                     (1B     —   •002)(1        —   iT)    + PLCYLeo

           •T        •T
(2)
           10 AIC

                    = (i-(1/9O)i-6O) +                 .0238
                                                                 T
           1+l               1013                               1e
                                                                                  0 < t < 59


           1t        1e                                                           61 <t<79

(3)        1     =     r  .T     +   .T
                                            +
                                                    T        .T
                                                           ÷ 1t-12 + .T
                     mmnL(1t         1t-4           't-8              ltll6)/5,
                                                               -28-


(4)            = .60             .022
                            +
                                                                                                 0< t<3
               = .08        -f   .022                                                            4    <t     < 15
               = .04 + .022
                                                                                                16 < t < 39
               = .03 + .022
                                                                                                40    < •t     79


          .T
                   't
                 = .T —          tT.T
                                   it
                                      + tT i'T,
                                             \.85)(1                  + 10-T    -
                                                                                    10i')   —
                                                                                                    I
                                                                                                 ________
                                                                                                       t+i     Et
                                                                                                mod(-.—)

                                                                 0 <t <79;          for   1957:1 <T < 1982:2

           T           T             TT
                      TT(875)
          1Et 1t_tit+tit.                                        —

                                                                      mod1t+i

                                                                                    for 1952:1 <T <1956:4


                                          1/Lf
(6)       bT =          +
                                 T
                                                     [(i   +    T               T
                                                                              E78 1/l4 +
                  (1                             +                        +
                             1E79)                             iE7g)(1

               + [(i       +     T
                                 iE79)(1
                                                 +
                                                     iE78)...(1
                                                                       + .T
                                                                         iE2)(1
                                                                                    +
                                                                                        1E1)(1
                                                                                                  +
                                                                                                       i)     1IL+




                                                                                          1952:1 < T < 1982:2

         We start our explanation with equation (1), building the struc-

ture from the ground up. 4A1c is the same rate used in constructing

above. 'BAAo is the rate on new long—term BAA bonds, the primary security

that life insurance companies have purchased for their portfolio. .002 is

subtracted out because of the costs due to investment expenses and expected

default. 4LCYLe is the rate the company will currently receive from
                                                  —29—



policy loans on newly issued policies.                       is the current proportion of

policy loans outstanding to reserves. It is assumed that all these rates

and proportions will continue into the future ——                  basically      the assumption

of a flat yield curve and stable insurance behavior.                             and 'PLCYLt are
the actual rates prevailing         t             quarters previous to T.             is the pro-

portion of new policy loans to reserve increase                    t       quarters   previous to
                                                                       I




T. We include policy loans because, especially in recent years, they have

been a drag on the ability of life insurance companies to get new market

rates. Equation (2) exhibits the fact that the life insurance policyholder

receives the average rate of return and therefore can expect to receive

market (marginal) rates, i, only after some time. The specific assump-

tions imbedded here are that the portfolio turns over (on average) every

fifteen years and is growing 1.3% per quarter. The securities retired in

the current quarter are 1/90
                                          1

                                        1.013
                                                   of the portfolio (      (i
                                                                           1=0
                                                                                 .013)1 = 90)

and those currently being purchased are (1 .O13)/9Q = .0238 of the port-
folio.



             .91.o13)1
         L               +   l.Ol3 59         —
                                              -      1
                                                         i15
                                                         J
              (1013)90         90


The accuracy of these assumptions can be checked by comparing the rate of

return on our hypothetical life insurance portfolio at a point of time with

1NAIC• For the several fourth quarters checked, the two rates were remark-
ably close.
                                      —30-.




                                      Table 3



                                                T          T
                     T
                                  Hypothetical j0         NAIC

                  1961:4                .0434              .0422
                  1966:4                .0478              .0473
                  1971:4                .0609              .0552
                  1976:4                .0696              .0668
                  1979:4                .0814              .0778




          Equation (3) is self—explanatory and is necessary because of the

tax formula. Equation (4) lists other expenses specific to life insurance.

The first number in the Et sum represents the sales agent's commission on

premium paid for the tth quarter after policy purchase. These are New York

State legal maximums and they haven't changed over the period being inves-

tigated. .022 is the average state premium tax. This figure has also been

steady over time. It should be noted that these percentages of premiums

paid are absolutely large, and in periods of low interest rates, relatively

large also. Equation ()    is   self—explanatory in light of the "Menge" for—

mula and represents the after—tax, after—expense expected rate of return t

quarters after T. The form of expenses subtracted was chosen for analyti-

cal convenience. It basically says that a declining proportion of expenses

is subtracted from total interest earned on an individual's life insurance

account. While not technically correct, the correct formulation (adding

still another subscript on i to distinguish between positive commissions

and state tax expenses subtracted from interest on new money and zero
                                                                  —3 1—




expenses   subtracted from interest on old money) would have been impossible
to    program. Therefore an                     "on average" approach was chosen. Finally,

Equation   (6) represents the                       accumulated amount over 80                  quarters.


                     is the level effecjve after—tax life insurance rate of return.

Defining
                       T1/
            (1 +      'E =                 (1   +   iT   )

and
            f(iT)      =   ( + •T + (1                       ÷ iT)2 +         ...   (1 +   .T)80 -   bT =   0
we get


            0    =   [(i   +iI
                            .T\80               —
                                                    i](i     +   1.T)       — bT



                                    T81                          T1
            0= [(1         +           )        — (1 +
                                                T
                                                                        -   bT



Using a Newton-Raphson iteration




             T             T               f(T)
                                              n
            'n+l =         n f     —

                                            (1 )
                                       T
with        (.T0 — (1          +   'NAIC -           1)


in converges to 1 . Finally,                             .T =
                                                                 (i   +     1.T4
                                                                               )    — 1.


            The rate of return on the alternative bond portfolio is duck

soup. It is simply
                                            —32—




                   (1 -          .T
                            tTt'AAA      — .003)
          'AAA


where tT is the individual income tax on interest income, 'AAAo is the

current yield on new—issue AAA long—term bonds, and .003 represents

various, unspecified, investment expenses. Again, a flat yield curve has

been assumed. The independent variable, therefore, is




   **                 =
           RDIFF             - 1AAA




  **                  vT_   (l+jT)VT_1
                                 c
          LISRY   =




is the dependent variable,l5 where           is personal disposable income.
                                            —33—



6.    Empirical Results

            The regression using these variables for the period 1959:1 to

1982:1, assuming tiT =    .35, VT,   is



                           Dependent Variable: LISRY

           Coefficient                    T-Stat          Independent Variable

            .00131                        6.745           Constant

1)                                                        PDL (RDIFF, 2, 4, NONE)

/0          .00051

/1          .00026
/2          .00015
/3          .000 17
SU          .00109                        4.809
2)        - .00023                   —1 .662              SEASON QI

3)        -.00038                    -2.380               SEASON Q2

4)        - .00031                   —2.240               SEASON Q3

            .610                          6.973           RHO

ff2         .6853
D-W =       1 .66

           RDIFF dropped approximately 2.4 over the period, while LISRY

dropped approximately .0040 over the period. Our regression explains



            (.ooiog)(2.4) =
                            65.4%    of    the drop in LISRY.


In another regression (not shown here), a trend variable was included. The

size of the RDIFF coefficient barely changed and it remained significant.
                                            -34-


There is, therefore, econometric support for the original contention that

the tax treatment of life insurance savings (in an inflationary environ-

ment) has been a significant determinant of the amount saved.

                If life insurance savings is more traditionally defined as

VT —    vT_l,    then the life insurance savings rate can be denoted as
LISYT =   (vT     -   T1 )/yT   and the following regression results for the period
1959:1 to 1982:1

                                 Dependent Variable: LISY

            Coefficient                   T—Stat            Independent Variable

                .00850                    38.99             Constant
1)
                                                            PDL (RDIFF, 2, 4, NONE)
/0              .00064

/1              .00033

/2              .00022

/3              .00029
SlIM        .001 48                       5.733

2)         -.00027                       -1.940             SEASON Q1

3)         -.00030                       -1.899             SEASON Q2
4)         -.00027                       —1.986             SEASON Q3


            .7995
D—W =       1.66


                                                                        iV T-1
This regression is not surprising when it is realized that              CT

has been added to the right hand side of the equation, which ads to the
                                    —35—


constant term and is colinear with RDIFFT. LISY dropped approximately

.0045 over the period. The second regression explains




          (.oo148)(2.41   78.9% of the drop in LI


There are several caveats to this empirical work. The problem of simultan-

eity bias presumably lurks in the regressions. A proper specification of

interest rate determination, such as might occur in a simultaneous

equations flow—of-funds model with due consideration of taxes would solve

that problem. The assumption of a constant personal tax rate is a weak one

and ultimately should be replaced. This improvement, however, would likely

support our results since marginal tax rates were very high in the 1950's

and recent inflationary increases in personal tax rates in no way cancel the

after-tax rate differential reported here. Indeed, improved specification

would probably be enough to include the 1952:1 to 19584 period in the

regressions. Further research on these points would seem desirable.
                                    —36—


7.   Conclusion

          The main substantive results have already been stated in the

introduction. One methodological point, however, has yet to be stated. As

is emphasized in Feldstein (1982), a well specified fiscal framework is

necessary for a complete analysis of monetary policy. Increases in the

inflation rate are clearly not neutral in the case of life insurance

savings due to tax considerations and it is reasonable to expect that simi-

lar non—neutralities induced by taxes exist.   This is not logically sur-

prising, because as in the history of life insurance taxation, there is a

close connection between an industry's tax mechanism and its institutional

characteristics and structure.
                                       —31—


Footnotes


 1. See Friedman (1980) for a discussion of these and related changes in

      post—war American financial markets.

 2. Other studies of life insurance savings flows either assume that the

      flows are exogenous (Hendershott, 1911) or depend simply on the private

      placement yield (Cuirmiins, 1915).

 3. This is because life insurance companies mainly invest in long—term

      corporate bonds and mortgages. See Friedman (1982).

 4.   See Feldstein (1918a) for a general model.

 5. For interesting (and different) macroeconomic implications of life

      insurance savings flows see Geren (1913) and Feldstein (1982).

 6.   See Keller (1963) for a detailed history of the early industry.
 7. This institutional review is taken from Warshawsky (1982).

 8.   Thaler   and Shefrin (1981) give a rigorous treatment of the idea. It is

      also connected to issues of the investor's horizon and holding period.

      See also Feldstein (1918b).

 9. Warshaws1r (1982) develops a model of policy loan demand where self—

      control is implicitly assumed to be the behavioral background.

10.   Rothschild   and Stiglitz (1916) introduced the problem into the litera-

      ture.

11. The existence of equilibrium under different behavioral assumptions in

      a continuous parameter model is discussed in Riley (1979).

12. This is a personal observation.
                                      —38—



13. The twenty year average persistency was computed as follows:
         140
    1/140 ST =   20.5.   I.e. the lapse rates are uniform throughout the

    hypothetical range of forty years. In 1911—12, the empirical average

    persistency was closer to fifteen years.

114. The year 1951 is included even though the tax law only applied to 1958

    and beyond. Since the computation involves future interest rate expec-

    tations, it is reasonable to also make an assumption regarding expec-

   tations of the future tax law. It was known as early as middle 1956 that

   the Treasury Department was proposing an increase in life insurance

    company taxation. It is assumed that this information was widespread

   and furthermore that some knowledgeable guesses could have been made

   about the form of the new law.

15. The assumption of 1.3% quarterly growth in reserves derives from a

   regression of log V on time. It therefore implicitly includes interest

   earned and reinvested. The 1.3% figure is also relatively steady for

   the period studied.

16. In defining the dependent variable, T obviously must be the quarterly

    (and not annual) interest earned. This is because we are investigating

   quarterly increases (decreases) in life insurance savings flows and

   using quarterly reserve numbers. Furthermore, T is computed using

   actual interest rates and tax laws, not expected ones. Therefore, the

   1959 law applies only back to 1958, and not 1957, as it does for i.
                                        —39—



Bibliography


Cummins, J. D., An Econometric Model of the Life Insurance Sector of the U.S.

      Economy, 1975, Lexington Books.


Feldstejn, M., "The Fiscal Framework of Monetary Policy," August 1982,

      NBER Working Paper No. 966.


____________ "Do Private Pensions Increase National Savings?," 1978(b), Journal

      of Public Economics, p. 277—293.


_____________    "Inflation,   Tax Rules, and the Long—Term Interest Rate," 1978(a)

      Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, p. 61-109.


Fraser, J. C., "Mathematical Analysis of Phase 1 and    Phase   2 of the Life Insurance

      Company Tax Act of 1959," 1962, Transactions of the Society of Actuaries,

      p. 51—138.


Friedman, B., "Effects of Shifting Saving Patterns on Interest Rates and

      Economic Activity," 1982, Journal of Finance.


____________    "Postwar Changes in American Financial Markets," in Martin Feldstein,

      ed., The American Economy in Transition, 1980, Chicago, p. 9-78.


Qeren, P., "The Contribution of Life Insurance to the Savings Stream," 1943,

      Journal of Political Economy.


Hendershott, P., A Flow of Funds Financial Model: Estimation and Application to

     Policies and Reform, 1977, Lexington Books.
                                      —40—



Jordan, C.W., Life Contingencies, 1975, Society of Actuaries.


Keller, M., The Life Insurance Enterprise, 1885-1910, A Study in the Limits of

      Corporate Power, Eelknap Press.


Kellison, S. G., The Theory of Interest, 1970, Irwin.


Riley, J., "Informational Equilibrium," 1979, Econometrica, p. 331—360.


Rothschild,   M. and J. Stiglitz, "Equilibrium in Competitive Insurance Markets:

      An Essay on the Economics of Imperfect Information," 1976, Quarterly

      Journal of Economics, p. 629—650.


Thaler, R. H. and H. N. Shefrin, "An Economic Theory of Self—Control," 1981,

      Journal of Political Economy, p. 392—406.


Valenti, R., "Theoretical Approaches to Taxing Life Insurance Companies for

      Federal Income Tax Purposes," November 1957, The Journal of Insurance.


Warshawsky, N., "The Demand for Policy Loans: Interest Differentials,

      Interest Awareness and Transactions Costs in a Dynamic Model," May 1982,

      unpublished paper.
                            —41-



                            Appendix


                       T      —T       I                  T
    T             LISRY       r             E     RDIFF
             -r




1952:1                                     2.40   .597
        :2        .00499                   2.51   .643
        :3        .00548                   2.50   .639
        :4        .00597                   2.45   .625
1953: 1           .00567                   2.56   .590
        :2        .00495                   2.88   .629
        :3        .00439                   2,82   .723
        :4        .00389                   2.54   .724
1954: 1           .00407                   2.34   .714
        :2        .00430                   2.36   .711
      :3          .00465                   2.42   .720
        :4        .00477                   2.33   .687
1955: 1           .00449                   2.44   .659
     :2           .00390                   2.48   .652
      :3          .00366                   2.60   .658
      :4          .00372                   2.57   .669
1956:1            .00388                   2.57   .680
      :2          .00376                   2.87   .738
      :3          .00343                   3.13   .793
        :4        .00255                   3.41   .867
1957:1            .00174    2.70           3.06   .526
      :2          .00081    2.70           3.23   .474
      :3          .00063    2.70           3.31   .437
      :4          .00099    2.70           3.27   .635
1958: 1           .00200    2.70           2.87   .836
      :2          .00239    2.70           2.83   .824
      :3          .00243    2.70           2.90   .662
    :4            .00211    2.70           3.00   .603
1959: 1           .00210    2.70           3.20   .492
      :2          .00184    2.70           3.29   .396
      :3          .00249    2.70           3.34   .395
      :4          .00362    2.70           3.48   .361
1 960: 1          .00323    2.70           3.48   .394
      :2          .00223    2.70           3.42   .492
      :3          .00090    2.70           3.30   .543
      :4          .00058    2.70           3.35   .503
1961: 1           .00017    2.70           3.21   .577
      :2          .00075    2.70           3.29   • 527
      :3          .00206    2.70           3.30   .477
      :4          .003 19   2.70           3.21   .534
                               —42—



                               Appendix

                              (Continued)


   T
            f    LISRY
                      T          -T       I                      T
                                 r             E          RDIFF

1962:1           .00291   I    2.70           3.16   f    .518
       :2        .00213        2.70           3.12        .606
       :3        .00122        2.70           3.14        .590
       :4        .00035        2.70           3.08        .600
1963:1           .00149        2.70           3.06        .600
       :2        .00188        2.70           3.11        .570
       :3        .00247        2.70           3.09        .520
       :4        .00300        2.70           3.09        .483
1964:1           .00207        2.70           3.11        .482
    :2           .00186        2.70           3.14        .480
    :3           .00192        2.70           3.11        .464
    :4      J    .00204        2.70           3.12        .436
1965:1           .00149        2.70           3.13        .457
    :2           .00239        2.70           3.18        .466
       :3        .00255        2.70           3.22        .456
    :4           .00197        2.70           3.26        .409
1966:1           .00152        2.70           3.42        .367
       :2   J
                 .00102        2.70           3.69        .365
    :3           .00104        2.70           3.92        .270
    :4           .00144        2.70           4.01        .339
1967:1           .00105        2.70           3.77        .480
    :2           .00122        2.70           3.94        .442
    :3           .00113        2.70           4.08        .338
    :4           .00085        2.70       J   4.28        .177
1968:1           .00073        2.70           4.09        .061
    :2           .00034        2.70           4.21        .021
    :3          -.00105        2.70           4.13        .108
    :4           .00172        2.70           4.23       —.010
1969:1          —.00018        2.70           4.35        .231
    :2           .00028        2.70           4.44       —.296
    :3           .00033        2.70           4.57       —.403
    :4           .00106        2.70           4.74       -.697
1970:1           .00023        2.70           4.92       —.560
    :2          -.00028        2.70           5.06       -.788
    :3           .00021        2.70           5.01       -.479
    :4           .00147        2.80           4.95       -.266
1971:1           .00087        2.80           4.64        .252
    :2           .00088        2.80           4.70       —.008
    :3           .00114        2.80           4.81       -.034
    :4           .00146        2.80           4.68   I    .102
                          —43--



                           Appendix
                          (Continued)

    T         LISRY
                      T
                              r
                              —T        T                  T


1 972: 1       .00111      2.80         4.60
        :2                                          .114
              .00096       2.80         4.66        .044
        :3    .00103       2.80         4.67        .034
        :4    .00116       2.80         4.59        .054
1973: 1       .00135       2.80         4.61
      :2
                                                —   .045
              .00135       2.80         4.71        .025
      :3      .00122       2.80         4.87    —.127
      :4      .00071       2.80         4.77    - .081
1974:1        .0 0007      2.80         4.85    - .282
      :2     - .00Q87      2.80         5.15    —.585
      :3     - .00079      2.80         5.35    —
                                                  .936
      :4     - .00003      2.80         5.36    - .483
1975: 1       .00066       2.90         5.35    - .228
      :2      .00012       2.90         5.41    - .445
      :3      .00122       2.90         5.41    - .508
      :4      .00083       2.90         5.36    -.347
1976:1        .00027       2.90         5.18    - .028
    :2       - .00045      3.00         5.19    —.131
    :3       -.00017       3.00         5.11    —
                                                    .134
      :4      .00094       3.00         4.95        .012
1977:1        .00 199      3.00         4.97    -.004
    :2        .00188       3.00         5.01    -.011
      :3      .00211       3.00         4.94         003
      :4      .001 64      3.00         5.06        .021
1 978: 1      .00165       3.00         5.15    —.191
      :2      .00130       3.50         5.46    - .092
      :3      .00124       3.50         5.42    - .065
      :4      .00120       3.50         5.49    —
                                                    .204
1979:1        .00113       3.50         5.68    -.177
      :2      .00096       3.50         5.76    —.117
      :3      .00080       3.50         5.78    -.107
     :4       .00045       4.00         6.30    - .609
1 980: 1      .0002 1      4.00
     :2                                 6.53   -1.418
             -.00010       4.00         6.46    —.565
     :3      - .00035      4.00         6.47    - .967
     :4      - .00068      4.00         6.66   -1.884
                                  —44—


                                Appendix
                                (Continued)

                            T            —T       1T                T
       T            LISRY                r        E             RDIFF

    1981:1         —.00121           4.50        6.94         —1.813
        :2         —.00221           4.50        6.98         —2.344
           :3      -.00193           4.50        7.00         -3.114
        :4         -.00075           4.50        7.00         -2.794
    1982:1         -.00158           4.50        7.00         —2.933
           :2      —.00159           4.50        7.00         -2.67




Note: All interest rates have been converted to percentages. In the
algorithms, decimals are used, while in the regressions, percentages in
RDIFF, decimals in LISRY. Raw data was provided courtesy of Data
Resources, Inc., (Flow of Funds) and the American Council of Life Insurance
(annual Fact Book and other documents).
