                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




           HOME CARE REIMBURSEMENT, LONG-TERM CARE UTILIZATION,
                          AND HEALTH OUTCOMES

                                            Robin McKnight

                                         Working Paper 10414
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w10414


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       April 2004




I am grateful for the guidance of Jon Gruber, Jim Poterba and David Autor and for helpful discussions with
Daron Acemoglu, Emek Basker, Tom Davidoff, Peter Diamond, Amy Finkelstein, Chris Hansen, Patricia
Keenan, Cindy Perry, Jon Reuter, Larry Singell, Wes Wilson and seminar participants at Amherst College,
CBO, UC-Davis, the Federal Reserve Board, Harvard School of Public Health, MIT, RAND, Texas A&M’s
Bush School, and the University of Oregon. Funding from the National Institute on Aging, through Grant
#K12-AG00983 to the National Bureau of Economic Research, is gratefully acknowledged.The views
expressed herein are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

©2004 by Robin McKnight. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Home Care Reimbursement, Long-term Care Utilization, and Health Outcomes
Robin McKnight
NBER Working Paper No. 10414
April 2004
JEL No. I1
                                    ABSTRACT


Long-term care currently comprises almost 10% of national health expenditures and is projected to

rise rapidly over coming decades. A key, and relatively poorly understood, element of long-term

care is home health care. I use a substantial change in Medicare reimbursement policy, which took

the form of tightly binding average per-patient reimbursement caps, to address several questions

about the market for home care. I find that the reimbursement change was associated with a large

drop in the provision of home care. This drop was concentrated among unhealthy beneficiaries,

which is consistent with the incentives for patient selection inherent in the per-patient caps. I find

that the decline in home health utilization was not offset by increases in institutional long-term care

or other medical care and that there were no associated adverse health consequences. However,

approximately one-quarter of the decline in Medicare spending was offset by increases in out-of-

pocket expenditures for home health care, with the offset concentrated in higher income populations.

Despite the value of home health care implied by the out-of-pocket expenditures, I find that the

welfare implications of the reimbursement change were ambiguous.

Robin McKnight
Economics, 435 PLC
1285 University of Oregon
Eugene, OR 97405
and NBER
robinm@uoregon.edu
I. Introduction

       Long-term care is a policy issue of growing importance in the United States. In 2000,

combined home- and community-based care and nursing home costs for the elderly totaled $98

billion, with Medicare and Medicaid bearing 56% of these costs (U.S. Congress 2000). This

spending level corresponds to roughly 10% of national health expenditures and 1% of GDP.

Moreover, demand for long-term care is expected to increase dramatically over the coming

decades due to the aging of the population. Estimates suggest that the number of elderly people

requiring assistance with activities of daily living will increase by 42% between 2000 and 2020

(U.S. Congress 2000). Many of these elderly people will require long-term care, in the form of

nursing home care or home health care.

       Traditionally, long-term care was synonymous with institutional care at nursing homes.

In 1980, expenditures for institutional care were seven times greater than expenditures for home

health care (HHS 2002). But the past two decades have seen a radical shift in the composition of

long-term care spending. Nursing home usage has fallen substantially; between 1985 and 1995,

there was an 8.2% decline in the share of elderly who reported staying overnight in a nursing

facility on a given day (Bishop 1999). And there has been a parallel substantial rise in long-term

care delivered in the home setting, “home health care”, over the same period, with an 82%

increase in the share of Medicare beneficiaries who used home care and a 208% increase in the

number of home care visits per user (U.S. Congress 2000). As a result, by 1995, expenditures

for nursing home care were only twice as great as expenditures for home care (HHS 2002).

       This dramatic shift in the composition of spending on long-term care naturally leads to

several important questions. First, was the increased use of home health care during this period

causally related to the reduction in nursing home use? Second, given the lower costs associated




                                                1
with providing home care, did the increased use of home health care reduce overall expenditures

on long-term care? Finally, what was the impact of increased home care utilization on the health

status of the elderly?

       This paper addresses these questions using evidence from a policy change that caused a

dramatic reversal of home care utilization growth rates. Specifically, I examine the short-run

impact of a substantial change to Medicare reimbursement for home care in October 1997. The

policy change had dramatic aggregate effects, causing an immediate 30% decline in Medicare

expenditures for home care.

       The reimbursement change, which involved the imposition of average per-patient

reimbursement caps, also fundamentally changed the incentives faced by home care agencies.

By shifting from fee-for-service to a more prospective reimbursement system, Medicare’s home

care program encountered a trade-off between incentives for patient selection and incentives for

efficiency in the production of medical care (Newhouse (1996)). In this paper, I model a profit-

maximizing home health agency with two patient types -- long-term and short-term. The model

shows that the imposition of an average per-patient cap on Medicare reimbursement can lead the

agency to intentionally shift the composition of its patients towards short-term patients and to

provide a lower intensity of care to its long-term patients.

       The empirical analysis uses data from the 1992-1999 Medicare Current Beneficiary

Survey (MCBS) to examine whether the imposition of average per-patient caps shifted the

composition of home care utilization and affected health status and use of other types of care. To

identify effects of the reimbursement change, I utilize state variation in the restrictiveness of the

per-patient caps. In particular, caps were constructed as a weighted average of the historical

costs per home care user in each agency and the mean historical costs per home care user in each




                                                  2
agency’s Census division. In consequence, agencies with otherwise similar utilization patterns

faced differential incentives across states to cut back on per-patient costs after the Medicare

reimbursement policy change. For example, aggregate data suggests that agencies in Georgia

and Oklahoma provided similar average amounts of care to their users in the pre-policy years,

but agencies in Georgia faced more stringent per-patient caps than those in Oklahoma, due to the

regional component of the per-patient cap calculation.

        Using this identification strategy, I find significant declines in the utilization of home

health care in the post-policy period, consistent with aggregate data. Strikingly, I find that these

declines were driven exclusively by declines in use among the beneficiaries who appeared likely

to incur the highest home care costs. Relatively healthy beneficiaries experienced an

insignificant increase in home care usage, whereas relatively unhealthy beneficiaries

experienced a significant decline. These findings are consistent with the model’s prediction that

agencies would respond to the reimbursement change by favoring relatively healthy, low-cost

patients.

        A subsequent analysis examines how changes in the cap and the consequent use of home

health care affected utilization of other types of care, providing evidence on the substitutability

of home care for nursing home and other types of care. I find no evidence that the policy-

induced reduction in home health care increased the likelihood of receiving long-term facility

care. I also find little evidence of increased expenditures for other types of care, although my

estimates are somewhat imprecise. Moreover, I find no evidence that this reduction in home

health care utilization had an adverse impact on the health of the elderly.

        One possible explanation for these findings is that individuals offset the cuts in financing

for public home health care visits by increasing their own out-of-pocket spending on home health




                                                  3
care. I find evidence that roughly 22% of the decline in Medicare home health care spending

was offset by increased out-of-pocket spending. Increases in out-of-pocket spending were

concentrated among relatively high-income beneficiaries but, even among those low-income

beneficiaries who did not offset the cuts, there was no offsetting increase in other health care

spending and no adverse impact on health.

           Finally, the fact that individuals desired to offset some of these public spending cuts

suggests that they were partially valued on the margin. I therefore discuss the welfare

consequences of this policy change, but conclude that the net effect on welfare was ambiguous.



II. Background

           Home health care is medical care that is provided in the home of the patient. To qualify

for Medicare coverage of home health care, a beneficiary must be home-bound, under the care of

a physician and require part-time or intermittent skilled care. The early 1990s witnessed

unprecedented growth in Medicare expenditures for home health care, with expenditures

increasing from $3.4 billion in 1989 to $19.2 billion in 1996.1 During this time, the percentage

of beneficiaries who used home care almost doubled—from 5.1% to 9.5%—and the number of

visits per user almost tripled—from 27 to 79 (U.S. Congress 2000). This growth was

precipitated by a liberalization of the Medicare home care benefit rules, following the settlement

of a class action lawsuit in 1988. Newhouse (2002) argues that this growth also reflects

increased use of post-acute care as a substitute for the last days of a hospital stay, in response to

Medicare’s prospective payment system (PPS) for hospital care.

           In response to rapidly rising expenditures, Congress mandated the development of a PPS

for home care in the Balanced Budget Act of 1997 (BBA 97). In order to slow the growth of
1
    Dollar amounts, throughout the paper, are in real (1999) dollars


                                                            4
home health expenditures in the interim before the PPS was ready to be implemented, BBA 97

also created an “Interim Payment System” (IPS) that took effect in October 1997. At the same

time, Congress mandated PPS for Medicare reimbursement of other forms of post-acute care,

including short-term skilled nursing facilities (SNFs) and rehabilitation services, but the IPS was

the first policy to take effect.

        Prior to BBA 97, home care agencies were reimbursed for their “reasonable” costs,

subject to a per-visit cap. The per-visit cap, which was equal to 112% of the national average

cost for each type of visit, was applied to aggregate agency payments. This reimbursement

policy was considered inadequate, because agencies had no incentive to minimize the number of

visits provided to each patient. Furthermore, there were no financial constraints on demand,

because beneficiaries face no cost-sharing for home care.

        Beginning in October 1997, the IPS added an additional limit to the calculation of agency

reimbursements: an annual per-patient cap. This new, agency-specific cap was calculated as a

weighted average of each agency’s 1994 average per-patient costs and the 1994 regional average

per-patient costs. The agency’s own average per-patient costs comprised 75% of the cap, with

the regional average per-patient costs comprising the remaining 25%.2 Thus, those agencies that

had above-average per-patient costs within their region in 1994 received per-patient caps that

were lower than their 1994 per-patient costs; agencies that had below-average per-patient costs

in 1994 received caps that were higher than their 1994 per-patient costs. In a regulatory impact

statement in March 1998, HCFA projected that 58% of agencies would exceed the per-patient

cap; by the following year, this projection was raised to 79% (Federal Register 1998, 1999).

2
 “New” agencies, for whom 1994 reimbursement information was not available, received a cap equal to the national
median cap, adjusted for regional differences in labor costs. In response to complaints that this formula led to new
agencies in some areas receiving more generous caps than old agencies, 1999 caps for “old” agencies with caps
below the national median were increased. The increase was equal to one-third of the difference between the
agency’s baseline cap and the cap for new agencies.


                                                         5
       Newhouse (1996) shows that prospective reimbursement, such as the IPS, yields two

distinct incentives for health care providers: (1) a production efficiency incentive arising from

the fact that providers can keep any residual reimbursement; and (2) a selection incentive arising

from the fact that lump-sum payment transfers the risk of high costs to the provider. Newhouse

reviews the empirical evidence on this issue, which generally supports the theoretical prediction

that providers and insurers respond to capitated payments by selecting the healthiest patients. It

follows that full prospectivity is unlikely to be optimal, due to the welfare loss from increased

patient selection.

        Empirical evidence about the response of home health agencies to a transition from fee-

for-service to prospective reimbursement is available from an experiment in the early 1990s.

Cheh (2001) evaluates the impact of the experimental PPS on patient selection, health care

utilization and health outcomes. She finds strong evidence of declines in home care utilization,

but little evidence of patient selection, adverse health effects, or increased utilization of other

forms of care. However, there are several reasons that these conclusions may not generalize to

the situation of BBA 97. First, important features of the experimental PPS—notably, the use of

adjustments for agency case-mix— were not used in the IPS. Second, agencies participated

voluntarily in the experiment and were insured against 97-99% of any losses that were generated

as a result of the experimental PPS. In contrast, the IPS was mandatory and did not offer any

insurance against agency losses. As a result, agencies may have reacted more strongly to the IPS

than they did to the experimental PPS.

       In January 1998, CBO projected that BBA 97 would lead to a slowing of the growth rate

of Medicare’s home care expenditures (CBO 1997). However, as Figure 1 shows, home health

expenditures actually plummeted by almost $6 billion in 1998. Figures 2 and 3 show that both




                                                   6
the dramatic pre-1997 increase in expenditures and the striking post-1997 decline in expenditures

were driven primarily by changes in the number of visits per beneficiary, rather than changes in

costs per visit. Data from the Health Care Financing Review’s annual statistical supplement

indicate that the striking decline in visits per beneficiary reflects substantial decreases in both the

share of beneficiaries who used home care (an 11% decline between 1996 and 1998) and in the

number of visits per user (a 31% decline between 1996 and 1998).

         Some observers have complained that declines in home care led to increases in the

utilization of other forms of health care.3 Indeed, it is plausible that Medicare could lose money

by cutting back on home care reimbursement if, for example, the policy change led patients to

substitute relatively expensive inpatient care for less expensive home care. Alternatively,

Medicaid or individual patients could bear financial costs if patients moved from home care to

nursing homes.

         The issue of substitution between home care and other forms of care has long been a

question of interest to health economists. In the early 1980s, the National Long Term Care

Demonstration project was implemented, providing case management and community services to

a treatment group. Kemper (1988) summarizes the conclusions of the evaluation. He reports

that patients and informal care-givers in the treatment group were more satisfied with the care

and quality of life; however, the additional services led to higher net costs because there were no

offsetting decreases in the costs of other care, notably nursing home care. The findings of other,

smaller demonstrations have suggested that there may be some opportunities for home care to




3
  For instance, a hospital administrator told the New York Times, “Our hospital has been busier since the cutbacks in
home health care. We attribute quite a bit of that to the fact that we can’t provide adequate home care. Patients are
admitted or readmitted to the hospital or to a nursing home, and both of those are more expensive than home care”
(Pear 2000).


                                                         7
substitute for other care, especially if increases in home care usage are well-targeted.4 However,

in the 20 years since these experiments, many aspects of the health care system – such as hospital

reimbursement – have changed in ways that are likely to have impacted home care utilization

patterns. This paper provides updated evidence that is more relevant in the current health care

environment.

        Hadley et al. (2000) consider the relationship between post-acute Medicare home health

care and health status in the early 1990s. They rely on year effects and regional market

characteristics to identify the impact of home health care and find a positive effect. Their

research, however, focuses only on a subset of home health users and is therefore not

generalizable to the case of the IPS.



III. Theoretical Framework

        The intention behind the IPS legislation was to provide an incentive for agencies to

provide care efficiently. Lawmakers intended that “payments on behalf of patients whose costs

were lower than average would ‘subsidize’ more costly patients; the balance of low and high cost

patients would determine whether an agency would exceed its aggregate per beneficiary cap”

(U.S. Congress 2000). However, a simple model, evaluated under reasonable assumptions,

suggests that the IPS also introduced an incentive for agencies to favor patients who appeared

likely to incur low costs.




4
 Hughes, Susan, Larry Manheim, Perry Edelman, and Kendon Conrad (1987). Kemper (1988) cites additional
evidence from Blackman, D. et al (1985). South Carolina Community Long Term Care Project: Report of Findings.
Spartanburg: South Carolina State Health and Human Services Commission.


                                                      8
Pre-policy

        Suppose there are two types of patients, those with short-term needs, type S, and those

with long-term needs, type L. An agency chooses the number of short-term patients to treat, NS,

and the number of long-term patients to treat, NL, to maximize its profits. Under pre-policy

reimbursement, the agency receives reimbursement, P, for each unit of care intensity provided to

either type of patient. P is fixed at Medicare’s per-visit cap for each visit. I initially assume that

the level of care intensity, Ii, is fixed for each type of patient. It is convenient to think of Ii as the

number of home health care visits for a patient of type i. The cost of providing a unit of care

intensity is C. I assume that P is greater than C to insure agency solvency. The agency’s profits

are equal to the number of patients of each type that it chooses to treat, Ni, multiplied by the per-

patient profit for each type of patient: (P ⋅ I i − C ⋅ I i ) . The number of patients treated, Ni, is

constrained to be less than or equal to the number of patients who demand services from the

agency, Di, which is initially assumed to be exogenously determined. The Lagrangian is:



(1)     L = N S ⋅ (P ⋅ I S − C ⋅ I S ) + N L ⋅ (P ⋅ I L − C ⋅ I L ) − µ ⋅ ( N S − D S ) − γ ⋅ ( N L − D L )



The first-order conditions show that, because PIi is assumed to be greater than CIi, the demand

constraints must be binding. Agencies will treat as many patients of type i as are available,

because the marginal profit from treating an additional patient is always positive. The following

graph shows the price and cost curves for long-term patients. As the first-order conditions

suggest, NL is determined by DL in this graph. The graph for short-term patients is comparable.




                                                           9
                      Dollars




                         P*IL


                         C*IL




                                                      NL=DL    Long-term
                                                               patients



Post-policy

The policy change can be incorporated into this simple model by adding an average per-patient

cap, X , to the pre-policy reimbursement formula. Under the cap, reimbursements are restricted

to be no greater than X ⋅ ( N S + N L ) . That is, an additional constraint is added to the profit

maximization problem:



(2)     P ⋅ (N S ⋅ I S + N L ⋅ I L ) ≤ X ⋅ (N S + N L )




For the purpose of the analysis, I assume that P ⋅ I S ≤ X ≤ C ⋅ I L and that the reimbursement

constraint is binding.

        It may seem counterintuitive that an agency would continue to treat long-term patients at

all when X ≤ C ⋅ I L . However, an agency will continue to receive full pre-policy reimbursement

for the marginal long-term patient ( P ⋅ I L ) so long as the agency’s average reimbursement




                                                          10
remains below the per-patient cap ( X ). Average reimbursement will remain below the cap as

long as the agency treats enough short-term patients, whose costs all fall below the cap.

        Agencies will maximize profit subject to the original demand constraints and subject to

the new reimbursement constraint. The new Lagrangian is:



        L = N S ⋅ (P ⋅ I S − C ⋅ I S ) + N L ⋅ (P ⋅ I L − C ⋅ I L )
(3)           − λ ⋅ (P ⋅ ( N S ⋅ I S + N L ⋅ I L ) − X ⋅ ( N S + N L ))
              − µ ⋅ ( N S − DS ) − γ ⋅ ( N L − D L )

The new first-order conditions for profit maximization are therefore:

             = (P ⋅ I S − C ⋅ I S ) − λ ⋅ (P ⋅ I S − X ) − µ = 0
         dL
(4)
        dN S

and:

             = (P ⋅ I L − C ⋅ I L ) − λ ⋅ (P ⋅ I L − X ) − γ = 0
         dL
(5)
        dN L



Because of the assumption that P − C > 0 , we know that the first term of (4) is positive.

Because of the assumption that P ⋅ I S ≤ X , we know that the second term of (4) is also positive.

Therefore, in order to set the first-order condition equal to zero, it must be the case that µ is also

positive. This fact implies that the constraint, N S ≤ DS , is binding. In contrast, it is not

necessarily true that the demand constraint for long-term patients, N L ≤ DL , is binding, because

the first term of (5) is positive and the second term of (5) is negative. Moreover, if the per-

patient cap is a binding constraint on reimbursement, it follows that there is a single value of NL,

N L* , that maximizes agency profit. By the reimbursement constraint, it must be the case that:




                                                           11
                 DS ⋅ ( X − P ⋅ I S )
(6)     N L* =
                   (P ⋅ I L − X )


This equation implies that the agency will treat more long-term patients as the demand among

short-term patients increases, because each additional short-term patient eases the reimbursement

cap. The agency will treat more long-term patients as the difference between the cap and P ⋅ I S

increases, because this difference also eases the cap. The agency will treat fewer long-term

patients as the difference between the cap and P ⋅ I L increases, because this difference increases

the constraint imposed by the reimbursement cap. This equation highlights the link between the

reimbursement that an agency receives for short-term patients and its ability to profitably treat

any long-term patients. Reimbursement for short-term patients is always below the cap and,

therefore, allows the agency to stay below the cap on average while collecting reimbursement

above the cap for some long-term patients.

       The following graph illustrates this point by showing the marginal reimbursement and

marginal cost curves for long-term patients, for a given level of short-term patient demand.




                                                12
    Dollars




        P*IL


         C*IL

 Per-patient cap




                      N L*         DL           Long-term
                                                patients



          At points below N L* , the agency receives full reimbursement, P ⋅ I L , for each long-term

patient, because there are enough short-term patients that the per-patient cap is not a binding

constraint. Because the marginal profit from an additional long-term patient is positive, the

agency will meet all demand in this range. At points above N L* , however, the agency receives

only X , which is below the cost, for each long-term patient. Per-patient marginal profits are

negative in this range, so the agency will choose to provide care to no more than N L* patients.

          One element of this model that seems particularly unrealistic is the assumption that

agencies cannot adjust Ii, the number of visits that they provide to a particular type of

beneficiary. Solving a more detailed model, which allows for some adjustment of Ii and assumes

that demand is an increasing function of Ii, yields the same prediction as the simpler model, plus

an additional prediction: agencies are more likely to decrease the intensity of care to long-term

patients than to short-term patients. This new prediction reflects the fact that an increase in the

intensity of care to short-term patients has the benefit of relaxing the demand constraint.




                                                   13
Increasing intensity of care to long-term patients is less beneficial to the agency, however, since

demand is less likely to be a constraint.

       The insight provided by this model is that, under reasonable assumptions, agencies may

attempt to increase the share of short-term patients in their caseload and may provide higher

intensity of care to those patients in order to attract more of them. Agencies may also decrease

the share of long-term patients and decrease the intensity of care provided to them. The

differential impact of the average per-patient cap on the probability that long-term patients

receive any care is an important prediction of the model and is tested in Section 6 of the paper.

The prediction that the per-patient cap will differentially affect intensity of care for long-term

patients, however, is not directly testable.



IV. Data and Empirical Strategy

       I use data from the MCBS to consider agency responses to the IPS and related changes in

beneficiary utilization of care and health status. The MCBS surveys a rotating panel of Medicare

beneficiaries, with an over-sampling of older beneficiaries. It combines administrative data from

Medicare claims with survey data from several interviews with beneficiaries (or proxies, for

beneficiaries who cannot participate in an interview) over the course of a year. The resulting

data set provides information on utilization and costs of medical care, in addition to information

on demographics and health status. Utilization and costs are categorized based on the type of

care and the setting; categories include long-term facility, short-term institutional, inpatient,




                                                  14
outpatient, medical provider, home health, hospice, and prescription drugs.5 The key dependent

variables in my analyses are annual expenditures for each type of care.

         The MCBS was conducted annually beginning in 1992. My data include 99,005

Medicare beneficiary observations from the 1992-1999 surveys, including 14,597 observations

that report some home health utilization during the year. 6 Of the home health users, 3,634 were

in the post-policy period.

         Summary statistics are provided in Table 1. The first column shows statistics for the full

sample. The second column provides summary statistics for observations that have relatively

high predicted home care costs. Predicted costs were imputed based on each observation’s

characteristics and the coefficients from a regression of total home care costs on individual

characteristics among those observations that had home health expenditures in the pre-policy

period. The resulting predicted costs are a measure of the costs that each person was likely to

have incurred if they had used home health care during the pre-policy period. The characteristics

that were used to predict home care costs include age, gender, marital status, race, difficulties

with walking, writing, lifting and stooping, as well as 18 diagnosis dummy variables.7 Table 2

shows some of the coefficients on the characteristics that were used to impute predicted costs to

the full sample. I define “high cost” beneficiaries as those individuals whose predicted costs are

above $3,877, the 75th percentile prediction for all Medicare beneficiaries in the sample. The

summary statistics in Table 1 show that the group with relatively high predicted costs has higher

utilization levels of all forms of medical care than the predicted low-cost beneficiaries, reflecting

5
  Facility care and institutional care both refer to nursing home care; they are distinguished by the expected length of
care. Medical provider events may refer to doctor visits, laboratory and surgical services, or purchases of medical
equipment and supplies.
6
  1,812 observations are excluded from the main analysis because of missing covariate values.
7
  Eighteen diagnosis dummy variables indicate whether an individual has ever received a diagnosis of Alzheimer’s
disease, angina pectoris, arthritis, broken hip, cancer, diabetes, emphysema, hardening of the arteries, hypertension,
mental retardation, mental disorders, myocardial infarction, osteoporosis, other heart conditions, paralysis,
Parkinson’s disease, stroke, and amputation of an arm or leg.


                                                          15
the relatively poor health of observations in the predicted high-cost group. In the empirical

analysis, I test for differential impacts of the IPS on these two groups of beneficiaries.

         I exploit state-level variation in the restrictiveness of IPS per-patient caps to identify the

effect of the caps on beneficiary utilization of care and health outcomes. The predictions of the

model were for individual agencies but they should also hold, on average, at the state level.

Variation in restrictiveness arises from the fact that the per-patient cap was based on both the

agency’s historical costs and the region’s average historical costs. Thus, agencies that had

above-average costs within their region were penalized by the regional component of the cap and

faced more restrictive caps; agencies that had below-average costs within their region benefited

from the regional component of the cap and faced less restrictive caps.

         For my empirical analysis, I create a measure of restrictiveness based on the 1994 state

average visits per user, published in the Health Care Financing Review’s annual statistical

supplement. Restrictiveness technically depends on 1994 Medicare payments per user, but these

payments – as well as the IPS caps – are adjusted across localities to reflect the differences in the

costs of providing care. Thus, visits per user provide a measure of utilization that is more

directly comparable across regions and yields a more accurate measure of actual restrictiveness

than a measure using payment data.8 From each state’s average visits per user in 1994, I subtract

the average visits per user in that state’s Census division, the relevant region for calculating per-

patient caps.9 The resulting measure of restrictiveness ranges from -41 to +35 visits. In the

analysis below, I use this measure, interacted with a dummy variable indicating the post-policy

period, to identify the effects of the IPS. I define the post-policy period as the years 1998 and


8
  When a payment-based measure of restrictiveness is used, instead of the preferred visits-based measure, the results
of the analysis are qualitatively unchanged.
9
  For 1999 data, I adjust the measure of restrictiveness to reflect increases in caps for those states that had average
caps below the national median cap.


                                                          16
1999; the last 3 months of 1997 are technically part of the post-policy period but, because the

data is annual, these months are included with pre-policy data in my analysis.10

         To graphically illustrate the basis for my identification strategy, I have classified states

into “high”, “medium” and “low” restrictiveness states, based on the continuous measure of

restrictiveness that is used in regressions. Figures 4 and 5 use aggregate data from the Health

Care Financing Review’s annual statistical supplement to show that states with relatively

restrictive caps had pre-policy trends that were similar to states with relatively unrestrictive caps,

but experienced substantially larger post-policy declines in home care usage.11 States with

relatively restrictive caps experienced a 32% decline in users per beneficiary and a 47% decline

in visits per user between 1996 and 1999. In contrast, states with relatively unrestrictive caps

experienced a 24% decline in users per beneficiary and a 37% decline in visits per user.

         The basic estimating equation takes the following form:

         Yist = α + γ 1 Re strict s * Post t + X ist β + ∑ φ s State s + ∑η t Yeart
                                                           s                t

(7)            + ∑ δ s State s * trend t + ∑ φ hs State s * HighCost i + ∑η ht Yeart * HighCost i
                   s                          s                                 t

               + ∑ δ hs State s * trend t * HighCost i + ε ist
                   s



The coefficient of interest, γ1, is on the interaction between the state-level measure of

restrictiveness and the post-policy dummy variable; this coefficient is shown in the first row of

each column in each of the tables that is discussed below. This coefficient measures the impact

of living—during the post-policy period—in a state that provided an additional one visit per user

above the regional average during the pre-policy period. I control separately for state and year

fixed effects, state trends, as well as separate state and year fixed effects and state trends for


10
   The qualitative results of the analysis are not sensitive to exclusion of the 1997 data. The magnitudes of the
effects on home health care are, as expected, larger when 1997 is excluded.
11
   Aggregate data for 1999 is from GAO (2000).


                                                          17
beneficiaries with high predicted costs, and individual characteristics and diagnoses.

Coefficients for some of these control variables are shown in the lower rows of each table.

        The main regressions of interest in my analysis use continuous dependent variables. I

estimate these equations using OLS. For binary dependent variables, I report marginal effects

from Probit estimation.

         The critical identifying assumption of the empirical strategy is that there are no

differential trends in states that faced relatively high restrictiveness due to the IPS. For example,

if there were mean reversion in home care utilization, states with high pre-policy usage would

experience decreases in utilization in the post-policy period, even in the absence of any policy

change. Because states that faced relatively high restrictiveness also had relatively high pre-

policy utilization levels, there is a possibility that my measure of restrictiveness simply captures

the mean reversion of high utilization states. It is important to note, first of all, that there is no

evidence of mean reversion in the pre-policy period (as shown in Figures 4 and 5), so it is not

clear why we should expect mean reversion in the post-policy period.

        Nevertheless, mean reversion is a concern and one of the ways that I address it is by

using the fact that my measure of restrictiveness depends on a state’s pre-policy utilization

relative to other states in its region, not relative to the rest of the country. States that have

similar pre-policy utilization may face the same degree of mean reversion, but would face

different IPS restrictiveness depending on whether their utilization is higher or lower than other

states in the division.12 Likewise, states that have very similar measures of restrictiveness had

very different utilization levels in 1994.13



12
  For instance, in 1994, home health users in Oklahoma received an average of 106 visits and users in Georgia
received a comparable 102 visits (Health Care Financing Review 1996). However, the IPS was substantially more
restrictive for Georgia, because the average home health user in Georgia in 1994 received 33 more visits than the


                                                        18
         In order to formally account for the possibility of mean reversion in my empirical

analysis, I run my regressions both with and without a control for mean reversion. The mean

reversion control variable is an interaction between the 1994 average visits per user in each state

and a dummy variable for the post-policy period. This additional term accounts for the fact that

states with high utilization in the pre-policy period may have decreased their utilization even in

the absence of the IPS. As discussed below, the majority of my results are not sensitive to the

inclusion of this additional term. This specification takes the following form:



         Yist = α + γ 1 Re strict s * Post t + γ 2Visits94 s * Post t + X ist β + ∑ φ s State s
                                                                                   s

(8)            + ∑η t Yeart + ∑ δ s State s * trend t + ∑ φ hs State s * HighCost i
                   t              s                           s

               + ∑η ht Yeart * HighCost i + ∑ δ hs State s * trend t * HighCost i + ε ist
                   t                              s




V. Empirical Results

A. Effect on Home Health Care Utilization

         The results for home care utilization in Table 3 confirm the evidence from aggregate

data: beneficiaries in states that had above-regional-average visits per user in 1994 had larger

declines in home health care utilization in the post-policy period. To interpret the magnitude of

the coefficients, I calculate the implied impact on a “typical” state, which received a per-

beneficiary cap that precluded reimbursement for 6.32 visits that the typical pre-policy user

received. The assumption that the per-beneficiary cap would permit reimbursement for 6.32



average user in the region; the average user in Oklahoma, in contrast, received only 4 more visits than the average
user in the region.
13
   The restrictiveness measures for Kansas and Mississippi are 9 and 8, respectively, but users in Kansas in 1994
received an average of 56 visits, whereas users in Mississippi received an average of 114 visits (Health Care
Financing Review 1996).


                                                         19
fewer visits per user in a typical state is based on pre-policy utilization levels and HCFA’s 1999

estimates of how tightly the caps constrained agency reimbursement.14

         The first column of Table 3 shows results for a regression that controls only for state and

year fixed effects and implies a decline of 3.4 visits per beneficiary in the “typical” state. The

second column illustrates that the results are robust to inclusion of individual-level covariates,

implying a decline of 3.3 visits per beneficiary in the typical state. The third column, which

corresponds to the basic estimating equation specified in Equation 7, adds controls for state-level

trends. The coefficient implies a decline of 4.9 visits per beneficiary in the typical state. Finally,

the fourth column adds the interaction between 1994 state average visits per user and a post-

policy dummy variable. In this specification, the implied impact of the IPS is a decrease of 2.8

visits. In fact, average visits per beneficiary fell by 4.6 between 1996 and 1999, so each of these

regressions suggests an impact of the IPS that is consistent with the aggregate data.

         These regression results show the impact on average utilization of home health care. In

Figures 6 and 7, I provide graphical evidence of the change in the distribution of home care visits

in states with relatively unrestrictive caps (Figure 6) and in states with relatively restrictive caps

(Figure 7). These figures suggest that the IPS led to a decline in the likelihood of receiving 50 or

more visits, but did not substantially decrease the likelihood of receiving fewer than 50 visits.

The fact that there was little change in the likelihood of receiving fewer than 50 visits could

14
   I begin with HCFA’s estimate that agencies that faced binding constraints would exceed the cost limits by an
average of 12% (Federal Register 1999). This 12% estimate is likely to understate the initial post-policy
restrictiveness, since agencies had presumably adjusted some of their behavior by 1999. Applying this conservative
12% estimate to the average pre-policy (1996) utilization level of 73.6 visits per user, I determine that the typical
agency that faced a binding cap provided 7.9 visits per user (in the pre-policy period) that would not be reimbursed
in the post-policy period (Health Care Financing Review 1998). Then, accounting for HCFA’s estimate that the
per-patient cap was not a binding constraint for 21% of agencies, I determine that an average agency in an average
state faced a cap that precluded reimbursement of 6.32 visits that the average pre-policy beneficiary received
(Federal Register 1999). This provides a conservative estimate of the reimbursement constraint that the typical state
faced after BBA 97. Since the coefficients in the tables measure the impact of a cap that precludes reimbursement
for an additional 0.25 visits per user, I multiply the coefficient in the table by 25.28 (6.32*4) in order to estimate the
impact for a typical state.


                                                           20
obscure changes in the composition of beneficiaries who received those visits. But the fact that

the effects of the IPS are most visible in the upper part of the distribution suggests that the

impact of the IPS may have been concentrated among those beneficiaries whose pre-policy

utilization would have exceeded the per-patient caps.

         The theoretical framework in Section 4 suggests that the negative impact of the IPS on

utilization should be stronger for relatively unhealthy beneficiaries. Therefore, in results shown

in Table 4, I interact the treatment variable with a dummy variable for having “high” predicted

costs. 15 The results for the basic estimating equation in column 3 reveal an impact on utilization

among high-cost beneficiaries that is 29 times as large as the impact on low-cost beneficiaries.

Moreover, the results in column 4, which control for mean reversion, suggest no decline in

utilization among low-cost beneficiaries. Instead, in the typical state, beneficiaries with low

predicted costs received an additional 1.5 home care visits, while beneficiaries with high

predicted costs received 13.2 fewer home care visits.

         There are two potential explanations for the larger declines among relatively unhealthy

beneficiaries. The larger declines could reflect the fact that patients with high predicted costs use

about six times more home care on average than those with low predicted costs and therefore had

a greater opportunity to decrease utilization. The larger declines could also reflect a behavioral

effect, arising from agencies’ efforts to cut back on care to patients who were most likely to

exceed per-patient caps. The results in Table 4 generally support the latter explanation. The

results in column 3 suggest that, even as a share of mean home care use, the decline among high-

cost beneficiaries was greater than the decline among low-cost beneficiaries. Likewise, the




15
  These regressions also control for second-order interactions between the state measure of restrictiveness, the post-
policy dummy variable, and the high predicted costs dummy variable.


                                                         21
results in column 4 indicate that the negative effects of the IPS on home health care usage were

driven exclusively by significant negative effects among the predicted high cost beneficiaries.

           In Table 5, I show basic results, estimated using Equation 8, for other measures of home

health utilization.16 These results provide additional evidence that agencies responded to the IPS

by differentially cutting back on care to relatively unhealthy beneficiaries. In particular, high-

cost beneficiaries faced a significant decline in the probability of receiving any Medicare home

health care, whereas low-cost beneficiaries faced a significant increase. Likewise, high-cost

beneficiaries experienced a significant decline in Medicare expenditures for home health care,

whereas low-cost beneficiaries experienced a significant increase. For the typical state, the

coefficients imply a $365 decline in Medicare home care spending per high-cost beneficiary and

an $81 increase in Medicare home care spending per low-cost beneficiary.

           It is unfortunately not possible to consider the impact of the IPS on the number of home

health care visits, conditional on receiving any, because the IPS had an effect on the home care

participation margin. However, it is possible to determine how much of the estimated effect on

unconditional Medicare home care spending can be explained by the estimated change in

Medicare home care participation implied by the coefficients in column 2 of Table 5. If the

predicted high-cost beneficiaries who stopped receiving any Medicare home health care after the

IPS were average predicted high-cost users, the implied one percentage point decrease in the

probability of receiving any home care explains only 11% of the $365 unconditional decline in

Medicare home health spending among high-cost users in the typical state. Thus, the remaining

89% of the unconditional decline must be explained either by a $1,062 decrease in home care

spending per user or by additional cream-skimming within the predicted high-cost beneficiaries

(or by a combination of both).
16
     Results estimated using Equation 7 are similar and, therefore, are not shown.


                                                           22
B. Effects on Other Usage and Health Outcomes

         Tables 6 through 8 provide evidence on substitution between home health care and other

types of care and are, therefore, relevant for assessing the overall effect of the IPS on efficiency

in the production of medical care. The impact of IPS restrictiveness on long-term facility care is

shown in Table 6. The coefficients indicate no significant effect of the IPS on the probability of

using any long-term nursing home care or on expenditures among the high-cost or low-cost

beneficiaries.17 The standard errors are sufficiently small that, for the typical state, I can reject

increases in the likelihood of a high-cost beneficiary receiving any long-term facility care that

are greater than 0.4 percentage points. Relative to the mean probability of any facility events for

high-cost beneficiaries (27%), this maximum 0.4 percentage point increase is relatively minor.

         Because the results for measures of utilization of other types of care are similar to the

results for long-term care facilities, I show only selected utilization measures in Tables 7 and 8.

Although the results suggest no significant impact of the IPS on any of these expenditure

measures, the standard errors are sufficiently large that it is impossible to reject a sizeable

impact. Thus, the results for substitution towards other care are merely suggestive that there was

no impact.

         Because the IPS led to a large decline in home care usage among some of Medicare’s

most unhealthy beneficiaries, it provides a good opportunity to assess the benefits of home health

care for beneficiary health outcomes. I use several measures of health, including body mass

index (BMI), functional limitations and mortality. Table 9 shows the impact on BMI, the


17
  The finding of no substitution towards long-term facilities could, in theory, reflect the existence of excess demand
for nursing home beds that has been previously reported. However, Grabowski (2001) summarizes the most recent
evidence, which suggests a shift away from excess demand in the nursing home market in the 1980s and 1990s.
Nursing home occupancy rates were roughly 89% in 1996 (Harrington, Swan et al. 1998).


                                                         23
probability of being underweight, and the probability of being overweight. Table 10 shows the

effects on reported difficulties with three activities: stooping or kneeling, lifting 10 pounds, and

walking 2-3 blocks.18 The dependent variable in each column is a dummy variable for reporting

a lot of difficulty or an inability to perform the activity. In each case, there is no significant effect

of the IPS. Finally, in results that are not reported in tables, I estimate effects on mortality, but do

not find any impact. These measures of health outcomes are obviously quite coarse and, thus,

should be interpreted as suggestive rather than conclusive. Nevertheless, they do not suggest any

adverse health consequences associated with declines in home care.

         There are several possible explanations for finding no evidence of a negative impact on

health. For instance, it may be the case that the visits that were cut back after the IPS were less

medically necessary than the visits that were not cut back.19 Another possible explanation is that

the decline in publicly provided home health care visits led to an increase in informal care by

family and friends. This explanation is not directly testable in the data. In addition, there may

have been impacts on aspects of health or well-being that are not measured in this data, or

impacts that affected only a small subset of patients rather than the overall Medicare population.

         Another possible explanation for these findings is that individuals offset the reduction in

Medicare-provided home health care visits by obtaining home health care through other sources

of payment. Thus, in Table 11, I show the impact of the IPS on total home health care spending,

and decompose the impact among the three largest sources of payment for home care: Medicare,




18
   These regressions necessarily exclude functional limitations from the set of explanatory variables and from the
home care cost prediction equations. This change raises the question of whether functional limitations should be
used as control variables in any regressions, since they are potential outcomes. Results that are not shown in the
tables reveal that my findings are not sensitive to the exclusion of functional limitation control variables.
19
   McCall et al. (2001) report that the composition of Medicare home health visits shifted away from home health
aide visits and towards skilled care after BBA 97. If the home health aide visits provided the least marginal medical
value, it may not be surprising that there are no observable adverse impacts on health status.


                                                         24
Medicaid and beneficiary out-of-pocket expenditures. 20 I do not find a significant increase in

Medicaid home health care spending, but I do find a significant increase in out-of-pocket home

health spending among high-cost beneficiaries. In particular, twenty-two percent of the

estimated decline in Medicare spending among high-cost beneficiaries was offset by increases in

out-of-pocket expenditures. This finding is consistent with aggregate data, which indicate that

out-of-pocket expenditures for home- and community-based long-term care for the elderly nearly

doubled between 1995 and 2000, rising from $6 billion to $11 billion (U.S. Congress 1998,

2000). The evidence, therefore, suggests that some of the cost savings from the IPS were not, in

the broadest terms, cost savings; rather, the costs were shifted to other payers.

        Given that some of the decline in Medicare home health care was offset by increases in

out-of-pocket expenditures, an important question is whether lower income beneficiaries—who

may not be able to afford to pay for their own home health care—experienced larger declines in

home health care. Table 12 shows key regression coefficients separately for beneficiaries with

incomes below and above the poverty line. Columns 1 and 4 show the means of the dependent

variables for the low- and high-income sub-samples. Columns 2 and 5 show the coefficient on

the interaction between a post-policy dummy variable and the state-level restrictiveness measure.

Columns 3 and 6 show the coefficient (from the same regression) on the interaction between the

predicted high-cost dummy variable, the post-policy dummy variable, and the restrictiveness

measure.

        The most striking difference between high- and low-income beneficiaries is that low-

income beneficiaries did not offset Medicare spending reductions with out-of-pocket

expenditures. Rather, the increases in out-of-pocket expenditures were concentrated among the


20
  There is likely to be more under-reporting in the non-Medicare payments for home health care, because these data
are based only on survey responses, rather than administrative data.


                                                       25
high-income beneficiaries, who offset 63% of Medicare’s spending decreases. As a result, high-

income beneficiaries experienced substantially smaller declines in home care use than low-

income beneficiaries. The results imply that high-income beneficiaries with high predicted costs

in a typical state received 8.8 fewer visits per beneficiary after the IPS; low-income beneficiaries

with high predicted costs in the same state received 19.4 fewer visits.

         The table also shows coefficients for several key measures of health care utilization and

health outcomes, separately by income level. These results provide little evidence of substitution

towards other types of care or of adverse health outcomes, even among the lower-income sub-

sample that experienced larger net declines in home care utilization.

     One concern about the results is the issue of external validity. If the IPS led agencies to cut

back on precisely those home care visits that had the lowest marginal medical value, it is

possible that further cuts would induce observable declines in health status in the overall

Medicare population. Another caveat to the present results is that they represent short-run

outcomes. Some agencies may have required a year to fully ascertain the implications of the

reimbursement changes or to fully incorporate changes to their procedures.21 Likewise, it is

possible that some effects on health outcomes would not become immediately apparent. Thus,

the results that are reported here could be an overestimate or underestimate of the long-run

impact of the IPS.



C. Identification and Specification Checks

         I find that the results are robust to a variety of specification checks: using different

cutoffs for “high” predicted costs, allowing separate effects of the IPS for all four quartiles of the

21
  Indeed, when the IPS effects on home care utilization are separated into effects for 1998 and 1999, the magnitude
of the 1998 effect is larger. This finding may suggest that agencies initially over-reacted to the IPS and moderated
their response in the longer-run.


                                                         26
distribution of predicted costs22, using cross-sectional weights, using state average visits per user

in 1996 (rather than 1994) for the mean reversion control variable, excluding functional

limitations as explanatory variables, controlling for the use of a proxy to answer survey

questions, restricting the sample to aged beneficiaries, and restricting the sample to beneficiaries

with fee-for-service Medicare coverage.

         Also, as a further test for problems of mean reversion, I exclude the actual post-policy

period from the analysis, designate the years 1995, 1996 and 1997 as “post-policy” years, and

replicate the analysis in Tables 3, 4 and 5. The IPS caps were based on utilization in 1994 so, if

mean reversion were truly driving the results in Tables 3, 4 and 5, we would find similar

coefficients in this falsification exercise in spite of the fact that the IPS did not yet exist.

However, whereas the coefficient for the actual analysis in column 4 of Table 3 is -.109, a

comparable coefficient in the falsification exercise is +.135, significant at the 10% level. For

every other measure of home health care utilization, the coefficient of interest, γ1, in the

falsification exercise consistently takes the opposite sign from the coefficient in the true analysis.

Thus, these results confirm that mean reversion is not driving my findings.

         One concern with the identification strategy is that there could be some correlation

between my measure of the restrictiveness of the home health reimbursement cap and the

restrictiveness of Medicare’s PPS for SNFs, which was implemented in 1998. In fact, there does

seem to be a correlation between the restrictiveness of the IPS and the restrictiveness of the SNF

PPS. In addition to identifying a negative impact on home health utilization, the measure of IPS

restrictiveness identifies a negative “impact” of the home health reimbursement caps on SNF




22
  The effects of the IPS on the first three quartiles of predicted costs are generally statistically indistinguishable
from one another.


                                                            27
utilization. In order to address this issue, I test the sensitivity of my results to using two

alternative sub-samples of the data that avoid contamination from the SNF policy change.

         In one specification check, I exclude any beneficiaries who had an inpatient hospital stay

during the year. Medicare covers SNF stays only following inpatient hospital stays, so the

change in Medicare reimbursement should have had no impact on beneficiaries who had no

inpatient stays. When I restrict my data set to this sub-sample, I no longer identify a decline in

SNF utilization. In another specification check, I exclude 1998 and 1999 data from the analysis.

This strategy has the substantial drawback of cutting out most of the “post-policy” period,

leaving only 1997 as a “treated” period. It does, however, accomplish the goal of excluding any

effects of the SNF policy change, since the SNF change occurred in mid-1998. Using this sub-

sample, there is again no evidence of a decline in SNF utilization. Both alternative analyses

yield results that are otherwise comparable to the main analysis.

         Given the substantial state-to-state variation in pre-policy utilization that underlies the

measure of restrictiveness, a natural question is what generated these regional differences. For

example, if this variation was driven entirely by differences in the health status of state residents,

the restrictiveness measure could be simply measuring the differential trends in utilization by

beneficiaries with different health statuses. However, there is little evidence that the large pre-

policy differences are primarily attributable to differences in patient characteristics. 23

         In one analysis of the geographic variation, GAO (1996) showed that some states

consistently provided more care than other states, even among patients with the same diagnosis,

in data from the early 1990s. Schore (1994) used detailed data about patient characteristics and

diagnoses as well as regional and agency characteristics and was able to explain only about one-


23
  Wide geographic variation in overall Medicare expenditures has also been documented, with little evidence that
differences in underlying beneficiary health can explain the variation. See, for example, Skinner and Fisher (1997).


                                                         28
third of the regional variation in the number of visits per episode of care in her data from the

early 1990s. She proposes differences in physician and agency practice patterns, differences in

the availability of nursing home or home- and community-based care, and unobservable patient

characteristics as potential explanations for the remaining variation. Other research suggests that

the supply of substitutes for Medicare home health care explains some portion of the historical

geographic variation in home health care usage.24 Taken together, the existing research on state

variation in Medicare home health care spending suggests that the variation—while not fully

explained—was largely attributable to a variety of historical supply factors and differences in

practice styles.



VI. Conclusion

        Long-term care is a policy issue that will become increasingly important in the coming

decades. Murtaugh et al. (1997) estimate that a person who reached the age of 65 in 1995 had a

39% chance of being admitted to a nursing home during his or her remaining lifetime. Thus, as

the population ages, it will become increasingly important for policy-makers to consider options

for long-term care policy and, in particular, whether home health care can provide a cost-

effective substitute for nursing home care. This paper uses a substantial change in Medicare’s

home care reimbursement policy to provide evidence on several important issues in long-term

care policy and draws several conclusions.

        I find that the provision of home health care is quite sensitive to the structure of

reimbursement. In particular, when Medicare augmented its traditional fee-for-service


24
  For example, Cohen and Tumlinson (1997), Kenney and Dubay (1992), and Swan and Benjamin (1990) all
document an inverse relationship between the supply of nursing home care and the utilization of home health care.
Likewise, Cohen and Tumlinson (1997) and Kenney and Rajan (2000) find a negative relationship between
Medicaid home health spending and Medicare home health utilization.


                                                        29
reimbursement with a more prospective, average per-patient cap, home health agencies

responded by reducing care to relatively unhealthy beneficiaries. Nevertheless, in spite of

dramatic reductions in home health care utilization, I find no evidence that beneficiaries were

more likely to move to long-term facilities. This finding is consistent with earlier research that

has suggested limited scope for substitution between home health care and nursing home care. I

also find no evidence of increased expenditures for other types of medical care or of adverse

consequences for beneficiary health.

       The empirical results highlight several potential sources of efficiency change. First, the

reimbursement change led to a decline in consumption of home health care that was valued

below its marginal cost, but had been consumed during the pre-policy period due to the absence

of cost-sharing. While the IPS did not explicitly impose any cost-sharing, it led to a decrease in

the availability of home health care for those beneficiaries who were not willing to make out-of-

pocket payments. In fact, out-of-pocket expenditures offset only 22% of the decline in Medicare

expenditures, suggesting that 78% of the spending that was cut back after BBA 97 was for care

that was valued by beneficiaries at less than its market price. This decline in the over-provision

of home health care represents a welfare gain.

       The empirical results suggest that there was considerable variation in responsiveness

across different types of beneficiaries. For instance, low-income beneficiaries exhibited more

elastic demand for home health care than relatively high-income beneficiaries. This finding may

reflect the fact that low-income beneficiaries have a relatively high marginal utility from non-

health consumption, such as food and clothing, due to their low income. If the social welfare

function favors health care utilization patterns that are determined solely by health status and not




                                                 30
by income, however, it is possible that low-income beneficiaries responded to the IPS by under-

consuming home health care, which would represent welfare loss.

       The IPS also generated welfare loss by raising the level of financial risk faced by

Medicare beneficiaries. That is, the IPS increased the out-of-pocket liability faced by relatively

unhealthy beneficiaries, who already face larger out-of-pocket medical expenditures than healthy

beneficiaries. The welfare loss is the risk premium that a Medicare beneficiary would be willing

to pay to fully insure against the risk of being a beneficiary with high predicted home care costs,

after the imposition of the IPS. The exact level of the risk premium depends on assumptions

about the form of the utility function, the degree of risk aversion in the Medicare population, and

the minimum level of non-medical consumption guaranteed by society to beneficiaries whose

medical expenses exceed their incomes.

       Taken together, the welfare implications are ambiguous. Depending on assumptions

about the social welfare and individual utility functions, it is possible that the policy change

either increased or decreased social welfare.




                                                 31
                                          References

Bishop, Christine (1999). “Where are the Missing Elders? The Decline in Nursing Home
       Use, 1985 and 1995,” Health Affairs 18(4).

Chalkley, Martin and James M. Malcomson (2000). “Government Purchasing of Health
       Services” in Handbook of Health Economics, Volume I, edited by A. J. Culyer
       and J. P. Newhouse (New York: Elsevier Science).

Cheh, Valerie (2001). “The Final Evaluation Report on the National Home Health
       Prospective Payment Demonstration: Agencies Reduce Visits While Preserving Quality,”
       Princeton, NJ: Mathematica Policy Research, Inc.

Cohen, Marc A. and Anne Tumlinson (1997). “Understanding the State Variation in
       Medicare Home Health Care: The Impact of Medicaid Program Characteristics, State
       Policy, and Provider Attributes,” Medical Care 35(6): 618-633.

Congressional Budget Office (1997). “Budgetary Implications of the Balanced Budget
      Act of 1997,” Washington D.C.:CBO.

Federal Register, March 31, 1998, U.S. Office of the Federal Register, National Archives
       and Records Service, General Services Administration, Washington, D.C.: U.S.
       Government Printing Office.

Federal Register, August 5, 1999, U.S. Office of the Federal Register, National Archives
       and Records Service, General Services Administration, Washington, D.C.: U.S.
       Government Printing Office.

Goldberg, Henry B. and Robert J. Schmitz (1994), “Contemplating Home Health PPS:
      Current Patterns of Medicare Service Use,” Health Care Financing Review 16(1):
      109-130

Grabowski, David C. (2001). “Medicaid Reimbursement and the Quality of Nursing Home
      Care,” Journal of Health Economics 20: 549-569.

Health Care Financing Administration (various years). Health Care Financing Review,
       Medicare and Medicaid Statistical Supplement. Washington, DC.: GPO.

Hadley, Jack, David Rabin, Andrew Epstein, Susan Stein, and Carolyn Rimes (2000).
      “Posthospitalization Home Health Care Use and Changes in Functional Status in a
      Medicare Population,” Medicare Care 38(5): 494-507.

Harrington, Charlene, James Swan et al. (1998). “1996 State Data Book on Long Term Care
       Program and Market Characteristics.”

Hughes, Susan, Larry Manheim, Perry Edelman and Kendon Conrad (1987). “Impact of



                                               32
       Long-Term Home care on hospital and nursing home use and cost,” Health Services
       Research 22(1): 19-47.

Kemper, Peter (1988), “The Evaluation of the National Long Term Care Demonstration:
     Overview of the findings,” Health Services Research 23(1):162-174.

Kenney, Genevieve M. and Lisa C. Dubay (1992). “Explaining Area Variation in the
      Use of Medicare Home Health Services,” Medical Care 30(1): 43-57.

Kenney, Genevieve and Shruti Rajan (2000). “Understanding Dual Enrollees’ Use of Medicare
      Home Health Services: The Effects of Differences in Medicaid Home Care Programs,”
      Medical Care 38(1): 90-98.

Liu, Korbin, Barbara Gage, Jennie Harvell, David Stevenson and Niall Brennan (1999).
       “Medicare’s Post-Acute Care Benefit: Background, Trends, and Issues to Be Faced,” The
       Urban Institute.

McCall, Nelda, Harriet L. Komisar, Andrew Petersons, and Stanley Moore (2001). “Medicare
      Home Health Before and After the BBA,” Health Affairs 20(3): 189-198.

Medicare Payment Advisory Commission (1999). Report to the Congress: Selected
      Medicare Issues (Washington, DC: MedPAC).

Murtaugh, Christopher, Peter Kemper, Brenda Spillman, and Barabara Lepidus Carlson (1997).
      “The Amount, Distribution, and Timing of Lifetime Nursing Home Use,” Medical Care
      35(3): 204-218.

Newhouse, Joseph P (1996). “Reimbursing Health Plans and Health Providers:
     Efficiency in Production Versus Selection,” Journal of Economic Literature 34(3): 1236-
     1263.

Newhouse, Joseph P (2002). “Medicare” in American Economic Policy in the 1990s,
     edited by Jeffrey A. Frankel and Peter R. Orszag (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press):
     899-955.

Norton, Edward C (2000). “Long-Term Care” in Handbook of Health Economics,
       Volume I, edited by A. J. Culyer and J. P. Newhouse (New York: Elsevier Science).

Office of the Inspector General, U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (2001).
       “Review of Medicare Home Health Services in Florida,” Report A-04-99-01195.

Phillips, Barbara, Randall Brown, Christine Bishop, Amy Klein, Grant Ritter, Jennifer
        Schore, Kathleen Skwara, and Craig Thornton (1999). “Do Present Per Visit Payment
        Rates Affect Home Care Health Behavior?,” Health Care Financing Review 16, No. 1:
        91-107.




                                             33
Schore, Jennifer (1994). “Patient, Agency, and Area Characteristics Associated with
       Regional Variation in the Use of Medicare Home Health Services, Princeton, NJ:
       Mathematica Policy Research, Inc.

Skinner, Jonathan and Elliot Fisher (1997). “Regional Disparities in Medicare Expenditures: An
       Opportunity for Reform,” National Tax Journal L(3): 413-426.

Swan, James H. and A. E. Benjamin (1990). “Medicare Home Health Utilization as a
       Function of Nursing Home Market Factors,” Health Services Research 25(3): 479-500.

United State Congress, Committee on Ways and Means (1998). Green Book 1998:
       Background Material on Programs Under the Jurisdiction of the Committee on
       Ways and Means, Washington D.C.: GPO.

United State Congress, Committee on Ways and Means (2000). Green Book 2000:
       Background Material on Programs Under the Jurisdiction of the Committee on
       Ways and Means, Washington D.C.: GPO.

United States Department of Health and Human Services (2002). Health, United States, 2002
       (Washington D.C.: GPO).

United States General Accounting Office (1998). “Medicare: Interim Payment System for
       Home Health Agencies,” Testimony of William J. Scanlon before the Subcommittee on
       Health, Committee on Ways and Means, House of Representatives, August 6.

United States General Accounting Office (1999). “Medicare Home Health Agencies:
       Closures Continue, with Little Evidence Beneficiary Access is Impaired,” GAO Report
       HEHS-99-120

United States General Accounting Office (1998). “Medicare Home Health Benefit:
       Impact of Interim Payment System and Agency Closures on Access to Services,” GAO
       Report HEHS-98-238.

United States General Accounting Office (2000). “Medicare Home Health Care:
       Prospective Payment System Could Reverse Recent Declines in Spending,” GAO Report
       HEHS-00-176.

United States General Accounting Office (1997). “Medicare Home Health: Success of
       Balanced Budget Act Cost Controls Depends on Effective and Timely Implementations,”
       Testimony of William J. Scanlon before the Subcommittee on Oversight and
       Investigations, Committee on Commerce, House of Representatives, October 27.

United States General Accounting Office (1996). “Medicare: Home Health Utilization
       Expands While Program Controls Deteriorate,” GAO Report HEHS-96-16.




                                              34
                                     Table 1: Summary statistics
                                     Means and standard deviations

Variable                                      Full sample     Predicted High-      Predicted Low-
                                                             Cost Beneficiaries   Cost Beneficiaries
Predicted home care costs                        2927              6224                 1828
                                                (2351)            (2070)               (1056)

Home health events                               12.59             34.04                 5.45
                                                (63.95)          (104.52)              (40.09)
    Any home health events                        .150              .314                 .096
                                                 (.357)           (.464)                (.294)
    Home health events, conditional on any       83.85            108.49                56.93
                                               (145.79)          (163.54)             (117.77)
    Expenditures                                   446             1357                   143
                                                (3256)            (6074)               (1215)

Medicare home health expenditures                 399                 1148               131
                                                (2368)               (4134)            (1096)
Medicaid home health expenditures                  8                   24                 2
                                                (1377)               (2632)             (216)
Out-of-pocket home health expenditures            30                   96                 6
                                                (1653)               (3126)             (378)

Facility events                                   .105              .291                .043
                                                 (.335)            (.501)              (.226)
   Any events                                     .097              .270                .039
                                                 (.296)            (.444)              (.194)
   Events, conditional on any                     1.08              1.08                1.10
                                                  (.32)             (.29)               (.36)
   Expenditures                                   2875              7896                1202
                                                (12813)           (18496)              (9679)

Inpatient events                                 .373               .649                .281
                                                (.956)            (1.239)              (.821)
    Any events                                   .217               .348                .174
                                                (.412)             (.476)              (.379)
    events, conditional on any                   1.72               1.87                1.62
                                                (1.38)             (1.46)              (1.31)
    Expenditures                                 2836               4902                2147
                                                (9518)            (12999)              (7911)

Outpatient events                                 3.74                 5.20              3.25
                                                 (9.53)              (11.91)            (8.54)
    Any events                                    .661                 .737              .635
                                                 (.473)               (.440)            (.481)
    events, conditional on any                    5.65                 7.06              5.11
                                                (11.26)              (13.39)           (10.26)
    Expenditures                                   812                 1128               707
                                                (3160)               (3685)            (2957)

Observations                                    97,193               24,293            72,900




                                                  35
                                   Table 1: Summary Statistics, continued

Variable                                     Full sample      Predicted High-      Predicted Low-
                                                             Cost Beneficiaries   Cost Beneficiaries
Medical provider events                         22.05              31.58                18.88
                                               (28.00)            (36.29)              (23.78)
      Any events                                 .944               .959                 .938
                                                (.231)             (.198)               (.241)
      Events, conditional on any                23.37              32.93                20.12
                                               (28.28)            (36.46)              (24.04)
      Expenditures                               2094               3079                 1765
                                               (4173)             (5528)               (3549)

Age                                             72.02              76.01                70.69
                                               (14.34)            (15.37)              (13.73)

Male                                            .436               .295                 .483

Married                                         .472               .330                 .520

Body Mass Index                                25.38               24.30                25.73
                                               (6.23)              (8.43)               (5.27)

Underweight                                     .068               .151                 .040

Overweight                                      .510               .448                 .530

Difficulty stooping                             .167               .571                 .032

Difficulty lifting                              .159               .552                 .028

Difficulty writing                              .030               .119                 .0001

Difficulty walking                              .225               .715                 .062

Died                                            .054               .126                 .030




                                                        36
              Table 2: Coefficients Used to Predict Home Care Costs

    Independent Variable                                                     Coefficient
                                                                           (Standard error)
    Male                                                                         -31
                                                                                (416)

    Married                                                                     872**
                                                                                (402)

    Male*Married                                                               -1704**
                                                                                (612)

    Some difficulty stooping                                                      206
                                                                                 (416)

    Lots of difficulty stooping                                                1411**
                                                                                (488)

    Some difficulty lifting 10 lbs                                                -25
                                                                                 (406)

    Lots of difficulty lifting 10 lbs                                          1003**
                                                                                (435)

    Some difficulty walking 2-3 blocks                                            446
                                                                                 (439)

    Lots of difficulty walking 2-3 blocks                                      1420**
                                                                                (458)

    Some difficulty writing                                                      586*
                                                                                 (322)

    Lots of difficulty writing                                                 4019**
                                                                                (538)

    Diabetes                                                                    791**
                                                                                (314)

    Stroke                                                                       609*
                                                                                 (345)

    Alzheimer’s                                                                   290
                                                                                 (485)

    Broken hip                                                                    396
                                                                                 (412)

    Observations                                                                6,187
This table shows coefficients from a regression on the sub-sample of beneficiaries who used home health
care during the pre-policy period. The dependent variable is home health care costs. Other predictors of
home health care costs include: age group, race, and other health conditions (amputation of an arm or leg,
angina pectoris, arthritis, cancer, emphysema, hardening of the arteries, hypertension, mental retardation,
mental disorders, myocardial infarction, osteoporosis, other heart conditions, paralysis, and Parkinson’s
disease).



                                                   37
                                                                      Table 3: Home Health Utilization
                                                                  (1)                               (2)                             (3)                             (4)
          Independent variable                                  Visits                            Visits                          Visits                          Visits
Post-BBA 97*Restrict                                           -.133**                           -.130**                         -.192**                          -.109*
                                                                (.036)                            (.037)                          (.048)                          (.057)

Personal Characteristics
Male                                                                                              .284                             .285                             .283
                                                                                                 (.700)                           (.698)                           (.697)

Married                                                                                        -2.638**                         -2.590**                         -2.596**
                                                                                                (.687)                           (.684)                           (.684)

Male*Married                                                                                     -.376                            -.400                            -.389
                                                                                                 (.862)                           (.858)                           (.858)

Predicted Cost                                                                                  .0007**                         .0008**                          .0008**
                                                                                                 (.0003)                         (.0003)                          (.0003)

Diabetes                                                                                        3.161**                         3.120**                          3.123**
                                                                                                 (.645)                          (.645)                           (.645)

Stroke                                                                                          2.488**                         2.444**                          2.459**
                                                                                                 (.969)                          (.971)                           (.972)

Alzheimer’s                                                                                       -2.012                          -2.095                           -2.095
                                                                                                 (2.065)                         (2.079)                          (2.079)

Year fixed effects                                               Yes                              Yes                             Yes                              Yes
State fixed effects                                              Yes                              Yes                             Yes                              Yes
State trends                                                      No                               No                             Yes                              Yes
Visits94*Post                                                     No                               No                              No                              Yes
Observations                                                    97,193                           97,193                          97,193                           97,193
Other control variables include year, state, state trends, age group, race, education, income, and other health conditions (amputation of arm or leg, angina pectoris, arthritis, broken hip,
cancer, emphysema, hardening of the arteries, hypertension, mental retardation, mental disorders, myocardial infarction, osteoporosis, other heart conditions, paralysis, and Parkinson’s
disease) and level of difficulty with walking, writing, lifting and kneeling. Equations are estimated using OLS. Standard errors are clustered on state and year.




                                                                                            38
                                                                      Table 4: Home Health Utilization
                                                                  (1)                               (2)                             (3)                              (4)
          Independent variable                                  Visits                            Visits                          Visits                           Visits
Post-BBA 97*Restrict                                           -.049**                           -.058**                          -.020                             .058
                                                                (.024)                            (.025)                          (.032)                           (.046)

Post-BBA 97*Restrict                                           -.293**                           -.253**                         -.588**                          -.582**
*Predicted High Cost                                            (.119)                            (.117)                          (.161)                           (.161)

Personal Characteristics
Male                                                                                              .293                             .301                             .299
                                                                                                 (.700)                           (.698)                           (.698)

Married                                                                                        -2.641**                         -2.597**                         -2.603**
                                                                                                (.686)                           (.684)                           (.684)

Male*Married                                                                                     -.382                            -.403                            -.392
                                                                                                 (.861)                           (.857)                           (.857)

Predicted Cost                                                                                  .0007**                         .0008**                          .0008**
                                                                                                 (.0003)                         (.0003)                          (.0003)

Diabetes                                                                                        3.168**                         3.110**                          3.113**
                                                                                                 (.645)                          (.643)                           (.643)

Stroke                                                                                          2.489**                         2.441**                          2.456**
                                                                                                 (.969)                          (.971)                           (.972)

Alzheimer’s                                                                                       -1.993                          -2.091                           -2.091
                                                                                                 (2.066)                         (2.079)                          (2.079)
Year fixed effects                                               Yes                               Yes                             Yes                              Yes
State fixed effects                                              Yes                               Yes                             Yes                              Yes
State trends                                                      No                                No                             Yes                              Yes
Visits94*Post                                                     No                                No                              No                              Yes
Observations                                                    97,193                           97,193                          97,193                           97,193
Other control variables include year, state, state trends, age group, race, education, income, and other health conditions (amputation of arm or leg, angina pectoris, arthritis, broken hip,
cancer, emphysema, hardening of the arteries, hypertension, mental retardation, mental disorders, myocardial infarction, osteoporosis, other heart conditions, paralysis, and Parkinson’s
disease) and level of difficulty with walking, writing, lifting and kneeling. Regressions that show interactions with high predicted costs also include a control for high predicted costs
and interactions of high predicted costs with post-BBA-97 and with Restrict. High predicted cost means predicted costs > $3877. Equations are estimated using OLS. Standard errors
are clustered on state and year.



                                                                                            39
                                                              Table 5: Medicare Home Health Utilization
                                                              (1)                           (2)                            (3)                            (4)
           Independent variable                         Any Medicare                  Any Medicare                     Medicare                       Medicare
                                                        Expenditures                  Expenditures                    Expenditures                   Expenditures
Post-BBA 97*Restrict                                     -.0000004                      .0004**                           -1.89                        3.22**
                                                           (.0002)                       (.0002)                         (1.99)                         (1.49)

Post-BBA 97*Restrict                                                                     -.0009**                                                       -17.67**
*Predicted High Cost                                                                      (.0003)                                                        (5.85)

Personal Characteristics
Male                                                        .009**                         .009**                         27.77                           28.21
                                                             (.002)                         (.002)                       (22.02)                         (22.00)

Married                                                     -.007*                        -.007**                        -19.91                          -19.98
                                                            (.003)                         (.003)                        (28.02)                         (28.00)

Male*Married                                                -.002                          -.002                         -30.81                          -31.18
                                                            (.006)                         (.006)                        (34.60)                         (34.56)

Predicted Cost                                             .000003                        .000003                           .01                            .01
                                                          (.000003)                      (.000003)                         (.01)                          (.01)

Diabetes                                                    .026**                         .026**                       294.38**                        294.16**
                                                             (.004)                         (.004)                       (30.85)                         (30.77)

Stroke                                                      .013**                         .013**                       108.27**                        108.20**
                                                             (.003)                         (.003)                       (0.79)                          (40.78)

Alzheimer’s                                                -.017**                        -.017**                       -158.50**                      -158.93**
                                                            (.003)                         (.003)                        (65.11)                        (65.03)

Observations                                                97,142                         97,142                         97,193                         97,193
Other control variables include year, state, state trends, age group, race, education, income, and other health conditions (amputation of arm or leg, angina pectoris, arthritis, broken hip,
cancer, emphysema, hardening of the arteries, hypertension, mental retardation, mental disorders, myocardial infarction, osteoporosis, other heart conditions, paralysis, and Parkinson’s
disease) and level of difficulty with walking, writing, lifting and kneeling. Regressions also control for 1994 state average visits per user interacted with a post-policy dummy variable.
Regressions that show interactions with high predicted costs also include a control for high predicted cost as well as an interaction of high predicted cost with post-BBA 97 and with
Restrict. High predicted cost means predicted costs > $3877. Columns 1 and 2 show marginal effects from Probit models; columns 3 and 4 are estimated using OLS. Standard errors
are clustered on state and year.




                                                                                            40
                                                  Table 6: Beneficiary Utilization of Long-Term Care Facilities
                                                 (1)                      (2)                       (3)                     (4)                       (5)                     (6)
         Independent variable                 Any Events               Any Events               Expenditures            Expenditures              Medicare                 Medicare
                                                                                                                                                 Expenditures             Expenditures
Post-BBA 97*Restrict                            -.00005                   .00003                     .108                    -1.86                   -.58                   -.71**
                                                (.00008)                 (.00010)                   (6.67)                  (7.20)                  (.43)                    (.36)

Post-BBA 97*Restrict                                                     -.00015                                             6.66                                               .38
*Predicted High Cost                                                     (.00013)                                           (18.62)                                           (1.79)

Personal Characteristics
Male                                             .007**                   .007**                  559.10**                 559.01**                   17.80                    17.82
                                                  (.001)                   (.001)                 (163.29)                 (163.29)                  (13.52)                  (13.50)

Married                                         -.020**                   -.020**                -1330.80**              -1331.01**                   1.57                     1.49
                                                 (.002)                    (.002)                 (148.22)                (148.37)                   (11.61)                  (11.61)

Male*Married                                     -.001                     -.002                   202.65                   203.23                   -30.04                   -29.88
                                                 (.002)                    (.002)                 (242.07)                 (242.15)                  (22.30)                  (22.28)

Predicted Cost                                 .000004**                .000004**                   .57**                    .57**                   -.008                    -.008
                                                (.000001)                (.000001)                   (.13)                    (.13)                  (.010)                   (.010)

Diabetes                                         -.001                     -.001                 -611.86**                -611.92**                   8.97                     8.92
                                                 (.001)                    (.001)                 (144.95)                 (145.03)                  (10.77)                  (10.77)

Stroke                                           .008**                   .008**                   -21.70                   -21.71                    16.18                    16.17
                                                  (.002)                   (.002)                 (152.77)                 (152.76)                  (14.98)                  (14.98)

Alzheimer’s                                      .095**                   .095**                 7212.61**                7213.72**                   15.09                    15.43
                                                  (.007)                   (.008)                 (483.60)                 (483.66)                  (18.84)                  (18.83)

Observations                                     97,161                   97,161                   97,192                   97,192                   97,193                   97,193
Other control variables include year, state, state trends, age group, race, education, income, and other health conditions (amputation of arm or leg, angina pectoris, arthritis, broken hip,
cancer, emphysema, hardening of the arteries, hypertension, mental retardation, mental disorders, myocardial infarction, osteoporosis, other heart conditions, paralysis, and Parkinson’s
disease) and level of difficulty with walking, writing, lifting and kneeling. Regressions also control for 1994 state average visits per user interacted with a post-policy dummy variable.
Regressions that show interactions with high predicted costs also include a control for high predicted cost as well as an interaction of high predicted cost with post-BBA 97 and with
Restrict. High predicted cost means predicted costs > $3877. Columns 1 and 2 show marginal effects from Probit models; other columns show estimates from OLS. Standard errors
are clustered on state and year.




                                                                                            41
                                                       Table 7: Beneficiary Utilization of Other Types of Care
                                               (1)                     (2)                     (3)                      (4)                    (5)                      (6)
      Independent variable                 Inpatient               Inpatient               Outpatient               Outpatient           Medical Provider         Medical Provider
                                          Expenditures            Expenditures            Expenditures             Expenditures           Expenditures             Expenditures
Post-BBA 97*Restrict                          -1.76                   -1.99                 6.94**                   7.38**                    .70                      .37
                                             (7.95)                  (8.04)                  (2.44)                   (2.57)                 (3.17)                   (3.05)

Post-BBA 97*Restrict                                                   .58                                              -1.53                                             1.10
*Predicted High Cost                                                 (17.41)                                           (4.22)                                            (6.37)

Personal Characteristics
Male                                         862.42**               862.52**                115.70**                 115.74**                 206.93**                 206.92**
                                             (105.85)               (105.92)                 (34.92)                  (34.92)                  (47.35)                  (47.36)

Married                                       72.25                   71.90                 172.54**                 172.52**                   87.12                    87.07
                                             (135.37)                (135.35)                (61.29)                  (61.28)                  (59.50)                  (59.50)

Male*Married                                -553.16**               -552.50**               -267.13**                -267.13**                -263.12**               -263.00**
                                             (242.33)                (242.36)                (110.26)                 (110.26)                 (101.40)                (101.41)

Predicted Cost                                -.24**                  -.24**                  -.14**                   -.14**                   -.11**                  -.11**
                                               (.12)                   (.12)                   (.06)                    (.06)                    (.05)                   (.05)

Diabetes                                    1258.63**              1258.43**                433.85**                 433.82**                 742.41**                 742.39**
                                             (145.09)               (145.03)                 (58.55)                  (58.53)                  (51.63)                  (51.63)

Stroke                                       733.18**               733.13**                202.39**                 202.39**                 149.86**                 149.86**
                                             (147.74)               (147.72)                 (50.86)                  (50.86)                  (64.12)                  (64.12)

Alzheimer’s                                 -620.19**               -618.79**                -72.51*                  -72.48*                 -274.63**               -274.38**
                                             (154.69)                (154.74)                (37.15)                  (37.16)                  (73.42)                 (73.38)

Observations                                  97,193                  97,193                  97,193                   97,193                  97,193                   97,193
Other control variables include year, state, state trends, age group, race, education, income, and other health conditions (amputation of arm or leg, angina pectoris, arthritis, broken hip,
cancer, emphysema, hardening of the arteries, hypertension, mental retardation, mental disorders, myocardial infarction, osteoporosis, other heart conditions, paralysis, and Parkinson’s
disease) and level of difficulty with walking, writing, lifting and kneeling. Regressions also control for 1994 state average visits per user interacted with a post-policy dummy variable.
Regressions that show interactions with high predicted costs also include a control for high predicted cost as well as an interaction of high predicted cost with post-BBA 97 and with
Restrict. High predicted cost means predicted costs > $3877. Equations are estimated using OLS. Standard errors are clustered on state and year.




                                                                                            42
                                                       Table 8: Total Beneficiary Utilization of Health Care
                                                            (1)                            (2)                             (3)                            (4)
           Independent variable                            Total                          Total                        Log Total                      Log Total
                                                        Expenditures                   Expenditures                   Expenditures                   Expenditures
Post-BBA 97*Restrict                                       3.45                           7.98                            .001                           .001
                                                          (13.72)                        (13.14)                         (.001)                         (.001)

Post-BBA 97*Restrict                                                                      -16.18                                                          -.002
*Predicted High Cost                                                                      (33.88)                                                         (.002)

Personal Characteristics
Male                                                      1715.04**                     1715.72**                         .07**                           .07**
                                                           (249.52)                      (249.56)                          (.02)                           (.02)

Married                                                  -1049.10**                     -1049.99**                        -.09**                         -.09**
                                                          (303.99)                       (304.12)                          (.02)                          (.02)

Male*Married                                               -939.27*                      -938.06*                         -.07**                         -.07**
                                                           (507.37)                      (507.45)                          (.04)                          (.04)

Predicted Cost                                                .11                            .11                         .000006                        .000006
                                                             (.26)                          (.26)                       (.000019)                      (.000019)

Diabetes                                                  2452.70**                     2452.00**                         .34**                           .34**
                                                           (285.52)                      (285.46)                          (.02)                           (.02)

Stroke                                                    1398.11**                     1397.91**                         .14**                           .14**
                                                           (291.05)                      (290.99)                          (.02)                           (.02)

Alzheimer’s                                               6061.58**                     6064.50**                         .55**                           .55**
                                                           (511.65)                      (511.36)                          (.03)                           (.03)

Observations                                                97,193                         97,193                         94,409                         94,409
Other control variables include year, state, state trends, age group, race, education, income, and other health conditions (amputation of arm or leg, angina pectoris, arthritis, broken hip,
cancer, emphysema, hardening of the arteries, hypertension, mental retardation, mental disorders, myocardial infarction, osteoporosis, other heart conditions, paralysis, and Parkinson’s
disease) and level of difficulty with walking, writing, lifting and kneeling. Regressions also control for 1994 state average visits per user interacted with a post-policy dummy variable.
Regressions that show interactions with high predicted costs also include a control for high predicted cost as well as an interaction of high predicted cost with post-BBA 97 and with
Restrict. High predicted cost means predicted costs > $3877. Equations are estimated using OLS. Standard errors are clustered on state and year.




                                                                                            43
                                                                      Table 9: Body Mass Index (BMI)
                                                 (1)                     (2)                    (3)                     (4)                    (5)                      (6)
      Independent variable                      BMI                     BMI                Underweight             Underweight             Overweight               Overweight
                                                                                           (BMI<18.5)              (BMI<18.5)              (BMI>25)                 (BMI>25)
Post-BBA 97*Restrict                           -.003                   -.002                  .0001                   .00006                 -.0005                   -.0002
                                               (.005)                  (.004)                (.0001)                 (.00017)               (.0003)                  (.0004)

Post-BBA 97*Restrict                                                   -.002                                          .00004                                          -.0013*
*Predicted High Cost                                                   (.012)                                        (.00029)                                         (.0007)

Personal Characteristics
Male                                          -.600**                 -.600**                 -.009**                -.009**                   .003                     .003
                                               (.064)                  (.064)                  (.002)                 (.002)                  (.005)                   (.005)

Married                                        -.134                   -.133                  .004**                  .004**                 -.034**                  -.034**
                                               (.101)                  (.101)                  (.002)                  (.002)                 (.007)                   (.007)

Male*Married                                  .959**                   .957**                 -.024**                -.024**                  .117**                   .117**
                                               (.170)                   (.170)                 (.003)                 (.003)                   (.010)                   (.010)

Predicted Cost                                 .00001                .0000004               -.000005**             -.000004**                .000007                  .000007
                                              (.00008)               (.000085)               (.000001)              (.000001)               (.000005)                (.000005)

Diabetes                                      1.482**                 1.482**                 -.015**                -.015**                  .119**                   .119**
                                               (.086)                  (.085)                  (.002)                 (.002)                   (.006)                   (.006)

Stroke                                        -.453**                 -.453**                 .007**                  .007**                 -.045**                  -.045**
                                               (.083)                  (.083)                  (.002)                  (.002)                 (.007)                   (.007)

Alzheimer’s                                   -.401**                 -.404**                 .008**                  .008**                 -.079**                  -.079**
                                               (.121)                  (.121)                  (.003)                  (.003)                 (.008)                   (.008)

Observations                                  96,007                   96,007                 95,953                  95,953                  95,998                   95,998
Other control variables include year, state, state trends, age group, race, education, income, and other health conditions (amputation of arm or leg, angina pectoris, arthritis, broken hip,
cancer, emphysema, hardening of the arteries, hypertension, mental retardation, mental disorders, myocardial infarction, osteoporosis, other heart conditions, paralysis, and Parkinson’s
disease) and level of difficulty with walking, writing, lifting and kneeling. Regressions also control for 1994 state average visits per user interacted with a post-policy dummy variable.
Regressions that show interactions with high predicted costs also include a control for high predicted cost as well as an interaction of high predicted cost with post-BBA 97 and with
Restrict. High predicted cost means predicted costs > $3877. Columns 1 and 2 show estimates from OLS; other columns show marginal effects from Probit models. Standard errors
are clustered on state and year.




                                                                                            44
                                                                      Table 10: Functional Limitations
                                                (1)                     (2)                    (3)                    (4)                     (5)                    (6)
      Independent variable              Lots of Difficulty      Lots of Difficulty     Lots of Difficulty     Lots of Difficulty      Lots of Difficulty     Lots of Difficulty
                                            Stooping                Stooping                Lifting                Lifting                Walking                Walking
Post-BBA 97*Restrict                         .00001                   .0002                  -.0001                 .0002                   .0003                  .0005
                                             (.0003)                 (.0003)                (.0003)                (.0003)                 (.0003)                (.0003)

Post-BBA 97*Restrict                                                  -.0006                                        -.0011*                                        -.0007
*Predicted High Cost                                                 (.0006)                                        (.0007)                                        (.0005)

Personal Characteristics
Male                                          -.039**                -.039**                 -.049**                -.049**                 -.036**                -.036**
                                               (.004)                 (.004)                  (.003)                 (.003)                  (.004)                 (.004)

Married                                       -.041**                -.041**                 -.046**                -.046**                 -.056**                -.056**
                                               (.005)                 (.005)                  (.005)                 (.005)                  (.005)                 (.005)

Male*Married                                  .061**                  .061**                 .080**                  .080**                 .093**                 .093**
                                               (.006)                  (.006)                 (.007)                  (.007)                 (.006)                 (.006)

Predicted Cost                              .000028**               .000028**              .00004**                .00004**               .000047**              .000047**
                                             (.000003)               (.000003)             (.000004)               (.000004)               (.000003)              (.000003)

Diabetes                                      .029**                  .029**                  -.003                  -.003                  .027**                 .027**
                                               (.005)                  (.005)                 (.005)                 (.005)                  (.005)                 (.005)

Stroke                                        .036**                  .036**                 .036**                  .036**                 .027**                 .027**
                                               (.006)                  (.006)                 (.005)                  (.006)                 (.006)                 (.006)

Alzheimer’s                                   .118**                  .118**                 .154**                  .154**                 .128**                 .128**
                                               (.010)                  (.010)                 (.010)                  (.010)                 (.009)                 (.009)

Observations                                  97,629                  97,629                 97,629                  97,629                 97,629                 97,629
Other control variables include year, state, state trends, age group, race, education, income, and other health conditions (amputation of arm or leg, angina pectoris, arthritis, broken hip,
cancer, emphysema, hardening of the arteries, hypertension, mental retardation, mental disorders, myocardial infarction, osteoporosis, other heart conditions, paralysis, and Parkinson’s
disease). Regressions also control for 1994 state average visits per user interacted with a post-policy dummy variable. Regressions that show interactions with high predicted costs also
include a control for high predicted cost as well as an interaction of high predicted cost with post-BBA 97 and with Restrict. High predicted cost means predicted costs > $3877. All
columns show marginal effects from Probit models. Standard errors are clustered on state and year.




                                                                                            45
                                               Table 11: Other Sources of Payment for Home Health Utilization
                                      (1)                 (2)                 (3)                 (4)               (5)                 (6)                 (7)                  (8)
  Independent variable              Total               Total             Medicare            Medicare           Medicaid            Medicaid          Out-of-pocket        Out-of-pocket
                                 Expenditures        Expenditures        Expenditures        Expenditures       Expenditures        Expenditures       Expenditures         Expenditures
Post-BBA 97*Restrict                 -.72               3.07*                -1.89             3.22**               .42                 .46                 .42                 -.67*
                                    (2.10)              (1.62)              (1.99)              (1.49)             (.35)               (.45)               (.62)                (.41)

Post-BBA 97*Restrict                                    -13.09**                               -17.67**                                  -.16                                   3.82**
*Predicted High Cost                                     (5.99)                                 (5.85)                                  (1.09)                                  (1.59)

Personal Characteristics
Male                                 21.50                21.80              27.77                28.21             -10.56             -10.55                4.53                4.40
                                    (28.80)              (29.26)            (22.02)              (22.00)            (15.36)            (15.38)              (7.85)              (7.84)

Married                              -27.62              -27.59             -19.91               -19.98             -30.23             -30.23               26.03                26.14
                                     (52.22)             (52.21)            (28.02)              (28.00)            (25.16)            (25.15)             (33.51)              (33.52)

Male*Married                         -28.15              -28.58             -30.81               -31.18              37.71              37.71              -34.82               -34.91
                                     (57.86)             (57.84)            (34.60)              (34.56)            (34.98)            (34.98)             (27.24)              (27.25)

Predicted Cost                       .04**                .04**                .01                 .01                .02                 .02                .004                .004
                                      (.02)                (.02)              (.01)               (.01)              (.02)               (.02)              (.004)              (.004)

Diabetes                           276.46**            276.35**            294.38**            294.16**             -19.68             -19.68                -2.18               -2.08
                                    (36.36)             (36.30)             (30.85)             (30.77)             (17.41)            (17.41)              (6.36)              (6.37)

Stroke                             158.79**            158.76**            108.27**            108.20**             -34.50             -34.50              86.03**             86.06**
                                    (68.72)             (68.72)             (0.79)              (40.78)             (33.10)            (33.10)             (41.70)             (41.71)

Alzheimer’s                        -231.72**           -232.38**           -158.50**          -158.93**             -25.87             -25.87              -31.42               -31.69
                                    (99.39)             (99.35)             (65.11)            (65.03)              (29.69)            (29.70)             (58.85)              (58.86)

Observations                         97,193              97,193              97,193              97,193             97,193             97,193              97,193               97,193
Other control variables include year, state, state trends, age group, race, education, income, and other health conditions (amputation of arm or leg, angina pectoris, arthritis, broken hip,
cancer, emphysema, hardening of the arteries, hypertension, mental retardation, mental disorders, myocardial infarction, osteoporosis, other heart conditions, paralysis, and Parkinson’s
disease) and level of difficulty with walking, writing, lifting and kneeling. Regressions also control for 1994 state average visits per user interacted with a post-policy dummy variable.
Regressions that show interactions with high predicted costs also include a control for high predicted cost as well as an interaction of high predicted cost with post-BBA 97 and with
Restrict. High predicted cost means predicted costs > $3877. Equations are estimated using OLS. Standard errors are clustered on state and year.




                                                                                            46
                                                       Table 12: Impact of the IPS, By Income Group
                                                           Below the Poverty Line                                              Above the Poverty Line
                                               (1)                   (2)                       (3)                 (4)                   (5)                     (6)
Dependent Variable                            Mean              Main effect               Interaction             Mean              Main effect              Interaction
Home health visits                            19.21                 .066                    -.835**               10.68                 .064                   -.412*
                                             (78.87)               (.095)                    (.208)              (58.80)               (.056)                  (.246)

Total home health expenditures                567                   5.92*                 -26.69**                 411                    3.03                  -4.07
                                             (2747)                 (3.35)                 (6.53)                 (3388)                 (2.13)                (10.09)

    Medicare                                  543                   5.97*                 -25.81**                 357                   3.19*                  -12.20
                                             (2689)                 (3.34)                 (6.42)                 (2260)                 (1.90)                 (9.67)

    Medicaid                                    6                    -.02                    -.22                   9                      .60                   -.10
                                              (178)                  (.14)                   (.28)                (1560)                  (.58)                 (1.78)

   Out-of-pocket                                5                     .02                   -.72*                   37                    -.82                 6.56**
                                              (149)                  (.14)                  (.40)                 (1859)                  (.51)                (2.58)

Any facility care                             .189                   .0003                  -.0004                 .070                  -.00002                -.0001
                                             (.391)                 (.0005)                (.0007)                (.256)                (.00009)               (.0001)

Facility expenditures                        6,018                   -8.43                 -13.42                 1,967                   -1.79                 13.80
                                            (19,830)                (24.55)                (36.40)               (9,712)                 (4.96)                (18.29)

Inpatient expenditures                        3,185                 -20.37                 -15.55                 2,735                   3.32                  16.65
                                            (10,795)                (15.35)                (25.87)               (9,114)                 (8.40)                (24.02)

Total expenditures                           13,871                  -2.44                 -66.36                  9324                  9.03                   8.73
                                            (26,107)                (34.52)                (59.38)               (18,035)               (12.77)                (39.55)

Difficulty with stooping                      .239                   .0006                  .0001                  .146                 .000004               -.0019**
                                             (.426)                 (.0006)                (.0010)                (.353)                (.00031)               (.0007)

Difficulty with walking                       .317                   .0008                  -.0003                 .200                  .0003                -.0013**
                                             (.466)                 (.0007)                (.0010)                (.400)                (.0003)                (.0006)

Observations                                 21,786                 21,786                  21,786                75,407                75,407                 75,407
Columns 1 and 4 show means of the dependent variable. Columns 2 and 5 show the coefficient on the interaction of a post-BBA97 dummy and the restrictiveness measure. Columns
3 and 5 show the interaction between post-BBA97, the restrictiveness measure, and a predicted high cost dummy. The regression specification is the same as in earlier tables.



                                                                                     47
                                  20
Billions of Real (1999) Dollars




                                  15




                                  10




                                   5




                                   0
                                       1983   1985   1987   1989    1991   1993   1995   1997   1999
                                                                    year
                                   Figure 1: Medicare Home Health Expenditures

Source: U.S. Congress (2000).




                                                                   48
                                  10

                                   9
Visits per Medicare Beneficiary




                                   8

                                   7

                                   6

                                   5

                                   4

                                   3

                                   2

                                   1

                                   0
                                       1983   1985   1987   1989    1991   1993   1995   1997   1999
                                                                    year
                                        Figure 2: Visits per Medicare Beneficiary



                                  85



                                  80
Real (1999) Dollars




                                  75



                                  70



                                  65



                                  60
                                       1983   1985   1987   1989    1991   1993   1995   1997   1999
                                                                    year
                                          Figure 3: Medicare Payment Per Visit

Source: U.S. Congress (2000).

                                                                   49
                    High restrictiveness                Low restrictiveness
      130

      120

      110

      100

        90

        80

        70

        60
             1993      1994        1995      1996        1997       1998       1999
                                             year
     Figure 4: Users per 1000 Beneficiaries, by Type of State


                    High restrictiveness                Low restrictiveness
      110

      100

        90

        80

        70

        60

        50

        40

        30
             1993      1994        1995      1996        1997       1998       1999
                                             year
               Figure 5: Visits per User, by Type of State

Sources: Health Care Financing Review’s annual statistical supplement, GAO (2000), author’s
calculations.

                                             50
                                     Pre-policy                       Post-policy
                                5

                               4.5

                                4
Percent of Beneficiaries




                               3.5

                                3

                               2.5

                                2

                               1.5

                                1

                                .5

                                0    1-10   11-20   21-30   31-40 41-50 51-100 101-150151-250 >250
                                                               Number of Visits
                           Figure 6: Home Health Visits in Low Restrictiveness States


                                     Pre-policy                       Post-policy
                                5

                               4.5

                                4
Percent of Beneficiaries




                               3.5

                                3

                               2.5

                                2

                               1.5

                                1

                                .5

                                0    1-10   11-20   21-30   31-40 41-50 51-100 101-150151-250 >250
                                                               Number of Visits
                           Figure 7: Home Health Visits in High Restrictiveness States


Source: Author’s calculations from the MCBS.

                                                                 51
