NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

LEGAL INSTITUTIONS AND FINANCIAL DEVELOPMENT
Thorsten Beck
Ross Levine
Working Paper 10417
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10417
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2004

We have received very helpful guidance from Mary Shirley and Andrei Shleifer. All remaining errors and
omissions, however, are our responsibility. This paper’s findings, interpretations, and conclusions are entirely
those of the authors and do not necessarily represent the views of the World Bank, its Executive Directors,
or the countries they represent. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and not necessarily
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2004 by Thorsten Beck and Ross Levine. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

Legal Institutions and Financial Development
Thorsten Beck and Ross Levine
NBER Working Paper No. 10417
April 2004
JEL No. K2, G18, O57
ABSTRACT

Why do some countries have growth-enhancing financial systems, while others do not? Why have
some countries developed the necessary investor protection laws and contract-enforcement
mechanisms to support financial institutions and markets, while others have not? This paper reviews
existing research on the role of legal institutions in shaping financial development.
Thorsten Beck
World Bank
Washington, DC 20433
tbeck@worldbank.org
Ross Levine
Finance Department, Room 3-257
Carlson School of Management
University of Minnesota
321 19th Avenue South
Minneapolis, MN 55455
rlevine@csom.umn.edu

2

1. INTRODUCTION
A burgeoning literature finds that financial development exerts a first-order impact on
long-run economic growth. Levine and Zervos (1998) show that banking and stock market
development are good predictors of economic growth. 1 At the microeconomic level, DemirgucKunt and Maksimovic (1998) and Rajan and Zingales (1998) find that financial institutions are
crucial for firm and industrial expansion. While disagreements remain, the bulk of existing
evidence points to a strong finance-growth nexus.
The finding that financial development influences economic growth raises critical
questions, such as why do some countries have well-developed growth-enhancing financial
systems, while others do not? Why have some countries developed the necessary investor
protection laws and contract-enforcement mechanisms to support financial institutions and
markets, while others have not?
The law and finance theory focuses on the role of legal institutions in explaining
international differences in financial development (La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, Shleifer, and
Vishny, 1997, 1998, 2000a, henceforth LLSV). The first part of the law and finance theory holds
that in countries where legal systems enforce private property rights, support private contractual
arrangements, and protect the legal right of investors, savers are more willing to finance firms
and financial markets flourish. In contrast, legal institutions that neither support private property
rights nor facilitate private contracting inhibit corporate finance and stunt financial development.
The second part of the law and finance theory emphasizes that the different legal
traditions that emerged in Europe over previous centuries and were spread internationally

3
through conquest, colonization, and imitation help explain cross-country differences in investor
protection, the contracting environment, and financial development today. More specifically,
legal theories emphasize two inter-related mechanisms through which legal origin influences
finance (Hayek, 1960). The “political” mechanism holds that (a) legal traditions differ in terms
of the priority they attach to private property vis-à-vis the rights of the State and (b) the
protection of private contracting rights forms the basis of fina ncial development (LLSV, 1999).
The “adaptability” mechanism stresses that (a) legal traditions differ in their formalism and
ability to evolve with changing conditions and (b) legal traditions that adapt efficiently to
minimize the gap between the contracting needs of the economy and the legal system’s
capabilities will more effectively foster financial development than more rigid systems
(Merryman, 1985).
Countervailing theories and evidence challenge both parts of the law and finance theory.
Many researchers accept that effective investor protection facilitates efficient corporate financing
and growth-enhancing financial development, but reject the law and finance’s view that legal
origin is a central determinant of investor protection laws and financial development (Roe, 1994;
Pagano and Volpin, 2001; Rajan and Zingales, 2003). Furthermore, while some scholars accept
the important of legal tradition in shaping the efficiency of financial contracting, there are sharp
disagreements about which legal systems work best to promote the efficient evolution of the law
(Rubin, 1982). Alternatively, some studies directly question the importance of investor
protection laws by arguing that changes in investor protection laws did not drive the evolution of

1

Furthermore, King and Levine (1993a,b) show that bank development predicts economic growth. Panel
investigations indicate that the relationship between finance and growth is not due to reverse causality (e.g., Beck,
Levine, and Loayza (2000), Levine, Loayza, and Beck (2000), and Beck and Levine (2003). For a review of the
literature, see Levine (1997, 2004).

4
corporate ownership and financial development in the United Kingdom and Italy (Franks, et al.,
2003; Aganin and Volpin, 2003).
Given debates about the role of legal institutions in shaping financial development, the
remainder of the Chapter is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the law and finance theory
along with skeptical and competing views.2 Section 3 reviews empirical evidence on both parts
of the law and finance view. That is, we assess (i) whether legal origins account for crosscountry variations in property rights protection, support of private contractual arrangements,
investor protection laws, and financial development and (ii) the degree to which cross-country
differences in investor protection laws explain differences in corporate finance and financial
development. Besides examining supportive and conflicting evidence on these two parts of the
law and finance theory, we also summarize recent findings on the mechanisms – the politics and
adaptability mechanisms -- through which law and finance may be related.

2

To qualify our approach, however, we recognize that many participants in the law and finance debate may not
agree that the law and finance view is necessarily composed of the two parts mentioned above. This is not crucial for
our review. We simply note that many contributors to the debate on the links between legal institutions and
financial development examine (i) the impact of legal origin on property rights protection, support for private
contractual arrangements, and investor protection laws, (ii) the impact of investor protection laws and their
enforcement on financial development, or (iii) both. This review examines these different components.

5
2. LEGAL THEORIES OF FINANCIAL DEVELOPMENT
This section describes the law and finance theory. We devote considerable space to
tracing the historical evolution of legal institutions because the law and finance theory stresses
that historically determined differences in legal heritage continue to shape private property rights
protection, investor protection laws, and financial development today. Furthermore, this section
describes two mechanisms through which legal origin may influence the contracting
environment: the political and adaptability mechanisms.

Finally, we review countervailing

views that question the law and finance theory.
Law, Enforcement, and Financial Development
The first part of the law and finance theory stresses that legal institutions influence
corporate finance and financial development (LLSV, 1998). As LLSV (2000a) emphasize, the
law and finance view follows naturally from the evolution of corporate finance theory during the
past half century. Modigliani and Miller (1958) view debt and equity as legal claims on the cash
flow of firms. Jensen and Meckling (1976) stress that statutory laws and the degree to which
courts enforce those laws shape the types of contracts that are used to address agency problems.
Furthermore, as summarized by Hart (1995), financial economists have increasingly focused on
(i) the control rights that financial securities bring to their owners and (ii) the impact of different
legal rules on corporate control. From this perspective, we may view finance as a set of
contracts.

Thus, a country’s contract, company, bankruptcy, and securities laws, and the

enforcement of these laws fundamentally determine the rights of securities holders and the
operation of financial systems.
At the firm level, Shleifer and Vishny (1997) note both that inside managers and
controlling shareholder are frequently in a position to expropriate minority shareholders and

6
creditors and that legal institutions play a crucial role in determining the degree of expropriation.
Expropriation may include theft, as well as transfer pricing, asset stripping, the hiring of family
members, and other “perquisites” that benefit insiders at the expense of minority shareholders
and creditors (LLSV, 2000a).

The law and finance theory emphasizes that cross-country

differences in (i) contract, company, bankruptcy, and securities laws, (ii) the legal systems’
emphasis on private property rights, and (iii) the efficiency of enforcement influence the degree
of expropriation and hence the confidence with which people purchase securities and participate
in financial markets.
Within the broad vision that legal institutions influence corporate finance and financial
development, there are differing opinions regarding the degree to which the legal system should
simply support private contractual arrangements and the degree to which the legal system should
have specific laws concerning shareholder and creditor rights. Coasians hold that the legal
system should simply enforce private contracts. Effective legal institutions allow knowledgeable
and experienced financial market participants to design a vast array of sophisticated private
contracts to ameliorate complex agency problems (Coase, 1960; Stigler, 1964; Easterbrook and
Fischel, 1991). For this to work effectively, however, courts must enforce private contracts
impartially and have both the ability and willingness to read complex contracts and verify
technically intricate clauses that trigger specific actions (Glaeser, et al., 2001, p. 853). Given the
difficulty in enforcing complex private contracts, there are potential advantages to developing
company, bankruptcy, and securities laws that provide a framework for organizing financial
transactions and protecting minority shareholders and creditors. While standardization may
improve efficiency by lowering the transactions costs associated with many financial market
contracts, the imposition of too rigid a framework may curtail customization and thereby hinder

7
efficient contracting. 3 Whether assuming a Coasian reliance on enforcing complex private
contracts or an approach that augments the support of private contracts with company,
bankruptcy, securities laws, etc., the law and finance view’s first part argues that the degree of
protection of private investors is a crucial determinant of financial development.

The Historical Development of Europe’s Legal Systems
The second part of the law and finance theory stresses that a country’s legal heritage
shapes its approach to property rights, private contracting, investor protection, and hence
financial development. Comparative legal scholars note that the world’s major legal families
were formed in Europe over many centuries and then spread internationally. Thus, we begin our
discussion with Roman law.
Hayek (1960) notes that when Emperor Justinian had the Roman law compiled in the
sixth century, he attempted to implement two substantive modifications. First, while Roman law
placed the law above all individuals, the Justinian texts placed the emperor above the law.
Second, Justinian broke with Roman law by attempting to eliminate jurisprudence. Roman law
had developed over centuries on a case-by-case basis, adjusting from the needs of a small farmer
community to the needs of a world empire with only a minor role left for formal legislation.
Justinian changed this doctrine and “… asserted for himself a monopoly, not only over all lawmaking power, but over legal interpretations.” (Dawson, 1968, p.22). This “Justinian deviation”
did not take root; jurisprudence continued to shape the law.

3

There may exist complex tradeoffs between law-making and enforcement conducted by the courts versus
regulation. One difference is that courts enforce the law reactively, while regulators enforce laws proactively. For
analyses of the conditions under which these different approaches work best, see Glaeser, Johnson, and Shleifer
(2001) and Pistor and Xu (2002).

8
From the 15th century, France’s legal system evolved as a regionally diverse mélange of
customary law, law based on the Justinian texts, and case law (Dawson, 1968, p. 349). Three
observations are notable. First France had a very fragmented legal system. 4 Second, although
courts must have debated the appropriate application of conflicting Roman and customary law as
new circumstances emerged, these deliberations generally occurred in private and without the
same public, scholarly debates seen in Germany or England (Dawson, 1968, p. 286-302). Third,
by the 18th century, there was a notable deterioration in the integrity and prestige of the judiciary.
The Crown sold judgeships to rich families and the judges unabashedly promoted the interests of
the elite and impeded progressive reforms. 5
Unsurprisingly, the French Revolution turned its fury on the judiciary and quickly strove
to (a) place the State above the courts and (b) eliminate jurisprudence.6 Codification under
Napoleon supported the unification and strengthening of the State and relegated judges to a
minor, bureaucratic role. According to the theory underlying the French Civil Code, the
legislature drafts laws without gaps, so judges do not make law by interpreting existing laws.
The theory is that the legislature does not draft conflicting laws, so that judges do not make law
by choosing between laws. The theory is that the legislature drafts clear laws so that judges do
not make law by giving meaning to ambiguous laws. Like Justinian, Napoleon sought a code that
was so clear, complete, and coherent that there would be no need for judges to deliberate
publicly about which laws, customs, and past experiences apply to new, evolving situations. 7

4

Voltaire mocked it by writing, “When you travel in this Kingdom, you change legal systems as often as you
change horses.” (Quoted from Zweigert and Kötz, 1998, p. 80)
5
See, Dawson (1968, p. 373). Also, while the Crown at times issued progressive reforms, the courts “...refused to
apply the new laws, interpreted them contrary to their intent, or hindered the attempts of officials to administer
them.” (Merryman, 1985, p. 16)
6
Robespierre even argued that, “the word jurisprudence … must be effaced from our language.” (Quoted from
Dawson, 1968, p. 426)
7
When the first commentary on the Code was published in 1805, Napoleon is said to have exclaimed, “My Code is
lost!’ (Quoted from Dawson, 1968, p.387)

9
Furthermore, this approach required a high degree of procedural formalism to reduce the
discretion of judges in regulating the presentation of evidence, witnesses, arguments, and appeals
(Schlesinger, et al., 1988). Thus, to reduce corruption and enhance the fair application of the
law, France adopted both greater procedural formalism and more limited judicial discretion.
There are conflicting views on the success of the Napoleonic Code’s goal of eliminating
jurisprudence. Merryman (1985, 1996) argues that the Napoleonic doctrine was a temporary,
largely theoretical “deviation” from two thousand years of a legal tradition built on
jurisprudence. Indeed, the lead draftsman of the Code recognized explicitly that the legislature
could not revise the Code sufficiently rapidly to handle efficiently the myriad of changing
problems that arise in a dynamic nation. In contrast to theory, the French courts eventually built
an entire body of tort law on the basis of Article 1382 of the Code Napoleon that states that one
whose act injures another must compensate that person. In contrast to theory, French courts have
used case law to recast the law of unjust enrichment, alter the law on obligations, re-work the
law of contract regarding gifts, and change the system of administrative law (Dawson, 1968,
400-415). From this perspective, while the theory of the Napoleonic code rejected jurisprudence
and embraced judicial formalism, practicalities in conjunction with a legal tradition grounded in
jurisprudence produced in France a legal system that has increasingly employed judicial
discretion over the last two centuries and thereby circumvented inefficient qualities of the Code.
Others disagree and argue that antagonism toward jurisprudence and the exaltation of the
role of the state produced a comparatively static, rigid legal tradition. 8 The French situation
encouraged the development of easily verifiable “bright-line-rules” that do not rely on the
discretion of judges (Glaeser and Shleifer, 2002). While simple and clear, Johnson et al. (2000)
argue that bright-line-rules and excessive judicial formalism may not allow judges sufficient

10
discretion to apply laws fairly to changing conditions and therefore not support evolving
commercial needs.
Turning to Germany, Bismarck -- like Napoleon -- unified the country (in 1871) and
placed a high priority on unifying the courts through codification. Although Bavaria and Prussia
codified parts of the law during the 18th century, it was Bismarck’s decision in 1873 to codify
and unify the whole of private law in Germany that led to the adoption of the German civil law
in 1900.
The parallels between France and Germany’s legal history, however, can be exaggerated.
Unlike in France, German courts have published (since at least the 16th century) comprehensive
deliberations that illustrated how courts weighted conflicting statutes, resolved ambiguities, and
addressed changing situations (Dawson, 1968). Law faculties at German universities worked
directly with courts and tried to reconcile emerging situations with the logic of the Justinian
texts. Through active debate between scholars and practitioners, Germany developed a dynamic,
common fund of legal principles that then formed the basis for codification in the 19th century.
Moreover, in contrast to the revolutionary zeal and antagonism toward judges that shaped
the Napoleonic Code, German legal history sheds a much more favorable light on jurisprudence
and explicitly rejected France’s approach. 9 Thus, the German Code “was not intended to abolish
prior law and substitute a new legal system; on the contrary, the idea was to codify those
principles of German law that would emerge from careful historical study of the German legal
system.” (Merryman, 1985, p.31)
Whereas the Napoleonic code was designed to be immutable, the Bürgerliches
Gesetzbuch was designed to evolve. For instance, France technically denies judicial review of
8

See, Posner (1973), Rubin (1977), and Priest (1977).

11
legislative actions, while Germany formally recognizes this power and German courts actively
exercise it (Glendon, et al., 1982, p.57). Similarly, in terms of adjudicating disputes involving the
government, France’s administrative courts are within the executive branch itself. In Germany,
the judiciary handles these disputes. Further, the Court of Cassation in France was originally
viewed as an institution to assist the legislature. It had powers to quash decisions, but not decide
cases. This is different from the Bundesgerichtshof in Germany that can reverse, remand,
modify, or enter final judgment on cases, and where judicial decision-making process tends to be
more openly debated. 10 Thus, while codification had a similar role in Germany and France in
unifying the country and reasserting the power of the central state, Germany had a very different
approach toward jurisprudence.
The Scandinavian Civil law developed relatively independently from the other traditions
in the 17th and 18th centuries and is less closely linked with Roman Civil law than the French or
German traditions (Zweigert and Kötz, 1988, henceforth ZK). Moreover, neither the
construction, nor the subsequent evolution, of the Scandinavian Civil law has been used to
eliminate jurisprudence and boost the role of the State relative to private investors to the same
extent as in the French Civil law (LLSV, 1998). 11 While extensive, active scholarship examines
differences between French, German, and British law, comparatively less effort has been devoted
to understanding the functioning of the Scandinavian civil law tradition and its influence on the
development of financial systems in Scandinavia.

9

The German legal scholar Karl von Savigny argued that the law of a people was a product of the history and
culture of that people’s development (Merryman, 1985, p. 30).
10
See Zweigert and Kötz (1998, p. 264) and Glendon, et al. (1982, p. 96-100, 123-133).
11
Coffee (2001) points to the superior performance of the Scandinavian countries relative to other Civil Law
countries and even to Common Law countries and explains this with the high level of social cohesion in these
countries.

12
The historical development of the British common law is unique both in terms of (a) the
relationship between the State and the Courts and (b) jurisprudence. From 1066, the English law
evolved based on the resolution of specific disputes and increasingly stressed the rights of private
property. While landholding rights in England were originally based on William I´s feudal
system, the courts developed legal rules that treated large estate holders as private property
owners and not as tenants of the king. Indeed, the common law at the dawn of the 17th century
was principally a law of private property (e.g., Littleton, 1481, and Coke, 1628).
The English Common law asserted its independence from the State during the tumultuous
16th and 17th centuries, during the great conflict between Parliament and the English kings. The
Crown attempted to reassert feudal prerogatives and sell monopoly rights to cope with budgetary
shortfalls. Parliament (composed mostly of landowners and wealthy merchants) along with the
courts took the side of the property owners against the Crown. While King James I argued that
royal prerogative superseded the common law, the courts asserted that the law is king, Lex, Rex.
This political struggle culminated in 1688, when the Stuarts were thrown out. This allowed the
courts to place the law above the Crown and limit the Crown’s power to alter property rights and
grant monopoly rights. 12
Besides the power of the law vis-à-vis the State, the Common law’s history is also
importantly different from France’s in terms of jurisprudence and legal formalism. Unlike in PreRevolutionary France, the courts in England were frequently viewed more favorably and
sometimes as supporters of progressive reforms, so that judges were afforded greater discretion.
In terms of legal formalism, English law typically imposes less rigid and formalistic
12

There are two additional related issues. First, England was unified during the formative period of the Common
law. This reduced political incentives for codification. Second, English courts were a liberalizing force that helped
dismantle the feudal system and protected the rights of landowners against the Crown (Hayek, 1960). Whereas the

13
requirements on the presentation of evidence, witnesses, etc., and instead offers judges greater
latitude (Schlesinger, et al., 1988). In terms of jurisprudence, the English common law tradition
is almost synonymous with judges having broad interpretation powers and with courts molding
and creating law as circumstances change. The common law is obsessed with facts and deciding
concrete cases, rather than adhering to the logical principles of codified law. Thus, the popular
dictum: “The life of the law has not been logic: it has been experience.” (ZK, 1998, p. 181).
Unlike the Napoleonic doctrine, judges continually – and as a matter of general practice -- shape
the law through their decisions.
The Spread of Europe’s Legal Systems
The English, French, and German legal traditions spread throughout the world through
conquest, colonization, and imitation. Napoleon secured the adoption of the Code in all
conquered territories, including Italy, Poland, the Low Countries, and the Habsburg Empire.
Also, France extended her legal influence to parts of the Near East, Northern and Sub-Saharan
Africa, Indochina, Oceania, French Guyana, and the French Caribbean islands during the
colonial era. Furthermore, the French Code heavily influenced the Portuguese and Spanish legal
systems, which helped spread the French legal tradition to Central and South America. The
English common law spread through colonization and conquest to all corners of the world. The
Austrian and Swiss civil codes were developed at the same time as the German civil code and the
three influenced each other heavily. In turn, Czechoslovakia, Hungary, Yugoslavia, and Greece
relied on German civil law in formulating and modernizing their legal systems in the early part
of the 20th century. The German Civil Code was not imposed but exerted a big influence on
Japan. At the end of the 19th century, Japan looked toward Europe as it sought to draft a

French Revolution sought individual rights through strict prohibitions on the discretion of judges, England found
liberty through an independent and influential judiciary.

14
commercial code. While Japan considered the French civil code, Japanese legal scholars were
attracted to the systematic theorizing of the German code and its emphasis on fitting the
evolution of the law into a country’s historical context (ZK, 1998, p. 296-302.) The Japanese
commercial code of 1899 is squarely based on the German counterpart. Although Japan came
under the influence of the Common law during the post World War II occupation period
(especially in the area of public law), it is not uncommon to classify Japan as a German civil law
country, particularly when focusing on Commercial and Company law. Similarly, the German
code influenced the development of commercial law in Korea, especially through the Japanese
occupation. During the early decades of the 20th century, China (and hence Taiwan) examined
European law in seeking to improve the operation of their commercial law. China introduced
civil codes in 1925 and 1935 that, except for family and inheritance law, were shaped by German
civil law. Of course, China has its own ancient legal tradition and also experienced Mao and the
Cultural Revolution. The Scandinavian legal system was not spread to any country outside
Northern Europe.
While the subject of active debate, Merryman (1996) advances four inter-related reasons
for why the exportation of the Napoleonic Code had more pernicious effects in French, Belgian,
Dutch, Spanish and Portuguese colonies than in France itself. According to this view, the
adoption of the French civil code has crippled the judicial systems of many French legal origi n
colonies and hindered their ability to develop efficiently adaptive legal systems.
First, the French rigidly imposed the Code Civil in its colonies even though there were –
and remain -- serious conflicts between the Code and local laws (ZK, 1998, p. 109-13).13

13

England did not try to replace Islamic, Hindu, or unwritten African law and the flexibility of the Common law
eased its transfer. For instance, the English courts in India were instructed to apply Islamic or Hindu law depending
on the faith of the parties in cases of inheritance, marriage, caste, etc. In Africa, judges were to apply the English
law only to the extent that local circumstances permitted and matters were to be decided by equity and good

15
Tensions between local law and the transferred doctrine may impede the efficient development
and application of the law with negative implications for financial development (Berkowitz,
Pistor, and Richard, 2002).
Second, when the French instilled the Code, they brought the theory of the Napoleonic
doctrine with its antagonism toward jurisprudence and its reliance on judicial formalism to
minimize the role of judges. The French did not also bring the practical knowledge of how to
circumvent some of the negative attributes of the Code and create an efficient role for judges
(Merryman, 1996).
Third, given the Napoleonic doctrine, judges frequently “… are at the bottom of the scale
of prestige among the legal professions in France and in many nations that adopted the French
Revolutionary reforms, and the best people in those nations accordingly seek other legal careers”
(Merryman, 1996, p. 116). Consequently, it is more difficult to develop efficiently responsive
legal systems if the courts do not attract the best minds. Also, the static theory of the Napoleonic
doctrine may become self-fulfilling: the best minds choose other professions, which hinders
efficient legal flexibility. As a consequence, the legislature will have a tendency to write “bright
line laws” to limit the role of the courts. As argued by Pistor et al. (2002, 2003), once a country
adopts the “bright line” approach to law making, it is very difficult to change. Courts will not be
challenged to develop legal procedures and methods to deal with emerging conditions. Thus,
according to some scholars, these characteristics of the French law have worked to retard the
development of efficiently adaptive legal systems that support financial development.
Fourth, France has a long history of avoiding open disputes about legal interpretation
(Dawson, 1968). Moreover, Napoleonic doctrine formally inhibits open disputations by judges

conscience as rendered necessary by local circumstances (ZK, 1998, 225-9). While somewhat chaotic, this arguably
set the stage for the evolution of an independent, dynamic common law in the post-colonial era.

16
on how they weigh competing statutes, ambiguous laws, and past court decisions in deciding
new cases. The exportation of this characteristic to French legal origin colonies, i.e., the absence
of a legal culture of openly discussing the application of the law to evolving conditions, hindered
the development of efficient legal systems around the world accordingly. From this perspective,
French legal origin colonies imported a restrictive, formalistic legal doctrine under particular
conditions that enhanced the probability that their legal systems would be less efficiently
adaptable than Common and German civil law countries and even than the legal system in
France itself.
From Legal Origin to Finance: Political & Adaptability Mechanisms
We now describe two mechanisms through which legal origin may influence financial
development. The political mechanism is based on two premises. First, legal traditions differ in
the emphasis they place on protecting the rights of private investors relative to the rights of the
State. Second, private property rights protection forms the foundation for financial development.
Thus, historically determined differences in legal origin can help explain existing differences in
financial development according to this component of the law and finance view (LLSV, 1998).
Some scholars argue that the Civil law has tended to support the rights of the State,
relative to private property rights, to a greater degree than the Common law with adverse
implications for financial development. Indeed, La Porta, et al. (2003) find that in civil law
countries, the State is less likely to grant judges tenure, give courts jurisdiction over cases
involving the government, or permit judicial review of the constitutionality of laws. LLSV
(1999, p. 231-2) state that a civil legal tradition, then, can be taken as a proxy for the intent to
build institutions to further the power of the State. A powerful State with a responsive civil law
at its disposal will tend to divert the flow of society’s resources toward favored ends, which is

17
antithetical to competitive financial markets. Furthermore, a powerful State will have difficulty
credibly committing to not interfere in financial markets, which will also hinder financial
development. Thus, the law and finance theory holds that Civil law countries will have weaker
property rights protection and lower levels of financial development than countries with other
legal traditions.
In contrast, the Common law has historically tended to side with private property owners
against the State according to this view. Rather than becoming a tool of the State, the Common
law has acted as a powerful counterbalance that promotes private property rights. Rajan and
Zingales (2003) note that governments in Civil Law countries were more effective than
governments in Common Law countries in expanding the role of government at the cost of
financial market development during the Interwar period 1919 – 1939. They attribute this to the
stronger role of the judiciary vis-à-vis the legislature in Common Law countries. Thus, the law
and finance theory holds that the British Common law supports financial development to a
greater degree than the Civil law systems.
The second mechanism linking legal origin with financial development is the adaptability
mechanism, which is built on two premises. First, legal systems differ in their ability to adjust to
changing circumstances. Second, if a country’s legal system adapts only slowly to changing
circumstances, large gaps will open between the financial needs of an economy and the ability of
the legal system to support those needs.
An influential, though by no means unanimous, line of inquiry holds that legal systems
that embrace case law and judicial discretion tend to adapt more efficiently to changing
conditions than legal systems that adhere rigidly to formalistic procedures and that rely more
strictly on judgments based narrowly on statutory law (Coase, 1960). Posner (1973) argues that

18
while legislators consider the impact on particular individuals and interest groups when writing
statutes, judges are forbidden from considering the deservedness of specific litigants and
therefore more likely to render decisions based on objective efficiency criteria (Rubin, 1982, p.
205. Rubin (1977) and Priest (1977) hold that common law systems are more efficient than
statutory-based systems because inefficient laws are routinely litigated and re-litigated pushing
the law toward more efficient outcome. In contrast, Posner (1973) and Bailey and Rubin (1994)
argue that statutory law evolves slowly and is subject to a greater degree of inefficient political
pressures than the Common law.14 If statutes are constantly playing “catch-up” and are
constantly pushed in inefficient direction by the legislative process, then this will hinder efficient
corporate finance and financial development.
Thus, while subject to countervailing views presented below, the adaptability channel
predicts that French legal origin countries, albeit not necessarily France itself, have a lower
probability of developing efficiently flexible financial systems than German civil law and
especially Common law countries. The adaptability channel holds that the Common law is
inherently dynamic as it responds case-by-case to the changing needs of society. This limits the
opportunities for large gaps to grow between the demands of society and the law. Indeed, La
Porta, et al. (2003) show that common law countries are more likely to admit judicial decisions
as a source of law. In addition, Djankov, et al. (2003a) stress that differences in legal formalism
also influence the adaptability of the law. They find that common law countries tend to have less
legal formalism in terms of regulating the collection and presentation of evidence, requiring

14

For example in the United States, corporate officers and directors have a legal responsibility to maximize firm
value for shareholders. Macey and Miller (1993) argue that the efficiency justification for these broad fiduciary
responsibilities is to fill in gaps because it is impossible to pre-contract for all contingencies. This gap-filling role of
fiduciary duties can lower transactions costs and improve corporate governance by requiring directors to promote
the interests of shareholder above their own interests. For example, in a legal system where judges do not got
beyond the statutes, “... a corporate insider who finds a way not explicitly forbidden by the statutes to expropriate
outside investors can proceed without fear of an adverse judicial ruling” (LLSV, 2000a, p. 9).

19
elaborate and extensive procedures throughout judicial processes, insisting on written
documentation at every stage of the process, and setting rigid procedural requirements on
communication between parties. In contrast, the Napoleonic doctrine’s distrust of judges induces
a reliance on judicial formalism. This hinders the flexibility of the legal system in many French
law countries, with adverse implications on financial development. Furthermore, as noted, many
legal scholars argue that the German law falls close to the Common law in terms of adaptability
since it rejected the Napoleonic doctrine and instead maintained its historical roots in
jurisprudence.
While the political and adaptability mechanism are inter-related parts of the law and
finance theory and while they both predict that legal origin shapes financial development, they
make conflicting predictions regarding French versus German civil law countries. The political
channel holds that the Civil law tradition – both French and German – tends to centralize and
intensify state power and therefore takes a more wary stance toward the development of free
financial systems than the Common law. In contrast, the adaptability channel stresses that
Common law and German civil law countries have notably more adaptable legal traditions than
French civil law countries.
The two mechanisms also make different predictions concerning the channels through
which legal systems influence the development of financial markets. The political mechanism
contends that State control of the judiciary produces a system that focuses more on the power of
the State and less on the private contracting rights of individual investors than a legal system
characterized by an independent judiciary. Thus, the political channel stresses that cross-country
differences in the independence of the judiciary are critical for explaining cross-country
differences in financial development. In contrast, the adaptability mechanism stresses that cross-

20
country differences in the flexibility of the law are critical for explaining cross-country
differences in financial development. 15
One can overemphasize the difference between the political and adaptability channels,
however. The political channel focuses on the power of the State while the adaptability channel
highlights differences in the ability of legal systems to evolve with changing conditions.
Jurisprudence, however, may be much less likely in a system where the State controls the
judiciary than in a system where the judiciary enjoys greater independence (Damaska, 1986;
Glaeser and Shleifer, 2002).
Skeptical Views regarding the Law and Finance Theory
Many influential legal scholars and economists question each of the premises underlying
the law and finance theory. There are disagreements about the comparative flexibility of the
Common and Civil law traditions, doubts about the view that the common places greater
emphasis on private property rights protection than the Civil law, skepticism about classifying
countries by legal origin, questions about whether legal origin is a fundamental determinant of
financial development, and doubts about the central role of investor protection laws in promoting
financial development.
Specifically, Backhaus (1997) and Blume and Rubinfeld (1982) argue that precedent can
stymie the efficient evolution of the law. Indeed, Epstein (1975) and Rubin (1982) provide a rich
set of examples, including the evolution of the law of property during 19th century and the design
of private clauses in contracts, when statutory law changes were necessary to produce more
15

Proponents of the political channel argue that historically Germany had much more efficient institutions than
France did. Citing Ertman (1997) and Finer (1997), LLSV (1998, 1999) note that Germany built a professional
bureaucracy based on the military and professional civil servants, while France developed a patrimonial bureaucracy
with strong links to political elites. Arguably, these differences have also worked to create German courts that are
more independent from the State, more efficient at protecting private contracting rights, and less focused on the
rights of the State than in France. Proponents of the legal-adaptability channel would counter that this cannot explain

21
efficient outcomes in the United States.

As another example, English law has clung with

remarkable tenacity to the principle that “only a person who is a party to a contract can sue on
it.” (ZK. 1998, p. 468) In contrast, the Continental countries granted greater rights to third
parties through statutory changes. Furthermore, Lamoreaux and Rosenthal (2002) provide a
fascinating comparison of the laws of incorporation and partnerships in the United States and
France. They argue that the French civil law system responded more effectively to evolving
economic conditions than the U.S common law system. Finally, Bentham (1789) noted that the
Common law’s lack of coherence hinders its ability to evolve efficiently.
Another line of criticism questions Posner’s (1973) argument that the courts have better
incentives to select socially efficient outcomes than the legislature. Galanter (1974) and Tullock
(1980) argue that rich disputants and well-endowed special interest groups can litigate and relitigate cases, which blurs Posner’s (1973) delineation between the processes of legislation and
litigation. Furthermore, the choice of litigation and legislation may be primarily a strategic,
decision regarding avenue offers the greatest probability of success. From this perspective, there
is no reason to presume that Common or Civil Law systems will produce more efficient
outcomes.
Research also questions whether Common law systems emphasize property rights relative
to the rights of the State to a greater degree than Civil law systems. For instance Ekelund and
Tollison (1980) and Rubin (1982) argue that while the courts in England sided with Parliament
against the Crown’s efforts to grant monopolies in 16th and 17th centuries, this should not be
viewed as a general characteristic that Common law legal systems favor private property rights
and competition more than Civil law systems. Arguing along similar lines, Coffee (2000) argues

why other German legal origin countries, such as Korea and Japan have developed relatively efficient financial
markets.

22
that Civil law systems are not inherently against minority shareholder rights, but rather the law
has evolved sufficiently in Civil law countries to protect minority shareholder effectively given
that patterns of corporate ownership in those countries.
Furthermore, many question whether it is appropriate and analytically useful to
categorize countries as simply having British, French, German, or Scandinavian legal origins. As
stressed above, Dawson (1960, 1968) and Merryman (1985, 1996) stress than when the French
legal system was exported to colonies around the world, it operated less effectively than in
France itself. One may further refine the categorization of legal systems. For instance, Franks
and Sussman (1999) describe differences in the adaptability of two Common law countries: the
United Kingdom and the United States. Also, legal scholars study differences across the French
civil law countries of Latin America. Along the same lines, Berkowitz, Pistor, and Richard
(2002) stress that the manner in which national legal systems were initially transplanted and
received, e.g., through conquest, colonization, or imitation, around the world is very important
for economic development. They stress that the transplant process – not just whether countries
are classified as having British, French, German, or Scandinavian legal origins – is important for
establishing well-functioning legal systems. Thus, many observers question the usefulness of
using legal origin to explain property rights protection, the efficient adaptability of legal systems,
and hence financial development.
Some researchers question whether legal heritage is a crucial determinants of legal and
financial institutions and instead stress that politics determines the degree of investor protection
laws, the energy devoted to private contract enforcement, the extent to which legal systems
emphasize the rights of property owners relative to the rights of the State, and hence the
development of competitive financial markets (Pound, 1991; Roe, 1994; Pagano and Volpin,

23
2001; Rajan and Zingales, 2003; Haber, et al., 2003). From this perspective, those in power
shape policies and institutions – including legal and financial institutions – to stay in power and
enrich themselves. The elite may or may not favor financial development, which ultimately
influences the operation of legal and financial institutions. This view does not reject the
importance of legal institutions in shaping financial systems. Rather, it stresses the political roots
of differences in legal and financial institutions. 16
Skepticism about the central role of legal institutions in shaping financial development
also emanates from those highlighting culture. Stulz and Williamson (2003) note that different
religions have different attitudes toward the rights of creditors. In particular, the Catholic Church
has historically taken a negative stance toward the charging of interest and creditor rights.
Similarly, the Qur’an prohibits the charging of interest, so that some countries still impose this
prohibition. In contrast, according to this culture-religion view, the Reformation advanced a
different religious attitude towards finance, whereby the payment of interest was considered a
normal part of commerce, so that the rights of creditors were more naturally emphasized in
countries dominated by Protestant religions. From this perspective, countries with a
predominantly Catholic religious heritage would tend to have less developed credit markets and
more poorly developed loan issuing financial institutions.
An additional line of attack comes from geography. The endowment view stresses that
differences in geography and disease have critically shaped patterns of political, institutional, and
economic development (Diamond 1997; Jones 1981; McNeill 1963; Crosby 1989; Engerman and

16

Glaeser and Shleifer (2002) model the evolution of legal institutions, while Glaeser and Shleifer (2003) show that
legal and regulatory institutions may evolve together and sometimes substitute for each other depending on specific
conditions. For broad discussions of the co-evolution of legal, regulatory, and political institutions see Olson (1993),
North (1981, 1990), Djankov, Glaeser, LaPorta, Lopez-de-Silanes, and Shleifer (2003b), and Barth, Caprio, and
Levine (2003). Easterly and Levine (1997) show that ethnic division may shape the wide range of institutions and
policies.

24
Sokoloff 1997, 2002; Sokoloff and Engerman, 2000; Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson, 2001,
2002).
Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson (2001, henceforth AJR) base their theory of how
endowments influence enduring institutions on three premises. First, AJR note that Europeans
adopted different types of colonization strategies. At one end of the spectrum, the Europeans
settled and created institutions to support private property and check the power of the State.
These “settler colonies” include the United States, Australia, and New Zealand. At the other end
of the spectrum, Europeans sought to extract as much from the colony as possible. In these
“extractive states,” Europeans did not create institutions to support private property rights; rather,
they established institutions that empowered the elite to extract gold, silver, etc. (e.g., Congo,
Ivory Coast, and much of Latin America). Second, AJR’s theory holds that the type of
colonization strategy was heavily influenced by the feasibility of settlement. In inhospitable
environments, Europeans tended to create extractive states (AJR, 2001). In areas where
endowments favored settlement, Europeans tended to form settler colonies. The final piece of the
AJR theory of institutional development stresses that the institutions created by European
colonizers endured after independence. Settler colonies tended to produce post-colonial
governments that were more democratic and more devoted to defending private property rights
than extractive colonies. In contrast, since extractive colonies had already constructed
institutions for effectively extracting resources, the post-colonial elite frequently assumed power
and readily exploited the pre-existing extractive institutions. AJR (2001, 2002), Beck, DemirgucKunt, and Levine (2003a, henceforth BDL), and Easterly and Levine (2003) provide empirical
support for the view that endowments influence institutions, including financial institutions.

25
Other work questions the central role of investor protection laws in shaping the efficient
flow of capital to corporations and overall financial development. For instance, Dyck and
Zingales (2003) find that non-traditional corporate control mechanisms, such as an open,
competitive media and a high degree of product market competition, are as important as statutory
protection of minority shareholders in explaining the private benefits of controlling a
corporation. Furthermore, Guiso, et al. (2000) hold that “social capital” the informal rules that
govern social interactions play a critical role in determining financial development in Italy.
Similarly, Franks, et al (2003) argue that implicit contracts enforced by informal mechanisms
fostered small shareholder participation in financial markets in late 19th and early 20th century
England. Johnson, McMillan, and Woodruff (2002a), however, note that while informal,
relational contracting has been important in post-communist countries and can sustain old
relationships, effective formal court systems are crucial in fostering new commercial
relationships and boosting the overall level of trust in society.

3. EMPIRICAL EVIDENCE ON LAW AND FINANCE
In this section, we review the empirical evidence on the law and finance view. The first
sub-section discusses evidence on the links between legal origin and financial development,
investor protection laws, and private property rights protection. Next, we assess whether investor
protection laws influence corporate valuations, corporate governance, and the operation of
financial markets? The third subsection reviews emerging evidence on the mechanisms -- the
political and adaptability mechanisms – linking the law to financial development.

26
Legal Origin and Financial Development
To measure legal origin, many researchers follow LLSV (1998) in classifying a country
as having either a British common law, French civil law, German civil law, or Scandinavian civil
law based on the source of each country’s Company or Commercial code. David and Brierley
(1985) argue that commercial legal systems of most countries derive from these four major legal
families. Reynolds and Flores (1989) provide information on the origins of national laws for over
100 countries. Using these legal origin dummy variables, researchers have initiated an energetic
examination of the relationship between legal and financial institutions.
LLSV (1997, 1998) find that French civil law countries have the lowest levels of
financial development even after controlling for the overall level of economic development.
French civil law countries have smaller stock markets (as measured by market capitalization
divided by GDP), less active initial public offering markets, and lower levels of bank credit as a
share of GDP. These results are broadly consistent with the theories of law and finance discussed
above.17
Empirical work also examines the connection between legal origin and specific laws
governing the rights of external investors in firms. To the extent that the legal system protects
shareholders and creditors, this may tend to (1) foster better functioning stock and debt markets
and (2) facilitate the flow of capital to firms.
Consider LLSV’s (1998) Shareholder rights measure, which is an index aggregates the
following six measures. The index is created by adding 1 when (a) the country allows
shareholders to mail their proxy vote to the firms, (b) shareholders are not required to deposit
their shares prior to the General Shareholders Meeting, (c) cumulative voting or proportional

17

Additional work further shows that Common law countries have significantly greater Market Capitalization than
the combined group of civil law countries (BDL, 2001).

27
representation of minorities on the board of directors is allowed, (d) an oppressed minorities
mechanism is in place, (e) the minimum percentage of share capital that entitles a shareholder to
call for an Extraordinary Shareholders Meeting is less than the sample median (10 percent), or (f)
shareholders have preemptive rights that can only be waived by a shareholders vote. Higher
values indicate greater minority shareholder rights such that majority shareholders have less
discretion in exploiting minority shareholders.
LLSV (1998) show that French civil law countries have lower levels of Shareholder
Rights. LLSV (1997) and Levine (2003) go on to show that low levels of Shareholder Rights
are associated with poorly developed equity markets. In contrast, Common law countries have
high levels of Shareholder Rights with correspondingly high levels of equity market
development. Furthermore, LLS (2003) find laws and regulations that force information
disclosure and that foster private enforcement through strict liability rules enhance market
development. Moreover, LLS (2003) show that French legal origin countries tend to have
relatively weak liability rules and weak information disclosure requirements, such that the legal
and regulatory environment in French civil law countries tends to emphasize private contract
enforcement less effectively than in Common law countries.
Next, consider Creditor Rights, which is an index that is formed by adding one when (a)
the country imposes restrictions, such as creditors consent or minimum dividends, to file for
reorganization, (b) secured creditors are able to gain possession of their security once the
reorganization petition has been approved (no automatic stay on assets), (c) secured creditors are
ranked first in the distribution of the proceeds that result from the disposition of the assets of a
bankrupt firm, and (d) the debtor does not retain the administration of its property pending the
resolution of the reorganization. Higher values indicate greater creditor rights.

28
As shown by LLSV (1998), countries with a Common law tradition tend to have greater
Creditor Rights than French civil law countries. Furthermore, LLSV (1997) and Levine (1998,
1999) show that greater Creditor Rights are positively associated with financial intermediary
development.
Furthermore, Levine (1998, 1999) and Levine, Loayza, and Beck (2000) empirically
trace the chain of connections from legal origin to financial development to economic growth.
Specifically, legal origin importantly accounts for cross-country differences in the development
of bank and stock markets and these differences in financial development explain international
differences in long-run rates of economic growth. Thus, a growing body of work suggests that
legal institutions influence the operation of financial institutions with substantial implications for
corporate finance and investment decisions, along with the overall rate of economic growth.
Nevertheless, legal origin is certainly not the whole story. Rajan and Zingales (2003)
argue that financial development does not always evolve monotonically over time and that crosscountry differences in financial development also change materially over time. Thus, timeinvariant factors such as legal origin cannot fully explain time-variation in the relative levels of
financial development across countries. Rajan and Zingales (2003) stress the important role of
political forces in shaping policies toward financial markets and intermediaries and hence the
development of financial systems. Pistor, et al. (2002, 2003) disagree with Rajan and Zingales
(2003) in the area of corporate law and argue that even acute political changes in Germany,
France, and England during the 20th century did not substantively alter the evolution of corporate
law.
While recognizing the limitations of the law and finance theory’s ability to explain
intertemporal changes in relative levels of financial development across countries, recent

29
research has conducted a number of robustness checks regarding the linkages between legal
origin and financial development. Levine, (1998, 1999, 2003a), Levine, Loayza, and Beck
(2000), and BDL (2003a) use different measures of financial development and also expand the
set of countries to over 100. This research confirms that legal origin helps explain cross-country
differences in financial development. In particular, French civil law countries, though not France
itself, tend to have particularly low levels of equity market development. To the extent that
competitive securities markets rely more on legal institutions than banks, these results are very
consistent with theories that suggest a strong link between legal institutions and financial
development.
Furthermore, BDL (2003a) show that French civil law countries tend to have lower levels
of private property rights protection. Again, this is consistent with the view that French legal
origin countries place comparatively less emphasis on the rights of private property holders than
countries with a Common or German civil law tradition.
While still in its nascent stages, research is also running statistical horse races between
theories that stress the role of legal institutions and alternative theories. As noted earlier, an
influential body of works stresses the dominating role of political forces in shaping financial
development. While it is extraordinarily difficult to measure cross-country differences in
political institutions, BDL (2003a) make an initial attempt to control for differences in political
systems in assessing the law and finance relationship. They include measures of the degree of
competitive and executive elections, measures of the number of influential veto players in
legislative process, and an overall index of national openness based on trade openness. BDL
(2003a) continue to find that legal origin explains differences in equity market development,

30
banking sector development, and the level of private property rights protection even when
controlling for these proxies for characteristics of the political environment.
BDL (2003a) also control for natural resource endowments and religion in examining the
robustness of the connection between legal heritage and financial development. To control for
religion, BDL (2003a) measure the percentage of the population adhering to different religious
faiths. To proxy for natural resource endowments, BDL (2003a) use the AJR measures of settler
mortality. As a further check, they use measures of each country’s latitude (the absolute value of
either the geographic mean of the country or of the country’s capital city) as an exogenous proxy
for the degree to which the country is in a tropic environment. They find that endowments
importantly explain cross-country differences in financial institutions, confirming the AJR and
Engerman and Sokoloff (1997) theories of institutional development. Nevertheless, legal origin
continues to explain property rights differences and stock market development even when
controlling for endowments.
Similarly, Stulz and Williamson (2003) examine the impact of legal origin on financial
development while controlling for cross-country differences in culture, as measured by the
dominant religion in each country. They find that legal origin is more important than religion in
explaining laws protecting equity holders, while religious differences are more closely tied to
laws protecting creditors. Thus, while culture matters, legal origin still explains cross-country
differences in financial development, especially equity market development, after controlling for
differences in religious heritage.

31
Investor Protection Laws, Corporate Finance, and Financial Development
We now examine the empirical evidence concerned with the relationship between
investor protection laws and the corporate financing decisions of firms and the operation of
financial markets. This subsection discusses this more microeconomic-based work.
Recent work suggests that legal institutions influence the valuation of firms and banks
and hence the cost of capital. Claessens, et al., (2002), LLSV (2002), and Caprio, et al, (2003)
find that stronger investor protection laws, as measured by higher values of the Shareholder
Rights indicator defined above, tend to enhance corporate valuations. Furthermore, LLSV
(2000b) show that countries with strong Shareholder Rights are able to force firms to disgorge
cash and pay higher dividends. This evidence is consistent with the view that investor protection
laws influence corporate governance with measurable implications on stock prices and dividend
policies. In related work Johnson, McMillan, and Woodruff (2002b) show that countries with
strong private property rights protection tend to have firms the reinvest their profits, but where
property rights are relatively weakly enforced, entrepreneurs are less inclined to invest retained
earnings.
Empirical analyses also find a strong connection between investor protection laws and
both ownership concentration and the private benefits of corporate control.

The data are

consistent with the view that stronger legal protection of investor rights makes minority investors
more confident about their investments, which reduces the need for firms (Claessens, et al.,
2000; LLS, 1999) and banks (Caprio, et al., 2003) to use concentrated ownership as a mechanism
for alleviating corporate governance problems. Furthermore, Dyck and Zingales (2003) and
Zingales (1994) show that greater statutory protection of minority shareholder rights and more

32
effective legal enforcement of those rights lowers the private benefits of controlling a
corporation.
Legal institutions also influence the ability of firms to raise capital. Thus, laws may
influence the degree to which firms operate at financially constrained levels. Kumar, Rajan, and
Zingales (2001) and Beck, Demirguc-Kunt and Maksimovic (2002) find that countries with legal
institutions that more effectively protect property rights tend to have larger firms. This is
consistent with the law and finance theory that in countries with better legal institutions, firms
are less constrained by retained earnings and operate at more efficient scales.
Recent work has also drawn a connection between legal institutions and the efficiency of
equity markets. Morck, Yeung, and Yu (2000) examine the relationship between legal
institutions, the availability and precision of information on firms, and the efficiency of stock
prices. They find that the degree to which legal institutions protect private property rights and the
rights of minority shareholders help account for cross-country differences in stock market
synchronicity. That is, in countries where legal institutions do not protect shareholders
effectively, domestic stock prices move together, so there is less information in individual stock
prices.
The impact of legal institutions on corporate finance may also play a role in explaining
the Asian financial crisis. Johnson, Boone, Breach, and Friedman (2000) show that weak legal
institutions – legal institutions that do not effectively support the claims of outside investors –
help account for cross-country differences in stock market declines and exchange rate
depreciations during the Asian crisis. Specifically, if managers expropriate more firm assets as
expected rates of return on firm investment fall, then adverse shocks to the economy will lead to
greater expropriation, larger stock declines, and bigger incipient capital outflows in countries

33
with weak legal institutions. Johnson, Boone, Breach, and Friedman (2000) find evidence
consistent with this legal institution explanation of exchange rate and stock price declines.
Wurgler (2000) and Beck and Levine (2002) examine whether legal institutions influence
the allocation of capital across firms and industries. They show that legal institutions influence
the efficiency with which financial systems re-allocate capital across industries. Specifically,
countries with legal institutions that define and enforce strong rights for small, outside investors
more effectively reallocate the flow of finance toward growing firms and away from declining
firms. Thus, well-functioning legal systems boost the efficiency with which financial systems
allocate capital.
Also, Demirguc-Kunt and Maksimovic (1998) show that countries with legal institutions
that protect outside investors tend to create better functioning financial systems that fund faster
growing firms. Claessens and Laeven (2003) show that legal rules regarding investor protection
influence the types of firms that get financed. Specifically, in countries with strong investor
protection laws, firms with less collateral have an easier time getting external finance than
similar firms in countries with poorly functioning legal institutions. Furthermore, building on
Rajan and Zingales (1998), Beck and Levine (2002) show that the efficiency of legal institutions
increases the availability of financing to industries and the creation of new establishments. Along
these lines, Demirguc-Kunt and Levine (2001), Beck and Levine (2002), Demirguc-Kunt and
Maksimovic (2002), and Levine (2002) provide empirical support for the view advanced by
LLSV (2000a) that the legal approach is a more fruitful way to explain corporate performance
than the more conventional distinction between bank-based and market-based financial systems.
Thus, national legal institutions are critically important in determining the supply of capital
available for corporate investment.

34
Some careful case-studies, however, challenge the importance of investor protection
laws. For example, Franks et al. (2003) trace the history of investor protection laws and
corporate ownership in the United Kingdom. They note that in a landmark court case, Foss v.
Harbottle (1843), the judge found that no individual shareholder could sustain an action against
the company, thereby rejecting the notion of minority investor protection. Not until 1948 did
Parliament begin to enact limited legislation to protect minority shareholders and Franks, et al.
(2003) stress that it was not until 1980 that Parliament enacted strong minority shareholder rights
statutes. According to the law and finance view, the U.K. should have had comparatively
inactive equity markets and concentrated ownership in the 19th and early 20th centuries and then
had more dispersed ownership and greater equity market activity after 1948 and especially after
1980. The evidence is, however, is at best mixed. Ownership concentration was similar in 1900
and 1960, which is not consistent with the law and finance prediction, but market liquidity did
jump substantially with enactment of stronger shareholder rights legislation.
Similarly, Aganin and Volpin (2003) argue that the history of investor protection laws
and corporate ownership in Italy during the twentieth century do not provide strong support for
the law and finance view. They hold that investor protection laws were weak at the beginning of
the century, did not change much after World War II, but were strengthened after 1974 and
especially after 1990. They note that the law and finance theory predicts a fall in corporate
ownership concentration after 1974 as stronger investor protection laws make small shareholder
more confident about their investments. But, corporate ownership concentration did not fall after
1974; it rose, and ownership concentration was more diffuse at the beginning of the 20th century
than at the start of the 21st century. Aganin and Volpin (2003), therefore, question the

35
applicability of the law and finance view in Italy and stress the importance of considering
politics in explaining corporate ownership and the evolution of investor protection laws.
Law and Finance Theory’s Political and Adaptability Mechanisms
While an exploding body of research examines (a) the links between legal origin and
investor protection and financial development and (b) the links between investor protection laws
and corporate financing efficiency, researchers are only beginning to examine the mechanisms
through which legal origin operates. The political channel postulates that legal traditions differ in
terms of the priority they give to private property rights relative to the rights of the state. The
adaptability channel stresses that legal traditions differ in terms of their responsiveness to
changing socioeconomic conditions.
BDL (2003b,c) study whether legal origin influences financial development primarily
through the political or adaptability mechanism by exploiting the data assembled by Djankov et
al. (2003a) and La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, Pop-Eleches, and Shleifer. (2003). To proxy for the
political channel, Supreme Court Power is a dummy variable that takes on the value one if
Supreme Court Judges have both life-long tenure and power over administrative cases, and zero
otherwise. The political channel predicts that (i) Civil law countries are less likely to grant
Supreme Court Power and (ii) Supreme Court Power will be positively associated with
private property rights protection and financial development. To proxy for the adaptability
channel, Case Law is a dummy variable that indicates whether judicial decisions are a source of
law. The adaptability channel predicts that (a) Common law and German civil law countries are
more likely to admit judicial decisions as a source of law than French law countries and (b)
countries in which judicial decisions are a source of law will adapt more efficiently to changing
financial conditions.

36
BDL (2003b) find that, French and German civil law countries have significantly less
Supreme Court Power than British common law countries. This is consistent with the view that
the State grants less independence in a civil law tradition than in a common law system. The
results also indicate that French civil law countries have significantly less Case Law -- i.e., a
significantly smaller role for judicial decisions as a source of law – than in German civil law or
British common law. This is consistent with the view that German civil and British common
legal traditions rely more on jurisprudence than French civil law systems.
BDL (2003b) next examine whether the proxy for the political channel or the proxy for
the adaptability channel is better able to account for international differences in stock market,
financial intermediary, and private property rights development. They use two-stage least
squares, where the instrumental variables are legal origin dummy variables.
The results provide support for the adaptability channel but not the political channel.
Specifically, the political channel predicts that Supreme Court Power will enter positively: less
State control of the courts will translate into greater financial development. In contrast, however,
Supreme Court Power enters either insignificantly, or negatively. Instead, the data are
consistent with the adaptability channel: Case Law is positively associated with stock market
development, bank development, and private property rights protection.
Research also focuses on judicial formalism, which is related to the adaptability
mechanism. Excessive formalism may slow legal processes, increase legal costs, and hinder the
ability of courts to arrive at fair judgments due to the rigid adherence to bright-line-rules
(Johnson et al., 2000; Djankov et al., 2003a; Glaeser and Shleifer, 2002). Indeed, Djankov, et al.
(2003a) construct an index of legal formalism that measures the need for legal professionals,
written documents, statutory justification, the statutory codification of evidence, and the formal

37
procedural steps associated with legal processes. They find that legal formalism is lower in
common law countries and that less legal formalism is associated with shorter proceedings and
less corruption.
In terms of finance, Acemoglu and Johnson (2003) examine the impact of legal
formalism on financial development using legal origin as an instrumental variable. Although
legal formalism is not linked with banking sector development, they find that the exogenous
component of legal formalism is associated with stock market development. Greater legal
formalism lowers stock market development, which is consistent with the adaptability
mechanism.
4. Conclusions
A rapidly growing body of research exami nes the role of legal institutions in explaining
financial development. The law and finance theory holds that (i) historically determined
differences in legal tradition influence national approaches to private property rights protection,
the support of private contractual arrangements, and the enactment and enforcement of investor
protection laws and (ii) these resultant legal institutions shape the willingness of savers to invest
in firms, the effectiveness of corporate governance, and the degree of financial market
development. Each of the components of the law and finance theory is being dissected, critiqued,
and evaluated from a broad array of perspectives. Many economists, legal scholars, political
scientists, and historians are questioning, testing and modifying the law and finance theory. This
promises to be an exciting and important area of inquiry in coming years.
THORSTEN BECK
WORLD BANK
ROSS LEVINE
UNIVERSITY OF MINNESOTA

38
References
Acemoglu, Daron and Simon Johnson. 2003. “Unbundling Institutions: Law versus Politics,”
Unpublished MIT mimeo.
Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, and James A. Robinson. 2001. “The Colonial Origins of
Comparative Development: An Empirical Investigation.” Amer. Econ. Rev., 91,
pp. 1369-1401.
Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, and James A. Robinson. 2002. “Reversal of Fortunes:
Geography and Institutions in the Making of the Modern World Income Distribution.”
Qtrly. Journ. of Econ., 117, pp. 1133-1192.
Aganin, Alexander and Paolo Volpin. 2003. “History of Corporate Ownership in Italy,” London
Business School mimeo.
Bailey, Martin J. and Paul H. Rubin. 1994. “A Positive Theory of Legal Change.” Intl. Rev. of
Law and Econ., 14, pp. 467-477.
Backhaus, Jurgen G. 1998. “Efficient Statute Law.” in New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics
and Law. Peter Newman, ed. London: MacMillan, pp. 24-28.
Barth, James, Gerard Caprio, and Ross Levine. 2004. “Bank Supervision and Regulation: What
Works Best?” Journ. of Finanl. Intermed., forthcoming.
Beck, Thorsten, Asli. Demirgüç-Kunt and Ross Levine. 2003c. “Legal Obstacles to External
Finance,” University of Minnesota mimeo.
Beck, Thorsten, Asli Demirgüç-Kunt, and Ross Levine. 2003b. “Law and Finance. Why Does
Legal Origin Matter?” Journ. of Comp. Econ., 31, pp, 653-75.
Beck, Thorsten, Asli Demirgüç-Kunt, and Ross Levine. 2003a. “Law, Endowments, and
Finance.” Journ. of Finanl. Econ., 70, pp. 137-81.
Beck, Thorsten, Asli Demirgüç-Kunt, and Ross Levine. 2001. “Legal Theories of Financial
Development.” Oxford Rev. of Econ. Pol., 17, pp. 483-501.

39
Beck, Thorsten, Asli Demirgüç-Kunt, and Vojislav Maksimovic. 2002. “Financial and Legal
Institutions and Firm Size,” World Bank unpublished working paper.
Beck, Thorsten and Ross Levine. 2002. “Industry Growth and Capital Allocation: Does Having a
Market- or Bank-based System Matter?” Journ. of Finanl. Econ., 64, pp. 147-180.
Beck, Thorsten and Ross Levine. 2003. “Stock Markets, Banks, and Growth: Panel Evidence.”
Journ. of Bankg. and Fin., forthcoming.
Beck, Thorsten, Ross Levine, and Norman Loayza. 2000. “Finance and the Sources of Growth.”
Journ. of Financl. Econ., 58, pp. 261-300.
Bentham, Jeremy. 1789. An Introduction to the Principles of Morals and Legislation. London: T.
Payne & Sons.
Berkowitz, Daniel, Katharina Pistor, and Jean-Francois Richard. 2002. “Economic Development,
Legality, and the Transplant Effect.” Europ. Econ. Rev., 47, pp. 165-195.
Blume, Lawrence E. and Daniel L. Rubinfeld. 1982. “The Dynamics of the Legal Process.”
Journ. of Leg. Stud., 11, pp. 405-419.
Caprio, Gerard, Luc Laeven, and Ross Levine. 2003. “Governance and Bank Valuation,”
University of Minnesota mimeo.
Claessens, Stijn and Luc Laeven. 2003. “Financial Development, Property Rights, and Growth.”
Journ. of Fin., forthcoming.
Claessens, Stijn., Simeon Djankov, Joseph P.H. Fan, and Larry H.P. Lang. 2002. “Expropriation
of Minority Shareholders in East Asia.” Journ. of Fin., 57, pp. 2741-71.
Claessens, Stijn, Simeon Djankov, and Larry H.P. Lang. 2000. “The Separation of Ownership
and Control in East Asian Corporations.” Journ. of Finanl. Econ., 58, pp. 81-112.
Coase, Ronald. 1960. “The Problem of Social Cost.” Journ. of Law and Econ., 3, pp. 1-44.
Coke, Edward. 1628 [1979 version]. The First Part of the Institutes of the Laws of England. New
York: Garland Publishing, Inc.
Coffee, John C. 2001. “Do Norms Matter? A Cross-Country Examination of the Private Benefits
of Control,” Unpublished working paper 183, Columbia Law School, New York.
Coffee, John C. 2000. “Privatization and Corporate Governance: The Lessons from Securities
Market Failure,” Unpublished working paper 158, Columbia Law School, New York.
Cooter, Robert and Lewis Kornhauser. 1980. “Can Litigation Improve the Law without the Help
of Judges?” Journ. of Leg. Stud., 9, pp. 139-63.

40

Cooter, Robert, Lewis Kornhauser, and David Lane. 1979. “Liability Rules, Limited Information
and the Role of Precedent.” Bell Journ. of Econ., 10, pp. 366-81.
Crosby, Alfred W. 1989. Ecological Imperialism: The Biological Expansion of Europe, 9001900. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Damaska, Mirjan R. 1986. The Faces of Justice and State Authority: A Comparative Approach to
the Legal Process. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
David. Rene and John E.C. Brierley. 1985. Major Legal Systems in the World Today. London:
Stevens and Sons.
Dawson, John P. 1960. A History of Lay Judges. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Dawson, John P. 1968. The Oracles of the Law. Ann Arbor, MI: University of Michigan Law
School (Reprinted in 1986 by William S. Hein & Co., Inc. Buffalo, New York).
Demirgüç-Kunt, Asli and Ross Levine. 2001. Financial Structure and Economic Growth: A
Cross-Country Comparison of Banks, Markets, and Development. Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
Demirgüç-Kunt, Asli and Vojislav Maksimovic. 1998. “Law, Finance, and Firm Growth.” Journ.
of Fin., 53, pp. 2107-2137.
Demirgüç-Kunt, Asli and Vojislav Maksimovic. 2002. “Funding Growth in Bank-based and
Market-based Financial Systems: Evidence from Firm Level Data.” Journ. of Finanl.
Econ., 65, pp. 337-363.
Diamond, Jared. 1997. Guns, Germs, and Steel: The Fates of Human Societies. New York:
W.W. Norton.
Djankov, Simeon, Edward Glaeser, Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and Andrei
Shleifer. 2003b. “The New Comparative Economics.” Journ. of Comp. Econ., 31,
forthcoming.
Djankov, Simeon, Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer. 2003a.
“Courts.” Qtrly. Journ. of Econ., 118, pp. 457-522.
Dyck, Alexander and Luigi Zingales. 2003. “Private Benefits of Control: An International
Comparison.” Journ. of Fin., forthcoming.
Easterbrook, Frank and Daniel R. Fischel. 1991. The Economic Structure of Corporate Law.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Easterly, William and Ross Levine. 1997. “Africa’s Growth Tragedy: Policies and Ethnic

41
Divisions.” Qtrly Journ. of Econ., 112, pp. 1203-1250.
Easterly, William and Ross Levine. 2003. “Tropics, Germs, and Crops.” Journ. of Mon. Econ.,
50, pp. 3-39.
Ekelund, Robert B. and Robert D. Tollison. 1980. “Economic Regulation in Mercantile England:
Heckscher Revisited.” Econ. Inquiry, 18, pp. 567-599.
Engerman, Stanley L., and Kenneth L. Sokoloff. 1997. “Factor Endowments, Institutions, and
Differential Paths of Growth among New World Economies,” in How Latin America Fell
Behind. Stephen Haber, ed. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, pp. 260-304.
Engerman, Stanley L., and Kenneth L. Sokoloff. 2002. “Factor Endowments, Inequality, and
Paths of Development Among New World Economies,” National Bureau of Economic
Research Working Paper #9259.
Epstein, Richard A. 1975. “Unconscionability: A Critical Reappraisal.” J. Law & Econ., 18, pp.
293-315.
Ertman, Thomas. 1997. Birth of the Leviathan. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Finer, Samuel. 1997. The History of Government. Vol. I-III. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Franks, Julian, Colin Mayer, and Stefano Rossi. 2003. “The Origination and Evolution of
Ownership and Control,” Oxford Financial Research Centre Working Paper No.
1003-FE-01.
Franks, Julian and Oren Sussman. 1999. “Financial Innovations and Corporate Insolvency,”
London Business School unpublished working paper.
Galanter, Marc. 1974. “Why the ‘Haves’ Come Out Ahead: Speculation on the Limits of Legal
Change.” Law and Soc. Rev., 9, pp. 95-160.
Glaeser, Edward, Simon Johnson, and Andrei Shleifer. 2001. “Coase versus the Coasians.” Qtrly
Journ. of Econ., 116, pp. 853-899.
Glaeser, Edward and Andrei Shleifer. 2003. “The Rise of the Regulatory State.” Journ. of Econ.
Lit., 41, pp. 401-425.
Glaeser, Edward and Andrei Shleifer. 2002. “Legal Origins.” Qtrly. Journ. of Econ., 117, pp.
1193-1230.
Glendon, Mary Ann, Michael W. Gordon, and Christopher Osakwe. 1982. Comparative Legal
Tradition in a Nutshell. St. Paul, MN: West Publishing Co.

42
Guiso, Luigi, Paola Sapienza, and Luigi Zingales. 2000. “The Role of Social Capital in Financial
Development,” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper, No. 7563.
Haber, Stephen, Armando Razo, and Noel Maurer. 2003. The Politics of Property Rights:
Political Instability, Credible Commitments, and Economic Growth in Mexico.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Hart, Oliver. 1995. Firms, Contracts, and Financial Structure. London: Oxford University Press.
Hayek, Friedrich A. 1960. The Constitution of Liberty. Chicago: The University of Chicago
Press.
Jensen, Michael C., and William H. Meckling, W. 1976. “Theory of the Firm: Managerial
Behavior, Agency Costs, and Ownership Structure.” Journ. of Finanl. Econ., 3, pp. 305360.
Johnson, Simon, Peter Boone, Alasdair Breach, and Eric Friedman. 2000. “Corporate
Governance in the Asian Financial Crisis.” Journ. of Finanl. Econ., 58, pp. 141-186.
Johnson, Simon, John McMillan, and Chrirtopher Woodruff. 2002a. “Courts and Relational
Contracts.” Journ, of Law, Econ, and Org., 18, pp. 221-277.
Johnson, Simon, John McMillan, and Christopher Woodruff. 2002b. “Property Rights and
Finance. Amer. Econ. Rev., 92, pp. 1335-56.
Johnson, Simon, Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer. 2000.
“Tunneling.” Amer. Econ. Rev. (Papers and Proceedings), 90, pp. 22-27.
Jones, Eric L. 1981. The European Miracle: Environments, Economies, and Geopolitics in the
History of Europe and Asia. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Kaplow, Louis. 1992. “Rules versus Standards: An Economic Analysis.” Duke Law Journ., 42,
pp. 557-629.
King, Robert G., Ross Levine. 1993a. “Finance and Growth: Schumpeter Might Be Right.”
Qtrly. Journ. of Econ., 108, pp. 717-38.
King, Robert G. and Ross Levine. 1993b. “Finance, Entrepreneurship, and Growth: Theory and
Evidence.” Journ. of Mon. Econ., 32, pp. 513-42.
Kumar, Krishna B., Raghuram G. Rajan, and Luigi Zingales. 2001. “What Determines Firm
Size?” University of Chicago unpublished working paper.
Lamoreaux, Naomi and Jean-Laurent Rosenthal. 2002. “Organizational Choice and Economic
Development: A Comparison of France and the United States during the Mid-19th
Century,” University of California at Los Angeles mimeo.

43

La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Cristian Pop-Eleches, and Andrei Shleifer. 2003.
“Judicial Checks and Balances,” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper
9775.
La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer. 2003. “What Works in
Securities Laws?” Harvard University mimeo.
La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert W. Vishny. 2002.
“Investor Protection and Corporate Valuation.” Journ. of Fin., 57, pp. 1147-1170.
La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert W Vishny. 2000b.
“Agency Problems and Dividend Policies around the World.” Journ. of Fin., 55, pp. 1-33.
La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert W. Vishny. 2000a.
“Investor Protection and Corporate Governance.” Journ. of Finanl. Econ., 58, pp. 3-27.
La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert W. Vishny. 1999.
“The Quality of Government.” Journ. of Law, Econ. and Org., 15, pp. 222-279.
La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert W. Vishny. 1998.
“Law and Finance.” Journ. of Pol. Econ., 106, pp. 1113-1155
La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert W. Vishny. 1997.
“Legal Determinants of External Finance.” Journ. of Fin., 52, pp. 1131-1150.
Levine, Ross. 1997. “Financial Development and Economic Growth: Views and Agenda.” Journ.
of Econ. Lit., 35, pp. 688-726.
Levine, Ross. 1998. “The Legal Environment, Banks, and Long-run Economic Growth.” Journ.
of Money, Cred., and Bankg., 30, pp. 596-620.
Levine, Ross. 1999. “Law, Finance, and Economic Growth.” Journ. of Financl. Intermed., 8,
pp. 36-67.
Levine, Ross. 2003. “Bank-based or Market-based Financial Systems: Which Is Better?” Journ.
of Financl. Intermed., 11, pp. 398-428.
Levine, Ross. 2003. “Napoleon, Bourses, and Growth: with a Focus on Latin America,” in
Market Augmenting Government: Essays in Honor of Mancur Olson. Azfar Omar and
Charles A. Cadwell, eds. Ann Arbor, MI: University of Michigan Press.
Levine, Ross. 2004. “Finance and Growth: Theory, Evidence, and Mechanisms,” in Handbook of
Economic Growth. Philippe Aghion and Steven Durlauf, eds. Amsterdam: NorthHolland Elsevier Publishers, forthcoming.

44
Levine, Ross, Norman Loayza, and Thorsten Beck. 2000. “Financial Intermediation and Growth:
Causality and Causes.” Journ of Mon. Econ., 46, pp. 31-77.
Levine, Ross and Sara Zervos. 1998. “Stock Markets Banks and Economic Growth.” Amer.
Econ. Rev., 88, pp. 537-58.
Littleton, Thomas. 1481 [1903 version]. Littleton's Tenures in English. Eugene Wambaugh, ed.
Washington, D.C.: John Bryne & Co.
Macey, Jonathan R. and Geoffrey P. Miller. 1993. “Corporate Stakeholders: A Contractual
Perspective.” Univ. of Toronto Law Journ., 43, pp. 401-427.
Mahoney, Paul. 2001. “The Common Law and Economic Growth: Hayek Might Be Right.”
Journ. of Legal Stud., 30, pp. 503-525.
McNeill, William H. 1963. The Rise of the West: A History of the Human Community. Chicago,
IL: University of Chicago Press.
Merryman, John H. 1985. The Civil Law Tradition: An Introduction to the Legal Systems of
Western Europe and Latin America. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.
Merryman, John H. 1996. “The French Deviation.” The Amer. Journ. of Comp. Law, 44,
pp. 109-119.
Modigliani, Franco., Merton Miller. 1958. “The Cost of Capital, Corporation Finance, and the
Theory of Investment.” Amer. Econ. Rev., 48, pp. 261-297.
Morck, Randall, Bernard Yeung, and Wayne Yu. 2000. “The Information Content of Stock
Markets: Why Do Emerging Markets Have Synchronous Stock Price Movements?”
Journ. of Financl. Econ., 58, pp. 215-260.
North, Douglass. 1981. Structure and Change in Economic History. Cambridge, MA: W.W.
Norton and Company.
North, Douglass. 1990. Institutions, Institutional Change, and Economic Performance.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Olson, Mancur. 1993. “Dictatorship, Democracy, and Development.” Amer. Pol. Sc. Rev., 87,
pp. 567-576.
Pagano, Marco, and Paolo Volpin. 2001. “The Political Economy of Finance.” Oxford Rev. of
Econ. Pol., 17, 502-519.
Pistor, K., Keinan, Y., Kleinheisterkamp, J., West, M.D., 2002. The evolution of corporate law.
Univ. of Penn. Journ. of Intl. Econ. and Law, 23, 791-871.

45
Pistor, Katharina, Yoram Keinan, Jan Kleinheisterkamp, and Mark D. West. 2003. “Innovation
in Corporate Law.” Journ. of Comp. Econ., 31, forthcoming.
Pistor, Katharina and Chen-Gang Xu. 2002. “Law Enforcement under Incomplete Law: Theory
and Evidence from Financial Market Regulation,” London School of Economics
Working Paper No. TE/02/442.
Priest, George L. 1977. “The Common Law Process and the Selection of Efficient Rules.” Journ.
of Leg. Stud., 6, pp. 65-82.
Posner, Richard A. 1973. Economic Analysis of the Law. Boston, MA: Little-Brown.
Pound, John. 1991. “Proxy Voting and the SEC.” Journ. of Financl. Econ., 29, pp. 241-285.
Rajan, Raghuram G., and Luigi Zingales. 1998. “Financial Dependence and Growth.” Amer.
Econ. Rev., 88, pp. 559-586.
Rajan, Raghuram G., and Luigi Zingales. 2003. “The Great Reversals: The Politics of Financial
Development in the 20th Century.” Journ. of Financl. Econ., 69, pp. 5-50.
Reynolds, Thomas H., and Arturo A. Flores. 1989. Foreign Law: Current Sources of Basic
Legislation in Jurisdictions of the World. Littleton, CO: Rothman and Co.
Roe, Mark J. 1994. Strong Managers Weak Owners: The Political Roots of American Corporate
Finance. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Rubin, Paul H., 1977. “Why Is the Common Law Efficient?” Journ. of Leg. Stud., 6, pp. 51-64.
Rubin, Paul H., 1982. “Common Law and Statute Law.” Journ. of Leg. Stud., 11, pp. 205-33.
Schlesinger, Rudolph B., Hans W. Baade, Mirjan R. Damaska, and Peter E. Herzog. 1988.
Comparative Law. Case-Text-Materials. New York: The Foundation Press, Inc.
Sokoloff, Kenneth, and Stanley L. Engerman. 2000. “Institutions, Factor Endowments, and Paths
of Development in the New World.” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 14, pp. 217-232.
Stigler, George J. 1964. “Public Regulation of the Securities Market.” Journal of Business, 37,
pp. 117-142.
Stulz, Rene, and Rohan Williamson. 2003. “Culture, Openness, and Finance.” Journ. of Financl.
Econ., forthcoming.
Tullock, Gordon. 1980. Trials on Trial. New York: Columbia University Press.
Weber, Max. 1958. The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism. New York: Charles
Scribner’s Sons.

46

Wurgler, Jeffrey. 2000. “Financial Markets and the Allocation of Capital.” Journ. of Financl.
Econ., 58, pp. 187-214.
Zingales, Luigi. 1994. “The Value of the Voting Right: A Study of the Milan Stock Exchange.”
The Rev. of Financl. Stud., 7, pp. 125-148.
Zweigert, Konrad and Hein Kötz. 1998. An Introduction to Comparative Law. New York:
Oxford University Press.

