NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

HETEROGENEOUS INVESTORS AND THEIR
CHANGING DEMAND AND SUPPLY SCHEDULES
FOR INDIVIDUAL COMMON STOCKS
Jung-Wook Kim
Jason Lee
Randall Morck
Working Paper 10410
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10410
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2004

We thank Hyeon Kee Bae, Mark Huson, Aditya Kaul, Ki Bong Lee, Vikas Mehrotra, Barry Scholnick, Andrei
Shleifer, Jeremy Stein, students in Andrei Shleifer’s behavioral finance seminar course at Harvard University,
and seminar participants at the University of Alberta for helpful comments. We gratefully acknowledge
financial supports provided by the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council of Canada. The views
expressed herein are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
©2004 by Jung-Wook Kim, Jason Lee, and Randall Morck. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Heterogeneous Investors and their Changing Demand and
Supply Schedules for Individual Common Stocks
Jung-Wook Kim, Jason Lee, and Randall Morck
NBER Working Paper No. 10410
April 2004
JEL No. G0
ABSTRACT

Using 550 million limit orders submitted in the Korea Stock Exchange, we estimate demand and
supply elasticities of heterogeneous investor types and their changes around the Asian financial
crisis. We find that domestic individuals have substantially more inelastic demand and supply curves
than domestic institutions and foreign investors. The crisis permanently reduced price elasticities
of domestic individuals by 50% but had no effect on those of foreign investors. Institutional changes
restricting margin purchases, implemented after the crisis, seem particularly important in explaining
the dramatic drop. Information heterogeneity, availability of close substitutes and arbitrage risk also
explain time-series variations in elasticities.
Jung-wook Kim
Department of Finance
University of Alberta
Edmonton Alberta
Canada T6G 2R6
jungwook.kim@ualberta.ca
Jason Lee
Department of Finance
University of Alberta
Edmonton Alberta
Canada T6G 2R6
jasonlee@ualberta.ca
Randall K. Morck
Department of Finance
University of Alberta
Edmonton Alberta
Canada T6G 2R6
and NBER
randall.morck@ualberta.ca

In this paper, we use a unique dataset from the Korea Stock Exchange to examine the demand
and supply schedules for common stocks. Our dataset allows us to identify limit orders
submitted by three types of investors: domestic individuals, domestic institutions, and foreign
investors. Using this feature, we investigate demand and supply elasticities across these three
types of investors in general, and then study their changes around the 1997 Asian financial
crisis. To the best of our knowledge, our paper is the first evidence that heterogeneous
investors have differing demand and supply schedules and that the elasticities of different
investor types are affected differently by a financial crisis.
The textbook description of arbitrage requires no capital and involves no risk.
Arbitrageurs short an overvalued security and use the proceeds to buy its perfect substitute.
In this environment, competition among arbitrageurs leads to perfectly elastic demand and
supply curves for individual securities. However, in real stock markets, arbitrage does not
work as effectively as the textbook description and the slopes of demand and supply curves
are finitely elastic.1, 2
Since Scholes (1972), the elasticities of demand and supply curves for common stocks
have been a subject of extensive research. In the past, researchers have used two approaches
to measuring these elasticities. One approach is to examine price changes associated with
stock issues or repurchases. Another is to examine price changes of stocks added to market
indexes. In this paper, we propose a third approach – the direct construction of demand and
supply curves for individual stocks from detailed data on individual bids and offers in the
course of normal daily trading in both call auction and continuous markets.3
We do this using a dataset which consists of over 550 million buy and sell orders
submitted in the Korea Stock Exchange (KSE) for the period from December 1996 to
December 2000. The methodology we develop using this data allows us to probe into the

1

nature of demand and supply elasticity for stocks more deeply than previous studies in
several ways.
First, by constructing daily demand and supply schedules for all common stocks listed
in the KSE, we are able to directly estimate the daily elasticity measures of demand and
supply curves in a general trading environment. Because the KSE opens with call auction
and then switches to continuous trading, we estimate two measures of elasticity for both
demand and supply curves. We find that for the opening auction, the average (median)
elasticity of demand is 9.26 (8.62) while it is 10.28 (8.85) for the continuous trading hours.
We also obtain comparable estimates for the elasticity of supply. Our estimates roughly fall
in the middle of the spectrum of existing estimates based on the other two approaches.
Second, going beyond previous studies, our data let us investigate demand and supply
schedules for different classes of investors. When we partition the sample by investor class,
we find that both domestic institutions and foreign investors (mainly institutional investors)
have substantially more elastic demand and supply schedules than domestic individual
investors.

This result indicates that institutional investors have more homogeneous

expectations and are more responsive to changes in stock prices than are individual investors.
Third, and also beyond the scope of previous studies, we can examine how elasticities
change. Since our sample period includes the 1997 Asian financial crisis, which led to sharp
declines in stock prices in Korea and other countries in the region, we can examine the effect
of this crisis on elasticities. We find that the crisis permanently reduced the demand and
supply elasticities of both domestic individuals and domestic institutions, but had virtually no
effect on the elasticities of foreign investors. Notably, demand and supply elasticities of
domestic individual investors fall by almost 50% from their pre-crisis levels. One possible
explanation for this structural break can be found in an equally dramatic decrease in margin

2

trading (over 90% down from the pre-crisis level) which was exclusively used by domestic
individuals before the crisis.
Finally, we relate time-series variation in our elasticity measures to variables related
to time-series variation in information heterogeneity, differences in opinion among investors,
the availability of close substitutes, and resources for arbitrage.4 These variables include
direct measures of information asymmetry among investors, intra-day volatility of returns,
trading volume, and margin buying orders as a fraction of total buy orders submitted. These
variables are highly significantly associated with our elasticity measures and explain a large
proportion of time-series variations in elasticity.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section I contains a short
overview of the relevant literature. Section II describes the data and elasticity estimation
procedures. Section III discusses the estimated elasticity measures. In section IV, we discuss
measures of information heterogeneity among investors and of resources for arbitrage.
Regression results are provided in section V. Section VI concludes the paper.

I. The Nature of the Demand and Supply Curves for Individual Securities
The demand curve for ketchup describes how the quantity of ketchup consumers buy
rises as the price of ketchup falls, all else equal. By all else equal, we typically mean no
changes in the consumer’s wealth, tastes, or information about the naturopathic benefits of a
high-ketchup diet; or in the prices of complements and substitutes, like hot dogs and mustard.
When any of these factors do change, we speak of a shift in the demand curve, rather than a
movement along it.
In a famous satire, Summers (1985) likens asset pricing unto ketchup pricing.
Pursuing this analogy, the demand curve for an individual stock describes how the quantity of
shares investors demand rises as the price of the stock falls, all else equal. Again, all else

3

equal means no changes in the investor’s wealth, tastes (including time preference, risk
aversion, and the like), or information about the fundamental value of the stock, or in the
prices of substitutes, such as other stocks.
The elasticity of the demand curve for ketchup, like its position, depends on
consumers’ wealth, tastes, information, and the availability of close substitutes.

The

elasticity of the demand curve for a stock depends on the same factors.
Wealthier investors might react differently to a given change in the stock’s price than
would poorer investors. For example, if a stock’s price falls to below what an investor
perceives as its fundamental value, a wealthy investor buys heavily in the hopes of profiting
when the price returns to its fundamental value. A poorer investor, if unable to borrow freely,
cannot do this. Thus, all else equal, demand curves for stocks should be flatter if investors
are wealthier.
Likewise, investors with different tastes react differently to the same price change.
For example, more risk adverse or less patient investors might be less willing to buy very
large amounts of a stock they believe to be slightly undervalued. Mitchell, Pulvino, and
Staffford (2002) point out that arbitrage requires taking very large undiversified positions in a
misvalued stock and holding those positions until the misvaluation is corrected. This requires
both risk tolerance (for other things might happen to change the price before it corrects) and
patience (for the correction might not occur promptly). Since greater investor risk aversion
or less investor patience means that a given price decline induces less additional buying, they
imply less elastic demand curves for individual stocks.
If different people have different information, or opinions, about the fundamental
value of a stock (or the true worth of a high-ketchup diet), the demand curve becomes less
elastic.

This is because the range of possible equilibrium price becomes wider as the

heterogeneity of investors’ expectation increases.

4

Heterogeneous information also determines the availability of close substitutes for
any given stock. If an investor invests costly resources to gather and process information
about a given stock and determines, say, that it is deeply undervalued, he naturally buys as
much of the stock as he can – even by bidding at higher prices than the current equilibrium
price. A small price increase does not induce him to stop buying the stock if it is still
undervalued. Only a large price hike that raises the price to equal or exceed the investor’s
estimate of fundamental value can induce him to stop buying. This is because other stocks,
which the investor has not spent resources valuing, are not perfect substitutes for this stock,
which he knows to be deeply undervalued. An analogous story applies to supply curves.
Thus, more heterogeneous information makes stocks more imperfect substitutes for each
other, and consequently renders demand and supply curves for individual stocks more
inelastic.
In fact, in a pure exchange framework, like the stock market, supply depends on the
same factors as demand, for without production, technology-related variables and factor costs
are irrelevant. Thus, the supply curve for an individual stock shifts with investors’ wealth,
tastes, and information, and with the prices of other stocks; and the same list of factors that
determine the elasticity of demand also determine the elasticity of the supply curve.5
Thus, at a technical level, the demand or supply curves for stocks seem not much
different from the demand or supply curves for ketchup in a pure exchange economy.
However, the critical differences between ketchup pricing and asset pricing are the
commonplace assumptions in the latter that:
1.

At least some investors can borrow cash and stocks freely to buy under-valued stocks

and short over-valued stocks without limit and are willing to do so. That is, some investors
have infinitely deep pockets and no risk aversion, and thus can freely engage in unlimited
arbitrage trading.

5

2.

There is no information heterogeneity. That is, all investors, except insiders, have the

same estimate of the fundamental value of all stocks. Any deviation of the stock price from
this value consequently leads to unlimited arbitrage trading, which quickly returns the price
to its consensus value.
3.

All stocks are priced at their fundamental values.

The absence of information

heterogeneity means that new information comes to all investors simultaneously. This makes
shares simply claims to future cash flows with different degrees of risk. Consequently, every
stock has numerous perfect substitutes – all other stocks and portfolios with the same level of
risk.6
These three interdependent assumptions render the demand and supply curves for
individual stocks perfectly elastic, or horizontal.

In other words, if any of the above

assumptions is violated, the perfect elasticity of demand and supply curves is not guaranteed.
Scholes (1972) therefore stresses the importance of empirically verifying that the
elasticities of demand and supply for individual stocks are very large. To this end, he
examines secondary offerings, and concludes that the associated stock price declines are due
to information conveyed by firms’ decisions to issue shares, and do not imply inelastic
investor demand or supply.

Mikkelson and Partch (1985) reexamine secondary equity

distributions and find variables they expect to be related to the elasticity of demand for stocks
insignificant in explaining the price impact of secondary offerings.

They consequently

second Scholes’ conclusion.
The first evidence for downward sloping demand curves is Shleifer (1986), who
reports that a stock’s price rises permanently upon its inclusion in the Standard and Poor’s
500 index (S&P 500). Shleifer argues that, because index funds must buy such a stock, its
demand curve mechanically shifts to the right. If the demand curve were flat, this shift would

6

have no price impact. Shleifer therefore interprets his finding of a large and permanent price
rise as evidence of imperfectly elastic demand curves for individual stocks.
However, Harris and Gurel (1986) report that these price increases are temporary, and
attribute them to temporary liquidity shortfalls associated with trading by index funds, rather
than to downward sloping demand curves. Other studies, including Jain (1987), Dhillon and
Johnson (1991), Beneish and Whaley (1996), and Lynch and Mendenhall (1997) fail to
replicate this finding. Jain (1987) finds price increases in included firms’ bonds, and Dhillon
and Johnson (1991) find price increases for stocks included in indexes that are not tracked by
index funds. Consequently, they argue that the permanent price rise noted by Shleifer (1986)
may result from a certification effect: addition to an index conveys positive information about
a company’s future prospects. Furthermore, Denis et al. (2003) find that newly added firms to
the S&P 500 index experience significant increases both in earnings per share forecasts and
in realized earnings. They interpret these results as supporting the view that S&P 500
inclusion is not an information free event.
Nonetheless, other evidence regarding index demand supports Shleifer’s (1986)
conclusions. For example, Kaul et al. (2000) find permanent stock price changes associated
with changes to the weights of firms in the Toronto Stock Exchange 300 Index. Since no
stocks are added to the index, and the weight changes are both preannounced and purely
mechanical, a certification effect can be ruled out. Wurgler and Zhuravskaya (2002) find that
price reactions to inclusion into the S&P 500 index are negatively related to the availability
of close substitutes for included stocks. Since the lack of close substitutes hinders arbitrage
activities, demand curves become more inelastic, resulting in large price impacts. Thus, the
controversy is far from settled.
A second approach, assessing price elasticities using data from auctions, also favors
finitely elastic demand and supply curves. Bagwell (1992) uses 32 Dutch auction stock

7

repurchases to estimate price elasticities of supply curves for individual securities. She
reports that repurchasing firms face upward-sloping supply curves for their shares, and that
heterogeneity of valuations is the main cause for the shape of the supply curve. Similarly,
Kandel et al. (1999), using 27 Israeli initial public offerings (IPOs), directly estimate
downward sloping demand curves for individual stocks.
Moreover, studies that support the view that the demand and supply curves for
common stocks are imperfectly elastic report differing elasticities. For example, the imputed
elasticites of demand reported by Kaul et al. (2000) and Wurgler and Zhuravskaya (2002) are
10.50 and 7.87, respectively. In contrast, Bagwell (1992) reports a mean elasticity of 0.68;
while Kandel et al. (1999) report a mean gross elasticity of 2.91 and a mean local elasticity of
37.10. It should be, however, noted that Dutch auction repurchases and IPOs represent
special corporate events.

II. Empirical Framework and Data
A. KSE Market Structure
The KSE is an order-driven market. The trading session starts at 9:00 and closes at
15:00.7 Throughout the trading session, a trader may place either a limit order or a market
order, which is directly transmitted to the KSE via the computerized order-routing system.
The automated trading system of the exchange prioritizes each order by price and then by
time. The KSE opens with a call market and then switches to a continuous market. In the
opening auction, all bids and offers submitted are regarded as simultaneous and matched at a
single price.8 Trading prices during the rest of trading hours are determined by continuous
auction, whereby a new bid (offer) entered into the automated trading system is matched with
any unfilled offers (bids).9 Like all other markets, the KSE has a minimum price increment
(tick), which determines what prices traders use. The size of the tick varies substantially

8

across stocks, depending on the price level. For example, a stock priced at 5000 won trades
on 5 won increments while a stock priced at 50,000 won trades on 50 won increments.10
Market participants observe part of the limit order book. During our sample period,
from December 1996 to December 2000, the KSE made order sizes for the five lowest sell
and five highest buy prices available to the public.11 The availability of this information lets
traders partially observe the demand and supply schedules of each stock before they submit
their own orders.

B. Data
Our basic data are from the KSE’s Trade and Quote (KSETAQ) records. We include
all common stocks listed in the KSE between December 1996 and December 2000, a total of
49 months.
The KSETAQ database provides detailed information on each order placed and each
trade executed. In addition to the price, order size, and time of arrival, this database contains
detailed information regarding each order and each executed trade that is unavailable
elsewhere. First, the database tags each order as either a buy or a sell, and further classifies
each buy or sell order as a market or limit order. Second, it contains information about
investor type. With this information, we are able to distinguish between three types of
investors: (a) domestic individuals, (b) domestic institutions, and (c) foreign investors. Third,
it has an indicator for a margin purchase or short sale order. Finally, the KSETAQ data
distinguishes orders in the call market auctions held at the opening from orders in the
continuous trading that occurs during the remainder of each day. The database provides this
information on each order and on each trade executed.

9

Given these data, we construct the demand and supply schedules for each stock at the
opening auction and during the rest of the day. In addition, we examine differences in
demand and supply schedules by investor type.

Insert Table I about here

Panels A and B of Table I summarize the distribution of the over 550 million orders
submitted in the KSE during our sample period. These orders are partitioned into buy and
sell orders, and then sorted by order type (market versus limit orders), investor type (domestic
individuals, domestic institutions, and foreign investors), and trading session (opening call
market auction versus continuous trading during the rest of trading hours). Most orders are
limit orders (94.78 percents of buy orders and 92.99 percent of sell orders). In addition,
individual investors dominate trading. Specifically, individual investors submit 95.70 percent
of buy orders and 95.34 percent of sell orders; while domestic institutions and foreign
investors collectively submit only 4.30 percent of buy orders and only 4.66 percent of sell
orders.12

However, individual investors’ orders are much smaller than those of domestic

institutions and foreign investors. Individual buy orders average only 1,217.09 shares, while
those of domestic institutions average 3,568.22 shares and those of foreign investors average
1,909.20 shares. Finally, 19.10 percent of buy orders and 21.14 percent of sell orders were
submitted to the opening session.
Panel C of Table I summarizes the distribution of our approximately 387 million trade
records. As with orders, individual investors dominate actual transactions. Specifically,
90.05 percent of buyers and 89.69 percent of sellers are individual investors during our
sample period. In contrast, domestic institutions and foreign investors collectively
participated in about 10 percent of transactions.

10

This participation rate is actually

surprisingly high, because, as Panels A and B show, these investors submit less than 5
percent of total orders during our sample period. Panel C of Table I shows that the average
trades by domestic institutions and foreign investors are larger than those of individual
investors. However, these average values may not reflect the actual differences in trade size
across investor types because of the way orders map into transactions. For example, if an
order is submitted and executed in parts over the course of the trading session, the single
order gives rise to several executions. When this happens, the KSE reports each execution as
a transaction. Thus, the average trade sizes reported in Panel C of Table I understate actual
trade sizes.
Insert Figure 1 about here
Figure 1 shows the time-series of the Korea Composite Stock Price Index (KOSPI)
during our sample period.

C. Elasticity Measures of Demand and Supply
In estimating the slopes of demand and supply curves, we use a modification of the
approach of Bagwell (1992). Specifically, for the opening session and the rest of trading
hours, we separately accumulate all limit orders submitted at or above (at or below) each
price point to construct demand (supply) schedules. 13 Then, all bid and ask prices are
normalized such that the opening auction price (closing price) is 100 for demand and supply
schedules of the opening auction (rest of trading hours).14 We also normalize quantity to
measure the cumulative percentage of total quantity demanded or supplied during each
trading session. Bagwell (1992) shows that this normalization of both prices and quantities
allows a linear regression on levels to generate estimates of elasticities directly.15
Thus, for each trading day, the elasticities of demand and supply are estimated by
running the following regression:

11

p jk = α j

+ β j d jk

+ ε jk

(1)

where p jk and d jk represent the normalized price and normalized market-wide cumulative
quantity at tick point k for firm j. At each normalized price level pjk, we sum bids from all
investors to obtain the market’s demand for stock j. Thus,
d jk ( p) = ∑i =1 ∑π ≥ p nijk (π )
I

(2)

where nijk(π) is the number of shares of stock j for which investor i bids price π in buy orders
valid on a given day. We use regression (1) to estimate the inverse of (2), so the
corresponding elasticity is approximated by the absolute value of the inverse of the slope
coefficient; that is, η j

=

β j−1 . We estimate (1) for each trading session, the opening call

market and the continuous market operating for the rest of the day, for all stocks with at least
five price-quantity pairs with nonzero quantities demanded. We then repeat this procedure
using offers instead of bids to estimate supply elasticities.16 That is,
s jk ( p ) = ∑i =1 ∑π ≤ p mijk (π )
I

(3)

where mijk(π) is the number of shares of stock j for which investor i asks price π in sell orders
valid on a given trading day.
As shown in Table I, the number of orders submitted for the opening auction is
substantially smaller than that for the rest of trading hours. This constrains our ability to
estimate demand and supply elasticities by investor type for the opening auction.
Consequently, we estimate the opening session slopes of demand and supply curves without
considering different types of investors. For the rest of each day’s trading hours, however,
the elasticities of demand and supply are estimated separately for each investor type.17

12

III. Elasticities of Demand and Supply
Panel A of Table II reports summary statistics for daily average elasticity of demand
curves. 18 The R-squared values of regression (1) average 82.55 percent for the opening
auction and 77.40 percent for the rest of trading hours. The mean (median) elasticity of
demand is 9.26 (8.62) for the opening auction and 10.28 (8.85) for the rest of trading hours.
This means demand for the average stock falls by 9.26% (10.28%) when its price rises by 1%
during the opening auction (rest of trading hours). Panel B of Table II shows elasticities of
supply to be of comparable magnitudes. Thus, we find that demand curves for individual
stocks are downward sloping and supply curves for individual stocks are upward sloping.

Insert Table II about here
Our estimates of demand and supply elasticity roughly match the imputed elasticity of
10.50 in Kaul et al. (2000), and slightly exceed the 7.89 estimate obtained by Wurgler and
Zhuravskaya (2002). However, our estimates greatly exceed the mean (median) elasticity of
0.68 (1.05) reported by Bagwell (1992) for Dutch auction share repurchases. Our elasticity
estimates are also much larger than the mean (median) estimate of 2.91 (2.47) estimated by
Kandel et al. (1999) using IPO price data. One possible explanation of the differences is that
we measure elasticities in the course of normal trading, while Bagwell (1992) and Kandel et
al. (1999) measure elasticity at special corporate events.

Another possibility, mentioned

earlier, is that investors in the KSE can observe the quantities demanded and supplied at the
five best prices, whereas general investors elsewhere have much less information.

A. Time-Series Patterns of Elasticity Measures
Our sample period includes the 1997 Asian financial crisis, which led to substantial
equity losses in Korea and other countries in the region. During the crisis period, many
13

Korean investors lost considerable wealth. From September 1997 to December 1997, the
Korean won fell by 54% relative to the U.S. dollar - from 914.40 to 1695.00 won per dollar,
while the Korea Composite Stock Price Index (KOSPI) dropped by almost 42% - from
647.11 to 376.31. Corporate bankruptcies and ensuing layoffs further eroded investor wealth.
It also became more difficult for Koreans to borrow money (and presumably also to borrow
stock for short sales). For example, the yield on 91-day commercial paper in Korea rose from
13.88% to 29.26% during the same 3-month period.19 Certainly, changing time preferences
and risk aversion plausibly explain part of this rise. Finally, it seems likely that investors
acquired new information about Korean stocks through the crisis. It is clear that these large
changes in investor wealth, tastes, and information shifted demand and supply curves for
individual stocks downward, for stock prices fell.

In this section, we explore whether

elasticities of demand and supply also changed.
We therefore break the sample into three sub-periods: (a) the pre-crisis period
(December 1996 – October 1997), (b) the in-crisis period (November 1997 – October 1998),
and (c) the post-crisis period (November 1998 – December 2000).

Insert Figures 2 and 3 about here

Figures 2(a) and 2(b) plot the time-series of the daily average demand elasticities.20
They also show the number of firms used in calculating each of these values. Figure 2(a)
shows that the demand elasticity for the opening auction varies substantially over the sample
period. Demand becomes markedly less elastic in the latter part of the sample period.21 The
figure also highlights an obvious structural break following the Asian financial crisis.
Summary statistics of elasticity measures for the three sub-periods are listed in Panel A of
Table II. For the opening auction, the average demand elasticity is 13.27 in the pre-crisis

14

period, but only 7.08 in the post-crisis period. Thus, the magnitude of demand elasticity falls
46% in absolute value with the crisis, and this difference in the elasticity (6.19) is significant
at the one percent level. Figure 2(b) and Panel A of Table II show a similar pattern in
demand elasticity for the rest of trading hours, and the decline is likewise highly significant.
Figures 3(a) and 3(b) exhibit the time-series patterns of supply elasticity and the
numbers of firms used each trading day in estimating these elasticity measures, while Panel B
of Table II presents summary statistics for the three sub-periods. Mimicking the pattern in
demand elasticities, supply curves are significantly less elastic after the 1997 financial crisis.

B. Opening-Auction Elasticity versus Rest-of-Day Elasticity
All orders submitted during the opening auction are regarded by the KSE as
simultaneous and are matched at a single price. Kalay et al. (2001) argue that auctions of this
type provide a natural environment for investigating the demand and supply curves of
individual common stocks because the confounding effects of new information are minimal.
However, the smaller number of orders submitted to the opening auction constrains our
ability to examine demand and supply elasticities by investor type. In contrast, the greater
number of orders typically submitted during the rest of trading hours lets us compare
elasticities for different classes of investors, but allows the criticism that demand and supply
curves may shift as new information arrives. Thus, estimating elasticities using data for the
rest of trading hours imposes a stationarity assumption, which may be inappropriate.
To investigate the appropriateness of the stationarity assumption, we partition the
sample into quintiles on the basis of the percentage of orders cancelled or revised during each
trading day. We take a large number of such revisions and cancellations as indicative of
shifts in the demand or supply curves during a given day. Table III reports regressions of our
opening elasticities on the elasticities for the rest of trading hours for each quintile.22

15

Table III about here

Panel A shows the two demand elasticity estimates to be highly significant, and the
adjusted R-squared values to exceed 80 percent in all five sub-samples.

Although the

regression coefficient monotonically decreases with the percentage of cancelled or revised
orders, the difference between the first and fifth quintile estimates is only about fifteen
percent of their average magnitude. Thus, our results strongly suggest that the openingauction and rest-of-trading-hour elasticities measure the same underlying phenomenon. The
results in Panel B show a similar pattern in the supply elasticity estimates. Overall, the
results in Table III justify that the assumption of the within-day stationarity is a reasonable
first approximation, but indicate grounds for some caution as well.23

C. Investor Types and Time-Series Patterns of Elasticity
Prior studies of demand and supply elasticities for individual securities (e.g., Bagwell
(1992) and Kandel et al. (1999)) do not distinguish different types of investors. However,
other research suggests possible systematic differences between different investor categories.
First, traders with higher quality information should probably be both more certain
about fundamental securities values than less informed traders and more in agreement with
each other. Thus, all else equal, more informed traders should have more elastic demand and
supply curves for individual securities. Second, traders with deeper pockets should have
more elastic demand and supply curves for individual stocks. This is because rapidly rising
margin and short sale costs prevent traders without deep pockets from taking very large
positions, even when they are very sure of their estimates of fundamental values. Therefore,
to distinguish investors who might have different elasticities, we consider categories of

16

investors who might have different quantities and qualities of information, and who might
have pockets of differing depth.
One such categorization distinguishes institutional investors from individuals.
Certainly, institutions have deeper pockets than all but the wealthiest individuals.
Also, much recent work suggests different information behind the trades of
institutions and individuals. Lev (1988) argues that institutional investors have a lower
marginal cost of gathering information and are generally better informed than individual
investors. Kim and Verrecchia (1994) and Cohen et al. (2002) propose that institutional
investors possess superior information processing ability. Shiller and Pound (1989) report
that institutional and individual investors differ as to how they acquire information.
Specifically, institutions typically do formal investment analyses and have access to costly
databases.

These considerations suggest that institutional orders and trades might be more

homogeneous and carry more information than those by individuals.
However, Lakonishok et al. (1991, 1992) posit that institutional fund managers
engage in a range of trading activities motivated by herding, window dressing, and the like.
Scharfstein and Stein (1990) provide a theoretical framework where concerns for reputation
generate herding driven by a ‘share the blame’ effect among managers. Dennis and Strickland
(2002) find some evidence for herding by mutual and pension fund managers in the U.S.
stock market. Herding might make institutional trading appear uninformed. Nonetheless,
insitutional investors’ opinions might still be homogeneous around prices where herding
occurs. Determining whether individuals or institutions possess more information is beyond
the scope of this paper, though we plan further work in this direction. Here, our concern is
which sort of investor makes more homogeneous valuations.
Another categorization distinguishes domestic investors from foreign investors. The
depth of domestic investors’ pockets should vary with the health of the domestic economy.

17

In contrast, the depth of foreigners’ pockets should vary with the health of the world
economy.

Also, following Malaysian Prime Minister Mahathir Mohamad who famously

blamed the Asian financial crisis of the 1990s on fad-driven foreign investors, much research
has focused on whether foreign investors are more, less, or differently informed than
domestic investors. Using Finish data, Grinblatt and Keloharju (2000) find foreign investors
typically taking opposite trades to those of domestic institutional and individual investors.
Seaholes (2000) presents evidence that foreign investors in Thailand and Taiwan also tend to
trade against domestic institutional and individual investors. In contrast, Choe, Kho, and
Stulz (1999) show that foreign investors in Korea behave much like domestic institutions but
not individuals during the Asian financial crisis. Thus, the extent to which foreign investors
behave differently from domestic investors is still incompletely understood, and which is
better informed remains an open question.
Because the KSE database identifies trader type for each order submitted, it allows us
to examine the behavior of different investor classes. Specifically, we break our sample of
limit orders submitted during each day’s continuous trading into three groups: (a) orders
submitted by domestic individuals, (b) orders submitted by domestic institutions, (c) orders
submitted by foreign investors. 24, 25 Then, we estimate the elasticity of demand and supply
for each investor class. This analysis provides a sense of how the supply and demand
schedules of these investors differ and of how they change around the Asian financial crisis.

Insert Table IV and Figure 4 about here

Table IV presents summary statistics of daily average elasticity measures for each
investor class. Panel A indicates that the elasticity of demand for common stocks differs
substantially across different classes of investors. Individual investors have a mean (median)

18

elasticity of 10.44 (8.96), which is significantly lower than the 18.90 (18.88) and 21.77
(21.46) estimates for domestic institutions and foreign investors, respectively.

Because

foreign investors in Korea are predominantly institutional investors, our findings suggest that
institutional investors’ demand is much more sensitive to price changes than is that of
individual investors. Panel B of Table IV reports similar results for supply elasticities. These
findings suggest that institutions as a group have more homogeneous valuations than
individual investors have. Our findings also indicate that foreign investors’ elasticities of
demand and supply resemble those of domestic institutions, not those of individual investors.
This is consistent with Choe, Kho, and Stulz (1999).
Figures 4(a) and 4(b) reveal that the elasticities of different classes of investors
change differently over time. The demand and supply curves of individual investors become
much less elastic following the 1997 crisis. In Panel A of Table IV, the mean elasticity of
demand for domestic individual investors falls almost 50 percent (from 15.83 to 7.96), and
this change is statistically significant at the one percent level. The mean elasticity of demand
for domestic institutions simultaneously falls less - by 24 percent (from 22.63 to 17.17).
However, the mean elasticity of demand for foreign investors hardly changes - from 22.00 in
the pre-crisis period to 21.77 in the post-crisis period. Panel B shows that the elasticities of
supply for these three categories of investors change in much the same ways.
Overall, Table IV and Figure 4 show intriguing differences in behavior among
different classes of investors that have not been documented in the previous literature. We
show that both domestic and foreign institutional investors have substantially more elastic
demand and supply schedules than individual investors. This result implies that a small
change in an individual stock’s price results in a much larger change in institutional
investors’ demand and supply than in individual investors’ demand and supply. We also
show that the Asian financial crisis affected domestic and foreign investors differently.

19

While it sharply reduced the demand and supply elasticities of domestic investors, it did not
alter foreign investors behavior in any meaningful way.

Insert Figure 5 about here

Domestic institutions and foreign investors might mainly trade certain high profile
firms, for example large firms. Thus, our results might be driven by a firm size effect or
some other anomaly associated with a specific type of firm.26 To check this possibility, we
repeat our empirical analysis using a restricted sample of firm-days that have elasticity
measures for all three investor categories. However, Figure 5 shows that the time-series
patterns for this restricted sample are similar to those in Figure 4.

IV. Potential Determinants of Time-Series Variations in Demand and Supply
Elasticities
Section III showed a structural break in the magnitude of demand and supply
elasticities around the time of the Asian financial crisis. However, there is also substantial
variation within each sub-period. This section considers factors that might underlie the timeseries variation in elasticities by constructing proxies for the time-series variation in
information heterogeneity (or differences of opinion) and available resources for arbitrage.
We then check how strongly the time-series variation of each proxy is correlated with the
time-series variation of our demand and supply elasticities
First, we construct three proxies for the heterogeneity of investors’ private
information (and/or difference in opinion) about individual stocks. These are: (a) the
asymmetric information component of bid-ask spreads, (b) intraday volatility, and (c) share
turnover. Second, we use the ratio of margin buy orders to total buy orders submitted to

20

proxy for the vigor of arbitrage activity. These variables derive from individual orders
submitted (i.e., the asymmetric information component of the spread and the ratio of margin
buy orders to total buy orders) or transactions executed (i.e., the intraday volatility and share
turnover) for each firm each day. Finally, we calculate cross-sectional averages for each
variable on each trading day to generate aggregated time-series variables. Detailed
discussions of these variables are provided below.

A. Adverse Selection Component the Bid-Ask Spread
Information asymmetry models in the market microstructure literature assume two
types of investors: informed traders and liquidity traders. Informed traders trade because they
have private information, while liquidity traders trade for reasons other than superior
information. Copeland and Galai (1983), Glosten and Milgrom (1985), and Easley and
O’Hara (1987) suggest that liquidity traders sustain losses from trading with informed
traders. Thus, the presence of informed traders increases information asymmetry among
market participants, who consequently include an adverse selection cost in the bid-ask spread
to cover their expected losses to informed traders.
The existence of privately informed traders can be measured by the magnitude of this
adverse selection component of the bid-ask spread. As discussed in Kandel et al. (1999),
greater asymmetry of information should induce less elastic demand curves.

Thus, we

expect demand curves to be more inelastic when the adverse selection component of the
spread is higher. In addition, as bid-ask spreads increase, traders incur greater trading costs,
further limiting arbitrage activities, and thereby rendering demand and supply curves even
more inelastic.
To investigate the effect of private information heterogeneity on the elasticities of
demand and supply, we decompose bid-ask spreads into realized half-spreads and adverse

21

selection components using the method of Huang and Stoll (1996). The realized half-spread
represents the post-trade revenues earned by liquidity providers while the adverse selection
component reflects the amount lost by liquidity providers to informed traders. We define the
spread as the difference between the prevailing lowest ask and highest bid prices. 27 To
estimate the realized-half spread, we first identify each trade as either buyer- or sellerinitiated. The realized half-spread for time horizon τ is
Realized Half − Spread

= Trade t +τ

− Trade t

(4)

for a seller-initiated trade and
Realized Half − Spread

=

− (Trade t +τ

− Trade t )

(5)

for a buyer-initiated trade, where Tradet is the transaction price at time t and Tradet +τ is the
transaction price at t + τ. In estimating realized half-spreads, we set τ equal to five minutes.28
The adverse selection component of the spread is then the difference between the bid-ask
spread and the realized half-spread. Because the bid-ask spread is highly dependent on the
tick size, which, in turn, depends on the price level, we use a relative measure of the spread:
the bid-ask spread divided by the mid-point of the prevailing bid and ask prices.

B. Intra-day Volatility
French and Roll (1986) and Roll (1988) show that much of the variation in individual
stock returns is firm-specific and unrelated to public announcements. Roll (1988) argues that
stock price movements are therefore largely caused by investors trading on private firmspecific information.

Higher volatility thus represents more active trading by informed

arbitrageurs, and consequently, reflects a more heterogeneous distribution of private
information across investors. Thus, periods of higher volatility should accompany periods of
inelastic demand and supply curves. However, higher volatility, though due to informed
trading by one set of arbitrageurs, makes the stock appear riskier to other potential
22

arbitrageurs. 29 Since arbitrageurs often hold less than fully diversified portfolios, higher
volatility makes them reluctant to take large positions even if they believe the stock to be
mispriced. This effect can be strong, especially if arbitrageurs have short horizons, as in
Benartzi and Thaler (1995) or Shleifer and Vishny (1997).
We estimate the intraday volatility for each stock and each trading day as the standard
deviation of 5-minute returns, which are measured using the mid points of bid and ask prices.

C. Share Turnover
Karpoff (1986) notes that trading occurs when investors disagree about fundamental
values. This presumably happens when different investors have access to different private
information, or simply have different opinions. Thus, trading volume arguably measures the
heterogeneity of expectations among investors, and periods of high trading volume should
also be periods of inelastic demand and supply curves.
On the other hand, large trading volume could represent extensive liquidity-driven
trading by uninformed investors. In this case, periods with larger trading volume should also
be periods of lower trading cost for arbitrageurs and thus of more elastic demand and supply
curves. Which of these effects dominates is an empirical question.
We measure trading volume as the number of shares traded divided by the total
number of outstanding shares.

D. Margin Buying and Short Sales
The KSE data used in this study allow us to identify each margin buying or short sale
order placed. Hence, we can investigate how margin buying and short sale activities affect
the elasticities of demand and supply. Specifically, we might consider the ratios of margin
buying and short sale orders to total buy and sell orders placed, respectively, as possible

23

proxies for the arbitrage activities of informed buyers (sellers) who affect supply (demand)
elasticity. However, as discussed in the following section, short sales are quite rare - less
than 0.5% of total sell orders. Thus, we focus on the effect of margin buying orders on
elasticities.
Also, a caveat must be inserted at this point. Two types of investors might engage in
margin trading: arbitrageurs and optimistic noise traders. Both sorts of margin traders should
place buy orders around the current market price, and this should flatten the demand curve.30
Thus, even if we cannot identify the primary users of margin trading, 31 increased margin
trading should be associated with more elastic demand curves.
Analogous links connect margin trading and the elasticity of the supply curves of
individual stocks. One such link is through arbitrage: observing increased demand at the
current market price, potential sellers might infer that buyers possess private information and
therefore adjust their own expectations accordingly. This would concentrate new sell orders
around a new equilibrium price level, flattening the supply curve. A second such link derives
from the market timing ability of buyers, which may play an important role in the KSE. As
discussed above, the KSE released information on the quantities demanded (supplied) at the
five highest (lowest) prices during our sample period. This means traders partially observe
the demand and supply schedules of each stock before they make trading decisions. Thus,
buyers (both arbitrageurs and irrationally optimistic investors) might prefer to place their
orders where they observe the supply curve to be relatively flat.
Two important institutional issues affect margin buying during our sample period.
First, during the Asian crisis, most KSE stocks fell sharply, and many investors failed to meet
the margin requirements. To guard themselves against increased default risks, brokerage
houses took various measures. In December 1997, the Korea Securities Finance Corporation
stopped lending money to brokerage firms, which borrow it to extend credit to individual

24

investors. 32

In addition, brokerage firms increased their collateral requirement from 140

percent to, on average, 174 percent and hiked their initial margin from 40 percent to 70
percent.33 These changes make it more difficult for traders to exploit arbitrage opportunities
and raised the probability of arbitrageurs being forced to unwind their positions prematurely
and thereby incur losses. Financial analysts in Korea suggest that these changes impeded
arbitrage in the stock market.34 As will be discussed, we suspect that this policy change is
partly responsible for the structural break that we observe in our elasticity measures.
Second, all of our short sale orders and 99.99% of our margin purchase orders are
from individual investors. Thus, margin orders mainly either gauge arbitrage by individual
investors or reflect the optimistic sentiment of individual investors. If this result carries across
to other stock markets, margin trades may be a useful general proxy for trading by individuals
– at least in the absence of institutional changes that alter the availability of margin financing.

E. Time-series Patterns of Potential Determinants of Elasticity

Insert Table V and Figure 6 here
Table V presents summary statistics of the potential determinants of elasticity listed
above, while Figure 6 plots their time-series patterns. All values reported are based on crosssectional averages for each trading day.
The adverse selection cost of buy orders (AdvCost-Buy) and of sell orders (AdvCostSell) display similar time-series patterns. Both variables are substantially higher during the
in-crisis period than either before or after it. They also move together, with a correlation
coefficient of 0.935. We can interpret the adverse selection variables as indicating that
heterogeneity in the private information possessed by investors rose sharply during the crisis,
and then fell back following it.

25

Like adverse selection costs, intra-day volatility (Volat) increases in the in-crisis
period and falls back, though not quite to its pre-crisis level, in the third period. Again, this
suggests much more heterogeneous information during the crisis, but only somewhat more
heterogeneous information following it.
In contrast, trading volume (Volume) rises after the crisis. However, this increase in
post-crisis trading volume comes with greater volatility. The magnitude of standard deviation
of post-crisis period is more than four times larger than that of pre-crisis period.
Margin buying and short selling fall off dramatically around the start of Asian
financial crisis. As Table V suggests, margin trading was about 20% of total buy orders
before the crisis, but decreases to a mere 1% after the crisis. On the other hand, short sales
were never widely used in the KSE, constituting about 0.5% of total sell orders before the
crisis and becoming almost negligible after it.
The time-series patterns of each variable are interesting per se, since they encapsulate
the stock market’s condition before, during, and after the crisis.

As noted above, the

structural break in elasticities cannot be explained by an increase in the asymmetric
information cost portion of spreads or by an increase in intraday volatility after the crisis.
This is because both variables revert to their pre-crisis level, while the elasticities do not. The
upward trend in trading volume could partly be explained by declining transactions costs due
to wider use of the internet and mobile phones for stock market investing. This story got
some empirical support in our data since post-crisis standard deviation of trading volume is
much larger than that of pre-crisis period. However, Table II shows that standard deviations
of elasticities for the rest of the trading day actually decreased a lot (about 45% from the precrisis level) in our data. On the contrary, a dramatic change in the magnitude of margin
trading does correspond to the structural break in the elasticity measures. The structural
break is most eminent in demand and supply elasticities of domestic individuals and margin

26

trading is exclusively used by domestic individuals before the crisis. Thus, the underlying the
observed changes in demand and supply elasticities around the crisis appear limited to this
change in margin interest along with the obvious decrease in the wealth of Korean investors
due to the crisis, a possible increase in their risk aversion, and a possible increase in their
perception of the risk in the stock market

V. Regression Results
Section III showed that the elasticities of demand and supply change substantially
over our sample period. Section IV considered variables that might capture the heterogeneity
of expectations among investors, and hence the potential for arbitrage. To investigate the
effect of these variables on the elasticities of demand and supply, we estimate the following
regressions:

Model 1: η t

= b0

+ b1 AdvCost t

= b0

+ b2Volatt

+ b3Volumet

+ b4 Mrg t

+ b5 t

+ εt

(6)

and
Model 2: η t

+ b3Volumet

+ b4 Mrg t

+ b5t

+ υt

(7)

We include a time trend variable t in the regressions to correct for possible time trends in
variables. All variables other than the time trend variable are averaged across all firms each
trading day to obtain daily aggregate measures. Then, they are transformed by adding one
and taking natural logarithms. When the dependent variable is the elasticity of demand
(supply), the adverse selection cost is calculated using buy (sell) orders only.
Several comments on the specification of our regression model are in order.
First, our regression specification is partly motivated by the fact that the correlation
between demand and supply elasticities is surprisingly high, suggesting that common factors

27

might affect both. The correlation between demand and supply elasticities for the opening
auction is 0.82 while that of the rest of the day is 0.71.
Second, in our sample period, the adverse selection cost measures (AdvCost) and
intra-day volatility (Volat) are highly correlated.35 This is not surprising, for these variables
both reflect the local price impact of trading. To mitigate any multicollinearity problem, we
estimate Model 1 and Model 2 separately, instead of including both adverse selection cost
and intra-day volatility as independent variables in a single regression model.
Third, our specification investigates the contemporaneous relationship between
elasticities and each variable over our sample period. Thus we do not attempt to address
causality between our variables. This is partly because our elasticity measures are aggregated
to a daily level, and so cannot address causality relationships that are probably only
detectable at the intraday level.
All t-statistics are adjusted for serial correlation and heteroskedasticity using the
generalized method of moments (GMM) procedure of Newey and West (1987).

Insert Table VI about here

Panel A of Table VI provides results from the time-series regression of the elasticity
of demand - both over the entire sample period and by sub-period. For the entire sample
period, the estimated coefficients on all the independent variables are highly significant at the
one percent level. The coefficient on AdvCost is negative. Thus, as the extent of information
heterogeneity increases among traders, their expectations diverge and the demand curve
becomes less elastic. The intraday volatility (Volat) is also negatively related to the elasticity
of demand. This is consistent with large price movements reflecting the capitalization of
private information possessed by informed traders who act as first movers.

28

The estimated Volume coefficient is also negative in both models, so higher volume
corresponds to more inelastic demand and supply curves for individual stocks. Finally, the
coefficient on Mrg is positive, implying that margin orders tend to cluster around a price level
(most plausibly the market price), thus increasing the elasticity of the demand schedule.
The leftmost columns of Panel B of Table VI present analogous time-series regression
results for the elasticity of supply for the entire sample period. The results are very similar to
those of elasticity of demand. The only exception is that the coefficient on Volume in Model
2 is positive, but insignificant.
However, caution is warranted in interpreting the regression results over the entire
sample period. The time-series plots of elasticity measures and their determinants shown in
Figure 6 strongly suggest a structural break at the time of the financial crisis. We therefore
re-estimate Model 1 and Model 2 by sub-period. Again, we use three sub-periods: the precrisis period of December 1996 to October 1997, the in-crisis period of November 1997 to
October 1998, and the post-crisis period of November 1998 to December 2000.
The remaining columns of Panel A of Table VI describe time-series regressions of
elasticity of demand by sub-period. The coefficients on AdvCost, Volat, and Volume have the
same signs in each sub-period as in the entire sample, and almost all the coefficients remain
significant at the one percent level. The main difference is that the estimated coefficient on

Mrg, is insignificant in the pre-crisis period in Model 1.
The remaining columns of Panel B of Table VI report time-series regressions of
elasticity of supply by sub-period. As with the results for the elasticity of demand, the
coefficients are generally significant at the one percent level and have consistent signs across
the three sub-periods. The only exception is the coefficient on Volume. This coefficient is
negative and significant in the pre-crisis period for both Model 1 and Model 2, but is

29

insignificant in both the in-crisis and post-crisis period (Model 1) or significantly positive,
especially in the in-crisis period (Model 2).
As discussed in Section IV.C, trading volume has two conflicting linkages with
elasticity. Trading volume rises if investors disagree more, implying a negative effect on
elasticity. However, a rise in trading volume can also increase elasticity because arbitrage is
easier in a deeper market. Our negative Volume coefficient may imply that the former effect
dominates the latter in the pre-crisis period, while they wash or reverse in importance in the
in-crisis and post-crisis periods. The positive coefficient in Model 2 is large and significant,
especially during the crisis period. If investors were forced to sell shares during this period
for liquidity reasons, volume might be positively associated with supply elasticity.
It is interesting to note that, even though the margin trading variable falls on average
by over ninety percent from the first to the third period, its effects on demand and supply
elasticities still remain positive and significant after the crisis.

VI. Conclusions
Using over 550 million limit orders submitted in the Korea Stock Exchange (KSE),
we investigate the demand and supply schedules for common stocks across heterogeneous
investor types in general, and then study their changes around the 1997 Asian financial crisis.
To the best of our knowledge, we provide the first evidence that different investor types have
differing elasticities and that their demand and supply schedules are affected differently by a
financial crisis.
We find that domestic institutions and foreign investors (mainly institutional
investors) have substantially more elastic demand and supply curves than domestic
individuals. This result implies that institutions and foreigners have more homogeneous
beliefs than domestic individuals, and consequently have more price sensitive demand and

30

supply schedules for common stocks. The proportion of ownership held by institutional
investors has increased in almost every stock market during the last two decades. Although
we do not address causality issues directly, our empirical findings raise the possibility that the
increased presence of institutional investors increases the price elasticity of demand and
supply for common stocks. However, whether homogeneity among institutional investors
represents rational valuation of securities or reputation-driven herding remains unclear.
Our sample period includes the 1997 Asian financial crisis, which led to sharp
declines in stock prices in many Asian countries. Partitioning the sample into pre-, in-, and
post-crisis sub-periods, we present evidence that the crisis affected different sorts of investors
differently. Specifically, domestic investors’ demand and supply curves became dramatically
less elastic following the crisis, while the crisis had virtually no effect on those of foreign
investors. For example, both demand and supply elasticities of domestic individual reduce by
almost 50% from the pre-crisis level. Sharp decreases in the elasticity measures for domestic
investors after the crisis could be due to a reduction in their available resources for arbitrage
caused by restrictions on margin trading and decreases in investors’ wealth. This asymmetric
result also demonstrates that, even if domestic investors are affected by a country-specific (or
region-specific) shock, foreign investors, presumably because of greater diversification in
their portfolios, can continue trading and help restore normalcy in the local stock market.
We also find that variables that capture a higher degree of heterogeneity among
investors, the lack of close substitutes, and arbitrage risk are associated with more inelastic
demand and supply curves. The adverse selection component of the bid-ask spread (which
measures the impact of private information possessed by a subset of investors and/or the
availability of close substitutes), intraday volatility (which reflects the heterogeneity of
opinions among investors and/or arbitrage risk for less than fully diversified arbitrageurs) and
trading volume are significantly negatively related with the magnitude of elasticities.

31

In passing, we also note that margin trading is almost exclusively an activity of
individual investors. Thus, margin trading might be a useful proxy for individual investor
activity in markets that, unlike the Korean Stock Exchange, do not separate trades by the two
classes of investors.

32

References
Bagwell, Laurie S., 1992, Dutch auction repurchases: An analysis of shareholder
heterogeneity, Journal of Finance 47, 71-105.
Baker, Malcolm and Serkan Savasoglu, 2002, Limited arbitrage in mergers and acquisitions,

Journal of Financial Economics 64, 91-116.
Baker, Malcolm and Jeremy Stein, 2002, Market liquidity as a sentiment indicator, working
paper, Harvard University.
Benartzi, Shlomo and Richard H. Thaler, 1995, Myopic loss aversion and the equity premium
puzzle, Quarterly Journal of Economics 110, 73-92.
Beneish, Messod, and Robert Whaley, 1996, An anatomy of the “S&P Game”: The effects of
changing the rules, Journal of Finance 51, 1909-1930.
Choe, Hyuk, Bong-Chan Kho, and René Stulz, 1999, Do foreign investors destabilize stock
markets? The Korean experience in 1997, Journal of Financial Economics 54, 227254.
Cohen, Randolph B., Paul A. Gompers, and Tuomo Vuolteenaho, 2002,Who underreacts to
cash-flow news? Evidence from trading between individuals and institutions, Journal

of Financial Economics, forthcoming.
Copeland, Thomas E. and Dan Galai, 1983, Information effects on the bid-ask spread,

Journal of Finance 38, 1457-1469.
De Bondt, W. F. M. and Richard H. Thaler, 1985, Does the stock market overreact? Journal

of Finance 40, 793-805.
Denis, Diane K., John J. Mcconnell, Alexei V. Ovtchinnikov and Yun Yu, 2003, S&P 500
index additions and earnings expectations, Journal of Finance 58, 1821-1840.
Dennis, Patrick J. and Deon Strickland, 2002, Who blinks in volatile markets, individuals or
institutions? Journal of Finance 57, 1923-1949.

33

Dhillon, Upinder, and Herb Johnson, 1991, Changes in the Standard and Poor’s 500 list,

Journal of Business 64, 75-85.
Easley, David and Maureen O’Hara, 1987, Price, trade size, and information in securities
markets, Journal of Financial Economics 19, 69-90.
French, Kenneth R. and Richard Roll, 1986, Stock return variances: the arrival of information
and the reaction of traders, Journal of Financial Economics 17, 5-26.
Glosten, Lawrence, and Paul Milgrom, 1985, Bid, ask, and transaction prices in a specialist
market with heterogeneously informed traders, Journal of Financial Economics 13,
71-100.
Grinblatt, Mark and Matti Keloharju, 2000, The investment behavior and performance of
various investor-types: A study of Finland’s unique data set, Journal of Financial

Economics 55, 43-67.
Grossman, Sanford and Joseph Stiglitz. 1980, On the impossibility of informationally
efficient markets, American Economic Review 70, 393-411.
Harris, Lawrance and Eitan Gurel, 1986, Price and volume effects associated with changes in
the S&P 500: New evidence for the existence of price pressures, Journal of Finance
41, 815-829.
Huang, Roger, and Hans Stoll, 1996, Dealer versus auction markets: A paired comparison of
execution costs on NASDAQ and the NYSE, Journal of Financial Economics 41,
313-357.
Jain, Prem, 1987, The effect of stock price of inclusion in or exclusion from the S&P 500,

Financial Analysts Journal 43, 58-65.
Kalay, Avner, Orly Sade, and Avi Wohl, 2001, Measuring stock illiquidity: An investigation
of the demand and supply schedules at the TASE, working paper, Tel-Aviv University
and The University of Utah.

34

Kandel, Shmuel, Oded Sarig, and Avi Wohl, 1999, The demand for stocks: An analysis of
IPO auctions, Review of Financial Studies 12, 227-247.
Karpoff, Jonathan M., 1986, A theory of trading volume, Journal of Finance 41, 1069-1088.
Kaul, Aditya, Vikas Mehrotra, and Randall Morck, 2000, Demand curves for stocks do slope
down: New evidence from an index weights adjustment, Journal of Finance 55, 893912.
Kim, Oliver and Robert E. Verrecchia, 1994, Market liquidity and volume around earnings
announcements, Journal of Accounting and Economics 17, 41-67.
Lakonishok, Josef, Andrei Shleifer, Richard Thaler, and Robert Vishny. 1991. Window
dressing by pension fund managers, American Economic Review 81, 227-32.
Lakonishok, Josef, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny. 1992. The structure and performance
of the money management industry, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1992,
339-92.
Lev, Baruch, 1988, Toward a theory of equitable and efficient accounting policy, The

Accounting Review 63, 1-22.
Loderer, Claudio, John W. Cooney, and Leonard D. Van Druen, 1991, The price elasticity of
demand for common stock, Journal of Finance 46, 621-650.
Lynch, Anthony, and Richard Mendenhall, 1997, New evidence on stock price effects
associated with changes in the S&P 500 Index, Journal of Business 70, 351-383.
Mikkelson, Wayne H. and M. Megan Partch, 1985, Stock price effects and costs of secondary
distributions, Journal of Financial Economics 14, 165-194.
Mitchell, Mark, Todd Pulvino, and Erik Stafford, 2002, Limited arbitrage in equity markets,

Journal of Finance 57, 551-584.

35

Newey, Whitney K. and Kenneth D. West, 1987, A simple, positive semi-definite,
heteroskedasticity and autocorrelation consistent covariance matrix, Econometrica 55,
703-708.
Roll, Richard. 1988, R2, Journal of Finance 43, 541-566.
Scharfstein, David S., and Jeremy C. Stein, 1990, Herd Behavior and investment, American

Economic Review 80, 465-479.
Scholes, Myron, 1972, The market for securities: Substitution versus price pressure and the
effects of information on share price, Journal of Business 45, 179-211.
Sesaholes, Mark S., 2000, Smart foreign traders in emerging markets, working paper,
Harvard Business School.
Shiller, Robert J., 2002, From efficient market theory to behavioral finance, Journal of

Economic Perspectives, forthcoming.
Shiller, Robert J. and John Pound, 1989, Survey evidence on diffusion of interest and
information among investors, Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization 12,
47-66.
Shleifer, Andrei, 1986, Do demand curves fro stock slope down? Journal of Finance 41, 579590.
Shleifer, Andrei and Robert W. Vishny, 1997, The limits of arbitrage, Journal of Finance 52,
35-55.
Summers, Lawrence. 1985. On Economics and Finance. Journal of Finance 40, 633-5.
Wurgler, Jeffrey and Katia Zhuravskaya, 2002, Does arbitrage flatten demand curves for
stocks?, Journal of Business 75, 583-608.

36

Footnotes
1

Shleifer and Vishny (1997) and Shiller (2002) suggest various reasons as to why arbitrage

may not work as effectively as the textbook description.
2

See Loderer, Cooney, and Van Drunen (1991) for detailed discussions on why demand and

supply curves are finitely elastic in real stock markets.
3

Kalay et al. (2001) also directly measure demand and supply elasticities for common stocks

listed on the Tel Aviv Stock Exchange. However, they do not examine differences in
elasticities across different investor types or changes in elasticities over time.
4

We are investigating the cross-sectional and intraday patterns of demand and supply

elasticities in another paper.
5

The above example shows the possibility of the existence of common factors that affect

both demand and supply elasticities in the same direction in a pure exchange economy. This
partly motivates our regression specification in section V.
6

This is strictly true of classical portfolio theory. Other treatments of asset pricing, such as

Grossman and Stiglitz (1980), allow finitely elastic demand curves.
7

Before May 19, 2000, the KSE held two trading sessions: a morning session (from 9:00

through 12:00) and an afternoon session (from 13:00 through 15:00).
8

Orders not filled completely during the opening auction are passed on to the continuous

auction unless they are cancelled or revised.
9

During the last 10 minutes of the day, no trades and orders are collected for the closing

batch auction at 15:00. For a more complete description of the KSE market structure, see
Choe, Kho, and Stulz (1999).
10

Complete information on minimum price variation is available on the KSE website

(http://www.kse.org.kr).

37

11

Starting January 2001, traders observe order quantities for the ten lowest sell and ten

highest buy prices.
12

Trading by domestic institutions and foreign investors is concentrated on large companies.

For example, almost 13 percent of buy and sell orders for Samsung Electronics, the largest
company in Korea, are by these investors. Their orders account for almost 55 percent of
quantities demanded and 49 percent of quantities supplied. They account for about 53
percent of Samsung shares traded.
13

In estimating the elasticity of demand and supply, we use limit orders only because market

orders, by definition, do not specify prices.
14

We have repeated the empirical analysis normalizing demand and supply schedules of the

rest of trading hours by the opening auction price. This alternative specification does not
change our results.
15

Regressions of logarithms of raw prices on those of raw quantities generate similar patterns

to those shown in the tables, as described in footnote 18.
16

The average number of price-quantity points for opening auction demand (supply)

schedules is 19 (19). The average number for the rest of the day demand (supply) schedules is
26 (27).
17

For the rest of trading hours, we implicitly assume that the demand and supply curves are

stable within a trading day. In Section III.B, we empirically investigate the validity of this
stationarity assumption.
18

As a robustness check, we estimate elasticities using the alternative regression specification

log(q jk ) = δ j + χ j log( p jk ) + ε jk , where p jk is the price corresponding to tick point k, q jk is the

market-wide cumulative quantity demanded (supplied) at or above (at or below) the tick point

k, and the absolute value of χ j is the elasticity of demand (supply) for firm j on a given

38

trading day. The estimated elasticities from this approach are highly correlated with those
described in the Tables. The correlation coefficients of the estimated elasticities are 0.775 for
opening session demand and 0.768 for opening session supply. In addition, the pattern of
signs and significance levels in all our results are preserved when we use these alternate
elasticity measures. Consequently, we report the results based on the modified Bagwell
approach in the paper.
19

In addition, it became extremely difficult to buy on margin after the crisis, which further

limited the amount of available money for stock investing. We look closely at changes in
margin buying practices around the crisis in section IV.D.
20

As discussed in Section II.C, we estimate the elasticity for each firm-day only if there are

at least five different price points with non-zero quantities demanded. Figures 1(a) and 1(b)
suggest that the numbers of firms satisfying this requirement are generally stable over the
sample period. A sharp decline in the number of firms is evident in a brief window during
the crisis.
21

The time series of median values of elasticity closely resembles that of the means.

Repeating our empirical analyses using median elasticities generates similar patterns of signs
and statistical significance.
22

We have repeated our analysis using individual firm-day elasticity measures instead of the

daily average values. Although this approach reduces the adjusted R-squared values, overall
inferences of the regressions are similar to those in Table III.
23

In addition to the percentage of orders cancelled or revised, other variables such as the

absolute price change from the opening to the closing of the market, trading volume, and
intraday volatility may serve as indicative of shifts in the demand or supply curves during a
given day. Repeating the analysis in Section III.B using these variables generates empirical
results qualitatively similar to those reported in Table III.

39

24

The number of orders submitted during the opening auction is substantially smaller than

that for the rest of trading hours. Especially, domestic institution and foreign investors rarely
place orders in the opening auction.

This constrains our ability to estimate elasticity

measures by investor type for the opening auction.
25

Foreign investors in Korea are mainly institutional investors such as mutual funds and

pension funds.
26

We find that demand and supply curves are more elastic for large firms than they are for

small firms.

During our sample period, the mean value of demand elasticities (supply

elasticities) is 10.97 (9.90) for firms in the 5th size quintile for the rest of trading hours while
it is 8.78 (8.17) for firms in the 1st size quintile.
27

In an order-driven market, it is not possible to place a buy (sell) order above (below) the

prevailing lowest ask (highest bid) price. As a result, the effective spread is always the same
as the quoted spread.
28

We have repeated the empirical analysis using τ = 30 minutes. This does not affect our

results in any meaningful way.
29

Mitchell et al. (2002) and Baker and Savasoglu (2002) find that idiosyncratic risk is

responsible for limited arbitrage.
30

Baker and Stein (2002) develop a model where high liquidity (elastic demand and supply

curves) is a symptom of a predominance of irrationally optimistic investors.
31

If margin trading is mainly used by rational arbitrageurs, the market price converges to the

fundamental value of the firm. On the contrary, if margin trading is used by noise traders with
an optimism bias, the market price could end up higher than the true value of the firm - a
bubble. In the former case, we ought not to observe a price reversal, while in the latter case
we should observe an eventual price reversal. However, as De Bondt and Thaler (1985)

40

show, the price reversal may happen quite gradually.

This fact limits our ability to

distinguish the two hypotheses - especially given the financial crisis and stock price collapse
in the middle of our sample period.
32

The Korea Securities Finance Corporation, established in October 1955, is the sole

provider of securities finance services in Korea under the Securities and Exchange Act.
33

According to an article in Munhwa Ilbo (March 4, 1998), some brokerage firms increased

their collateral requirements to 200 percent or more. Ssang Yong Securities Company, for
example, increased its requirement to 250 percent.
34

Munhwa Ilbo (March 4, 1998).

35

For our sample, the correlation coefficient between AdvCost-Buy and Volat is 0.739 while

it is 0.675 between AdvCost-Sell and Volat.

41

Table I
Distribution of Orders and Trades
This table reports the distribution of orders submitted and trades executed in the Korea Stock
Exchange (KSE) during the period December 1996 – December 2000. Buy and sell orders are
partitioned into market and limit orders. Investors are classified as domestic individual investors,
domestic institutional investors, and foreign investors. Each daily trading session is partitioned into
the opening call market auction and the continuous trading during the rest of trading hours. Values in
parentheses are average order sizes in shares in Panels A and B, and average trade sizes in Panel C.

Investor Type
Domestic
Individual

Panel A: Distribution of Buy Orders Submitted
Rest of Day
Opening
Continuous
Order Type
Call Market
Market
3,462,466
8,678,562
Market
(1,054.44)
(1,221.05)
46,596,656
197,009,332
Limit
(1,169.03)
(1,231.02)
50,059,122
205,687,894
Total
(1,161.57)
(1,230.60)

Entire Day
12,141,208
(1,173.54)
243,605,988
(1,218.26)
255,747,016
(1,217.09)

104,187
(1,777.17)
585,118
(6,862.06)
689,305
(6,093.49)

1,113,798
(1,038.34)
5,598,581
(3,760.60)
6,712,379
(3,308.89)

1,217,985
(1,101.54)
6,183,699
(4,054.07)
7,401,684
(3,568.22)

53,474
(2,468.17)
246,740
(3,361.41)
300,214
(3,202.30)

526,211
(1,331.09)
3,317,035
(1,883.88)
3,843,246
(1,808.19)

579,685
(1,435.98)
3,563,775
(1,986.18)
4,143,460
(1,909.20)

3,620,127
(1,096.11)
47,428,384
(1,251.10)
51,048,511
(1,240.11)

10,318,122
(1,205.92)
205,873,390
(1,309.54)
216,191,512
(1,304.60)

13,938,249
(1,177.40)
253,301,774
(1,298.60)
267,240,023
(1,292.28)

Market
Domestic
Institutional

Limit
Total
Market

Foreign

Limit
Total
Market

All

Limit
Total

42

Investor Type
Domestic
Individual

Panel B: Distribution of Sell Orders Submitted
Rest of Day
Continuous
Opening
Call Market
Market
Order Type
6,732,424
11,173,446
Market
(606.50)
(746.62)
51,422,932
201,169,307
Limit
(1,153.35)
(1,766.00)
58,155,356
212,342,753
Total
(1,090.05)
(1,712.36)

Entire Day
17,905,870
(693.94)
252,592,239
(1,641.28)
270,498,109
(1,578.56)

190,256
(1,142.47)
985,626
(6,433.11)
1,175,882
(5,577.09)

1,329,346
(762.77)
6,411,346
(4,199.12)
7,740,692
(3,608.98)

1,519,602
(810.31)
7,396,972
(4,496.80)
8,916,574
(3,868.53)

43,388
(1,948.78)
216,188
(3,714.74)
259,576
(3,419.56)

413,493
(1,262.65)
3,400,153
(2,380.34)
3,813,646
(2,259.16)

456,881
(1,327.81)
3,616,341
(2,460.11)
4,073,222
(2,333.10)

6,966,032
(628.91)
53,011,848
(1,254.08)
59,977,880
(1,181.47)

12,914,374
(764.04)
210,819,707
(1,849.31)
223,734,081
(1,786.66)

19,880,406
(716.69)
263,831,555
(1,729.71)
283,711,961
(1,658.72)

Market
Domestic
Institutional

Limit
Total
Market

Foreign

Limit
Total
Market

All

Limit
Total

43

Investor Type
Domestic
Individual

Domestic
Institutional

Panel C: Distribution of Trade Records
Rest of Day
Opening
Continuous
Market
Order Direction
Call Market
14,774,259
335,213,043
Buy
(374.78)
(442.93)
14,677,872
332,549,722
Sell
(372.70)
(440.33)
Buy
Sell
Buy

Foreign
Sell
Buy
All
Sell

Entire Day
349,987,302
(440.05)
347,227,594
(437.47)

440,944
(804.29)
645,917
(711.19)

25,256,326
(616.26)
28,185,855
(624.28)

25,697,320
(619.49)
28,831,772
(626.22)

399,194
(513.00)
290,658
(574.70)

11,036,713
(484.25)
10,770,505
(497.39)

11,435,907
(485.25)
11,061,163
(499.42)

15,614,447
(390.43)
15,614,447
(390.43)

371,506,082
(455.93)
371,506,082
(455.93)

387,120,529
(453.29)
387,120,529
(453.29)

44

Table II
Elasticity of Demand and Supply
This table reports the elasticity of demand and supply during the period December 1996 – December
2000. Each trading day is partitioned into two sessions: opening auction and rest of trading hours.
For each firm and each trading session, the daily elasticity is estimated using the following regression:
p jk = α j + β j d jk + ε jk ; where p jk and d jk represent the normalized price and normalized
market-wide cumulative quantity at tick point k for firm j on a given trading day. The daily elasticity
is defined as the inverse of slope coefficient (i.e., η j = 1 β j ). Then, the daily elasticity measures
are averaged across all firms. The sample period is divided into three sub-periods: (a) pre-crisis
period (December 1996 – October 1997), (b) in-crisis period (November 1997 – October 1998), and
(c) post-crisis period (November 1998 – December 2000).
Trading Session
Opening auction

Rest of trading hours

Trading Session
Opening auction

Rest of trading hours

Panel A: Elasticity of Demand
Sub-Period
N
Mean
Entire sample period
1,090
9.26
Pre-crisis period
265
13.27
In-crisis period
293
9.58
Post-crisis period
532
7.08
Entire sample period
Pre-crisis period
In-crisis period
Post-crisis period

1,090
265
293
532

10.28
15.52
9.91
7.86

Panel B: Elasticity of Supply
Sub-Period
N
Mean
Entire sample period
1,090
9.06
Pre-crisis period
265
13.30
In-crisis period
293
9.62
Post-crisis period
532
6.64
Entire sample period
Pre-crisis period
In-crisis period
Post-crisis period

1,090
265
293
532

45

9.30
13.56
9.09
7.30

Median
8.62
13.30
9.23
6.91

Std. Dev.
2.79
0.70
1.81
0.99

8.85
15.58
9.64
7.80

3.50
1.73
2.38
0.95

Median
8.36
13.61
9.21
6.44

Std. Dev.
3.02
1.08
1.98
0.96

8.06
13.80
8.64
7.23

3.02
1.63
2.50
0.90

Table III
Proportion of Cancelled/Revised Orders and Potential Shifts in Demand and Supply
Curves
For each trading day, we divide the sample into five quintiles based on the portion of orders that are
either cancelled or revised. Quintile 1 (Quintile 5) includes observations for which this proportion is
the smallest (largest). Then, the elasticity for the opening auction is regressed on the elasticity for the
rest of trading hours using the daily average elasticity measures. Values in parentheses represent tstatistics which are adjusted for serial correlation and heteroskedasticity using the generalized method
of moments (GMM) with the Newey-West (1989) procedure.

Panel A: Elasticity of Demand

Quintile 1 (smallest)
Quintile 2
Quintile 3
Quintile 4
Quintile 5 (largest)
Entire Sample

Intercept
0.018
(0.26)
0.055
(1.16)
0.084
(1.76)
0.172
(3.81)
0.180
(4.09)
0.094
(2.12)

Slope Coefficient
1.054
(33.82)
1.026
(46.19)
0.997
(43.86)
0.934
(42.89)
0.901
(42.72)
0.985
(47.04)

Adj. R2
82.07%

Mean Value of
Cancelled/Revised
Proportions
12.08%

84.26%

20.67%

83.51%

25.52%

83.25%

31.07%

83.33%

44.22%

86.57%

26.63%

Adj. R2
81.92%

Mean Value of
Cancelled/Revised
Proportion
8.54%

77.27%

16.68%

77.15%

20.86%

78.22%

25.05%

82.36%

33.59%

81.74%

20.09%

Panel B: Elasticity of Supply

Quintile 1 (smallest)
Quintile 2
Quintile 3
Quintile 4
Quintile 5 (largest)
Entire Sample

Intercept
0.186
(2.57)
0.389
(8.34)
0.449
(10.27)
0.489
(12.25)
0.404
(10.22)
0.377
(9.43)

Slope Coefficient
0.962
(29.35)
0.846
(38.48)
0.806
(39.83)
0.776
(40.15)
0.794
(40.91)
0.836
(44.83)

46

Table IV
Investor Classes and Elasticity of Demand and Supply
This table reports the elasticity of demand and supply for the trading session following the opening
auction (i.e., rest of trading hours) during the period December 1996 – December 2000. Investors are
classified as domestic individuals (Individual), domestic institutions (Institution), and foreign
investors (Foreign). For each firm and each investor type, the daily elasticity is estimated using the
following regression: p jk = α j + β j d jk + ε jk ; where p jk and d jk represent the normalized
price and normalized cumulative quantity demanded by the investor class at tick point k for firm j on a
given trading day. The daily elasticity is defined as the inverse of slope coefficient (i.e.,
η j = 1 β j ). Then, the daily elasticity measures are averaged across all firms. The sample period
is divided into three sub-periods: (a) pre-crisis period (December 1996 – October 1997), (b) in-crisis
period (November 1997 – October 1998), and (c) post-crisis period (November 1998 – December
2000).
Sub-period
Entire sample period

Panel A: Elasticity of Demand
Investor class
N
Mean
Individual
1,090
10.44
Institution
1,090
18.90
Foreign
1,090
21.77

Median
8.96
18.88
21.46

Std. Dev.
3.59
5.00
6.07

Pre-crisis period

Individual
Institution
Foreign

265
265
265

15.83
22.63
22.00

15.93
22.54
21.23

1.72
3.58
6.48

In-crisis period

Individual
Institution
Foreign

293
293
293

10.07
18.67
20.16

9.78
18.44
19.49

2.47
4.71
5.91

Post-crisis period

Individual
Institution
Foreign

532
532
532

7.96
17.17
22.55

7.90
16.26
22.40

0.96
4.77
5.77

Median
8.10
19.24
21.26

Std. Dev.
3.01
5.32
5.58

Sub-period
Entire sample period

Panel B: Elasticity of Supply
Investor class
N
Mean
Individual
1,090
9.32
Institution
1,090
19.59
Foreign
1,090
21.55

Pre-crisis period

Individual
Institution
Foreign

265
265
265

13.52
24.25
22.22

13.74
24.34
21.39

1.62
3.76
5.07

In-crisis period

Individual
Institution
Foreign

293
293
293

9.15
19.07
20.18

8.64
18.59
20.12

2.59
4.55
5.86

Post-crisis period

Individual
Institution
Foreign

532
532
532

7.32
17.55
21.98

7.26
16.47
21.75

0.90
4.94
5.53

47

Table V
Summary Statistics for Potential Determinants of Elasticity
This table reports the summary statistics for the time series of daily average of each variable for
different periods. AdvCost is the adverse selection component of the spread, relative to the mid-point
of bid and ask prices of buy (sell) orders. The adverse selection cost is calculated for buy orders and
sell orders separately. Volat is the standard deviation of returns over the trading day where returns are
measured using the bid-ask mid-point in 5-minute intervals. Volume is the daily trading volume
divided by the number of shares outstanding. Mrg is the ratio of margin buy orders to total buy orders
submitted while Sht is the ratio of short sale orders to total sell orders submitted. The sample period
is divided into three sub-periods: (a) pre-crisis period (December 1996 – October 1997), (b) in-crisis
period (November 1997 – October 1998), and (c) post-crisis period (November 1998 – December
2000)
Sub-period
Entire sample period

Variable
AdvCost-Buy (%)
AdvCost-Sell (%)
Volat (%)
Volume (%)
Mrg (%)
Sht (%)

N
1,090
1,090
1,090
1,090
1,090
1090

Mean
0.853
1.087
0.661
1.631
7.123
0.155

Median
0.751
0.931
0.638
1.389
2.665
0.004

Std. Dev.
0.348
0.482
0.165
0.988
8.305
0.264

Pre-crisis period

AdvCost-Buy (%)
AdvCost-Sell (%)
Volat (%)
Volume (%)
Mrg (%)
Sht (%)

265
265
265
265
265
265

0.755
0.917
0.542
0.773
20.364
0.481

0.661
0.812
0.519
0.787
20.234
0.428

0.236
0.305
0.113
0.192
2.879
0.241

In-crisis period

AdvCost-Buy (%)
AdvCost-Sell (%)
Volat (%)
Volume (%)
Mrg (%)
Sht (%)

293
293
293
293
293
293

1.253
1.625
0.802
0.991
5.748
0.140

1.197
1.519
0.782
0.957
3.179
0.025

0.331
0.525
0.158
0.329
5.034
0.260

Post-crisis period

AdvCost-Buy (%)
AdvCost-Sell (%)
Volat (%)
Volume (%)
Mrg (%)
Sht (%)

532
532
532
532
532
532

0.682
0.875
0.644
2.411
1.284
0.000

0.650
0.836
0.618
2.251
0.987
0.000

0.197
0.244
0.130
0.849
0.846
0.001

48

Table VI
Time-Series Regression Results for Determinants of Elasticity
This table reports the time-series regression results for the determinants of elasticity. The elasticity is
measured by using orders submitted during the session following the opening auction (i.e., the rest of
trading hours). The sample period is divided into three sub-periods: (a) pre-crisis period (December
1996 – October 1997), (b) in-crisis period (November 1997 – October 1998), and (c) post-crisis
period (November 1998 – December 2000). The determinants of elasticity are examined using the
following regressions:

η t = b0 + b1 AdvCost t + b3Volumet + b4 Mrg t + b5 t + ε t
η t = b0 + b2Volat t + b3Volumet + b4 Mrg t + b5 t + υ t

ηt is the magnitude of elasticity on trading day t. AdvCostt is the adverse selection component of
spread. Volatt is the standard deviation of returns over the trading day where returns are measured
using the bid-ask mid-point in 5-minute intervals. Volumet is the daily trading volume divided by the
number of shares outstanding. Mrgt is the ratio of margin-buy orders to total buy orders. All
variables are averaged across all firms to obtain the daily aggregate measures. Then, they are
transformed by adding a value of one and then by taking natural logarithms. t is the trend variable.
Values in parentheses represent t-statistics which are adjusted for serial correlation and
heteroskedasticity using the generalized method of moments (GMM) with the Newey-West (1989)
procedure.

No. of
days

Intercept
AdvCost

Entire sample
period
Model 1 Model 2
1,090
1,090
3.290
(21.51)
-0.541
(-10.32)
-0.375
(-7.34)
0.108
(5.18)
-0.069
(-4.96)

-0.912
(-13.12)
-0.244
(-6.86)
0.135
(7.84)
-0.040
(-3.37)

82.44%

83.53%

Volat
Volume
Mrg
t

Adj. R 2

3.086
(25.05)

Panel A: Elasticity of Demand
In-crisis period
Pre-crisis period

Post-crisis period

Model 1
265

Model 2
265

Model 1
293

Model 2
293

Model 1
532

Model 2
532

3.904
(11.50)
-0.884
(-7.24)

2.886
(13.66)

0.741
(1.22)
-0.540
(-6.35)

1.704
(2.60)

1.449
(1.66)
-0.470
(-5.80)

2.197
(2.56)

-0.495
(-7.13)
0.024
(0.33)
-0.088
(-4.57)

-1.034
(-7.54)
-0.252
(-3.31)
0.189
(2.93)
-0.016
(-1.61)

36.52%

32.09%

49

-0.760
(-6.34)
0.166
(3.38)
0.381
(4.10)

-0.919
(-5.11)
-0.643
(-6.01)
0.141
(3.38)
0.232
(2.53)

-0.194
(-3.52)
0.286
(4.45)
0.147
(1.25)

-0.722
(-8.36)
-0.084
(-1.81)
0.204
(3.00)
0.042
(0.35)

35.54%

38.01%

51.92%

58.29%

Entire sample
period
Model 1
Model 2
No. of
days

Intercept
AdvCost

1,090
2.875
(19.09)
-0.484
(-9.14)

Volat
Volume
Mrg
t

Adj. R 2

-0.186
(-4.91)
0.147
(7.54)
-0.050
(-3.55)
78.96%

1,090
2.432
(20.16)

Panel B: Elasticity of Supply
In-crisis period
Pre-crisis period
Model 1

Model
2

Model
1

265
1.595
(6.88)

293
1.670
(2.15)
-0.616
(-5.72)

265
3.351
(11.38)
-0.966
(-8.54)

Model 2

Model 1

Model 2

293

532

532

-0.368
(-0.44)

1.644
(1.99)
-0.489
(-6.63)

1.656
(1.78)

-0.516
(-7.39)
0.018
(0.52)
0.195
(11.54)
-0.034
(-1.98)

-0.676
(-11.27)
0.211
(3.38)
-0.070
(-4.84)

-0.951
(-6.61)
-0.257
(-4.00)
0.521
(6.75)
0.009
(0.89)

0.099
(0.71)
0.107
(1.84)
0.158
(1.39)

0.152
(0.61)
0.444
(3.19)
0.199
(3.62)
0.320
(2.75)

73.39%

66.97%

34.70% 39.37%

19.78%

50

Post-crisis period

-0.074
(-1.64)
0.259
(4.02)
0.099
(0.88)
51.80%

-0.657
(-6.43)
0.055
(1.56)
0.236
(3.04)
0.079
(0.61)
47.79%

Figure 1: Time-Series Pattern of KOSPI index

This figure plots the time-series pattern of the Korea Composite Stock Price Index (KOSPI)
during the period December 1996 – December 2000.

1200

1000

800

600
400

200

51

01/12/2000

01/09/2000

01/06/2000

01/03/2000

01/12/1999

01/09/1999

01/06/1999

01/03/1999

01/12/1998

01/09/1998

01/06/1998

01/03/1998

01/12/1997

01/09/1997

01/06/1997

01/03/1997

01/12/1996

0

52

Number of Firms Used to Estimate Demand Curves

600

500

400

300

200

100

0
01/06/2000

01/03/2000

01/12/1999

01/09/1999

01/06/1999

01/03/1999

01/12/1998

01/09/1998

01/06/1998

01/03/1998

01/12/1997

01/09/1997

01/06/1997

01/03/1997

01/12/1996

01/12/2000

700

01/12/2000

800
01/09/2000

Time-Series Patterns of Average Elasticity for Demand Curves

01/09/2000

01/06/2000

01/03/2000

01/12/1999

01/09/1999

01/06/1999

01/03/1999

01/12/1998

01/09/1998

01/06/1998

01/03/1998

01/12/1997

01/09/1997

01/06/1997

01/03/1997

01/12/1996

Figure 2: Time-Series Patterns of Demand Elasticities

This figure plots the cross-sectional averages of demand elasticities for the opening auction

and the rest of trading hours.
(a) Opening auction

25

20

15

10

5

0

53

Number of Firms Used to Estimate Demand Curves

600

500

400

300

200

100

0

01/06/2000

01/03/2000

01/12/1999

01/09/1999

01/06/1999

01/03/1999

01/12/1998

01/09/1998

01/06/1998

01/03/1998

01/12/1997

01/09/1997

01/06/1997

01/03/1997

01/12/1996

01/12/2000

700

01/12/2000

800

01/09/2000

Time-Series Pattern of Average Elasticity for Demand Curves

01/09/2000

01/06/2000

01/03/2000

01/12/1999

01/09/1999

01/06/1999

01/03/1999

01/12/1998

01/09/1998

01/06/1998

01/03/1998

01/12/1997

01/09/1997

01/06/1997

01/03/1997

01/12/1996

(b) Rest of the Day

30

25

20

15

10

5

0

54

Number of Firms Used to Estimate Supply Curves

600

500

400

300

200

100

0
01/06/2000

01/03/2000

01/12/1999

01/09/1999

01/06/1999

01/03/1999

01/12/1998

01/09/1998

01/06/1998

01/03/1998

01/12/1997

01/09/1997

01/06/1997

01/03/1997

01/12/1996

01/12/2000

700

01/12/2000

800
01/09/2000

Time-Series Pattern of Average Elasticity for Supply Curves

01/09/2000

01/06/2000

01/03/2000

01/12/1999

01/09/1999

01/06/1999

01/03/1999

01/12/1998

01/09/1998

01/06/1998

01/03/1998

01/12/1997

01/09/1997

01/06/1997

01/03/1997

01/12/1996

Figure 3: Time-Series Patterns of Supply Elasticities

This figure plots the cross-sectional averages of supply elasticities for the opening auction

and the rest of trading hours.
(a) Opening auction

25

20

15

10

5

0

55

Number of Firms Used to Estimate Supply Curves

600

500

400

300

200

100

0
01/06/2000

01/03/2000

01/12/1999

01/09/1999

01/06/1999

01/03/1999

01/12/1998

01/09/1998

01/06/1998

01/03/1998

01/12/1997

01/09/1997

01/06/1997

01/03/1997

01/12/1996

01/12/2000

700

01/12/2000

800
01/09/2000

Time-Series Pattern of Average Elasticity for Supply Curves

01/09/2000

01/06/2000

01/03/2000

01/12/1999

01/09/1999

01/06/1999

01/03/1999

01/12/1998

01/09/1998

01/06/1998

01/03/1998

01/12/1997

01/09/1997

01/06/1997

01/03/1997

01/12/1996

(b) Rest-of-the-Day Supply Curves

30

25

20

15

10

5

0

Figure 4: Demand and Supply Elasticities by Investor Type (Unrestricted Sample)
This figure plots the time-series patterns of demand and supply elasticities of three investor
classes: (1) domestic individual investors, (2) domestic institutional investors, and (3) foreign
investors.
(a) Demand Elasticities
35
30
25
Domestic
Individual
Domestic
Institutional
Foreign

20
15
10
5

01/12/2000

01/09/2000

01/06/2000

01/03/2000

01/12/1999

01/09/1999

01/06/1999

01/03/1999

01/12/1998

01/09/1998

01/06/1998

01/03/1998

01/12/1997

01/09/1997

01/06/1997

01/03/1997

01/12/1996

0

10-day Moving Average of Demand Elasticities
(b) Supply Elasticities
35
30
25
Domestic
Individual
Domestic
Institutional
Foreign

20
15
10
5

01/12/2000

01/09/2000

01/06/2000

01/03/2000

01/12/1999

01/09/1999

01/06/1999

01/03/1999

01/12/1998

01/09/1998

01/06/1998

01/03/1998

01/12/1997

01/09/1997

01/06/1997

01/03/1997

01/12/1996

0

10-day Moving Average of Supply Elasticities

56

Figure 5: Demand and Supply Elasticities by Investor Type (Restricted Sample)
This figure plots the time-series patterns of demand and supply elasticities by investor type
using a restricted sample of firm-days that have elasticity measures for all three investor
types: (1) domestic individual investors, (2) domestic institutional investors, and (3) foreign
investors.
(a) Demand Elasticities
40
35
30
25

Domestic
Individual
Domestic
Institutional
Foreign

20
15
10
5

01/12/2000

01/09/2000

01/06/2000

01/03/2000

01/12/1999

01/09/1999

01/06/1999

01/03/1999

01/12/1998

01/09/1998

01/06/1998

01/03/1998

01/12/1997

01/09/1997

01/06/1997

01/03/1997

01/12/1996

0

10-day Moving Average of Demand Elasticities
200
180
160
140
120
100
80
60
40
20

Number of Firms used to Estimate Elasticities

57

01/12/2000

01/09/2000

01/06/2000

01/03/2000

01/12/1999

01/09/1999

01/06/1999

01/03/1999

01/12/1998

01/09/1998

01/06/1998

01/03/1998

01/12/1997

01/09/1997

01/06/1997

01/03/1997

01/12/1996

0

58

Number of Firms used to Estimate Elasticities

20

15

01/12/2000

01/12/2000

01/09/2000

01/06/2000

01/03/2000

01/12/1999

01/09/1999

01/06/1999

01/03/1999

01/12/1998

01/09/1998

01/06/1998

01/03/1998

01/12/1997

01/09/1997

01/06/1997

01/03/1997

01/12/1996

25

01/09/2000

01/06/2000

01/03/2000

01/12/1999

01/09/1999

01/06/1999

01/03/1999

01/12/1998

01/09/1998

01/06/1998

01/03/1998

01/12/1997

01/09/1997

01/06/1997

01/03/1997

01/12/1996

(b) Supply Elasticities

40

35

30

Domestic
Individual
Domestic
Institutional
Foreign

10

5

0

10-day Moving Average of Supply Elasticities

200

180

160

140

120

100

80

60

40

20

0

Figure 6: Time-Series Patterns of Potential Determinants of Elasticities
This figure plots cross-sectional averages of potential determinants of demand and supply
elasticities over the sample period.
(a) Adverse Selection Component of the Spread (Buy Orders)

3.5
3
2.5
2
1.5
1
0.5

01/09/2000

01/12/2000

01/09/2000

01/12/2000

01/06/2000

01/03/2000

01/12/1999

01/09/1999

01/06/1999

01/03/1999

01/12/1998

01/09/1998

01/06/1998

01/03/1998

01/12/1997

01/09/1997

01/06/1997

01/03/1997

01/12/1996

0

(b) Adverse Selection Component of the Spread (Sell Orders)
4
3.5
3
2.5
2
1.5
1
0.5

59

01/06/2000

01/03/2000

01/12/1999

01/09/1999

01/06/1999

01/03/1999

01/12/1998

01/09/1998

01/06/1998

01/03/1998

01/12/1997

01/09/1997

01/06/1997

01/03/1997

01/12/1996

0

60

1

0.5

0
01/09/1999

01/06/1999

01/03/1999

01/12/1998

01/09/1998

01/06/1998

01/03/1998

01/12/1997

01/09/1997

01/06/1997

01/03/1997

01/12/1996

01/12/2000

1.5

01/12/2000

2
01/09/2000

2.5

01/09/2000

3
01/06/2000

3.5

01/06/2000

4
01/03/2000

4.5

01/03/2000

5
01/12/1999

(d) Daily Share Turnover (%)

01/12/1999

01/09/1999

01/06/1999

01/03/1999

01/12/1998

01/09/1998

01/06/1998

01/03/1998

01/12/1997

01/09/1997

01/06/1997

01/03/1997

01/12/1996

(c) Intraday Volatility (%)

1.6

1.4

1.2

1

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0

61

1

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0
01/06/2000

01/03/2000

01/12/1999

01/09/1999

01/06/1999

01/03/1999

01/12/1998

01/09/1998

01/06/1998

01/03/1998

01/12/1997

01/09/1997

01/06/1997

01/03/1997

01/12/1996

01/12/2000

1.2

01/12/2000

1.4
01/09/2000

(f) Ratio of Short Sale Orders to Total Sell Orders (%)

01/09/2000

01/06/2000

01/03/2000

01/12/1999

01/09/1999

01/06/1999

01/03/1999

01/12/1998

01/09/1998

01/06/1998

01/03/1998

01/12/1997

01/09/1997

01/06/1997

01/03/1997

01/12/1996

(e) Ratio of Margin Buying Orders to Total Buy Orders (%)

30

25

20

15

10

5

0

