                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                        CONDITIONAL BETAS

                                               Tano Santos
                                              Pietro Veronesi

                                          Working Paper 10413
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w10413


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       April 2004




We thank seminar participants at University of Texas at Austin, NYU, University of Illinois at Urbana-
Champaign, McGill, MIT, Columbia University, and the University of Chicago. We also thank John
Cochrane, George Constantinides, Lars Hansen, John Heaton, Martin Lettau, Lior Menzly, Toby Moskowitz,
Monika Piazzesi, and Jessica Wachter for their comments. We thank Arthur Korteweg for outstanding
research assistance. Some of the results in this paper were contained in a previous version entitled “The Time
Series of the Cross-Section of Asset Prices.” The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and not
necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2004 by Tano Santos and Pietro Veronesi. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
Conditional Betas
Tano Santos and Pietro Veronesi
NBER Working Paper No. 10413
April 2004
JEL No. G12
                                           ABSTRACT


Empirical evidence shows that conditional market betas vary substantially over time. Yet, little is

known about the source of this variation, either theoretically or empirically. Within a general

equilibrium model with multiple assets and a time varying aggregate equity premium, we show that

conditional betas depend on (a) the level of the aggregate premium itself; (b) the level of the firm's

expected dividend growth; and (c) the firm's fundamental risk, that is, the one pertaining to the

covariation of the firm's cash-flows with the aggregate economy. Especially when fundamental risk

(c) is strong, the model predicts that market betas should display a large time variation, that their

cross-sectional dispersion should be negatively related to the aggregate premium, and that

investments in physical capital should be positively related to changes in betas. These predictions

find considerable support in the data.

Tano Santos
Graduate School of Business
Columbia University
3022 Broadway, Uris Hall 414
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
js1786@columbia.edu

Pietro Veronesi
Graduate School of Business
University of Chicago
1101 East 58th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
fpverone@gsb.uchicago.edu
                                          I. INTRODUCTION

         A ﬁrm’s decision to take on a new investment project depends on whether the discounted
value of future payouts from the project exceeds the direct current investment cost. To this
day, the standard textbook recommendation is to appeal to the CAPM to compute the cost
of equity: The rate used to discount future cash-ﬂows should be proportional to the excess
return on the market portfolio, where the proportionality factor is the market beta. The task
of estimating the cost of equity though is complicated because there is substantial empirical
evidence showing that both the market premium and individual assets’ betas ﬂuctuate over
time.1 There are many theoretical explanations for the time series variation in the aggregate
premium but the same cannot be said of ﬂuctuations in betas.2 Why and how do betas move?
How do they depend on the characteristics of the cash-ﬂows that the ﬁrm promises to its
investors? How do betas correlate with the aggregate premium? How do they correlate with
investments in physical capital?
         In this paper we answer these questions within a general equilibrium model where both
the aggregate equity premium and the expected dividend growth of individual securities are
time varying. We show that conditional betas depend on (a) the level of the aggregate premium
itself; (b) the level of the ﬁrm’s expected dividend growth; and (c) the ﬁrm’s fundamental
risk, that is, the one pertaining to the covariation of the ﬁrm’s cash-ﬂows with the aggregate
economy. This characterization yields novel predictions for the time variation of conditional
betas as well as their relation with investments in physical capital. Speciﬁcally, when the ﬁrm’s
cash-ﬂow risk (c) is substantial, the model predicts that conditional betas should display a large
time variation, that their cross sectional dispersion is high when the aggregate equity premium
is low, and that capital investment growth should be positively related to changes in betas.
These predictions are met with considerable support in the data
   1
       On time-varying betas see Bollerslev, Engle, and Wooldridge (1988), Braun, Nelson, and Sunier (1995),
Bodhurta and Mark (1991), Campbell (1987), Chan (1988), Evans (1994), Ferson (1989), Ferson and Harvey
(1991, 1993), Fama and French (1997), Harvey (1989), and more recently, Franzoni (2001), Lettau and Ludvigson
(2001b), and Lewellen and Nagel (2003). On the ﬂuctuations of market premia, see Ang and Beckaert (2002),
Campbell and Shiller (1988), Fama and French (1988,1989), Goyal and Welch (2003), Hodrick (1992), Keim
and Stambaugh (1986), Lamont (1998), Lettau and Ludvigson (2001a), Menzly, Santos and Veronesi (2004),
and Santos and Veronesi (2003).
   2
     On time varying equity premium, see Campbell and Cochrane (1999), Barberis, Huang, and Santos (2001),
Veronesi (2000) and Santos and Veronesi (2003). On time varying betas, see Berk, Green and Naik (1999) and
Gomes, Kogan and Zhang (2003).



                                                      1
      To grasp intuitively the results in this paper, consider ﬁrst an asset that has little cash-
ﬂow risk, that is, an asset for which cash-ﬂows have little correlation with the “ups and downs”
of the economy, see (c) above. In this case, the risk-return trade-oﬀ is only determined by the
timing of cash-ﬂows, that is by the duration of the asset. As in the case of ﬁxed income
securities, the price of an asset that pays far in the future is more sensitive to ﬂuctuations
in the aggregate discount rate than an otherwise identical asset paying relatively more today.
Clearly, return volatility due to shocks to the aggregate discount rate is systematic. As a
consequence, the asset is riskier and thus its beta is higher the longer its duration.
      This intuition though does not hold if the asset has substantial cash-ﬂow risk. Indeed,
consider now the case of an asset whose cash-ﬂow growth is highly correlated with the growth
rate of the aggregate economy. Furthermore, assume as well that the asset has a low duration,
that is, it pays relatively more today than in the future. In this case, the total value of this
asset is mainly determined by the current level of cash-ﬂows, rather those in the future. The
price of the asset is then mostly driven by cash-ﬂow shocks and the fundamental risk embedded
in these cash-ﬂows drives also the risk of the asset. Thus, when cash-ﬂows display substantial
fundamental risk, the conditional market beta is higher when the duration is lower. If instead
the asset has high duration, current cash-ﬂows matter less and the asset becomes less risky.
      These ﬁndings highlight a tension between “discount eﬀects” (high risk when the asset
has a high duration) and “cash-ﬂow risk eﬀects” (high risk when the asset has low duration.)
This tension has deep implications for the behavior of the cross section of risk as a function
of ﬂuctuations in the aggregate equity premium. Assume ﬁrst that cash-ﬂow risk eﬀects are
negligible compared to discount eﬀects. Then the cross sectional dispersion of conditional betas
moves together with the aggregate equity premium: It is low (high) when the aggregate equity
premium is low (high). Intuitively, when the aggregate equity premium is low, individual asset
prices are determined by the average growth rate of its cash ﬂows over the long run. Given
some mean reversion in expected dividend growth – a necessary condition if no asset is to
dominate the economy – this implies that the current level of expected dividend growth is not
important in determining prices. In this case, assets’ prices have similar sensitivities to changes
in the stochastic discount factor and hence have similar market betas as well. Thus when the
equity premium is low so is the dispersion in betas. Instead, when the market premium is high,
diﬀerences in current expected dividend growth matter more in determining the diﬀerences in
value of the asset. This results in a wide dispersion of price sensitivity to changes in the
stochastic discount factor and hence more dispersed betas.


                                                2
      In contrast if cash-ﬂow risk is a key determinant of the dynamics of conditional betas
low discount rates lead to an increase in the dispersion of betas. Assets with high cash-ﬂow
risk have a component of their systematic volatility that is rather insensitive to changes in the
discount rate. However, since a low aggregate discount rate (i.e. good times) tends to yield a
low volatility of the market portfolio itself, the relative risk of the individual asset with high
cash-ﬂow risk increases, and therefore so does its beta.
      Finally we link the ﬂuctuations in market betas to ﬂuctuations in investment. To do so
we propose a simple model of ﬁrm investment behavior where the standard textbook NPV rule
holds. According to this rule, investments occur whenever market valuations are high, which
happens when the aggregate risk premium is low, or when the industry is paying relatively
high dividends compared to the future, or both. The relation between investment growth and
changes in betas is now clear. If cash ﬂow risk is negligible, a decrease in the aggregate equity
premium or an increase in current dividend payouts result in a lower conditional beta, as
already discussed. Thus a negative relation between changes in betas and investment growth
obtains. Instead, when cash-ﬂow risk dominates the risk return trade-oﬀ of the asset, there is
a positive relation between changes in betas and investment growth. The reason is that now
the beta of a low duration asset increases as the aggregate discount decreases.
      These observations produce simple empirical tests to gauge the size of discount eﬀects
relative to cash-ﬂow eﬀects in determining the dynamics of conditional betas. Empirically, we
ﬁnd that the dispersion of industry conditional betas is high when the market price dividend
ratio is high, which in turn occurs when the aggregate market premium is low (e.g. Campbell
and Shiller (1989)), conﬁrming that cross sectional diﬀerences in cash-ﬂow risk must be large.
Similarly, we ﬁnd that investments growth is higher for industries that experienced increases
in their market betas, as well as declines in their expected dividend growth, consistently again
with the model and the presence of a signiﬁcant cross sectional diﬀerences in cash-ﬂow risk.
Monte Carlo simulations of our theoretical model yield the same conclusion: When cash-
ﬂow risk is small and only discount eﬀects matter, the model-implied conditional betas show
little variation over time, unlike what is observed in the data. In contrast, when we allow
for substantial cash-ﬂow risk our simulations produce ﬂuctuations in conditional betas and
investment growth that match well their empirical counterparts.
      We obtain our results within the convenient general equilibrium model of Menzly, Santos
and Veronesi (2004) – henceforth MSV. This paper, however, diﬀers substantially from MSV,
which focused exclusively on the time series predictability of dividend growth and stock returns


                                                3
for both the market and individual portfolios. The present paper is instead concerned with
the equilibrium dynamic properties of the conditional risk embedded in individual securities,
a key variable for the computation of the cost of equity and thus for the decisions to raise
capital for new investments. As discussed, we fully characterize conditional betas as a function
of fundamentals and the aggregate market premium, and obtain numerous novel predictions
about their dynamics and their relation to investments in physical capital. This paper is also
related to Campbell and Mei (1993), Vuolteenaho (2002), and Campbell and Vuolteenaho
(2002), who also investigate the relative importance of shocks to cash ﬂows and shocks to the
aggregate discount in determining the cross-section of stock returns and market betas. These
papers though focus on unconditional betas while we emphasize the dynamic aspect of betas.
         This paper relates as well to the recent literature on the ability of the conditional CAPM
to address the asset pricing puzzles in the cross section.3 Typically, researchers assume ad-hoc
formulations of betas and, in addition, little eﬀort is taken to quantify the magnitude of the
variation in betas needed to resolve the puzzles.4 In contrast, in this paper we obtain the
market betas within an equilibrium model that successfully reproduces the variation of the
aggregate risk premium, as well as the variation in expected dividend growth of individual
assets. Our characterization of betas allows us to quantify the magnitude of their variation at
the industry level and yields several interesting insights about expected returns: For instance,
it is not surprising that industry portfolios have little diﬀerences in unconditional expected
returns, notwithstanding large diﬀerences in conditional betas. In fact, consistently with the
model, our empirical results show that the dispersion of betas is high when the aggregate equity
premium is low, and viceversa, which imply a little dispersion in expected returns in average.
         The paper develops as follows. Section II contains a brief summary of the MSV model.
Section III contains the theoretical results. In Section IV we propose a simple model of invest-
ment and link the ﬂuctuations in betas to changes in investments. Section V oﬀers empirical
tests as well as simulations of the many implications of the model. Section VI concludes. All
proofs are contained in the Appendix.




   3
       See e.g. Jagannathan and Wang (1996), Lettau and Ludvigson (2001b), Santos and Veronesi (2001), Fran-
zoni (2001).
   4
     Lewellen and Nagel (2003) is a noteworthy exception.


                                                      4
                                             II. THE MODEL

II.A Preferences
         There is a representative investor who maximizes
                         ∞                        ∞                   
                                                          −ρt
                      E       u (Ct , Xt, t) dt = E      e log (Ct − Xt) dt ,                              (1)
                              0                             0

where Xt denotes an external habit level and ρ denotes the subjective discount rate.5 In
this framework, as advanced by Campbell and Cochrane (1999), the fundamental state vari-
able driving the attitudes towards risk is the surplus consumption ratio, St = (Ct − Xt) /Ct .
Movements of this surplus produce ﬂuctuations of the local curvature of the utility function,
                                     uCC      1       Ct       1
                            Yt = −       Ct =    =         =     > 1,                                    (2)
                                      uC      St   Ct − Xt   1− X t
                                                                 Ct

which translate into the corresponding variation on the prices and returns of ﬁnancial as-
sets. MSV assume that the inverse of the surplus consumption ratio, or inverse surplus for
short, Yt , follows a mean reverting process, perfectly negatively correlated with innovations in
consumption growth
                                          
                             dYt = k Y − Yt dt − α (Yt − λ) (dct − Et [dct]) ,                             (3)

where λ ≥ 1 is a lower bound for the inverse surplus, and an upper bound for the surplus itself,
Y > λ is the long run mean of the inverse surplus and k is the speed of the mean reversion.
Here ct = log (Ct ) and we assume that it can be well approximated by the process:

                                             dct = µc dt + σc dBt1 ,                                       (4)

where µc is the mean consumption growth, possibly time varying, σ c > 0 is a scalar, and Bt1 is
a standard Brownian motion. Given (3) and (4) then, we assume that the parameter α in (3)
is positive (α > 0), so that a negative innovation in consumption growth, for example, results
in an increase in the inverse surplus, or, equivalently, a decrease in the surplus level, capturing
the intuition that the consumption level Ct moves further away from a slow moving habit Xt .6
   5
       On habit persistence and asset pricing see Sundaresan (1989), Constantinides (1990), Abel (1990), Ferson
and Constantinides (1991), Detemple and Zapatero (1991), Daniel and Marshall (1997), Campbell and Cochrane
(1999), Li (2001), and Wachter (2000). These papers though only deal with the time series properties of the
market portfolio and have no implications for the risk and return properties of individual securities.
  6
                                             
    MSV show that α ≤ α (λ) = (2λ − 1) + 2 λ (λ − 1) is needed in order to ensure that covt (dCt , dXt) > 0
for all St , as economic intuition would have it.


                                                        5
II.B The cash-ﬂow model
                                                                                                  n
          There are n risky ﬁnancial assets paying a dividend rate, Dti                           i=1
                                                                                                      ,   in units of a homoge-
neous and perishable consumption good. Agents total income is made up of these n cash-ﬂows,
plus other proceeds such as labor income and government transfers. Denoting by Dt0 the ag-
gregate income ﬂow that is not ﬁnancial in nature, standard equilibrium restrictions require
            n
Ct =        i=0   Dti . Deﬁne the share of consumption that each asset produces,

                                                                     Dti
                                                            sit =        .                                                     (5)
                                                                     Ct

Then MSV assume that sit evolves according to a mean reverting process of the form
                                          
                         dsit = φi si − sit dt + sit σ i (st ) dBt ,            for each i = 1, ..., n.                       (6)
                         
In (6) Bt = Bt1 , ..., BtN is a N -dimensional row vector of standard Brownian motions, si ∈
[0, 1) is the average long-term consumption share, φi is the speed of mean reversion, and
                                                n
                             σ i (st) = v i −         sjt v j = [σi1 (st) , σi2 (st ) , · · · , σiN (st )]                     (7)
                                                j=0


is a N dimensional row vector of volatilities, with v i for i = 0, 1, · · ·, n a row vector of constants
with N ≤ n + 1.7
          The share process described in (6) has a number of reasonable properties. First, the
functional form of the volatility term (7) arises for any homoskedastic dividend growth model.
                                   
That is, denoting by δit = log Dti , (7) is consistent with any model of the form, dδ it =
µi (Dt ) dt + v i dBt, as it is immediate to verify by applying Ito’s Lemma to the quantity
sit = Dti /(      n
                  j=0   Dtj ). Second, the assumption that the share sit is mean reverting ensures that
no asset will ever dominate the whole economy, as it appears ex-ante reasonable. Third, under
                         n                            n
the conditions           i=1 s
                               i   < 1 and φi >            j j
                                                      j=1 s φ ,      dividends are positive and total income equals
total consumption at all times.
          In this framework the relative share, si /sit , stands as a proxy for the asset’s duration.
When the relative share is high (low) the assets pays relatively more (less) as a fraction of
total consumption in the future than it does presently and then we say that the asset has a
high (low) duration. Clearly, high duration assets are also those that experience high dividend
                                                             
growth. Indeed, an application of Ito’s Lemma to δ it = log Dti yields
   7
       The process for the alternative source of income, s0t , follows immediately from the fact that 1 −               n
                                                                                                                        i=1   sit .



                                                                 6
                                                dδ it = µiD (st ) dt + σ iD (st) dBt ,

where
                                                                            
                                                                      si      1
                              µiD   (st ) = µc + φ               i
                                                                       i
                                                                         − 1 − σ i (st ) σ i (st ) ,               (8)
                                                                      st      2
                              σ iD (st ) = σ c + σ i (st) .                                                         (9)

and σ c = (σ c , 0, ..., 0).8 Notice that the volatility of the share process, σ i (st ) , is parametrically
indeterminate, that is, adding a constant vector to all v i’s leaves the share processes unaltered.
A convenient parametrization is then to rescale the vector of constants v i ’s, for i = 0, 1, ..., n
so that
                                                                n
                                                                      sj v j = 0.                                  (10)
                                                                j=0
           Finally the model oﬀers a simple characterization of the fundamental measure of an
asset’s risk, the covariation of the growth rate of its cash-ﬂows with consumption growth,
                                                                    n
                     covt dδit , dct       =   σ2c   +   θiCF   −          sjt θ jCF   where    θ iCF = v1i σc .   (11)
                                                                     j=0
                                                                           
The normalization in (10) implies that the unconditionally E covt dδ it , dct = σ 2c + θ iCF ,
           n    j i
as         j=0 s θCF   = 0. Thus, the parameter θ iCF determines the unconditional cross sectional
diﬀerences of cash-flow risks across the various assets.9

                                           III. CONDITIONAL BETAS

III.A Preliminaries
           In the absence of any frictions the price of asset i is given by:
                    ∞                                             ∞                   
             i            −ρ(τ −t) uc (Cτ − Xτ )      i        Ct           −ρ(τ −t) i
           Pt = Et       e                          Dτ dτ =       Et       e        sτ Yτ dτ ,                     (12)
                      t             uc (Ct − Xt)               Yt      t

where Dτi = siτ Cτ . Notice that for the total wealth portfolio, the claim to total consumption,
siτ = 1 for all τ . In this case a complete characterization of the price and return process is
possible and they are given by
                                                                         
                                       PtT W    TW          1       kY
                                             =Φ    (St ) =       1+    St                                          (13)
                                        Ct                 ρ+k       ρ
     8
         MSV ﬁnd substantial empirical support for both the fact that dividends and consumption are cointegrated,
and that the relative share si /sit predicts future dividend growth, as (8) implies.
   9
     1 + θiCF /σ2c can then be taken to be the unconditional cash-ﬂow beta of asset i, the covariance of dividend
growth with consumption growth divided by the variance of consumption growth.


                                                                           7
and dRTt W = µTRW (St) dt + σ TRW (St) dB1,t, where

                               µTRW (St) = (1 + α (1 − λSt)) σ TRW (St ) σc                         (14)
                                                                  
                                 TW             kY St (1 − λSt ) α
                               σ R (St) = 1 +                        σc .                           (15)
                                                     kY St + ρ
         Equation (13) shows that price of the total wealth portfolio is increasing in the surplus
consumption ratio. Roughly, if the surplus consumption ratio is high the degree of risk aversion
is low and thus the high price of the total wealth portfolio. As for µTRW (St ) and σTRW (St ) they
are both decreasing in St for high values of St, as the intuition would have it. However, they
are increasing in St for very low values of St . The reason is that since St ∈ (0, 1/λ) , the
volatility of St must vanish as St → 0. This translates in a lower volatility of returns, and,
hence, in a decrease in expected returns as well.10
         As for individual securities, assume ﬁrst that their prices can be written as:
                                                           
                                           Pti    i     si
                                               = Φ St , i                                           (16)
                                           Dti          st
Equation (16) can be intuitively understood appealing to the traditional Gordon model. Here
St is the main variable determining movements in the aggregate discount rate, whereas si /sit,
stands for the dividend growth of asset i, as shown in equation (8). In other words, we expect
              
Φi St , si /sit to be increasing in both St and si /sit. Below we provide closed form solutions for
              
Φi St , si /sit and conﬁrm these intuitions. However, much can be said about conditional betas
without making any additional assumptions once we assume that the price dividend ratio can
be written as in (16).

 Proposition 1: Let the price function be given by (16). Then, (a) the process for returns is
        given by
                                                                              n
                                   dRit   =   µiR,tdt   + σ i1,R,tdB1,t   +         σij,R,t dBj,t   (17)
                                                                              j=2

        where the loadings to the systematic and idiosyncratic shocks are, respectively,
                                                                              
                    i
                              i
                                          ∂Pti /Pti                 ∂Pti /Pti
                  σ 1,R,t St, st = σ c +               σS (St) σc +              σ i1 (st) ;        (18)
                                            ∂St/St                   ∂sit /sit
                                                    
                    i
                              i
                                          ∂Pti /Pti
                  σ j,R,t St, st = 1 +        i   i
                                                        σ ij (st ) ;
                                            ∂st /st
        and σ i1 (st) and σ ij (st ) are given in (7) and σ S (St ) = α (1 − λSt) is the time varying
        component of the volatility of the surplus consumption ratio dSt/St .
 10
      For a plot of µTRW (St ) and σTRW (St ) the reader can turn to Figure 1 in MSV.


                                                             8
 (b) The CAPM beta with respect to the total wealth portfolio can be written as,
                                             
                          covt dRit, dRTt W                                           
          i      i i
         β St , s /st , st =       T W  = β iDISC St , si /sit + β iCF St , si /sit , st                            (19)
                              vart dRt
         where
                                                                i i
                                                        1 + ∂P      /P
                                                                  ∂St /St
                                                                            σS (St )
                              β iDISC St , si /sit =         TW TW                     ;                            (20)
                                                              ∂P      /P
                                                        1+        ∂St /St     σ S (S t )
                                                         i i                                
                                                         ∂P /P          i
                                                                            −    n      j j                 
                                                          i  i
                                                         ∂st /st
                                                                      θ CF       j=0  s t θ CF        1
                             β iCF St, si /sit , st =             TW TW                                             (21)
                                                           1+
                                                                   ∂P     /P
                                                                                  σS (St )            σ2c
                                                                      ∂St /St


         Consider ﬁrst part (a) of the proposition. As it intuitively follows from (16), consumption
shocks, dBt1 , aﬀect returns through three channels: (i ) the impact on the dividend of the asset
Dti = sit Ct ; (ii ) the impact on the surplus consumption ratio St , which only loads on dBt1 ; and
(iii ) the impact on the share sit , that is, the relative share si /sit .
         Part (b) of Proposition 2 now follows naturally from part (a). The CAPM beta has two
components to it. The ﬁrst one captures the component of the covariance that is driven by
shocks to the discount factor, and, logically, we refer to it as the “discount beta.” It depends
                                                                                                                  ∂P i /P i
on the sensitivity of the price of the asset to shocks in the surplus consumption ratio,                          ∂St /St
                                                                                                                            .
                                                                                     ∂P T W /P T W
If this elasticity is higher than that of the total wealth portfolio,                   ∂St /St
                                                                                                     , the asset is riskier
on this account than the total wealth portfolio and thus it has a higher discount beta.
         The second component of the return beta is driven by asset’s cash-ﬂow shocks and for
this reason we refer to it as the “cash-ﬂow beta.” It depends on the elasticity of prices to shocks
               ∂P i /P i
in shares,     ∂sit /sit
                         .   Of course, only the component of the shock that covaries with consumption
is relevant for pricing and for this reason the expression for the cash-ﬂow beta includes the
covariance of dsit/sit with consumption growth itself:

                                                                       n
                                       covt dsit /sit , dct = θiCF −         sjt θjCF ,                               (22)
                                                                       j=0

where we recall that θ iCF is the parameter that regulates the unconditional covariance between
consumption growth and dividend growth, as deﬁned in (11). This component then is driven
by the covariance of the cash-ﬂows of asset i with consumption, and hence with the stochastic
discount factor.11
  11
       Campbell and Vuolteenaho (2002) refer to the “cash ﬂow beta” as bad beta and the discount beta as “good.”
Our terminology is closer to that of Campbell and Mei (1996)


                                                            9
      The results in Proposition 1 are generic. They rest on assuming that the price dividend
ratio can be written as in (16). We show next that this is indeed the case for the two polar
cases where either cash-ﬂow eﬀects or discount eﬀects are assumed away. For the general case
we show that equation (16) is a very accurate approximation so that the intuitions built in
Proposition 1 remain.

III.B The discount beta

      To asses the impact of the variation in the discount factor on the cross section of stock
prices and returns, we shut down the cross sectional diﬀerences in unconditional cash-ﬂow risk,
that is, we set θiCF = 0 for all i = 1, .., n in (11). The next proposition characterizes prices and
betas in this case. Part (a) is shown in MSV, and it is reported for completeness:

 Proposition 2. Let θ iCF = 0 for all i = 1, .., n. Then, (a) the price dividend ratio of asset i,
      is given by
                                                                              
                     Pti                      i                     si                        
                         = Φ i
                                 S t , si i
                                         /st  ≡ a0 + ai
                                                      1 Y kS t                    + ai + ai2 Y kSt     (23)
                     Dti                                                sit
                           −1 i                                                   
      where ai = ρ + k + φi    , a0 = ai φi (ρ + k)−1 , ai1 = ai0 2ρ + k + φi / ρ ρ + φi and
                     −1
      ai2 = ai ρ + φi     .

 (b) The CAPM beta is given by

                                                             kY St
                                                 1 + kY St +ρf (si /sit) σ S (St )
                            β iDISC          i i
                                       St , s /st =                                  ,                 (24)
                                                      1 + kYkYSS+ρ
                                                                 t
                                                                     σ S (St)
                                                                    t


      where f (·) is such that f  < 0 and f (1) = 1 and it is given explicitly by equation (37)
      in the Appendix.

      Equation (23) shows that asset i’s price dividend ratio is increasing in both si /sit and
St . This is intuitive: As shown in (8), si /sit is positively associated with the asset’s dividend
growth, whereas St is negatively associated with the aggregate discount (see equation (14)).
       Part (b) of Proposition 2 characterizes the CAPM beta in the case where there are only
                                               
discount eﬀects. Since f (1) = 1 and f  si /sit < 0, for any level of the surplus consumption
                                                                                        
ratio, high duration assets, that is, those with si /sit > 1, have a β iDISC St , si /sit > 1, while
the opposite is true for low duration assets. The reason is that high duration assets deliver
dividends in the distant future, and thus their prices are particularly sensitive to changes in


                                                    10
the aggregate discount, which is regulated by St. These assets are then riskier than otherwise
identical assets with lower duration.
          An additional characterization of the CAPM beta is provided in the following corollary:

 Corollary 3. Let θ iCF = 0 for all i = 1, .., n. Then, for any given level of si /sit > (<)1,
                                                   
    there exists a St∗ such that β DISC St , si /sit is decreasing (increasing) in the surplus
         consumption ratio, St for St > St∗ .

          Corollary 3 says that for a given relative share si /sit , the CAPM betas are more dispersed
for low, but not too low, levels of St .12 To gain some intuition it is useful to turn to Panel A of
Figure 1, where we plot the beta as a function of St and si /sit. First, during booms, when St
is high, the aggregate equity premium is low and thus the prices of all assets are mainly driven
by the expected dividends in the far future. Mean reversion in expected dividend growth then
implies that the variation in the aggregate discount rate has a similar impact on the prices of
the diﬀerent assets, and thus that they all have similar risk: All betas are close to each other
and around 1. In contrast, when St is low and the aggregate discount rate is high, agents
discount future dividends considerably, and thus the level of current dividend growth matters
more. In this case then, whether the asset has high or low duration is a key determinant of
its riskiness and this yields a high cross sectional dispersion of betas when St is low and the
aggregate premium is high.

III.C The cash-ﬂow beta

          How do cross sectional diﬀerences in unconditional cash-ﬂow risk aﬀect the main conclu-
sions obtained in the previous section? In order to obtain sharp implications about cash-ﬂow
risk in the context of our cash-ﬂow model (6), we focus in this section on the case with no
discount eﬀects, and leave for the next section the more general case. To shut down discount
eﬀects, we must ensure that Xt = 0 for all t, and thus we assume α = 0 and Yt = Y = λ = 1.
We then obtain the standard log utility representation with multiple assets. The next propo-
sition characterizes the prices and returns of individual securities in this case. Again, part (a)
is shown in MSV.

 Proposition 4. Let α = 0 and Yt = Y = λ = 1. Then:
  12
       Recall that for low levels of the surplus consumption ratio, its volatility has to go down in order to keep St
above zero. This eﬀect decreases the volatility of the total wealth portfolio. From the stationary density of St ,
a low value of St has a very small probability of occurring, however. See Figure 1 in MSV.


                                                          11
 (a) The price dividend ratio of asset i, is given by
                                                                                                            
                             Pti                                   1                   1               φi       si
                               i
                                 = Φi si /sit ≡                                  +                                                (25)
                             Dt                                    ρ + φi              ρ + φi            ρ        sit

 (b) The CAPM beta is given by
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                              
                              i i                             1
                                                                                               n
                                                                                                                        1
                     β iCF    s /st , st = 1 +                  i              θiCF −             sjt θjCF                    (26)
                                                       1+           φ      si                                           σ2c
                                                                    ρ      sit                j=0


      Equation (25) shows that, as before, the price dividend ratio is increasing in si /sit . Part
(b) of Proposition 4 provides the CAPM beta with respect to the total wealth portfolio, which
is the specialization of the cash-ﬂow beta in equation (21) to this case. In particular, recall
                                 n    j i
that under condition (10),       j=0 st θCF          ≈ 0, and thus (26) simply shows that, intuitively, assets
with a high unconditional cash-ﬂow risk θ iCF have a high market beta.
      Notice that now if θiCF > 0, the premium is higher the lower the relative share, si /sit,
that is the lower the assets i’s duration. This is also intuitive: assets with low si /sit have prices
that are mainly determined by the current cash-ﬂows. Thus, naturally, the covariance of cash-
ﬂows with consumption growth, regulated by θ iCF , has substantial impact on the riskiness of
the asset. This results in a relatively higher risk for low duration assets. This implication is in
                                                       
stark contrast with the behavior of β iDISC St , si /sit obtained in the previous section, where
we found that high duration assets had a higher risk. As we will see, this implication about
the cash-ﬂow beta, β iCF , carries over in the general case, yielding a tension between discount
betas and cash-ﬂow betas.

III.D Betas in the general case

      The general model, where the cash-ﬂow and discount eﬀects are combined, is more
complex than either one of the cases discussed so far. For this reason, an exact closed form
solution for prices and the corresponding CAPM representation is not available. However,
there is a very accurate analytical approximate solution of the same form as (16), where the
nature of the approximation is contained in the Appendix of MSV. As in equations (23) and
(25), we ﬁnd                                                                                                 
                                                                                                     si
                         Pti /Dti   ≈Φ   i
                                                 St , sit/si       =    Φi0 (St )    + Φi1   (St )                                (27)
                                                                                                       sit
where Φij (St ), j = 1, 2, are linear functions of St given explicitly in (34) and (35), respec-
tively. The important additional feature of this pricing formula is that it now depends on the

                                                                   12
parameter θiCF , that is, the parameter deﬁned in equation (11) that regulates the long-term
unconditional cash-ﬂow risk. Generically speaking, a high θ iCF tends to decrease the price of
the asset.
                               
            Given Φ St , si /sit in (27), we can apply the general result in Proposition 2 (b), and
thus obtain the beta representation (19). The formulas are explicitly given in (36) and (38) in
                                         
the Appendix. Brieﬂy, β iDISC St , si /sit is essentially identical to the one obtained in equation
(24), with the only additional feature that a high unconditional cash-ﬂow risk θ iCF is associated
with a higher discount beta.
            The most interesting eﬀect of the general model, instead, pertains to the cash-ﬂow beta
                                                                                           
β iCF       St , si /sit, st . As in the case with no discount eﬀects, β iCF St , si /sit , st is still decreasing
in the relative share si /sit when the unconditional cash-ﬂow risk θiCF > 0 (see discussion in
Section III.C). In addition, however, it now depends also on the surplus consumption ratio St.
That is, how important cash-ﬂow risk is also depends on the aggregate state of the economy.
                                                              
        Panels B and C of Figure 1 plot the β iCF St , si /sit for the cases where θ iCF > 0 and
                                                                                
θ iCF < 0, respectively.13 In contrast to the discount beta β iDISC St , si /sit , we can see that
                 
β iCF St , si /sit tends to display a higher relative cross sectional dispersion during good times,
that is, when St is high. Intuitively, as we discussed in Proposition 4 (b), a low duration asset
with a positive unconditional cash-ﬂow risk θiCF > 0 tends to have a high beta, as its price is
mainly determined by current dividends rather than the future ones. This component of the
systematic volatility of the asset price is relatively insensitive to the ﬂuctuations in the discount
rate, as it stems from cash-ﬂow ﬂuctuations. However, during good times the volatility of the
total wealth portfolio is lower than in bad times, as shown in equation (15). Thus, the low
duration asset tends to become relatively riskier – compared to the total wealth portfolio –
during good times, that is, when St is high. A similar argument holds for θ iCF < 0, although
in this case the source of the diﬀerence stems from the hedging properties of the asset. In this
case, we obtain that the cash-ﬂow beta, which is negative, is lower when St is high when assets
have low duration. In summary, independently of whether θ iCF is positive or negative the cross
sectional dispersion of cash-ﬂow betas increases when the aggregate premium decreases.




  13
                                                           i=1 st θ CF ≈ 0. The plots are for values of the
       We make use of the normalization (10) and thus set Σn    i i


parameters of the underlying cash ﬂow process that are of the same magnitude as the ones found in the
estimation procedure below for the set of industry portfolios we use.


                                                          13
                     IV. CONDITIONAL BETAS AND INVESTMENTS

         The cost of equity is a key determinant of the ﬁrm’s decision to invest. To address the
relation between investment decisions and time-varying betas we propose next a simple model
of the ﬁrm’s investment behavior. In this section, we interpret the n risky assets introduced
in Section II as industries, and the betas derived in Section III as industry portfolio betas.
We then link the investment decisions of a small ﬁrm with its corresponding industry beta, a
relation that is taken to the data in the empirical section. MSV indeed show that the cash-ﬂow
model (6) oﬀers a reasonable description of the cash-ﬂows associated with industry portfolios.
IV.A A simple model of investment

         Consider a small ﬁrm in industry i faced with the decision of whether to undertake an
investment project at time t. We assume this project can only be undertaken at time t, as it
vanishes afterwards, has a ﬁxed scale, and requires an exogenous initial investment amount It.
We also assume that projects arrive independently of the ﬁrm’s previous investment decisions.14
All these assumptions imply that the textbook NPV rule holds and the ﬁrm chooses to invest
by simply comparing the value of the discounted cash ﬂows to the investment needed to attain
them, It . If the investment does take place, the project produces a continuum random cash ﬂow
CFτ up to some random time t + T , where T is a random variable exponentially distributed
with parameter p > 0. We assume that the cash ﬂow process is given by

                                               CFτ = aDτi ετ .

where a is a constant. Here Dτi is the aggregate dividend of industry i and ετ is an idiosyncratic
component that follows a mean reverting process
                                                               √
                                     dεt = kε (1 − εt ) dt +       εt σε dBt,

where dBt is uncorrelated with the Brownian motions introduced in Section II. This setting
ensures that the cash ﬂows produced by the new investment inherits the cash-ﬂow risk char-
acteristics of industry i, although the idiosyncratic component may drift these cash ﬂow far
away from the industry mean.15
  14
       Berk, Green, and Naik (1999) and Gomes, Kogan, and Zhang (2003) have recently proposed similar models
of investments though to answer diﬀerent questions.
  15
     We do not attempt here to oﬀer a general equilibrium model of investments, as doing so is outside the scope
of the simple investment model oﬀered in this section. However, note that if there are N investment projects



                                                      14
       The discounted value of the project’s cash-ﬂows, Vt, is now easy to calculate. Assuming
that investors are well diversiﬁed the value of the project at time t is
                                   t+T                               
                                           −ρ(s−t) uc (Cs − Xs )
                          Vt = Et        e                       CFs ds                                     (28)
                                     t             uc (Ct − Xt )
and investment occurs according to the textbook NPV rule, that is, if Vt > It .
       To understand the relation between betas and investments, it is convenient to rewrite
(28), the value of the speciﬁc project at hand,16 in the more familiar form (see Appendix):
                                    t+T    
                                                                        
                                            − ts rτ +β τ ×µT W dτ
                           Vt = Et         e               τ      CFs ds ,               (29)
                                             t

where rτ is the risk free rate at τ , µTτ W is the expected excess return on the total wealth
portfolio, and                                                                        
                                                               Covτ dVτ /Vτ , dRTτ W
                            β τ = β Sτ , s i
                                               /siτ , ετ       =                 
                                                                    V arτ dRTt W
is the beta with respect to the total wealth portfolio. Equation (43) in the Appendix shows
that β τ has a representation similar to the one in (19).
       It is clear now that even when the standard positive NPV rule applies and the conditional
CAPM holds, as they do in this simple framework, the prescription of computing separately
the cost of capital and expected future cash ﬂows is misleading as
                      s                         s                
                   Et e− t rτ +β τ ×µs dτ CFs = Et e− t rτ +β τ ×µτ dτ Et [CFs ] .
                                     TW                           TW




Even when the expected excess returns on the market portfolio µTs W is constant, the presence
of predictable components in dividend growth induce time varying betas that naturally cor-
relate with the future cash ﬂows of new projects.17 Variation in the aggregate premium only
complicates the problem further.
alive at any time t in industry i, and a = 1/N , an application of the central limit theorem shows that the total
cash ﬂows from these projects approaches Dti as N → ∞. The model can then potentially be closed by a simple
assumption that the industry produces a total output rate given by Kti = Dti + Iti , where Iti is the aggregate
investment deﬁned by the optimal investment rule below.
  16
     This should not be confused with the value of the ﬁrm, which includes the portfolio of current projects plus
the options to invest in all future projects that arise.
  17
     And there are predictable components in dividend growth. MSV show that the relative share si /sit forecasts
dividend growth for the majority of industries in our sample (see their Table III.) Ang and Liu (2004) also
emphasize that the cost of capital cannot be computed separately from the expected cash-ﬂows in a setting
where the beta dynamics are assumed exogenously.



                                                               15
         Given that the decision to invest has to be taken before εt is known and that E [εt] = 1,
the Appendix shows that NPV rule is given by
                                                                
                                         Vt = aDti ΦV St, si /sit > It                                    (30)
                    
where ΦV St , si /sit is as in (27) but where the parameter ρ is substituted for ρ + p. That
is, investments occur when prices are high, which occur when either the surplus consumption
ratio St is high, Dti is high or si /sit is high. In our setting, however, Dti = sit Ct . From the
                         
formula of ΦV St , si /sit in (27), and assuming that the size of investment grows with the
economy, It = bCt , we ﬁnd that investment occurs whenever

                                          sit V                           b
                                  VtN =     i
                                              Φ0 (St ) + ΦV1 (St) > I ∗ = i ,                             (31)
                                          s                              as
where VtN = Vt /Ct , and ΦV0 (St ) and ΦV1 (St) are as in (34) and (35) in the Appendix with
the only exception that ρ is substituted for ρ + p, as already mentioned. The implications for
the ﬁrm’s investment rule are now clear and intuitive. Given that ΦV0 (St ) and ΦV1 (St ) are
positive, increasing functions of St , investments occur when the surplus consumption ratio, St,
is high, that is whenever the aggregate premium is low.18 It also occurs whenever sit /si is high,
that is, when the industry expected dividend growth is low. The reason is that an industry
with high dividend today relative to those in the future is one with high valuations as well, as
measured for instance by the price consumption ratio.

IV.B Changes in betas and changes in investments

         Equation (31) oﬀers a complete characterization of the ﬁrm’ investment policy. Our
purpose next is to link this behavior to the variation in betas. After all, cross sectional
diﬀerences in the discount can only arise due to cross sectional diﬀerences in betas. Here turning
to Figure 1 is helpful to oﬀer intuitive predictions about the relation between investments and
betas. The question is whether β is high when prices are high, or, to put it diﬀerently, whether
β increases or decreases when prices increase, since the decision to invest is related to changes
in prices that push VtN above I ∗ . The classical CAPM setting would intuitively suggest that a
high beta implies a high cost of capital, and thus lower prices discouraging the ﬁrm to invest.
The endogenous time variation in betas oﬀers a more subtle picture of the cross sectional
diﬀerences in the cost of equity ﬁrms may face depending on the industry they belong to.
  18
       This proposition has, of course, received considerable attention. See, for example, Barro (1990), Lamont
(2000), Baker, Stein, and Wurgler (2003), and Porter (2003).



                                                       16
      Assume ﬁrst that there are no cash ﬂow eﬀects (θ CF = 0) so that β t = β DISC (.), which
is plotted in the top panel in Figure 1. Equation (31) shows that investment occurs when the
surplus consumption ratio St is high or the relative share si /sit is low. As shown in the top
panel of Figure 1, the combination of a high St and a low si /sit results in a low discount beta.
Thus, if discount eﬀects dominate the risk-return characteristics of projects, investment occurs
when betas decrease.
      The opposite conclusion obtains in the presence of substantial cash-ﬂow risk. In this
case, the total beta is the sum of the discount beta and the cash ﬂow beta. Consider ﬁrst the
case where θ CF > 0 (the middle panel in Figure 1.) The cash-ﬂow beta is high whenever the
surplus consumption ratio St is high or the relative share si /sit is low, the conditions that lead
to higher investment according to (31). In addition, a positive θ CF implies that, on average,
an increase in the surplus St is correlated with an increase in the share sit and thus negatively
correlated with the relative share si /sit . Thus, on average, the cash-ﬂow beta of assets with a
high θ CF > 0 moves along the ray of low surplus−high duration to high surplus−low duration.
This implies that if θCF is positive and suﬃciently large, a positive relation between investment
growth and change in betas should occur.
      The case where θCF < 0, plotted in the bottom panel of Figure 1, leads to the same
conclusion, although the intuition is slightly more involved. First of all, a negative θ CF < 0
implies on average cash-ﬂow betas move along the ray of low surplus−low duration area to
the high surplus−high duration. Moreover β CF is increasing along this diagonal. Since the
eﬀect of changes in St on prices is intuitively the most important one – all prices are high in
good times – it follows that, on average, a positive relation between investment growth and
the cash-ﬂow beta obtains as well.

                               V. EMPIRICAL ANALYSIS

V.A Data
      Our data and estimation of parameters can be found in MSV. Brieﬂy, quarterly dividends,
returns, market equity and other ﬁnancial series are obtained from the CRSP database, for the
sample period 1946-2001. We use the Shiller (1989) annual data for the period 1927-1945, where
we interpolate the consumption data to obtain quarterly quantities. We focus our empirical
exercises on a set of twenty value-weighted industry portfolios for which summary statistics
are provided in Table AI. There are two reasons to focus on this set of portfolios: The ﬁrst is
that they enable us to obtain relatively smooth cash-ﬂow data that are a-priory consistent with


                                                17
the underlying model for cash-ﬂows put forward in this paper (equation (6)). We concentrate
our analysis on a coarse deﬁnition of industries – the ﬁrst two SIC codes – which are likely to
generate cash-ﬂows for a very long time. A second reason to focus on industry portfolios is
that, as shown by Fama and French (1997), they display a large time series variation in their
betas, precisely the object of interest in this paper.19 Moreover, industry portfolios show little,
if any, cross sectional dispersion in average returns. This may suggest that there is little cross
sectional dispersion in cash-ﬂow risk across these portfolios. We show how testing whether
the cross section of betas is positively or negatively related to the aggregate equity premium
uncovers instead important cash-ﬂow eﬀects. This set of test portfolios then seems an ideal
laboratory to test many of the implications of the model.
         The cash-ﬂow series includes both dividends as well as share repurchases (constructed
as in Jagannathan, Stephens, and Weisbach (2000)) a detailed description is included in the
Appendix in MSV. With some abuse of terminology we use the expressions “cash-ﬂow” and
“dividend” interchangeably throughout the empirical section. Finally consumption is deﬁned as
real per capita consumption of non durables plus services, seasonally adjusted and is obtained
from the NIPA tables. All nominal quantities are deﬂated using the personal consumption
expenditure deﬂator, also obtained from NIPA.
                                                        
         MSV contain a number of tests showing that log Dti and log(Ct ) are cointegrated series
for most industries (twelve out of twenty), and that indeed the relative share sit /sit is the
strongest predictor of future dividend growth, as the model implies. Finally, they show that
the cross-sectional and time variation in price dividend ratios implied by the model nicely line
up with the empirical data.
         As for the deﬁnition of investments, we deﬁne them as Capital Expenditures (Compustat
Item 128) over Property, Plants, and Equipment (PPE, Compustat, Item 8). Individual ﬁrm
investments are aggregated to industry investments in three diﬀerent ways: Total Capital
Expenditure over Total PPE, referred to as Total Investments, or as a value-weighted or
equally weighted average of ﬁrm investments. Data are available from 1951 - 2001, at the
annual frequency.
         Finally, Table I reports the estimates of the parameters used for the simulations below.
  19
       Braun, Nelson, and Sunier (1995, page 1584-5) also ﬁnd that “the evidence for time-varying betas is some-
what strong” for their set of industry and decile portfolios. In addition these authors compare the rolling
regression estimate of the ﬁve year window beta with the estimate obtained from an EGARCH model and show
that these two estimates track each other rather well (see their Figure 1.) Ferson and Harvey (1991) also ﬁnd
substantial variation in the betas of the industry portfolios in their sample.


                                                        18
These parameters are as in MSV and the reader is referred to Appendix B in that paper for
details.

Estimation of θ iCF

         As repeatedly emphasized, θ iCF is the key parameter in evaluating many of the asset
pricing implications of the model. We estimate this parameter using two alternative procedures.
Our ﬁrst estimate relies exclusively on cash-ﬂow data. Speciﬁcally we make use of expressions
                                                 
(11) and (10) which yield θ iCF = E covt dδ it, dct − var (dct). Given that Et [dct] is constant,
                                     
we simply have θ iCF = cov dδ it , dct − var (dct) and estimate it accordingly. These estimates
are reported in Table I in the column denoted θ iCF -Cash-ﬂow.
         Our second estimation procedure uses stock return data to back out the cash-ﬂow pa-
rameter θ iCF . This estimation procedure is motivated by the fact that, as we show below, when
we estimate θ iCF using only cash-ﬂow data, the cash-ﬂow beta β iCF ﬂuctuates too little. As
noted by Campbell and Mei (1993, page 575) cash-ﬂow betas are only imprecisely estimated
and thus it is natural to ask whether the lack of variation in betas is due to a downward bias
in our estimates of θ iCF . Speciﬁcally, we estimate θ iCF and v i using a GMM procedure where
the moment conditions are constructed as follows. First deﬁne,
                                                                  
                                 ui1,t = Rit − β i St, si /sit , st RM
                                                                     t
                                             2                      
                                 ui2,t = Rit − σ 2Ri St , si /sit , st
                                                              t

                                                                                                     
where β St, si /sit , st is the theoretical beta as given in expression (19) and σ2Ri St , si /sit , st
           i
                                                                                         t
is the theoretical variance of returns implied by expression (17). The moment conditions are
then given by
                                                                     
                                     E        ui1,t, ui1,tRM    i
                                                           t , u2,t          =0

         To make sure that the system is not underidentiﬁed we assume, for simplicity, that the
vector of constants governing the diﬀusion component of the share process (see expression (6))
is such that                                                                   
                                          θ iCF
                                 vi =           , 0, . . ., 0, v i, 0, . . ., 0 ,
                                           σc
where the only non-zero element besides θ iCF /σ c , the systematic component, occurs in entry
i + 1.
         The results of the estimation are contained in Table I under the heading θ iCF −Return.
As can be readily noted, there is a remarkable diﬀerence in the estimates across these two
alternative procedures. First notice that the estimates in, absolute terms, are oﬀ by a factor of

                                                        19
ten! Estimating θ iCF using returns emphasizes the point that resorting only to cash-ﬂow data
may seriously underestimate the amount of cash-ﬂow risk present in the data. Second, notice
as well that many of the estimates ﬂip signs, and whereas negative signs dominate when only
cash-ﬂow data is used, positive ones do when returns data is used.

V.B Can the model generate substantial variation in betas?

         Fama and French (1997) provide a simple estimator of the time variation in betas: Under
the assumption that the sampling error associated with the market betas is uncorrelated with
the true value of the beta, the variance of the rolling regression beta is the sum of the variance
of the true market beta and the variance of the estimation error, or in symbols,
                                      rolling-regress.
                                  σ 2 βt                = σ2 (β t ) + σ2 (εt ) ,                           (32)

          rolling-regress.
where βt                  is the estimated rolling regression beta, β t stands for the true beta and
εt is the estimation error.20
         Table II reports the estimates for σ 2 (β t ) for our set of industry portfolios. The average
standard deviation of betas is .14, which, incidentally, is only slightly higher than the one
obtained by Fama and French (1997) for a set of 48 industry portfolios. Thus if the beta of
an average industry were to be one, a two standard deviation of beta yields variation between
.74 and 1.28, which is rather substantial. Some of them, like Retail, Petroleum, Mining,
Department Stores, Fabrication Metals, and Primary Metals display standard deviation of
betas that are above .20. Thus if the average beta of retail is around one, a two standard
deviation around the mean yields betas that ﬂuctuate between .46 and 1.54!
         Can our model yield comparable variation in betas? The next two columns in Table II
report the standard deviation of the betas in our model in 40,000 quarters of artiﬁcial data.
The column under the heading “θ iCF −Cash-ﬂow” reports the standard deviation of theoretical
betas when θiCF is estimated using only cash-ﬂow data, that is as the covariance of dividend
and consumption growth. The variation of betas in this case does not match the one observed
in the data and hovers around .02. The only exception is Primary Metals, where the variation
of the theoretical beta reaches 0.10.
  20
       Clearly, when the variance of the true beta is estimated as the diﬀerence of the variance of the rolling
regression beta and the variance of the estimation error there is no guarantee that the variance of the true beta
is greater than zero. In this case we follow Fama and French (1997) and set the variance equal to 0. This occurs
in our sample for only two industries, Electrical Equipment and Manufacturing.




                                                        20
      The results are rather diﬀerent when we estimate the cash-ﬂow parameters using returns
data, as described in the previous section. These results are reported in the column under
the heading “θiCF −Returns.” In this case the average standard deviation is given by .10,
which is close to the average standard deviation obtained through the Fama and French (1997)
procedure, see equation (32) above, which was .14. Also notice that in the case of θ iCF −Cash-
ﬂow only one industry out of twenty had a standard deviation of beta above .10, Primary
Metals. Now the number has increased up to ten. For instance, the model can generate
a substantial variation in the betas of Primary Metals, Utilities and Food, which also had
a large variation in the betas as estimated by Fama and French (1997). There are clearly
some shortcomings as, for example, Electrical Equipment where the data suggests a very
low variation in the market loading whereas the model attributes a standard deviation .22.
However, small sample accounts for a large part of these diﬀerences. In fact, Figure II reports
the results of a diﬀerent simulation exercise: we obtain 1,000 samples of artiﬁcial data, each 54
years long. On each sample we estimate the standard deviation of beta as described in (32).
The top panel in Figure II reports the 95% simulation bands of σ(β t ) (solid lines) along with
the point estimates in the data (stars) for the case where θiCF is estimated using cash ﬂows.
The bottom panel reports the same quantities for the case where θiCF is estimated using stock
returns. In this latter case, it is indeed the case that the majority of point estimates of σ(β t)
from the data (stars) fall in the simulated bands (thirteen out of twenty). When θ iCF is instead
estimated from cash ﬂow data, the empirical estimate of σ(β t ) fall in the bands for only ﬁve
industries, a result that is in line with those reported in Table II.
      In summary then, the estimate of θ iCF turns out to have a rather substantial impact on
the behavior of the conditional beta, not only the unconditional one, as one may suppose at
ﬁrst. The reason is that the duration eﬀect associated with cash-ﬂow risk, the fact that assets
with high cash-ﬂow risk have higher risk the shorter their duration, is a key determinant of
risk. But if this is the case, this observation has strong implications for the time series behavior
of the cross sectional dispersion of risk over time, to which we now turn.
V.C The cross sectional dispersion of betas

      We now investigate the time series properties of the cross sectional dispersion of betas.
We run the following time series regressions
                                                              
                                          Up
                   Rit+1 = αi + β iU p Idxt RM       i     Do M      i
                                             t+1 + β Do Idxt Rt+1 + εt+1


where Rit+1 and RM
                 t+1 are the excess return on industry i and the market between t and t + 1,


                                                21
respectively, and IdxU p      Do are indicator functions of whether times are good (Up) or
                     t and Idxt
bad (Do), that is, whether the aggregate equity premium is low or high. We consider two
                                                                                                   Up
diﬀerent proxies for good and bad times: (i ) the market price dividend ratio, with Idxt                =1
if the price dividend ratio of the market is above its historical 70 percentile, and           IdxDo
                                                                                                  t     =1
if price dividend ratio is below its historical 30 percentile; and (ii ) the surplus-consumption
ratio St itself, where again IdxU p         Do
                                t = 1 or Idxt  = 1, if the surplus is above its 70 percentile,
or below its 30 percentile.21 How can we formally test whether the cross sectional variance
of β iU p is higher or lower than the cross sectional variance of β iDo ? Assuming that β iU p and
β iDo are drawn from a normal distribution with two diﬀerent variances, σ 2U p and σ2Do , we can
                                             
use the statistics V ar CS β iU p /V ar CS β iDo , which has an F -distribution, with 19 degrees of
freedom. The results are in Table III.
         Panel A of Table III shows that for both samples, 1927 - 2001 and 1947 - 2001 the
dispersion of betas is signiﬁcantly higher when the aggregate equity premium is low, with the
exception of the long sample when the surplus consumption ratio is used a sorting variable, in
which case the diﬀerence is not statistically signiﬁcant. In particular, there is no evidence that
dispersion of betas is higher during bad times.
         These ﬁndings have a clear interpretation in light of our model. Essentially, cash-ﬂow
eﬀects have to be strong in order to undo the positive relation between the cross sectional
dispersion of betas and the aggregate equity premium that discount betas induce (see Corollary
3). That is, these ﬁndings can be explained by either a strong time variation in the cross-
                                                                         
sectional dispersion of expected dividend growth, proxied by STDCS si /sit , and/or substantial
unconditional cash-ﬂow risk θiCF = 0. Indeed, the eﬀect of the time variation in si /sit can also
be seen in the last line of Panel A, where it shows that the dispersion of betas is higher when
also the dispersion of relative shares is high, especially in the postwar period.
                                                                                                     
         To disentangle the eﬀects of the dynamics of the dispersion of relative shares STDCS si /sit
from the unconditional cash-ﬂow risk, we decompose in Panel B of Table III the variation in
return betas in its two basic sources, variation in aggregate discounts (St) and variation in
                                    
dispersion in cash-ﬂow growth si /sit . In this case, in addition to Up and Down periods as
deﬁned in Panel A, we also deﬁne an index of whether the cross sectional dispersion of relative
                   
shares STDCS si /sit is high or low, where we set the cutoﬀ levels to the median in all cases
now in order to have a suﬃcient number of observations for each of the four categories (Up-Hi,
  21                                                                                             t = dct −
       We obtain the surplus consumption ratio St by computing a sequence of consumption shocks dB
Et [dct ] and then applying recursively formula (3).



                                                       22
Do-Hi, Up-Lo, Do-Lo). As before, we run the time series regressions
                                                              
                  Rit+1 = αi +                 β ikh Idxkh  M       i
                                                        t Rt+1 + εt+1
                                        k=U p,Do h=Hi,Lo
                                                         
and test whether the ratios V ar CS β ikh /V ar CS β ik ,h are statistically diﬀerent from 1.
        Panel B of Table III reports the results for the case where Up and Down periods are
deﬁned either with the log price dividend ratio of the market or the surplus consumption ratio.
There is a strong diﬀerence in the dispersion of market betas between the Up-High period and
Down-Low period for both the 1927 - 2001 and the 1947 - 2001 sample. Indeed, the diﬀerence
in the cross sectional standard deviation of market betas is not only strongly statistically but
also economically signiﬁcant, as it equals 0.27 and 0.39 for the Up-High period in the 1927-2001
and 1947-2001 sample respectively, while it is less than half those numbers during the Do-Low
period. The second ﬁnding is that even after controlling for the dispersion of relative shares,
Up periods are characterized by a higher dispersion of betas than Down periods. The only
exception to this is again in the full sample when the surplus consumption ratio is our proxy
for the aggregate state of the economy and the cross sectional dispersion of relative shares is
high. However, the diﬀerence is again not statistically signiﬁcant.
        These results are also important because they help to bring together two statements
that may seem diﬃcult to reconcile at ﬁrst. On the one hand the cross sectional dispersion
of unconditional returns in our set of industry portfolio is low whereas as Fama and French
(1997) demonstrate, and the results in Section V.B conﬁrm, there is considerable variation in
the loadings on the market portfolio. Table III shows why: The main cross sectional variation
in betas occurs during good times, that is periods when aggregate expected returns are low.
But this implies that when beta are dispersed, they are multiplied by a low aggregate market
premium, and thus the dispersion of industry average returns is low. In contrast, when the
dispersion of betas is low, the aggregate expected excess return is high, and thus the variation
in conditional expected returns of industry portfolio is still low. Unconditionally, then, we
should observe relatively little cross sectional dispersion in average returns, precisely what we
see in the data for the set of industry portfolios.
        To summarize, the evidence in Table II and III supports the view that cash ﬂow eﬀects
have to be relatively strong to induce both a substantial variation in the market betas and,
in addition, generate a dispersion in betas that is inversely related to the aggregate market
premium.22
 22
      Our empirical results are robust to alternative methodologies and sample periods: for instance, we also


                                                      23
V.C.1 Simulations

       We now turn to our artiﬁcial data to verify whether the model can reproduce the mag-
nitudes of the empirical results in Table III. Table IV reports the results. The headings
θ CF −Cash-ﬂows shows the simulation results for the case where θiCF are estimated from cash
ﬂow data (see Section V.B). The magnitudes are puny compared to what is observed in the
empirical data though there is a slightly higher dispersion of the betas in “Up” periods versus
“Down” periods. This result extends to the case where the dispersion of betas is also condi-
tional on the cross sectional dispersion of the relative share. That is, using the parameters
θ iCF −Cash-ﬂow, the model cannot yield the magnitudes of the cross sectional dispersion of
betas that is observed in the data. This is the same observation made in Section V.B – Table
II – regarding the little time series variation in betas that result when using θ iCF −Cash-ﬂow.
       Results are quite diﬀerent when the cash-ﬂow risk parameters are estimated from returns,
reported under the heading θ iCF −Returns. Now the overall magnitudes are much closer to the
corresponding ones in the empirical data. The cross sectional dispersion of betas is higher when
both the price dividend ratio of the market portfolio and the surplus consumption ratio are high,
which matches the empirical results in Table III. When we condition on both the aggregate
                                     
state of the economy and STDCS si /sit though, the model cannot generate the diﬀerences in
the cross sectional dispersion in betas due to variation in cross-sectional dispersion in relative
share. Still, the very strong diﬀerence in the cross sectional dispersion of betas across the
Up-High and Down-Low states observed in the long and short samples and for both PtM /DtM
and St is nicely born in simulations almost to the point.

V.D Conditional Betas and Investments

       The negative relation between the cross sectional dispersion of betas and the aggregate
equity premium established in Section V.C conﬁrms that the cash-ﬂow component of market
betas dominates the risk-return trade-oﬀ. As Section IV shows this also implies that changes
in beta should be positively correlated with changes in investments. To test this proposition
Tables V and VI report the results of annual panel regressions of industry real investment
growth on changes in the price consumption ratio of the industry portfolio, normalized by its
                                       
average price consumption ratio, Pti /Ct /P C, changes in relative share, si /sit , and changes
computed conditional betas both through simple rolling regressions and by using standard conditioning variables,
such as the market dividend yield, the term spread, the corporate bond spread, and Lettau and Ludvigson (2001)
cay. In either case we ﬁnd a strong positive relation between the cross-sectional dispersion of conditional betas
and the market P/D ratio.


                                                       24
in conditional betas, β it , and their lags. Speciﬁcally we run

                              gti = α0,i + α0,t + α1 · ∆Xt + α2 · ∆Xt−1 + εit

where gti denotes the investment growth at time t in industry i, as deﬁned earlier, α0,i denotes an
industry ﬁxed eﬀect, α0,t denotes a year dummy, and ∆Xit denotes the changes in explanatory
variables. Lags are included in the regression to control for possible lags on investments
growth (see Lamont (2000)). Panels A, B and C report the results when industry investment
is measured as industry total investments, or as the value or equal weighted average investment,
respectively, as deﬁned in Section V.A. Table V does not include year dummies whereas Table
VI does in order to control for market wide factors. Finally t−statistics are computed using
robust standard errors clustered by year.
          Start with Line 1 of Table V across the three diﬀerent Panels, which only includes con-
temporaneous and lagged changes in prices. Lagged changes in prices are always positive and
statistically signiﬁcant at the 5% level independently of the deﬁnition of investment growth
used. Instead contemporaneous changes in prices are never signiﬁcant. These results are consis-
tent with previous literature (see e.g. Barro (1990) and Lamont (2000)).23 As for the changes
in the relative share (Line 2) notice that this variable always enter with the negative sign,
as predicted by the model, but it is only strongly signiﬁcant when investments are measured
as total investments. Instead it is not signiﬁcant at the 5% when investment is measured as
equally or value weighted average investment.
          Lines 3 and 4 test the proposition that if cash-ﬂow risk is determinant in the risk re-
turn trade-oﬀ of assets prices, a positive correlation should obtain between contemporaneous
changes in betas and investment growth. We estimate β it of industry i at time t by using a
rolling regression of industry i returns in excess of the one month t-bill rate on the market
portfolio excess return for the 24 months preceding t.24 Recall that when cash-ﬂow eﬀects are
  23
       To follow standard practice in the investment literature we also ran the panel regression using changes in
market-to-book as our measure of changes in valuation and ﬁnd, consistent with the unsatisfactory performance
of q−models, much weaker results for M/B. The results regarding betas where instead very similar.
  24
     The results in Tables V and VI are robust to alternative deﬁnitions of beta. For instance, we ﬁnd that the
alternative timing convention where β t is estimated using a rolling regression in the 24 months around t, rather
than preceeding t, yields in fact stronger results. Similarly, since it can be argued that the relevant beta for a
ﬁrm’s investment decision is the asset beta rather than the levered equity beta, we also run the panel regressions
by using the standard correction β asset,t = Et /(Lt + Et )β equity,t ,where Et is total industry equity and Lt is
total industry debt. Again, the results are very similar and typically stronger, since Et /(Lt + Et ) tends to be
high in good times. These results are available upon request.


                                                        25
strong, betas should correlate negatively with the aggregate premium. As discussed in Sections
III and IV, prices (and valuations) increase as the aggregate premium falls and thus so does
investment. As a consequence, in the presence of strong cash-ﬂow risk, a positive relation be-
tween investment growth and betas results. This implication is met with considerable support
in the data across the diﬀerent speciﬁcations. The coeﬃcient has always the sign predicted
by theory and it is statistically signiﬁcant throughout. Lagged values of changes in betas are
also signiﬁcant. This result conﬁrms the evidence presented in section V.C concerning the
importance of cash-ﬂow eﬀects in determining the risk-return characteristics of asset prices.
      Finally, Table VI redoes the exercise in Table V but now year dummies are added to
remove period speciﬁc eﬀects. Brieﬂy, notice that now lagged changes in valuations are no
longer signiﬁcant whereas the contemporaneous changes in betas are still signiﬁcant throughout
all diﬀerent speciﬁcations. As for changes in the relative share, as before, they are only
signiﬁcant when investment growth is measured as total investments.

V.D.1 Simulations

      To gauge the magnitude of the cash-ﬂow eﬀects, we reproduce in Table VII the results of
panel regressions equivalent to those in Tables V and VI but now in artiﬁcial data. According
to the model, investments occur when the industry price consumption ratio is above a cut
oﬀ, which we assume to be equal to the long term average price consumption ratio. The cost
of each investment project is assumed to be proportional to consumption. The normalized
investment rate in a given quarter is then just simply a constant. We aggregate quarterly
investments to annual to have comparable ﬁgures to those of Table V and VI. Finally, to
deal with a dimensionality problem that arises in inserting year dummies in 10,000 years of
artiﬁcial data, we divide our long sample in 20 time series of 500 years each. As in previous
sections, results are reported for the parameter choices θiCF −Cash-ﬂow and θ iCF −Returns.
For each panel regression we report the mean, median, 5 and 95 percentiles of the estimated
coeﬃcients across the 20 samples. In these simulations, we only run the multivariate regression,
corresponding to line 4 in each panel of Tables V and VI, and we did not include any lags, as
the simple model proposed in Section IV does not account for any adjustment costs or time
diﬀerences between investment decision and actual investments.
      Start with Panel A which reports panel regressions without year dummies and thus
                                                                      
should be compared with Table V. The sign of the coeﬃcient on ∆ Pti /Ct /P C is positive
and close in magnitude to the corresponding one on the lagged coeﬃcient in the empirical
data, especially for the case where the cash-ﬂow risk parameter θ iCF is calibrated using returns

                                               26
(Panel A.2). Recall that from Section V.B and V.C, this calibration is also the most eﬀective
to match the magnitude of the time variation in asset betas. As for the changes in the relative
share si /sit , they are negative, as expected, but their magnitude is smaller in absolute value
than the corresponding empirical estimates in Table V. Still, in most cases the estimates in
Table V are imprecise and thus the numbers are not statistically diﬀerent from each other.
      As for the impact of changes in betas ∆β it , when the θiCF is measured using cash-ﬂows
alone (Panel A.1) the sign of the mean and median estimates of the coeﬃcient is negative, which
is consistent with the fact that discount eﬀects dominate the risk return trade-oﬀ. When
θ iCF −Returns is used instead (Panel A.2), the magnitudes are large enough to, once again,
induce suﬃciently strong variation in the cash-ﬂow beta and yield the positive correlation
between investment growth and changes in betas. The magnitude of the coeﬃcient in simulated
data is smaller though than the corresponding point estimates in Table V, showing that the
cash ﬂow eﬀect in the data may be even stronger than what the calibrated model implies.
      Finally, similar results obtain when year dummies are included. In both data and sim-
ulations, especially in the case θ iCF −Return (Panel A.2), the coeﬃcients on changes in prices
decrease, while the coeﬃcients on ∆β it increase. The eﬀect on relative share is instead un-
changed between the cases with and without year dummies, as one would expect because
relative shares are industry speciﬁc.

                                    VI. CONCLUSIONS

      Betas, the classic measure of an asset’s risk, is a fundamental input in any valuation
problem, whether it be an investment project or a ﬁnancial asset. This paper is concerned
with the determinants of this fundamental measure of risk, a challenging problem given that
there is substantial evidence that these betas ﬂuctuate over time. This paper uses a general
equilibrium asset pricing model to show that conditional betas depend on the level of the
aggregate premium itself; the level of the ﬁrm’s expected dividend growth; and the ﬁrm’s
fundamental risk, that is, the one pertaining to the covariation of the ﬁrm’s cash-ﬂows with
the aggregate economy.
      We investigate the interaction between these three elements by decomposing the condi-
tional beta into a discount beta and a cash-ﬂow beta. The ﬁrst reﬂects the sensitivity of prices
to shocks in the aggregate discount whereas the second captures the sensitivity of the price to
shocks to cash ﬂows. We show that the time series properties of the cross section of betas is
driven by whether the discount beta or the cash-ﬂow beta is a more important determinant


                                              27
of the overall conditional beta. In particular, if the cash-ﬂow beta dominates the risk-return
trade-oﬀ we show that the cross sectional dispersion of betas correlates negatively with the
aggregate discount. Moreover, we show that strong cash-ﬂow eﬀects are needed to match the
observed time series variation in betas. We also propose a model of ﬁrm behavior that links
investment decisions to changes in betas and ﬁnd that, in the presence of strong cash-ﬂow
eﬀects, changes in investments should correlate positively with changes in betas.
      Our empirical exercises reveal the consistent pattern that cash-ﬂow risk must play a
dominant role in shaping the conditional risk-return characteristics of asset prices. Indeed, we
ﬁnd substantial evidence that industry market betas display a large time variation, that their
cross-sectional dispersion is high when the aggregate equity premium is low and, ﬁnally, that
investment growth in physical capital is high when market betas increase. The magnitudes of
these empirical facts can only be explained in our model when industries are characterized by
cross-sectional diﬀerences in cash ﬂow risk, and the aggregate equity premium is time varying.
      An important message of this paper then is that the properties of the underlying cash-
ﬂow process, both the asset’s duration as well as the covariation of the asset’s cash-ﬂow with
the aggregate state of the economy, are key if one is to understand the role of conditioning
information in asset pricing tests. For instance, one way researchers typically capture condi-
tioning information is by instrumenting betas with observable state variables. Diﬀerences on
how assets’ betas load on these state variables can only be due to diﬀerences in their cash-ﬂow
processes. Thus, for example, the way the conditional cross section of returns varies with the
relevant conditioning variables depends on the cash-ﬂow properties of the set of test portfolios.
An important direction for future research then is to link the observed cross sectional disper-
sion in average returns to the dispersion in the fundamental cash-ﬂow parameters in order to
obtain a more economically based view of what determines the dispersion in the risk-return
trade-oﬀ across diﬀerent assets and diﬀerent time periods. This paper makes progress in this
direction by oﬀering an explicit characterization of the betas as a function of the relevant
cash-ﬂow parameters.




                                               28
                                      REFERENCES

Abel, Andrew B. (1990) “Asset Prices Under Habit Formation and Catching Up with the Jones,”
   American Economic Review, 80, 38-42.
Ang, Andrew and Geert Bekaert (2001) “Stock Return Predictability: Is it There?,” Manuscript,
   Columbia University.
Ang, Andrew and Jun Liu (2004) “How to discount cash ﬂows with time-varying expected returns,”
   Journal of Finance (forthcoming).
Baker, Malcolm, Jeremy C. Stein and Jeﬀrey Wurgler (2003) “When does the Market Matter?
   Stock Prices and Investments of Equity-dependent Firms,”Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118,
   969-1106.
Bansal, Ravi, Robert F. Dittmar, and Christian T. Lundblad (2002), “Consumption, Divi-
   dends, and the Cross Section of Stock Returns,” working paper, October, Duke University.
Barberis, Nick, Ming Huang, and Tano Santos (2001), “Prospect Theory and Asset Prices,”
   Quarterly Journal of Economics, 116, 1-53.
Barro, Robert J. (1990), “The Stock Market and Investments,” Review of Financial Studies, Vol.
    3 (1), 115-131.
Berk, Jonathan, Richard C. Green, and Vasant Naik (1999) “Optimal Investment, Growth
    Options, and Security Returns,” Journal of Finance , October, 1553-1607.
Bollerslev, Tim, Robert F. Engle, and Jeﬀrey M. Wooldridge (1988), “A Capital Asset Pricing
    Model with Time-varying Covariances”,, Journal of Political Economy, 96 no. 1, February, 116-
    131.
Bodurtha, James N. and Nelson C. Mark (1991), “Testing the CAPM with Time-varying Risks
   and Returns,” Journal of Finance, XLVI (4), September, 1485-1505.
Braun, Phillip A. Daniel B. Nelson and Alain M. Sunier (1995), “Good News, Bad News,
    Volatility, and Betas,” Journal of Finance, L (5), December, 1575-1603.
Campbell, John Y. (1987), “Stock Returns and the Term Structure,” Journal of Financial Eco-
   nomics, 18, 373-400.
Campbell, John Y. and Robert Shiller (1988) “The Dividend-Price Ratio and Expectations of
   Future Dividends and Discount Factors,” Review of Financial Studies, 1, 195-227.
Campbell, John Y. and Jianping Mei “Where do Betas Come From? Asset Price Dynamics and
   the Sources of Systematic Risk,” Review of Financial Studies, vol. 6 (3), 567-592.
Campbell, John Y. and John H. Cochrane (1999), “By Force of Habit: A Consumption Based
   Explanation of Aggregate Stock Market Behavior,” Journal of Political Economy, 107, 2, 205-251.
Campbell, John Y. and Tuomo Vuolteenaho (2002), “Bad Beta, Good Beta,” Working Paper,
   Harvard University.
Chan, K.C. (1989), “On the Contrarian Investment Strategy,” Journal of Business, 61 (2), 147-163.



                                               29
Constantinides, George (1990), “Habit Formation: A Resolution of the Equity Premium Puzzle,”
   Journal of Political Economy, 98, 519-543.
Daniel, Kent and David Marshall (1997), “The Equity Premium Puzzle and the Risk-Free Rate
   Puzzle at Long Horizons,” Macroeconomic Dynamics, 1 (2), 452-484. .
Detemple, Jerome B. and Fernando Zapatero, (1991), “Asset Prices in an Exchange Economy
    with Habit Formation,” Econometrica, Vol. 59, pp. 1633-1657.
Evans, Martin D. D. (1994), “Expected Returns, Time-Varying Risk, and Risk Premia,” Journal
    of Finance, Vol. 44 (2), 655-679.
Fama, Eugene F. and Kenneth R. French (1988), “Dividend Yields and Expected Stock Returns,”
   Journal of Financial Economics, 22, 3-27.
Fama, Eugene F. and Kenneth R. French (1989), “Business Conditions and Expected Returns
   on Stocks and Bonds,” Journal of Financial Economics, 25, 23-39.
Fama, Eugene F. and Kenneth R. French (1992), “The Cross Section of Expected Stock Returns,”
   Journal of Finance, 47, 2, 427-465.
Fama, Eugene F. and Kenneth R. French (1997), “Industry Costs of Equity,” Journal of Finan-
   cial Economics, 43, 153-193.
Ferson, Wayne, (1989), “Changes in expected Security Returns, Risk, and the Level of Interest
    Rates,” Journal of Finance, Vol. 44 (5), 1191-1217.
Ferson, Wayne and George Constantinides, (1991), “Habit Persistence and Durability in Ag-
    gregate Consumption: Empirical Tests,” Journal of Financial Economics, 29, 199-240.
Ferson, Wayne and Campbell Harvey, (1991), “The Variation of Economic Risk Premiums,”
    Journal of Political Economy, 29 no. 2, 385-415.
Ferson, Wayne and Campbell Harvey, (1993), “The Risk and Predictability of International
    Equity Returns,” Review of Financial Studies, Vol. 6 no. 3, 527-566.
Franzoni, Francesco (2001), “Where is Beta Going? The Riskiness of Value and Small Stocks,”
    working paper, November, MIT.
Gomes, Joao, Leonid Kogan, and Lu Zhang (2003), “Equilibrium Cross Section of Returns,”
   Journal of Political Economy, 111(4) August, 693-732.
Goyal, Amit and Ivo Welch (2003), “Predicting the Equity Premium with Dividend Ratios,”
   Management Science, Vol. 49 no. 5, 639-654.
Hansen, Lars P., John C. Heaton, and Nan Li (2002), “Intangible Risk?,” working paper,
   University of Chicago.
Harvey, Campbell R. (1989), “Time-varying Conditional Covariances in Tests of Asset Pricing
   Models,” Journal of Financial Economics, 24, 289-317.
Hodrick, Robert. (1992), “Dividend Yields and Expected Stock Returns: Alternative Procedures
   for Inference and Measurement,” Review of Financial Studies, 5, 357-386.




                                            30
Jagannathan, Murray, Cliﬀord P. Stephens, and Michael S. Weisbach (2000), “Financial
    Flexibility and the Choice Between Dividends and Stock Repurchases,” Journal of Financial
    Economics, 57, 355-384.
Jagannathan, Ravi and Zhenyu Wang (1996), “The Conditional CAPM and the Cross Section
    of Stock Returns,” Journal of Finance, 51 March, 3-53.
Keim, Donald B. and Robert F. Stambaugh (1986), “Predicting Stock Returns in the Stock and
   the Bond Market,” Journal of Financial Economics, 17, 357-390.
Lamont, Owen (1998), “Earnings and Expected Returns,” Journal of Finance, vol. 53, October ,
   1563-1587.
Lamont, Owen (2000), “Investment Plans and Stock Returns,” Journal of Finance, vol. 55, Decem-
   ber , 2719-2745.
Lettau, Martin and Sydney Ludvigson (2001a), “Consumption, Aggregate Wealth, and Expected
    Stock Returns,” Journal of Finance, vol. 56, June , 815-849.
Lettau, Martin and Sydney Ludvigson (2001b), “Resurrecting the (C)CAPM: A Cross Sectional
    Test When Risk Premia Are Time-Varying” Journal of Political Economy, vol. 109 (6), 1238-
    1287.
Lewellen, Jonnathan and Stefan Nagel (2003), “The Conditional CAPM Does Not Explain
   Asset-Pricing Anomalies” Manuscript,MIT.
Li, Yuming (2001), “Expected Returns and Habit Persistence,” The Review of Financial Studies, 14,
     861-899.
Menzly, Lior, Tano Santos and Pietro Veronesi (2004) “Understanding Predictability,” Journal
   of Political Economy, February, 1-47.
Porter, R. Burt (2003), “Time-to-Plan and Production Based Asset Pricing: An Application of Q
    Theory,” Manuscript, University of Florida.
Santos, Tano, and Pietro Veronesi (2001), “Labor Income and Predictable Stock Returns,” CRSP
    working paper, University of Chicago.
Sundaresan, Suresh (1989), “Intertemporal Dependent Preferences and the Volatility of Consump-
   tion and Wealth,” The Review of Financial Studies, 2, 73-88.
Veronesi, Pietro (2000), “How does Information Quality Aﬀect Stock Returns?” Journal of Finance,
    55, 807-837.
Vuolteenaho, Tuomo (2002), “What Drives Firm-Level Stock Returns?” Journal of Finance, 57,
    233-264.
Wachter, Jessica (2000), Habit Formation and the cross section of Asset Returns, Unpublished
   Doctoral Dissertation, Ch. 4, Department of Economics, Harvard University.




                                              31
                                                                APPENDIX

(A) The Approximate Pricing Functions and Betas
(I) The approximate pricing formula is given by

                                                      Pti                      si
                                                        i ≈ Φ0 (St ) + Φ1 (St ) i ;
                                                                        i
                                                                                                                                              (33)
                                                      Dt                       st
where
                                                                                    
                                                   1               kY + λα θiCF
                     Φi0 (St )   =                                          1+ St                                                           (34)
                                           ρ + k + φi + αθiCF          ρ + φi
                                                                                         
                                                φi /ρ           ρ + kY St     kY + λα θiCF St
                     Φi1 (St )   =                                      +                                                                   (35)
                                         ρ + k + φi + αθiCF       ρ+k              ρ + φi

It is easy to see that if Y = 1 = St = λ and α = 0, the formula (33) is the same as the one in Proposition 4
(Model B), while if θiCF = 0, the formula is the same as the one shown in the proof of Proposition 3 (Model A).
The derivation below also shows that in these cases the approximation is in fact exact.
(II) The betas corresponding to (33) are as follows:
                                                                             
                                        si                  si              si
                                β i St , i = β iDISC St , i + β iCF St , i
                                        st                  st              st

        (a) The Discount Beta is given by

                                                                   1+           Y kSt
                                                                                                    σS       (St )
                                                      si                 Y kSt +ρf (si /sit ;θiCF )
                                    β iDISC    St ,             =                                                                             (36)
                                                      sit                 1+        kY S
                                                                                           σ         (St )
                                                                                   kY St +ρ S

where
                                                                             
                                                 φi ρ + φi si /sit + (ρ + k) ρ + φi
               f si /sit ; θiCF =                                          
                                                                           −1  i  i i      
                                     φi ρ + φi si /sit + (ρ + k) 1 + λ αθi Y k      φ s /st + ρ
                                                                                                   (ρ+φi +k)Y
In addition,
             f si /sit ; θiCF has the properties (i): f  si/sit ; θiCf < 0 if and only if θiCF > −    λα
                                                                                                                  ; (ii)
f 1; θiCF > 1 if and only if θiCF < 0; (iii) ∂f si /sit ; θiCf /∂θ iCF < 0; and (iv) θiCF = 0 implies
                                                                                
                                              φi ρ + φi si /sit + (ρ + k) ρ + φi
                                f s /st = i 
                                   i  i
                                                                                                            (37)
                                          φ ρ + φi si /sit + (ρ + k) φi si /sit + ρ

which, in turn, has f (1) = 1.
       (b) The Cash-Flow Beta is given by
                                                                                                         n
                                                                                                                                         
                           si                                        1                                                             1
                 β iCF St , i , st = H (S)                                                       θiCF −          sjt θjCF                   (38)
                           st                1+                 φi
                                                                   G (S)        si /sit                      j=0
                                                                                                                                  σ2c,1
                                                                ρ

where
                                                 σc,1               kY St + ρ
                           H (S)      =                   =
                                              σT W (St )    kY St + ρ + kY St σS (St )
                                                                                     
                                               ρ + φi ρ + kY St + (ρ + k) Y k + λ αθiCF St
                          G (St )     =                                              
                                                  ρ + φi (ρ + k) + (ρ + k) Y k + λ αθiCF St

In addition,                                           √
                                               −ρλ+         ρ2 λ2 +kY λρ
        (i) H  (S) > if and only if St >                   kY λ
                                                                         ;


                                                                         32
               −1 
        (ii) G Y     =1
                                            Y (ρ+φi +k)
     (iii) G (S) > 0 if and only if θi > −     λα
                                                        .
(B) Proofs
     In this appendix, deﬁne for convenience vY = −ασ c . The inverse surplus process can be rewritten as
                                                     
                                     dYt = k Y − Yt dt + (Yt − λ) vY dBt .                             (39)

By Ito’s Lemma, the process for surplus St = 1/Yt is then
                                                            
                     dSt /St = k 1 − Y St + (1 − λSt )2 α2 σ 2c dt − (1 − λSt ) vY dBt .

Since the diﬀusion part can be written as − (1 − λSt ) vY = α (1 − λSt ) σc , it is convenient to denote σ (St ) =
α (1 − λSt ) . . Finally, the pricing kernel mt = uc (Ct , Xt , t) = e−φt Yt /Ct follows the dynamics

                                                         dmt /mt = −rt dt + σm dBt

where
                                                                             
                                       rt     =    φ + µc,t − σ2c + k 1 − Y St − α (1 − λSt ) σ2c ,
                                  σm          =    − (1 + α (1 − St λ)) σ c ,


                                i      i
                                                   i  i
                                                         
Proof of Proposition
                    1 : From
                              Pt /D  t = Φ St , s /st i , we can generically
                                                                                write (with a slight abuse of notation)
Pt = P Ct , St , st = Ct Ψ St , st , where Ψ St , st = sitΦ St , si /sit . An application of Ito’s Lemma yields
  i     i         i                i

equation (17). In fact,

                       dPti       ∂P i /∂Ct               ∂P i /∂St              ∂P i /∂sit
                           i =               i dCt +                 i dSt +                   dsit
                        Pt       i
                               P (Ct , St , st )         i
                                                      P (Ct , St , st )      P (Ct , St , sit)
                                                                               i

                                                             
Since ∂P i /∂Ct = Ψ St , sit and P i Ct , St , sit = Ct Ψ St , sit , the diﬀusion component of dPti /Pti is

                                                         ∂P i /P i                  ∂P i /P i i i
                                            σiP = σc +             St σ (St ) σ c +          st σ (st )
                                                          ∂St                         ∂sit

where σ (S) = α (1 − λSt ) and σi (st ) is the diﬀusion of dsit /sit . Since the diﬀusion part of the price process σiP
must equal the one of excess returns dRit = dPti /Pti + Dti /Pti dt − rt dt, equation (17) follows.
        As for part (b), the price of the total wealth portfolio is PtT W = Ct ΨT W (St ). A similar derivation as
                                                    TW    TW
above implies that we can write σ TRW = σc + ∂P ∂St /P  /St
                                                              σ (St ) σc . Since the total wealth portfolio is perfectly
correlated with the stochastic discount factor, a beta representation exists for the expected returns of individual
securities (see e.g. Duﬃe (1996, page 229)). Thus,
                                                            
                                            covt dRit , dRTt W        σi (St , st ) σTRW (St )
                             β i St , sit =                      = RT W
                                                         Tw
                                               vart (dRt )            σR (St ) σ TRW (St )

Since by deﬁnition σ c = (σc,1 , 0..., 0), we ﬁnd
                                                                                               2
                                                                          ∂P T W /P T W
                                  σTRW (St ) σ TRW (St ) =         1+                  σ (St ) σ c σc
                                                                             ∂St /St
and
                                                                                                                 
                                                          ∂P i /P i                      ∂P T W /P T W
               σiR   (St , st ) σTRW   (St )       =    1+            St σ (St )    1+                    σ (St ) σ c σc
                                                              ∂St                            ∂St /St
                                                                                                     
                                                         ∂P i /P i           ∂P T W /P T W
                                                       +                1 +                  σ (S t )   σi (st ) σc .
                                                          ∂sit /sit               ∂St /St

Substitution yield equations (20) and (21).


                                                                       33
Proof of Proposition 2 : Part (a) is shown in MSV. Using their results, one obtains expression (23) where Φ0 (St )
and Φ1 (St ) are identical to equations (34) and (35) for θ iCF = 0. Part (b) can be obtained by following the
                                                                                                      
same steps as in the proof for the general case, obtaining β iDISC St , si /sit as in (36) with f si /sit given in
(37).
Proof of Proposition 3 : Part (a) is shown in MSV. Part (b) follows from the general result in equation (21) with
                                                                           TW        TW
the pricing function in (25), where we must set ∂P ∂S/P t
                                                              = 0. 
Derivation of Beta Formulas in Appendix A
(a) Discount Beta: The pricing function (33) is in the form discussed in Proposition 1. Thus, representation
                                                  1
(19) applies. From PtT W = P T W (Ct , St ) = Ct ρ+k 1 + kY
                                                          ρ
                                                            St , we have ∂P T W /∂St = Ct (ρ+k)ρ
                                                                                            kY
                                                                                                 yielding
                                                                                
                                                                 ∂P T W /P T W                kY S
                                                                                     =                   
                                                                   (∂St /St )            ρ 1+   kY
                                                                                                     St
                                                                                                 ρ

                                                                                                                       
Similarly, as in the proof of proposition 2, from the general pricing function Pti = P i Ct , St , si /sit = Ct Ψ St , sit .
For convenience, let me rewrite
                                              
                                Ψi St , si /sit = ai0 si + ai1 Y ksi St + ai sit + ai2 Y ksit St
                                                                −1
where a little algebra shows that given ai = ρ + k + φi + αθiCF      and
                                                                                 −1 
                                  φi              φi 2ρ + k + φi + φi (ρ + k) λ αθi Y k
                     i
                   a0 = a    i            i
                                       ; a1 = ai
                                                                             
                               (ρ + k)                       ρ (ρ + k) ρ + φi
                                           1 
                                 1 + λ αθi kY
                   ai2 = ai                 
                                      ρ + φi

This implies                                         i i          
                                  ∂P i /P i          a1 s + ai2 sit Y kSt                                           Y kSt
                                            = i i                                =
                                  ∂St /St    a0 s + ai sit + a1 si + ai2 sit Y kSt                        ai0 si +ai sit
                                                                                                          ai1 si +ai2 sit
                                                                                                                            + Y kSt
Finally, notice that
                                                           
                                ai0 si + ai sit    ai0 si /sit + ai
        f s/sit         =                       = i  i i
                                ai1 si + ai2 sit   a1 s /st + ai2
                                                                                         
                                                          ρ φi ρ + φi si /sit + (ρ + k) ρ + φi
                         =                                             −1   i i                      1 
                                  φi 2ρ + k + φi + φi (ρ + k) λ αθi Y k           s /st + ρ (ρ + k) 1 + λ αθi kY
                                                                                
                                                 ρ φi ρ + φi si /sit + (ρ + k) ρ + φi
                         =                                                    
                                                                            −1  i  i i        
                                φi ρ + φi si /sit + (ρ + k) 1 + λ αθi Y k             φ s /st + ρ

Thus, we can write
                                                              i i
                                                       1 + ∂P   /P
                                                                         σS (St )     1 + Y kS +ρfY kS t
                                                                                                                   σ (S )
                                                              ∂St /St                         t    (si /sit ;θiCF ) S t
                     β iDISC          St , sit       =       T W    T W
                                                                                   =
                                                       1 + ∂P ∂St /P
                                                                  /St
                                                                           σS (St )         1 + kYkY S
                                                                                                   St +ρ S
                                                                                                           σ (St )

where
                                                                                         
                                                             φi ρ + φi si /sit + (ρ + k) ρ + φi
                 f s     i
                             /sit ; θiCF       =                                  −1   i  i i    
                                                 φi ρ + φi si /sit + (ρ + k) 1 + λ αθi Y k      φ s /st + ρ




                                                                                 34
     Proof of properties(i) - (iv): (i) after taking the ﬁrst derivative with respect to si /sit and canceling
common terms, we ﬁnd f  si /sit ; θiCF < 0 if and only if
                                                                   −1 
                      − (ρ + k) φi ρ + φi         ρ + φi + k 1 + λ αθi Y k        < 0,

which yields the condition. (ii) is immediate, as
                                                φi + (ρ + k)
                    f 1; θiCF =                                −1  > 1 if and only if θCF < 0
                                                                                           i
                                          i
                                         φ + (ρ + k) 1 + λ αθi Y k

(iii) and (iv) are also immediate.
(b) Cash-Flow Beta.                                                                        
       In this case, we must compute ∂P i /∂sit . From P i Ct , St , si /sit = Ct Ψ St , sit with
                                           
                             Ψi St , si /sit = ai0 si + ai1 Y ksi St + ai sit + ai2 Y ksit St

we ﬁnd
                                              ∂P i /P i                          1
                                                        =                                              .
                                              ∂sit /sit               ai0 +ai1 Y kSt
                                                          1+             ai +ai2 Y kSt
                                                                                              si /sit
Deﬁne                                                   i
                                                                                        
                            ai0 + ai1 Y kSt   φi ρ + φ ρ + kY St + (ρ + k) Y k + λ αθi St
                   G (St ) =                 =                                            ,
                             ai + ai2 Y kSt    ρ      ρ + φi (ρ + k) + (ρ + k) Y k + λ αθi St
and thus                                                                  
                                       ρ + φi ρ + kY St + (ρ + k) Y k + λ αθi St
                             G (St ) =                                    
                                         ρ + φi (ρ + k) + (ρ + k) Y k + λ αθi St
Notice that G (S) > 0 if and only if
                                                                       
                     0 < ρ + φi kY ρ + φi (ρ + k) + (ρ + k) Y k + λ αθi ρ + φi k,

                                   Y (ρ+φi +k)
which yields the condition θ i > −       λα    . We can then write
                         i i                              
                        ∂P /P
                                     θ i
                                            −   n
                                                    s j j
                                                        θ            
                             i  i
                          ∂st /st      CF       j=1   t   CF    1
    β iCF St , sit   =           TW TW 
                           1 + ∂P ∂S/P           σS (St )      σ2c,1
                                          t

                                 i
                                         1                          n
                                                                                                      
                            1+ φρ G(S) (si /sit )                                               1
                     =                                    θiCF   −         sjt θjCF
                          1+    kY S
                                       σ      (St )                                           σ 2c,1
                               kY St +ρ S                            j=1
                                                                                                                            n
                                                                                                                                                             
                                   kY St + ρ                                              1                                                            1
                     =                                                                                               θiCF −         sjt θjCF                    .
                            kY St + ρ + kY St σS (St )                   1+    φi
                                                                                  G (S)             si /sit                     j=1
                                                                                                                                                     σ 2c,1
                                                                               ρ

Thus, formula (38) follows. Finally,

                                                                   kY St + ρ
                                             H (S) =
                                                          kY St + ρ + kY St (1 − λS) α

is such that H  (S) > 0 if and only if 0 < −ρ + kY (St )2 λ + ρ2St λ. Since the two roots of the equation
kY λ (St )2 + 2ρλSt − ρ = 0 are
                                                               
                              −ρλ − ρ2 λ2 + kY λρ        −ρλ + ρ2 λ2 + kY λρ
                        S1 =                      <0<                          = S2
                                     kY λ                         kY λ
we ﬁnd the condition                                                                          
                                                                              −ρλ +             ρ2 λ2 + kY λρ
                               H (S) > 0 if and only if St >                                                   .
                                                                                                 kY λ

                                                                      35
        Proof of expression (29) and (30): From (28) and the notation π t = e−ρt uc (Ct − Xt ), we can apply the
law of iterated expectations and write
                                                t+T                
                                                         πτ
                                       Vt = E E             CFτ dτ |T                                       (40)
                                                    t    πt
Since the stochastic discount factor does not depend explicitly on the random arrival of T , the inner expectation
                                                      t+T              
                                                            πτ
                                        Vt (T ) = Et           CFτ dτ |T
                                                       t    πt
satisﬁes the Euler equation
                                                          Et [d (Vt (T ) πt )] + Et [πt CFt ] = 0
Let Xt be the set of state variables aﬀecting all random processes in this economy and let them satisfy the
stochastic diﬀerential equation dXt = µ (Xt ) dt + σ (X) dBt . Rewriting V (Xt , t; T ) = Vt (T ), an application of
Ito’s Lemma yields

                                   ∂V          ∂V                                1                                   ∂2 V
                      V rt =          +            · (µi (X) + σi,1 (Xt ) σπ ) +                                            · σ i (X) σ j (X) +CFt
                                   ∂t      i
                                               ∂Xi                               2                  i       j
                                                                                                                    ∂Xi ∂Xj

where rt = r (Xt ) is the riskless rate. The excess expected return is given by
                                                        
                                                dV dπ          1      ∂V
                              µR (Xt ) = −cov       ,     =−              σi,1 (Xt ) σπ
                                                 V π           V i ∂Xi

Thus, we can rewrite

                                                   ∂V          ∂V             1                                  ∂2 V
                          V (rt + µR (Xt )) =         +            · µi (X) +                                           · σ i (X) σ j (X) +CFt
                                                   ∂t      i
                                                               ∂Xi            2                 i       j
                                                                                                                ∂Xi ∂Xj

Feynman Kac theorem then yields
                                                                          T        τ
                                                                                                                          
                                                    Vt (T ) = E                 e−   t    rs +µR (Xs )ds
                                                                                                            CFτ dτ |T
                                                                        t

Since the return on the total wealth portfolio dRTt W is perfectlycorrelated
                                                                           with the stochastic discount factor,
it is immediate to see that we can also write µR (Xt ) = β t × Et dRTt W where
                                                                    
                                                    cov dV
                                                         V
                                                            , dRTt W
                                             βt =
                                                      var (dRTt W )

yielding the representation (29).
        We can ﬁnally obtain an expression for Vt : The random time T has an the exponential distribution with
f (T ) = pe−pT . From (40) we obtain
                    ∞     t+T                            ∞  t+T             
                                  πτ               −pT                     πτ
              Vt =     Et             CFτ dτ |T pe     dT =            E       CFτ dτ pe−pT dT            (41)
                    t        t    π t                        t    t        π t

Using the integration by parts rule
                                                                                                                        
                        G (x) F (x) dx =                           G (x) dx F (x) −                                  G (x) dx F  (x) dx

                                   
and recalling that                     pe−pT = −e−pT , we obtain
       ∞          t+T                               t+T                T =∞  ∞                 
                                  πτ                             πτ                          πτ
                          E          CFτ dτ pe−pT dT =        E     CFτ dτ pe−pT       −   E    CFτ −e−p(τ −t) dτ
    t           t                 πt                      t      πt               T =0   t   πt


                                                                                      36
                                
                        E ππτt CFτ dτ does not diverge to inﬁnity faster than e−pT , we obtain that the ﬁrst
                    t+T
Assuming that      t
term is zero and thus                       ∞                     
                                                              πτ
                                      Vt =     e−p(τ −t) Et      CFτ dτ
                                            t                 πt
From the deﬁnition of CFτ and the fact that ετ is independent of Dτi we ﬁnd
                         ∞                                ∞                     
                              −p(τ −t)      πτ i                  −p(τ −t)      πτ i
                 Vt = a     e          Et      Dτ ετ dτ = a     e          Et      Dτ Et [ετ ] dτ
                         t                  πt               t                  πt

Substituting Et [ετ ] = 1 + (εt − 1) e−kε (τ −t)
          ∞                                                    ∞                                     
                                 uc (Cτ − Xτ ) i                                          uc (Cτ − Xτ ) i
  Vt = a       Et e−(ρ+p)(t−t)                   Dτ dτ + (εt − 1)     Et e−(ρ+p+kε )(t−t)              Dτ dτ
            t                    uc (Ct − Xt)                      t                      uc (Ct − Xt)
A proof identical to the one in the Appendix of MSV then shows that for every t after the investment takes
place, Vt has the approximate solution
                                                                              
                                                                  V St , si /sit
                            Vt ≈ aDti ΦV St , si /sit + (εt − 1) Φ                   ,                (42)
                                         
where ΦV St , si /sit and Φ  V St , si /sit are as in (27), but where the parameter ρ is substituted for ρ + p and
ρ + p + kε , respectively. At the time of the investment, however, εt is not known, and thus the value equals the
unconditional expectation of (42). Since unconditionally E[εt ] = 1 we obtain (30).
       Finally, since εt is idiosyncratic, its variation does not command a premium, and thus a similar proof as
in Proposition 1 shows that for every t after the investment takes place:
                                                                              
                                                       si                si
                                   β τ = β DISC Sτ , i , εt + β CF Sτ , i , εt                              (43)
                                                       sτ                sτ

where the formulas for β DISC and β CF are given in (20) and (21).25




  25
    Note that although εt does not command a premium on its  own, its    level does
                                                                                    aﬀect the   project beta, as it
changes the relative weight of the two components of Vt , ΦV St , si /sit and Φ  V St , si /sit .


                                                         37
                              TABLE AI
            Description and Summary Statistics of Industries

      Industry           SIC           Avg. No. of   Min. No. of   Avg. Market
      Description                        Stocks        Stocks       Cap. (%)
1.    Mining             10-14           145.2           30           2.656
2.    Food               20                98            48           4.943
3.    Apparel            22-23             74            18           0.609
4.    Paper              26               37.8            5           1.904
5.    Chemical           28              150.5           25          10.394
6.    Petroleum          29               35.4           23          10.610
7.    Construction       32               36.2            5           1.273
8.    Prim. Metals       33               75.7           44           4.269
9.    Fab. Metals        34               73.6            9           1.415
10.   Machinery          35              185.7           25           5.760
11.   Electric Eq.       36              198.9           14           6.064
12.   Transport Eq.      37               91.4           46           7.646
13.   Manufacturing      38-39           153.6           10           2.902
14.   Railroads          40                34             8           3.049
15.   Other Transport.   41-47            61.4           15           0.875
16.   Utilities          49              127.7           21           7.856
17.   Dept. Stores       53               42.4           20           3.743
18.   Retail             50-52 54-59     254.2           22           2.313
19.   Financial          60-69           441.6           15           6.927
20.   Other                              619.2           57          14.788




                                       38
                                               TABLE I
                          Model parameters and moments of aggregate quantities

                           Panel A: Preference parameters and consumption parameters

                      ρ           Ȳ         k         λ               α              µC            σC
                    0.04         33.97      0.16     20.00           79.39            0.02         0.01

                                           Panel B: Aggregate Moments

                                 E(R)     V ol(R)    E(rf )         V ol(rf )     Ave(PC/100)       SR
               Data              0.07      0.16       0.01            0.01            0.30         0.46
               Model             0.07      0.23      0.01             0.04            0.30         0.31

                                               Panel C: Share Process

               Industry                      s̄i       φi        θiCF -Cash-ﬂow   θiCF -Return
                                                                     (x1000)         (x100)
               Constr.                      0.04      0.52             -0.12           0.23
               Railroads                    0.09      0.20             -0.47           0.04
               Retail                       0.04      0.20             -0.09           0.07
               Petroleum                    0.52      0.16             -0.20          -0.18
               Mining                       0.05      0.16             -0.33          -0.11
               Elect.Eq.                    0.09      0.14             -0.21           0.23
               Apparel                      0.01      0.12             -0.16           0.02
               Machinery                    0.12      0.11             -0.10           0.14
               Paper                        0.05      0.11             -0.19          -0.01
               Other Transp.                0.01      0.09             -0.06           0.09
               Dept.Stores                  0.09      0.09             -0.03           0.08
               Transp.Eq.                   0.25      0.08              0.27           0.03
               Manufact.                    0.05      0.06             -0.13           0.04
               Other                        0.17      0.06             -0.08          -0.07
               Fab.Metals                   0.03      0.05             -0.17          -0.03
               Financial                    0.05      0.04             -0.02          -0.02
               Chemical                     0.29      0.03             -0.14          -0.06
               Prim.Metals                  0.12      0.01             -0.32          -0.05
               Utilities                    0.10      0.00             -0.06          -0.11
               Food                         0.15      0.00             -0.09          -0.05
               Mkt.Ptﬂ.                     2.22      0.07             -0.10             -

Notes to Table I: This is Table 1 in Menzly, Santos, and Veronesi (2003) with the only exception of the estimate
of θiCF obtained using returns data, which is under the heading “Returns”. Panel A: Annualized preference
and consumption process parameters chosen to calibrate the mean average excess returns, the average price
consumption ratio, the average risk free rate and its volatility, and the Sharpe ratio of the market portfolio.
Panel B: Expected excess return of the market portfolio, E(R), standard deviation of returns of the market
portfolio, V ol(R), expected risk free rate, E(rf ), standard deviation of the risk free rate, V ol(rf ), average price
consumption ratio, Ave(PC/100), and Sharpe ratio of the market portfolio, SR. Panel C: Estimates of the long
run mean, si , and the speed of mean reversion φi , cash ﬂow risk, θiCF , and covariance between dividend growth
and consumption growth, cov(dδit , dct ) for each industry. Industries are ordered, in this and subsequent tables,
according to the parameter φi . All entries in the table are in annual units.




                                                            39
                                                 TABLE II
                                   The standard deviation of market betas

                    Industry          Fama and French (1997)        θiCF -Cash-ﬂow     θ iCF -Return


                    Constr.                       .11                      .02              .11
                    Railroads                     .19                      .05              .04
                    Retail                        .27                      .02              .04
                    Petroleum                     .24                      .02              .10
                    Mining                        .27                      .05              .16
                    Elect.Eq.                     .00                      .02              .22
                    Apparel                       .10                      .03              .06
                    Machinery                     .05                      .03              .14
                    Paper                         .14                      .02              .01
                    Other Transp.                 .05                      .04              .10
                    Dept.Stores                   .24                      .02              .09
                    Transp.Eq.                    .07                      .04              .03
                    Manufact.                     .00                      .03              .05
                    Other                         .08                      .02              .08
                    Fab.Metals                    .21                      .04              .04
                    Financial                     .08                      .02              .03
                    Chemical                      .05                      .04              .10
                    Prim.Metals                   .11                      .10              .14
                    Utilities                     .30                      .02              .33
                    Food                          .12                      .03              .15




Notes to Table II: This table reports the standard deviation of betas. The column under the heading Fama
and French (1997) provides an estimate of the standard deviation of the “true” beta using the procedure used by
these authors. Under the assumption that the sampling error associated with the market betas is uncorrelated
                                                                                     rolling-regress.
with the true value of the beta, the variance of the rolling regression beta, β̂ t                    , is the sum of the
variance of the true market beta and the variance of the estimation error and thus
                                       rolling-regress. 
                                   σ2 β̂ t                 = σ2 (β t ) + σ 2 (εt ) .

The column under the heading θiCF -Cash-ﬂow provides an estimate of the standard deviation of the theoretical
betas in 40,000 quarters of artiﬁcial data when θiCF is estimated using only cash-ﬂow data. The column under
the heading θiCF -Returns provides an estimate of the standard deviation of the theoretical betas in 40,000
quarters of artiﬁcial data when θiCF is estimated using only returns data.




                                                           40
                                                    TABLE III
                                   The cross sectional dispersion of market betas


                                                 Panel A: Dispersion in Betas

                                                            Sample: 1927 - 2001    Sample: 1947 - 2001

                                   Sorting Variable        Up    Down    p-Value   Up    Down    p-Value
                                      PtM /DtM             .25    .19      .04     .32    .17      .00
                                       Surplus
                                                         .17    .22      .85     .22    .13      .01
                                               si
                                    STDCS      sit
                                                           .25     .18     .09     .27    .17      .02

                         Panel B: Dispersion of Betas: Interaction with dispersion of Shares

                                               Sample: 1927 - 2001                 Sample: 1947 - 2001

                                                     Sorting variable = PtM /DtM

                                                           Up    Down    p-Value   Up    Down    p-Value
                                      High               .27    .22      .15     .39    .16      .00
                         si
             STDCS       sit
                                        Low                .19    .12      .02     .20    .14      .05
                                       p-value             .06     .00     .00     .00    .26      .00

                                                     Sorting variable = Surplus

                                                           Up    Down    p-Value   Up    Down    p-Value
                                      High               .20    .25      .85     .27    .20      .07
                          i
             STDCS       s
                         sit
                                        Low                .20     .11     .01     .24    .14      .01
                                       p-value             .53     .00     .01     .27    .07      .00


Notes to
       Table
              III: Panel A: Cross sectional dispersion of return betas in good or bad times as measured by
STDCS β i and p values of the diﬀerence. Betas are estimated from the regression
                                                                        
                       Rit+1 = αi + β iU p IdxU p M        i       Do M
                                              t Rt+1 + β Do Idxt Rt+1 + εt+1
                                                                                i



where Rit+1 and RM  t+1 are the excess return on industry i and the market between t and t + 1, respectively, and
IdxUt
      p
        and IdxDo
                t  are indicator functions of whether the aggregate equity premium is low or high, that is whether
times are good (U p) or bad (Do). As proxies for the aggregate state of the economy we consider (i) the market
price dividend ratio, with IdxUt
                                 p
                                   = 1 if the price dividend ratio of the market is above its historical 70 percentile,
         Do
and Idxt = 1 if price dividend ratio is below its historical 30 percentile; (ii ) the surplus-consumption ratio St
itself, where again IdxUt
                          p
                            = 1 or IdxDo
                                       t   = 1, if the surplus is above its 70 percentile, or below its 30 percentile;
and (iii )the dispersion of relative shares. Panel B : Cross sectional dispersion of return betas in good versus
bad times and periods of large dispersion of relative shares versus low dispersion of relative shares. Betas are
computed from the regression
                                                                             
                              Rit+1 = αi +                   β ikh Idxkh   M        i
                                                                       t Rt+1 + εt+1 ,
                                                     k=U p,Do h=Hi,Lo

where Idxkh
          t   is an indicator function of whether the economy is in a high or low state and the cross sectional
dispersion of relative share is high (Hi) or low (Lo). The high dispersion of relative shares as well as the
good state periods are deﬁned using the 50% percentile cutoﬀ. The results are reported for the long sample,
1927-2001, and the short sample, 1947-2001.


                                                                  41
                                             TABLE IV
                     Simulations - The Cross Sectional Dispersion of market betas




                                                  Panel A: Dispersion of Betas

                                                                  θiCF -Cash-ﬂow            θiCF -Return

                                    Sorting variable        Up      Down    p-Value   Up      Down     p-Value
                                       PtM /DtM             .03      .02      .01     .27      .14       .00
                                        Surplus
                                                          .04      .02      .00     .29      .14       .00
                                                si
                                     STDCS      sit
                                                            .02      .02      .53     .13      .15         .68

                       Panel B: Dispersion of Betas: Interaction with dispersion of shares

                                                      Sorting variable = PtM /DtM

                                                            Up      Down    p-Value   Up      Down     p-Value
                                       High               .03      .02      .03     .26      .12       .00
                          si
             STDCS        sit
                                          Low               .04      .02      .01     .28      .14         .00
                                        p-Value             .78      .55      .04     .64      .77         .00

                                                      Sorting variable = Surplus

                                                            Up      Down    p-Value   Up      Down     p-Value
                                       High               .04      .02      .00     .27      .12       .00
                          si
             STDCS        sit
                                          Low               .04      .02      .00     .30      .14         .00
                                        p-Value             .54      .57      .00     .65      .76         .00

Notes to Table IV: This table replicates Table III in 40,000 quarters of artiﬁcial data. Speciﬁcally, in simulated
return data,
            the
               table reports the cross sectional dispersion of return betas in good or bad times as measured
by STDCS β i and p values of the diﬀerence. Betas are estimated from the regression
                                                                           
                         Rit+1 = αi + β iU p IdxU p M        i        Do M
                                                t Rt+1 + β Do Idxt Rt+1 + εt+1
                                                                                    i



where Rit+1 and RM  t+1 are the excess return on industry i and the market between t and t + 1, respectively, and
IdxUt
      p
        and IdxDo
                t  are indicator functions of whether the aggregate equity premium is low or high, that is whether
times are good (U p) or bad (Do). As proxies for the aggregate state of the economy we consider (i) the market
price dividend ratio, with IdxUt
                                 p
                                   = 1 if the price dividend ratio of the market is above its historical 70 percentile,
         Do
and Idxt = 1 if price dividend ratio is below its historical 30 percentile; (ii ) the surplus-consumption ratio St
itself, where again IdxUt
                          p
                            = 1 or IdxDo
                                       t   = 1, if the surplus is above its 70 percentile, or below its 30 percentile;
and (iii )the dispersion of relative shares. Panel B : Cross sectional dispersion of return betas in good versus
bad times and periods of large dispersion of relative shares versus low dispersion of relative shares. Betas are
computed from the regression
                                                                             
                              Rit+1 = αi +                   β ikh Idxkh   M        i
                                                                       t Rt+1 + εt+1 ,
                                                      k=U p,Do h=Hi,Lo

where Idxkht  is an indicator function of whether the economy is in a high or low state and the cross sectional
dispersion of relative share is high (Hi) or low (Lo). The high dispersion of relative shares as well as the
good state periods are deﬁned using the 50% percentile cutoﬀ. The heading θCF -Cash-ﬂow reports results
where simulated returns are generated using θiCF estimated from only cash-ﬂow data. The heading θCF -Return
reports results where simulated returns are generated using θiCF estimated from stock return data.


                                                                    42
                                                     TABLE V
                                       Changes in betas and investment growth


                                                                                       
                                            i
                         Pti /Ct           Pt−1 /Ct−1               si               si
                 ∆        PC
                                       ∆      PC
                                                            ∆       sit
                                                                              ∆     sit−1
                                                                                                ∆β it    ∆β it−1   Adj. R2



                                                 Panel A: Total Investment

            1.       −0.14                 0.18∗                                                                    0.06
                     (0.98)                (3.06)
            2.                                              −0.09∗            −0.05∗∗                               0.03
                                                            (−3.83)           (−1.94)
            3.                                                                                  0.06∗∗   0.11∗      0.02
                                                                                                (1.79)   (2.52)
            4.      −0.04                  0.17∗            −0.08∗             −0.03            0.07∗    0.08∗      0.09
                   (−0.63)                 (2.76)           (−3.01)           (−1.05)           (2.13)   (2.11)


                                           Panel B: Value-weighted Investments

            1.      −0.05                  0.20∗                                                                    0.06
                   (−0.76)                 (3.17)
            2.                                              −0.06∗∗            −0.02                                0.01
                                                            (−1.91)           (−0.76)
            3.                                                                                  0.09∗    0.13∗      0.02
                                                                                                (2.11)   (2.62)
            4.      −0.07                  0.20∗             −0.04                −0.00         0.10∗    0.11∗      0.08
                   (−1.11)                 (3.01)           (−1.48)               (0.14)        (2.35)   (2.31)


                                           Panel C: Equal-weighted Investments

            1.        0.02                 0.24∗                                                                    0.07
                     (0.28)                (3.58)
            2.                                               −0.03             −0.01                                0.00
                                                            (−1.04)           (−0.50)
            3.                                                                                  0.11∗    0.16∗      0.03
                                                                                                (2.66)   (3.99)
            4.      −0.00                  0.23∗             −0.01                 0.01         0.11∗    0.13∗      0.32
                   (−0.01)                 (3.48)           (−0.25)               (0.51)        (2.81)   (3.38)


Notes to Table V: This table reports the results of a panel regression of industry real investment growth on
changes in the price consumption ratio of the industry portfolio, normalized by the average price consumption
ratio, Pti /Ct /P C, changes in relative share si /sit and changes in conditional betas β t , and their lags. In Panel
A, industry investments are deﬁned as the industry total Capital Expenditures (Capex) over total Property,
Plant and Equipment (PPE). Panel B and C industry investments are deﬁned a Weighted Average or Equally
Weighted Average of individual ﬁrms Capex over PPE. The industry conditional beta at time t, β t is computed
from a rolling regression using the 24 months prior to t. Industry dummies are included in the regression.
t-statistics, computed using robust standard errors clustered by year, are reported in parenthesis. * and **
denotes signiﬁcance at the 5% and 10% respectively.




                                                                      43
                                                 TABLE VI
                         Changes in betas and investment growth with year dummies


                                                                                       
                                            i
                         Pti /Ct           Pt−1 /Ct−1               si               si
                 ∆        PC
                                       ∆      PC
                                                            ∆       sit
                                                                              ∆     sit−1
                                                                                                ∆β it    ∆β it−1   Adj. R2



                                                 Panel A: Total Investment

            1.        0.08                   0.13                                                                   0.32
                     (1.27)                 (1.48)
            2.                                              −0.06∗            −0.04∗                                0.32
                                                            (−3.28)           (−1.82)
            3.                                                                                  0.09∗     0.06      0.32
                                                                                                (2.47)   (1.57)
            4.      −0.00                    0.11           −0.06∗             −0.02            0.09∗     0.06      0.33
                   (−0.01)                  (1.13)          (−3.01)           (−0.97)           (2.57)   (1.43)


                                           Panel B: Value-weighted Investments

            1.        0.04                   0.07                                                                   0.29
                     (0.59)                 (0.71)
            2.                                               −0.02             −0.01                                0.29
                                                            (−1.03)           (−0.23)
            3.                                                                                  0.14∗     0.07      0.30
                                                                                                (2.71)   (1.55)
            4.      −0.00                    0.08            −0.02                 0.01         0.14∗     0.07      0.30
                   (−0.01)                  (0.86)          (−0.92)               (0.19)        (2.71)   (1.50)


                                           Panel C: Equal-weighted Investments

            1.      −0.01                    0.14                                                                   0.27
                   (−0.08)                  (1.74)
            2.                                               −0.03             −0.03                                0.27
                                                            (−1.15)           (−1.59)
            3.                                                                                  0.14∗    0.10∗      0.29
                                                                                                (3.37)   (2.43)
            4.      −0.07                    0.13            −0.04             −0.02            0.14∗    0.10∗      0.29
                   (−0.84)                  (1.48)          (−1.29)           (−0.73)           (3.40)   (2.45)


Notes to Table VI: This table reports the results of a panel regression of industry real investment growth on
changes
       in the price consumption ratio of the industry portfolio, normalized by the average price consumption
ratio, Pti /Ct /P C, changes in relative share si /sit and changes in conditional betas β t , and their lags. In Panel
A, industry investments are deﬁned as the industry total Capital Expenditures (Capex) over total Property,
Plant and Equipment (PPE). Panel B and C industry investments are deﬁned a Weighted Average or Equally
Weighted Average of individual ﬁrms Capex over PPE. The industry conditional beta at time t, β t is computed
from a rolling regression using the 24 months prior to t. Industry dummies and year dummies are included in the
regression. t-statistics, computed using robust standard errors clustered by year, are reported in parenthesis. *
and ** denotes signiﬁcance at the 5% and 10% respectively.




                                                                     44
                                            TABLE VII
                        Simulations - Changes in betas and investment growth


                         Panel A: Panel regression without year dummies - Table V

                                           Mean          Median        5%         95%

                                               A.1        θiCF −Cash-Flow
                                      
                             Pti /Ct
                        ∆                  0.510         0.596        0.052      0.777
                          iPC
                        ∆ ssi              −0.011        −0.00       −0.051      0.000
                              t
                        ∆β it              −0.094        −0.059      −0.519      0.204

                                                   A.2     θiCF −Returns
                                      
                             Pti /Ct
                        ∆                  0.211         0.194        0.026      0.461
                          iPC
                        ∆ ssi              −0.001        −0.00       −0.012      0.000
                              t
                        ∆β it              0.022         0.023       −0.029      0.059


                            Panel B: Panel regression with year dummies - Table VI

                                           Mean          Median        5%         95%

                                               B.1       θiCF −Cash-Flow
                                      
                             Pti /Ct
                        ∆                  0.352         0.443       −0.057      0.804
                          iPC
                        ∆ ssi              −0.029        −0.00       −0.142      0.000
                              t
                        ∆β it              0.540         0.547        0.358      0.709

                                                   B.2     θiCF −Returns
                                      
                             Pti /Ct
                        ∆                  0.078         0.041        0.001      0.207
                          iPC
                        ∆ ssi              −0.002        −0.00       −0.014     −0.000
                              t
                        ∆β it              0.110         0.119        0.026      0.154



Notes to Table VII: This table reports the results of the multivariate panel regression of industry real
investment growth on changes in the price     consumption ratio of the industry portfolio, normalized by the
average price consumption ratio, Pti /Ct /P C, changes in relative share si /sit and changes in conditional betas
β t in simulated data. To handle the dimensionality problem with year dummies, we divide the 10,000 simulation
years in 20 series of 500 years each for our two sets of estimates of the cash-ﬂow parameter θiCF . Panel A: Panel
regression without time dummies as in Table V. Panel B: Panel regression with time dummies as in Table VI.
For each panel regression we report the mean, median, 5 % and 95% estimates of the corresponding coeﬃcient
across the 20 simulations.




                                                           45
                                    Figure 1: Model-Implied Betas
                                             A. Beta: Discount Component




        1.25
          1.2
        1.15
          1.1
        1.05
           1
        0.95
          0.9
        0.85
          0.8
        0.08

Good            0.06                                                                                            6
Times                                                                                                   5
                             0.04                                                                   4       High
                   Surplus                                                           3                      Duration
                                     0.02                                 2         sbar i/s    i
                                                                1
                                    Bad           0    0
                                    Times                  Low Duration
                                      B. Beta: Cash Flow Risk Component: θCF > 0




         0.1


        0.08


        0.06


        0.04


        0.02


        0.08

Good            0.06                                                                                            6
Times                                                                                                   5
                            0.04                                                                    4       High
                  Surplus                                                           3                       Duration
                                     0.02                                 2        sbar i/s i
                                                                1
                                     Bad         0    0
                                     Times                 Low Duration


                                      C. Beta: Cash Flow Risk Component: θCF < 0




    −0.02


    −0.04


    −0.06


    −0.08


        −0.1


        0.08

Good            0.06                                                                                            6
Times                                                                                                   5
                             0.04                                                                   4       High
                   Surplus                                                       3                          Duration
                                     0.02                                 2    sbar i / s i
                                                                1
                                                 0    0
                                     Bad
                                     Times                 Low Duration




Panel A: Discount Beta β DIS (St, si /sit ); Panel B: Cash-Flow Beta β CF (St, si /sit )
with positive unconditional cash ﬂow risk index θ iCF > 0; Panel C: Cash-Flow Beta
β CF (St, si /sit) with negative unconditional cash ﬂow risk index θ iCF < 0.

                                                      46
                            Figure 2: Model-Implied Betas

                                                    i
                           95% simulation bands: θCF from fundamentals
0.5

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

 0
      0   2        4         6        8        10           12     14     16   18   20

                                                        i
                              95% simulation bands: θCF from returns
0.5

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

 0
      0   2        4         6        8        10           12     14     16   18   20
                                          Industry

Panel A: Empirical estimates of the time-series variation of industry betas (stars),
computed as in Fama and French (1997):
                                        rolling-regress.
                       σ(β true
                           t    )=   σ2 βt                − σ 2 (εt ),

          rolling-regress.
where σ 2 βt                is the time series variance of betas estimated using a
20 quarter rolling regression, and σ 2 (εt ) is the average variance of the residuals
of the rolling regressions. The solid lines provide the 95 % conﬁdence interval for
the same statistic computed on 1000, 54-year samples of artiﬁcial data (the lower
bound coincides with the zero axis). The parameter choices correspond to the case
where θ iCF are computed using fundamental variables. Panel B: Same as panel A,
but with parameter choices corresponding to the case where θiCF are estimated by
GMM using stock returns.
                                              47
