                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     PHASED-IN TAX CUTS AND ECONOMIC ACTIVITY

                                        Christopher L. House
                                        Matthew D. Shapiro

                                        Working Paper 10415
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w10415


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      April 2004




We gratefully acknowledge the comments of Alan Auerbach, William Gale, James Hines, Saul Hymans,
Andrew Lyon, Samara Potter, Joel Slemrod, and participants at the NBER Public Economics Meeting. The
views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

©2004 by Christopher L. House and Matthew D. Shapiro. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Phased-In Tax Cuts and Economic Activity
Christopher L. House and Matthew D. Shapiro
NBER Working Paper No. 10415
April 2004
JEL No. E62, E32, E65
                                      ABSTRACT


Phased-in tax reductions are a common feature of tax legislation. This paper uses a dynamic general

equilibrium model to quantify the effects of delaying tax cuts. According to the analysis of the

model, the phased-in tax cuts of the 2001 tax law substantially reduced employment, output, and

investment during the phase-in period. In contrast, the immediate tax cuts of the 2003 tax law

provided significant incentives for immediate production and investment. The paper argues that the

rules and accounting procedures used by Congress for formulating tax policy have a significant

impact in shaping the details of tax policy and led to the phase-ins, sunsets, and temporary tax

changes in both the 2001 and 2003 tax laws.

Christopher L. House
Department of Economics
University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, MI 49109-1220
chouse@umich.edu

Matthew D. Shapiro
Department of Economics
University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, MI 49109-1220
and NBER
shapiro@umich.edu
Legislating predictable changes in tax rates violates one of the cardinal principles of public

finance: Changes in tax rates should be permanent and immediate. Taxation typically distorts

economic behavior and, because the deadweight burden of taxation is a convex function of the

tax rate, there are efficiency gains to equalizing tax rates over time. As Barro (1979) argues, this

logic implies that changes in tax rates should be unpredictable, that is, tax rates should follow

random walks. As intuitive as Barro’s principle is, it is not universal. Chamley (1986) and Judd

(1985) show that, in economies with capital, the optimal tax rate on capital income must be zero

in the steady state. Because it is often optimal to tax the initial capital stock heavily, the optimal

tax rate on capital income should be phased in.

       In practice, however, government policy frequently ignores these principles and often

specifies that tax rates should follow various phase-ins and sunsets. The 2001 and 2003 tax laws

both feature changes in the tax code at prescribed times. The 2001 Economic Growth and Tax

Relief Reconciliation Act (EGTRRA) called for a scheduled sequence of rate reductions in the top

four tax brackets. The law cut tax rates for all brackets above the 28 percent tax bracket by 1/2

percentage point immediately and provided for further reductions effective in 2002, 2004, and

2006. By 2006, the top marginal tax rate was scheduled to fall by more than 4 percentage points.

In 2011, the tax plan would sunset, so absent further legislation, tax rates would revert to their

pre-EGTRRA levels in 2011. Two years later, the 2003 Jobs and Growth Tax Relief

Reconciliation Act (JGTRRA) legislated further changes in the tax system. Reductions in income

tax rates that were scheduled to occur in 2004 and 2006 under EGTRRA instead went into effect

immediately. In addition, the 2003 law provided for temporary reductions in taxes on dividends

and capital gains.
       Phase-ins are not new to U.S. tax policy. The tax cuts of 1964, the Reagan tax cuts of

1982, and the tax reform of 1986 all featured phased-in reductions in tax rates. In contrast,

recent tax increases (the 1990 and 1993 legislation under the Bush and Clinton administrations)

took effect immediately or within one year of their passage.

       This paper considers the macroeconomic implications of phasing in tax cuts. We focus

on three issues. First, we show how the timing of economic activity is affected by phased-in tax

cuts. As in the optimal tax literature, we show that there are important differences between

phased-in tax cuts on labor income and phased-in tax cuts on capital income. Second, we discuss

the implications of the phased-in tax cuts passed in 2001, and the subsequent acceleration of

those cuts in 2003, for overall the performance of the economy. Finally, we ask why tax cuts are

so often phased in. We argue that Congressional budget rules tend to encourage tax cuts that are

phased in and temporary.

       To address the first two sets of issues, we construct a simple dynamic general equilibrium

model that allows the government to specify a path of tax rates on labor income and capital

income. The model allows us to assess quantitatively the effects of tax changes under various

timing assumptions.

       We use the tax cuts in 2001 and 2003 as case studies. Our analysis suggests that the

timing of the tax cuts had substantial effects on labor supply, investment and economic

performance. In particular, the slow recovery from the 2001 recession may have been, in part,

attributable to declines in labor supply owing to the phased-in nature of the income tax

reductions.

       During the period of the phase-in, taxes on labor income are high relative to future tax

rates. Workers have an incentive to work less currently while taxes are temporarily high. The

incentive to delay production and employment will be operative as long as the workers can

                                                2
intertemporally substitute consumption and work. The strength of the motive to delay

production depends on consumers’ preferences. If labor supply is highly elastic but, at the same

time, consumers are not willing to substitute consumption intertemporally, then the incentive to

defer production will be strong. In a closed economy model, like the one we consider, workers

and firms can accumulate (or decumulate) capital. In an open economy model, the nation as a

whole can borrow or lend with its trading partners. In either case, phased-in tax cuts temporarily

reduce investment and production as consumers try to reap the rewards of the future tax cut but

delay working.

        Deferred tax cuts on capital income have very different effects from delayed labor tax

cuts. The reason for the difference is simple: The decision to invest in new plant and equipment

depends on the expected total discounted returns over the life of the capital. To the extent that

capital is long-lived, a large part of these returns will be realized in the future. As a result,

provided that the delay is short enough, a phased-in tax cut on capital income provides almost

the same incentive to invest now as an immediate tax cut. Moreover, compared to an immediate

tax cut, a deferred tax cut also reduces the windfall to previously-installed capital. As a

consequence, phased-in capital tax cuts have better efficiency properties than phased-in labor tax

cuts.

        The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: Section I presents the model. Section

II illustrates the basic features of the model by analyzing separately the case of delayed labor tax

cuts and delayed capital tax cuts. Section III describes the basic features of the 2001 and 2003

tax laws and uses the model to estimate their aggregate effects. Section III also considers the

robustness of these findings to alternative parameter values and discusses the findings in the

context of the literature. Section IV considers the influence that federal budget rules have on the

timing of the tax changes. Section V presents our conclusions.

                                                   3
I.      The Model

We consider a standard business cycle model extended to allow for a government sector.1 The

government finances spending with both distortionary and lump-sum taxes. We allow for both

anticipated and unanticipated changes in tax rates and government purchases.

        The representative agent derives utility from consumption (Ct) and experiences disutility

associated with labor (Nt). The agent seeks to maximize

                                             ∞

                                            ∑β
                                            t =0
                                                      t
                                                          Et u ( Ct ) − v ( N t )                           (1)


subject to the constraints:

                                                                                           I    
               (1 − τ tN )Wt N t + (1 − τ tK ) Rt K t + τ tK δ K t + Tt = Ct + I t + K tϕ  t     (1 − τ t )
                                                                                                           K
                                                                                                                (2)
                                                                                           Kt   

and

                                                   K t +1 = Kt (1 − δ ) + I t .                                 (3)

Here, Wt is the real wage, Nt is labor, Rt is the real rental price of capital, Kt is the level of the

capital stock, and Tt represents any lump sum transfers. The tax rates τ N and τ K are distortionary

taxes on labor income and capital income respectively. The adjustment cost function ϕ is convex

with ϕ (δ ) = 0, ϕ ′ (δ ) = 0 , and ϕ ′′ (δ ) = φ ≥ 0 . Note that we allow the representative agent to

deduct both depreciation and adjustment costs from the tax bill.




1
  Auerbach and Kotlikoff (1987) present a detailed and comprehensive treatment of fiscal policy
in a dynamic model. Barro (1989), Mankiw (1987), and Baxter and King (1993) consider the
effects of government purchases and the financing of such purchases in general equilibrium
models.

                                                                   4
          Firms produce output with the constant returns to scale production function F(K,N). The

firm’s profit maximization conditions imply that

                                                                       ∂F
                                                               Wt =       (K , N )                                                       (4)
                                                                       ∂N

and

                                                                     ∂F
                                                              Rt =      ( Kt , Nt ) .                                                    (5)
                                                                     ∂K

Finally, the goods market clearing condition is

                                                                                      I 
                                         Yt = F ( K t , N t ) = Ct + I t + Gt + K tϕ  t  .                                             (6)
                                                                                      Kt 

We abstract from international flows of goods and capital (reflected by the absence of net

exports in the resource constraint (6)).

          We assume that the government balances its budget each period. Thus,

                                                                                I 
                                        Gt = τ tN N tWt + τ tK K t  Rt − δ − ϕ  t   + Tt .                                           (7)
                                                                                Kt 

This assumption may seem extreme. In fact it is innocuous. Although the timing of the

distortionary taxes (τ N and τ K) does influence the equilibrium, the timing of the lump sum

transfers is irrelevant.

          Utility maximization implies that, in equilibrium,

                                                                                 (        )
                                                      v ' ( N t ) = u ' ( Ct ) Wt 1 − τ tN ,                                             (8)


                   β                                           I t +1  I t +1            I t +1                                
 u ' ( Ct +1 ) =
                   Qt 
                                        (
                     Et u ' ( Ct +1 )  1 − τ tK+1   )     R
                                                           t +1 +
                                                                   K
                                                                           ϕ ' 
                                                                                 K
                                                                                         − ϕ 
                                                                                                K
                                                                                                          + δτ  K
                                                                                                                 t +1 + Qt +1 (1 − δ )  (9)
                                                                  t +1        t +1          t +1                              

and




                                                                         5
                                               It         −1  Q − 1 
                                                                              (
                                                  = (ϕ ' )  t K  = h Qt ,τ tK ,     )                  (10)
                                               Kt            1−τt 

Qt is marginal Brainard-Tobin’s Q, the ratio of the shadow value of additional capital to the

marginal utility of consumption at date t. The investment rate depends on Qt and the tax rate on

capital income (because of the deductibility of investment adjustment costs). When there are no

adjustment costs then Qt = 1 in every period.

               Given any initial position of the system, a rational expectations equilibrium requires that

equations (3), (4), (5), (6), (8), (9) and (10) hold in every period. These are seven equations in

the seven variables Kt, I t, C t, Q t, N t, Y t, W t, and R t with the exogenous forcing variables

{τ                     }
                       ∞
     t
      N
          ,τ tK , Gt          . Because of Walras’s Law and Ricardian equivalence, we can ignore Tt (and the
                       t =0


government’s budget constraint).



Functional forms

To quantify the dynamic effects of changes in tax policy we solve the model for specific

functional forms for the flow utility of consumption, the flow disutility of labor, the production

function, and adjustment costs. Specifically:

                                                                      −1 1
                                                               1    1−
                                                    u ( C ) = 1 −  Ct ,σ                               (11)
                                                               σ

                                                                      −1          1
                                                               1     1+
                                                    v ( N ) = 1 +  N t η ,                             (12)
                                                               η

                                                        Yt = AK tα N t1−α ,                              (13)

and
                                                                                  2
                                                     I     φ  It    
                                                   ϕ t    =      −δ  .                               (14)
                                                     Kt    2  Kt    


                                                                6
The parameter σ is the intertemporal elasticity of substitution, η is the Frisch labor supply

elasticity, α is capital’s share in production and φ is the curvature of the investment adjustment

cost function.



Parameters Values

Our quantitative results depend on the parameters of these functions. The parameter values we

use in our baseline simulations are given in Table 1. These values fall within standard ranges of

values used in typical dynamic general equilibrium models and models of economic growth.

The discount factor is set at 0.98 to generate a 2 percent annual real interest rate. Capital’s share

is set to 0.35. We choose an annual economic depreciation rate of 0.10. The remaining three

parameters—the Frisch labor supply elasticity, the elasticity of intertemporal substitution, and

the curvature of the investment adjustment cost function—can have important effects on our

results. Because of this, in addition to our baseline settings, we consider a range of alternative

values for these parameters.

        We use 0.5 as our baseline value for the Frisch labor supply elasticity (η). Although an

elasticity of 0.5 is relatively high compared with evidence from much of the labor economics

literature, it is much smaller than elasticities typically used in the real business cycle literature,

which follows Prescott (1986) in adopting a value of at least 2. Our baseline value is in line with

estimates found in more recent studies that focus on situations in which individuals have to make

unconstrained choices about labor supply. (For a discussion of this literature, see Farber (2003)

and Kimball and Shapiro (2003).)

        Our baseline setting for the elasticity of intertemporal substitution (σ) is 0.2. The

empirical evidence indicates that σ is substantially less than 1 (see Hall (1988)). Our favored



                                                   7
setting for this parameter is roughly the average estimate in Hall (1988), Campbell and Mankiw

(1989) and Barsky, et al. (1997).

        We assume that the economy begins in an initial steady state. We assume that the share

of real government purchases in GDP is 0.2, which is roughly in line with historical averages.

The initial tax rates are assumed to be τ N = 0.362 and τ K = 0.183. These correspond to the

effective marginal tax rates on wage and capital income estimated by the Congressional Budget

Office (CBO) prior to the 2001 tax bill. The tax rate on wage income includes the payroll tax for

Medicare and Social Security as well as state income taxes. CBO’s estimate of the tax rate on

capital is low relative to statutory marginal rates. The CBO includes housing capital in its

estimate, which according to the CBO, gets a tax subsidy.



Solution

At time t = 0, the government announces a new path for tax rates and government purchases.

                                                          {                 }
                                                                            ∞
Agents have perfect foresight and take the sequences τ tN ,τ tK , Gt , Tt          as given. We solve the
                                                                            t =0


model by taking a log-linear approximation in the neighborhood of the initial steady state. As a

robustness check, we also solved the model with a nonlinear shooting algorithm. The results

were, for all practical purposes, identical.



II.     Dynamic Effects of Delayed Tax Cuts

Before turning to studying the effects of the 2001 and 2003 tax law changes, we examine the

effects of stylized delayed tax cuts on economic activity.

        Typically, tax cuts of any kind reduce tax revenue. As a result, at some point, the

government will have to either reduce purchases or raise taxes to balance its budget. The effects



                                                    8
of tax cuts are typically influenced by how the government chooses to balance its budget in the

long run. The government could balance its budget through some combination of lower

government purchases or higher future distortionary taxes. We instead assume that the

government makes up for the reduction in revenue by reducing future lump sum transfers.

Unlike the timing of distortionary taxes or government purchases, the timing of lump sum

transfers is irrelevant for economic activity. So using lump sum transfers to balance the budget

focuses attention squarely on the effects of the phased-in tax cut. Allowing the government a

non-distortionary option to adjust revenues and balance its budget overstates the long-run

benefits of the tax cuts we study. In an earlier version of this paper, we analyzed the case where

the budget was balanced by contemporaneous cuts in government purchases. While cutting

government purchases has a significant impact on the level of economic activity because of the

wealth effect, it does not affect the results on the relative timing of activity that we highlight in

this paper.



A.     Delayed Tax Rate Cuts: Labor Taxes

To illustrate how the timing of tax cuts affects economic activity, we contrast a delayed

reduction with an immediate, but more modest, tax cut. Consider a policy that calls for a delayed

reduction in the marginal tax rate on wage income by one percentage point. To mimic the basic

shape of the 2001 tax cuts, we take the delay in the tax cut to be four years. We also consider an

immediate 0.53 percentage point tax cut that has same revenue consequences over the

subsequent 10-year period. The immediate tax cut is an illustrative, but salient alternative to the

delayed tax cut.2


2
  We choose its size to be revenue-equivalent to the delayed tax cut using static scoring, that is,
ignoring the endogenous response of revenue to changes in policy.

                                                   9
        Figure 1 shows the effects of the delayed tax cut (the dark lines) and immediate tax cut

(the light lines) under the assumption that the government reduces lump sum transfers to balance

the budget. The top panel of Figure 1 shows the path of the tax rates for each of the two policies.

The Debt/GDP ratio panel shows how much government debt would increase if the reductions in

transfers were deferred.

        Consider first the effect of the immediate tax cut. In the long run, production and income

rises permanently. Because consumers are forward looking, the permanent income hypothesis

(PIH) implies that consumption increases immediately in response to the tax cut. The increase in

the after-tax real wage due to the reduction in labor income taxes increases the incentive to

supply labor. At the same time, the income effect from the higher long run income decreases

labor supply. In the model, the income effect is fairly strong so there is only a modest increase in

employment. In the short run, because the capital stock cannot jump, output increases by

roughly two-thirds of the percentage increase in labor.

        In summary, with an immediate tax cut our model generates routine results. Output and

employment (and the long run capital stock) do not change much. Consumption and production

jump immediately. There are modest effects on investment. There is a very gradual increase in

the capital stock that brings the capital-labor ratio back to its steady-state value.

        The delayed tax cut produces sharply different results. Most notably, there is a

substantial reduction in economic activity during the period of the delay. In the year following

the policy announcement, employment is below trend by 0.28 percent, output is below trend by

0.20 percent and investment by 0.95 percent. During the period of the delay, the tax rate is

temporarily high relative to the future, so labor supply is reduced. GDP falls proportionately.

Since production falls, the increase in consumption comes at the expense of investment, which

falls sharply during the period of the phase in. Employment falls further as the date of the

                                                  10
deferred tax cut approaches. The closer the future tax cut, the more powerful the incentive to

defer work.

       Another way to see the effect of the delay in the tax cut is to consider the labor supply

decision of the representative consumer (equation 8),

                                                             (        )
                                    v ' ( N t ) = u ' ( Ct )Wt 1 − τ tN .

Although forward-looking consumers experience the income effects of the policy as soon as the

tax plan is announced, because the tax reductions are delayed, the substitution effects are not

realized until four years later. As a result, during the period of the phase in, employment must

drop to workers on their labor supply curve given the increase in consumption.

       When the tax rate cut occurs in year four, employment, output, and investment jump.

Once the tax rate on labor income actually falls, workers have an increased incentive to supply

labor. The increased labor supply raises the marginal product of capital and stimulates

investment. As capital accumulates, output slowly rises to its new higher steady-state. Real

interest rates are temporarily high during this period of time.

        The message of this simulation is clear. Delayed tax cuts on labor income give workers

and firms incentives to delay work and investment until the tax cuts are in effect. While the tax

cuts may be stimulative in the long run, the fact that they are delayed reduces employment and

production in the short run.



B.     Delayed Tax Rate Cuts: Capital Taxes

We now turn to delayed tax cuts on capital income. Again, we compare the effects of a one-

percentage point reduction in tax rates that goes into effect in four years with an immediate tax

cut. In contrast to the case of labor tax cuts just discussed, we consider an immediate and



                                                    11
delayed tax cut of the same size (one percentage point). Because investment is inherently

forward looking, current investment decisions depend mainly on the long-run tax rate. We

consider equal delayed and immediate tax cuts so that the long-run consequences of the policies

we consider do not diverge widely.

          The tax treatment of depreciation has important interactions with the timing of tax rate

changes. To show this, we consider two different tax treatments of depreciation. First, as in our

benchmark model, firms deduct current economic depreciation from current profits. Second, we

consider a variant of the model in which firms expense investment, that is, they deduct 100

percent of current investment expenditure from their current taxable profits. Expensing is an

extreme version of the accelerated depreciation allowances that are a feature of current tax law.

We use it to illustrate how accelerated depreciation interacts with the timing of taxes on capital

income. House and Shapiro (2004) present a detailed analysis of accelerated depreciation and

the timing of tax cuts with particular attention paid to the 2002 Job Creation and Worker

Assistance Act.

          Figure 2 shows the effects of capital tax cuts under the assumption that firms write off

investment expenditures at the economic rate of depreciation. Unlike a delayed labor tax cut,

which gives workers and firms the incentive to delay employment, the reduction in capital taxes

stimulates employment and investment immediately regardless of whether the tax cut is delayed

or not.

          Figure 3 shows the response of the model when we allow firms to expense investment.

The delayed tax cut is more stimulative than the immediate tax cut. Indeed, the immediate tax

cut has essentially no effect on consumption, investment, employment or production. Moreover,

the delayed tax cut has a much larger effect on economic activity compared to the previous

situation in which firms deduct only current economic depreciation. In the quarter following the

                                                  12
policy announcement, employment is above trend by 0.31 percent. Delayed tax cuts have a large

impact when investment expenditures can offset current taxable profits. There is a substantial

incentive to move investment spending forward to take advantage of the write off when the tax

rate on profits is high.

        To summarize, in contrast to taxes cuts on labor, delaying capital income tax cuts does

not discourage current economic activity. 3 Current investment can be stimulated by future tax

cuts because the payoff of current investment largely accrues in the future. This stimulus is

magnified if depreciation allowances are accelerated. Moreover, there are advantages to

delaying the tax rate cut on capital income. An immediate tax cut on capital is, for the most part,

simply a windfall to existing capital and has no beneficial incentive effects. In contrast, a

delayed tax cut provides incentives for current investment but still taxes existing capital at a high

rate.



III.    The 2001 and 2003 Tax Laws and Economic Activity

In this section, we use the model to analyze the tax policy changes enacted in 2001 and 2003.

These policy changes included cuts in both the tax rate on labor and capital. The tax rate cuts

under the 2001 law were phased in over a period of five years in a series of steps. Hence, the

2001 law had various effects on economic activity, with the capital and labor tax provisions

potentially offsetting. The 2003 tax law accelerated the rate cuts called for in the original 2001


3
  Employment can share some of the characteristics of investment. Working currently raises
productivity and wages in the future because of the returns to on-the-job training and experience.
This is particularly true for workers early in their careers. If this channel were important, future
wage tax cuts would encourage current labor supply though the human capital accumulation
channel. If we incorporated this channel into our analysis it would partially offset the
intertemporal substitution channel that is highlighted in the previous section and that dominates
our analysis of the 2001 tax rate cuts in the next section.


                                                 13
law and also implemented an additional temporary reduction in the tax rate on capital income.

The series of phase ins and phase outs included in the two laws does not complicate the analysis

appreciably, but it is difficult to infer the overall result based only on the simple cases we have

considered so far. In this section, we describe the 2001 and 2003 tax legislation and present

estimates of the effect of these tax changes on economic activity. We also consider the

robustness of our results to alternative parameterizations of the model.



A.     The 2001 Tax Law: Provisions

The Economic Growth and Tax Relief Reconciliation Act of 2001 (EGTRRA) was approved by

the congressional conference committee on May 25, 2001 and signed into law by President

George W. Bush on June 7, 2001. Relative to their pre-EGTRRA values, marginal tax rates

above the 15 percent rate were cut by 0.5 percentage points in 2001. The legislation called for

subsequent rate cuts in 2002, 2004 and 2006. By January 2006, the taxes rates above the 15

percent bracket were scheduled to fall by 3 percentage points, except the top rate, which was

scheduled to fall by 4.6 points. Under the 2001 tax law, these tax rates would remain in effect

until 2011. In 2011, the tax reductions would sunset, that is, the tax rates were scheduled to

revert to their pre-EGTRRA levels. See Joint Tax Committee (2001a) for a summary of the

provisions. Table 2 summarizes the time path of marginal tax rates under the 2001 law.

       In addition to the changes in marginal tax rates, the law also had several other noteworthy

provisions. The law reduced the marriage penalty by extending the 15 percent tax bracket for

married individuals filing joint tax returns. The law also featured a phased-in reduction and

subsequent elimination of the estate tax. Finally, the law created a new 10 percent bracket for

the first $12,000 of taxable income ($6,000 for singles) effective in 2001. The Treasury paid

most households a rebate of $600 ($300 for singles) in July through September 2001 as an

                                                 14
advanced payment of the benefit of this new bracket. (See Shapiro and Slemrod (2003a, 2003b)

for a discussion of this aspect of the tax bill and estimates of its effect on consumer

expenditures.) These rebate checks, though highly visible in 2001, did little to reduce marginal

rates. Only households with taxable income below $12,000 ($6000 for singles) experienced a

reduction in their marginal tax rate as a consequence of the new 10 percent bracket. Hence,

though the 10 percent bracket has a large impact on average tax liabilities and aggregate

revenues, it has a minor effect on marginal rates.

       The Congressional Budget Office (2001) produced estimates of the impact of the tax law

on marginal tax rates. It estimated that the effective marginal tax rate on labor income would fall

1.8 percentage points from 36.2 percent before the law to 34.4 percent in 2006. It estimated that

the effective marginal tax rate on capital income would fall 0.5 percentage point from 18.3 to

17.8 percent. The estimated effective marginal tax rate on labor income includes federal income

taxes, payroll taxes, and state and local income taxes; for capital income, it includes federal

income taxes, corporate taxes, and state and local income taxes. Since the housing stock is

conceptually part of the capital stock in our model, it is appropriate to include its tax treatment in

the analysis. Note also that significant investment incentives were passed in 2002. We do not

address the 2002 tax law in this paper. The CBO did not provide a time series for the effective

marginal tax rates, but it seems reasonable to interpolate them using the reductions in the

statutory rates discussed in the previous paragraph. In Table 3, we present the precise tax path

used in our simulations of the 2001 tax law.



B.     The 2001 Tax Law: Aggregate Effects

Figures 4 and 5 report our estimates of the responses to the phased-in tax changes legislated in

2001. In analyzing the tax policy, we need to incorporate what economic agents expect to

                                                 15
happen in 2011, when tax rates are legislated to revert to their pre-2001 levels. In Figure 4, we

assume that, as the 2001 tax law requires, the tax rates revert to their original, pre-EGTRRA,

levels in 2011. In Figure 5, we assume that the 2006 tax rates remain in place indefinitely. In

both cases, the expectations and realizations of tax rate coincide. In each figure we also report

the model’s response to an immediate tax cut. The size of the immediate tax cut is calculated as

in Section II to yield the same discounted revenue loss over a 10-year budget window ignoring

feedback effects (static scoring).

       Except for the timing and pattern of the phase ins, the results of the 2001 tax cuts in

Figure 4 shows similar effects of the delayed labor tax cut shown in Figure 1. Employment,

output, and investment fall in response to the announcement of the phased-in path. In the six

months immediately following the policy, employment and output are slightly below trend (on

impact, employment falls below trend by 0.13 percent and GDP falls below trend by 0.9

percent). Investment falls sharply initially, and remains below trend for two and a half years.

The drop is greatest in the early stages of the policy; in the first quarter, investment falls below

trend by 0.58 percent. Consumption rises immediately and remains high for the foreseeable

future. In 2002, employment and output are only slightly above their initial level (employment is

0.05 percent above trend and GDP is 0.02 percent above trend). Investment remains below trend

until 2004 (it is below its initial level by 0.20 percent throughout 2002-2003).

       The reduction in employment is due to the incentive to shift work from the present to the

future combined with a substantial income effect associated with the tax cut. The agents finance

the increase in consumption by reducing investment while they wait for the lower taxes. In

contrast, the immediate tax cut stimulates production, employment and investment as soon as it

is passed. Employment rises immediately by more than 0.5 percent, GDP increases by more than




                                                  16
0.3 percent and investment rises by more than 0.9 percent in the quarter following the passage of

the law.

       Figure 5 shows the perfect foresight equilibrium when the tax cuts remain in effect

indefinitely. The short run effects of the tax plan are even more dramatic in this case. The

reduction in employment and production are most severe in the initial stages of the policy. In the

first six months, employment is below trend by 0.38 percent; GDP is below its trend level by

0.25 percent. Investment spending falls by 1.4 percent immediately following the passage of the

2001 tax law and remains below its initial level until 2006. Unlike the previous simulation,

when the tax cuts are perceived to be permanent, employment and GDP remain below their

original levels for more than two years after the policy change. In 2002, GDP is 0.18 percent

below trend and employment is 0.21 percent below trend. The reason for the difference is

simple: if the tax plan were understood to be permanent, the wealth effects associated with it

would be much greater and there would be an even greater incentive to postpone production.

Gale and Orszag (2003) show that eliminating the sunsets would have a very large impact on

future tax revenues.

       Why do the 2001 phased-in tax cuts, which are mixtures of capital and labor tax cuts,

lead to aggregate implications that match the behavior of a labor tax cut rather than a capital tax

cut? The reductions in labor taxes are larger than the capital tax rate reductions. A cut in the

labor tax rate of 1.8 percentage points from a starting point of 36.2 percent is a 5.0 percent cut in

the tax rate. A cut in the capital tax rate of 0.5 percentage point from a starting point of 18.3

percent is a 2.7 percent cut in the tax rate. Additionally, because labor income is roughly two-

thirds of total income, the larger tax rate cut applies to a larger base. (Tax changes in 2002 may

have significantly affected investment. See House and Shapiro (2004)).




                                                 17
       To summarize, whether the tax cuts are perceived to be permanent or sunsetting in 2011,

the immediate effect to the 2001 phased-in tax cuts was to reduce output and employment. The

contractionary effects of the law are greater if the tax cuts are perceived to be permanent. Our

calculations suggest that the phased-in tax cuts in the 2001 tax law reduced GDP in 2002 by

roughly 0.4 percent relative to a more modest but immediate tax cut.



C.     The 2003 Tax Law: Provisions

On May 28, 2003, President Bush signed the Jobs and Growth Tax Relief Reconciliation Act

(JGTRRA). We focus on major provisions of the 2003 law. It made immediate the phased-in tax

rate reductions enacted in 2001, so that the rate cuts scheduled for 2004 and 2006 went into

effect retroactively to the beginning of 2003. The sunset provisions of the 2001 tax law

remained in place. The 2003 tax law also reduced tax rates on capital income for seven years.

The dividend tax rate and the tax rate on capital gains were reduced to 15 percent for 2003 to

2008. (For low income individuals, the tax rate on capital gains and dividend income were cut to

5 percent for 2003 to 2007 and to zero in 2008.) The dividend tax rates revert to the ordinary

income tax rates in 2009; the capital gains tax rates revert to 20 percent (10 percent for lower

income individuals) in 2009. (See Joint Tax Committee (2003a, 2003b).)

       There were several other prominent changes to the tax code that are worth mentioning.

The expansions of the 15 percent bracket for married couples, and the 10 percent bracket for all

taxpayers, that were to be phased in under the 2001 law were accelerated to 2003. In 2005 these

brackets revert to the paths specified in the 2001 law. As with the income tax rates, the sunset

provisions of the 2001 tax law remain in place. Also, the exemption of the individual Alternative

Minimum Tax (AMT) was increased for 2003 and 2004 only. This provision prevented roughly




                                                18
8 million taxpayers from losing the full benefits of the marginal rate cuts in these years. In 2005

and beyond, these taxpayers will be subject to the AMT under current law.

       We do not attempt a quantitative analysis of all of these complex provisions. Instead, we

focus attention on the changing of the time of the income tax rate cuts and the seven-year tax cut

on capital income. First, we present estimates of the effect of the immediate implementation of

the phased-in income tax rate cuts. Second, we estimate the effects of the temporary tax cuts on

capital gains and dividend income by reducing the tax rate on capital income in the model for the

years 2003 through 2008 by 1.37 percent.4



D.     The 2003 Tax Law: Aggregate Effects

Unlike the 2001 law, the 2003 law provided strong incentives to increase employment and

production immediately. Under the 2003 law, tax rates fell immediately to their long run levels,

where they will remain until the sunset date. Moreover, the additional reductions in capital gains

and dividend income taxes made the tax rate on capital lower than it was under the 2001 tax law.

These rate reductions are set to remain in effect until 2009.

       Figure 6 shows the effect of the 2003 law. The estimated effects under the 2001 law are

also included for comparison (in the simulation, we take the change in policy in 2003 to be

completely unanticipated though this is clearly a simplification). Because it calls for an

4
  To calibrate the amount of the reduction, we focused on the dividend tax cut. First, we
calculated the fraction of dividend income in total capital income. For the years 1990-2002 this
fraction was .0914. Second, because dividend income is highly skewed towards upper income
households, we treated all dividend income as though it were taxed at a rate of 30.0 percent prior
to JGTRRA and 15.0 percent afterwards. This gives us an additional reduction in the effective tax
rate on capital income of 1.37 points. This calculation neglects any endogenous response of the
dividend payout rate to the change in dividend taxes. Poterba (2004), based on time series
evidence, projects that tax change should eventually increase dividend payouts by almost 20
percent. Blouin, Raedy, and Shackelford (2004) estimate that the change in the payout rate as a



                                                 19
immediate reduction in labor income taxes, the 2003 law causes employment, output and

investment to all rise sharply. Relative to the equilibrium implied by the 2001 tax rates, in the

third quarter of 2003, employment increased by 0.80 percent, GDP increased by 0.52 percent,

and investment increased by 1.83 percent. Although it increases, consumption does not respond

as much to the policy change since the moving forward the rate cut has a relatively small effect

on after-tax permanent income.



E.     Recession in 2001 and Growth in 2003

The NBER business cycle committee dated a business cycle peak in March 2001 and a trough in

November 2001. The recovery of both income and employment from the trough has been

unusually slow. Payroll employment has not yet regained the level it achieved at the previous

peak. Output growth has been positive, but more sluggish than previous recessions.

       The phased-in tax cuts enacted in 2001 are a potential explanation of the failure of

employment and output to recover rapidly during the period from 2001 to mid-2003. As the

results of the previous section make clear, the phased-in nature of these tax cuts provides a

powerful incentive for businesses and workers to defer production and employment while at the

same time it gives consumers reason to maintain high levels of consumption spending. The

combination of high consumption and relatively lower levels of production means that

investment spending will be particularly weak. To the extent that workers and firms responded to

these incentives, the 2001 tax plan may have inadvertently worked to prolong the recession and

stifle investment. While there are, of course, many other factors that influenced employment and




consequence of the 2003 law was about 10 percent. Such changes would have only a modest
effect on our calculations.

                                                20
production decisions, it is likely that the phase-in features of the 2001 tax law contributed to the

tepid economic performance of the period.

        Following the passage of JGTRRA in mid-2003, economic performance in the United

States improved somewhat. Unemployment reached a peak of 6.3 percent in June of 2003 and

declined slowly during the remainder of 2003. In the third quarter of 2003, real GDP expanded

at a rate of 8.2 percent. This rate was more than double the highest growth rate in the previous

two years. Just as the phased-in nature of the 2001 tax law may have delayed production and

employment, the immediate tax relief included in the 2003 law may have contributed towards the

increased pace of economic activity in the second half of 2003.



F.      Robustness

Alternative elasticities

We now consider how the simulated effects of phased-in tax cuts depend on the elasticity of

labor supply (η) and the elasticity of intertemporal substitution (σ). We confine our attention to

the effects of the 2001 tax law. Figure 7 shows the simulated time paths for consumption,

employment, and investment (we omit the time path for GDP since it is almost identical to the

time path of employment). The rows give results for σ equal to 0.2, 0.5., 1, and 2. The different

lines in each panel correspond to different values of η. The light line is for η equal to 0.2, the

dark line is for η equal to 1, and the dotted line is for η equal to 2. Recall that our baseline case

in the previous figures has been σ equal to 1 and η equal to 0.5.

        Consider first the paths for consumption. Lower labor and capital taxes imply that

income and consumption are higher in the long run. The new long run level of consumption

increases with a higher labor supply elasticity and with a higher elasticity of intertemporal



                                                  21
substitution. The more elastic labor supply is, the greater the increase in future income. Not

surprisingly, as the elasticity of intertemporal substitution increases, the consumers are more and

more willing to tolerate changing consumption over time. For σ = 0.2, consumption is nearly

constant. As this elasticity gets higher, households are more willing to defer consumption. This

makes the path of consumption steeper and makes future income higher due to high capital

accumulation. Note that consumption always rises immediately following the announcement of

the policy change.

       Now consider the paths for employment. As the labor supply elasticity becomes higher,

labor becomes more and more responsive to both immediate and anticipated tax changes. For

low levels of η, the long run increase in labor is very modest; for high levels, there are much

bigger increases in labor as each successive tax rate cut is put into effect. The level of the path of

labor is depends on the value of σ . High values of σ shift this time path up. Notice that for

values of σ less than one, the wealth effect dominates the substitution effect and employment

falls in the short run. For values greater than one, the substitution effect dominates, so the

combination of current and future tax cuts causes employment to rise in the short run.

Anticipated future tax cuts will be more likely to cause current reductions in employment if

consumers are willing to delay employment but not willing to delay consumption.

       Notice that for all of the parameterizations, investment falls during the period of the

phase in. The immediate increase in consumption always outweighs the short run changes in

production, which are often negative.

       The long run effects of the tax cut need to be interpreted with caution. To focus on the

short run effects stemming from the timing of tax changes we suppose that the government cuts

lump-sum transfers to balance its budget. This is not a realistic assumption for long run analysis.



                                                 22
A suitable analysis of the long run would wrestle with the hard choices that actual policy makers

face. Because the government does not cut spending or raise distortionary taxes in our

simulations, the long run forecast from our model overstates the benefit of these tax policies.



Adjustment costs

If consumption rises in response to future tax cuts without a contemporaneous increase in

production then investment must fall. If adjustment costs inhibit large changes in the flow of

investment, consumption smoothing and the intertemporal reallocation of labor are less

attractive. Here, we consider the effects such adjustment costs. Again, we focus on the 2001 tax

law. Adjustment costs are governed by the parameter φ , the curvature of the adjustment cost

function. We consider various values, including zero, to show the role of adjustment costs.

       In Figure 8, we show the response of consumption, employment, and investment to the

phased-in tax cuts for different values of the adjustment cost parameter φ . Recall that our

baseline setting for this parameter was zero (no adjustment costs). Here we consider three cases:

our baseline case ( φ = 0 ), moderate investment adjustment costs ( φ = 2 ), and high investment

adjustment costs ( φ = 6 ). Shapiro (1986) and Hall (2002) present evidence consistent with

moderate to negligible adjustment costs. While high adjustment costs are consistent with

estimates from q-theoretic investment regressions, they are generally regarded as implausibly

high. We include a higher adjustment cost to illustrate the point that it is the ability to move

consumption over time easily that makes an announcement of future tax cuts affect current real

economic activity.

       In the Figure 8, the dark solid line corresponds to our baseline settings, the light solid line

represents an economy with moderate adjustment costs and the dotted line corresponds to the



                                                 23
high adjustment cost model. In the baseline model, consumption jumps as soon as the policy is

announced and then rises smoothly from then on. Investment drops initially to finance the

increased consumption. Employment responds only slightly to the tax policy in the first year. In

contrast, in the adjustment cost models, consumption rises by less initially and then jumps each

time the labor income taxes fall. Investment falls by less and employment responds more to the

initial tax cuts.

        Another interesting consequence of the adjustment cost models is that Brainard-Tobin’s

Q (in the bottom center panel) drops immediately. Consumers desire the additional consumption

immediately but are restricted (by the adjustment costs) in their ability to intertemporally

substitute. If we take Q as an indicator of stock market valuation then the 2001 tax cut policies

also provide a reason for the poor stock market performance in the wake of the policy.



G.      Related literature

Several other papers examine the 2001 tax cuts. Auerbach (2002) uses the Auerbach and

Kotlikoff (1987) model to study the 2001 tax rate changes. The focus of Auerbach’s analysis is

the effect of the tax policy on national savings and investment. Though it is not the central focus

of his paper, his analysis does take into account the phased-in nature of the tax cuts. He reports a

pattern of output effects similar to those shown in our simulations (Figure 4) under the

assumption that the tax cuts sunset as scheduled.

        Gale and Potter (2002) provide a valuable summary and evaluation of the provisions of

the legislation. They also provide an estimate of the effect of the tax changes on labor supply,

savings, and GDP growth. Their analysis is confined to the long run effects of the policy so it is

difficult to make direct comparisons with our paper. They estimate that labor supply increases in

steady state by 0.48 percent by multiplying an average uncompensated elasticity of 0.17 by a 2.8

                                                 24
percent increase in the after-tax real wage. The uncompensated elasticity is not relevant for

phase-in effects, which depends on the compensated or Frisch elasticity, so we cannot infer what

their analysis would predict about the dynamic response of labor. (Our model implies an

uncompensated elasticity of zero only if σ = 1 .) Their results for saving and investment are also

hard to compare with our results because they implicitly hold the interest rate constant on one

hand, but consider offsetting changes in the current account on the other. In contrast, our

approach does allow for endogenous changes in the interest rate but abstracts from international

borrowing and lending.

       Gale and Potter conclude that the tax law would depress the level of GDP once it is

phased in. In contrast, we find a modest increase in GDP. One important factor explaining this

difference is that the capital stock increases in our simulations. The increase in the capital stock

comes not only from the incentive effects of the capital tax rate reduction, which are modest in

our calculations, but from the equilibrium response of the capital stock to the increase in labor

supply. An increase in labor supply puts downward pressure on the wage and therefore

stimulates capital accumulation.

       Calomiris and Hassett (2002) present a survey of the evidence that leads them to make an

optimistic forecast about the output and revenue effects of the 2001 tax law. They do not

produce quantitative estimates, and in particular, do not address the issue of the phase in.

       Burman, Gale and Rohaly (2003) show that the number of taxpayers affected by the

alternative minimum tax (AMT) will grow dramatically in the next decade because the

interaction of economic growth and non-indexation of the AMT with the lower marginal tax

rates in the 2001 and 2003 tax laws. In later years, the non-indexation of the AMT leads effective

tax rates to increase. Roughly speaking, the effects of such an increase will be similar to a mix

of the estimates with the sunset (Figure 4) and without it (Figure 5).

                                                 25
IV.    Government Budget Rules

The previous section showed how the timing of tax changes in recent tax legislation had

substantial, and perhaps undesirable, effects on the timing of output, employment, and

investment. Given that phased-in tax changes have these effects, it is natural to ask why they are

so often features of tax policy. In this section we argue that legislative rules pertaining to the

framing and scope of tax policy play important roles in shaping actual policy.

       Budget rules shaped both the 2001 and 2003 tax laws. First, federal budget rules

mandate reporting the revenue consequences of tax laws over 10-year windows. This rule

frames the debate and the description of the legislation. Second, provisions of the Budget Act

allow senators to raise a point of order concerning tax changes that have an effect beyond ten

years. This rule, called the Byrd rule, effectively requires a supermajority of 60 votes to pass tax

reductions that extend beyond 10 years.



A.     Budget Rules and the 2001 Tax Law

The 10-year budget window had a major effect in shaping the 2001 legislation. The centerpiece

of the 2001 tax cut proposal was the phased-in marginal tax rate reductions discussed in Section

III. The phase in allowed the budget consequences of the first 10 years of the tax cut to be much

smaller than long run impact. According to the Bush Administration’s 2002 budget, the

President’s tax cut proposal would reduce revenues by 1.5 trillion dollars in the ten-year period

after passage of the law. According to the administrations estimates, the revenue losses for the

years 2007 – 2011 were more than twice the revenue losses for the first five years (2002 – 2006).

Because the debate over tax laws focuses on the first ten years rather than their steady-state

impact, phased-in tax reductions make long run reductions in tax rates appear to be smaller than

                                                  26
they truly are. The effort to fit the magnitude of tax cuts into particular 10-year targets strongly

suggests that this rule has real consequences for the details of tax changes.

       As it happened, President Bush could not secure the permanent, phased-in tax rate

reduction that he proposed in the budget. A majority of the Senate favored these provisions, but

not the 60 senator supermajority required by the Byrd rule. Accordingly, the Congress enacted a

ten-year tax cut whose provisions sunset in 2011.

       The combination of the 10-year budget accounting and the Byrd rule produced a schedule

of tax rate cuts that phased in slowly and then disappeared after 10 years. A natural question

arises: Did the public (and the members of Congress) expect the tax provisions to expire?

Advocates of the tax cut clearly hoped that they would ultimately be made permanent. Indeed, a

bill proposing to do so was introduced in the House in 2002. Moreover, President Bush

proposed making them permanent both after the 2002 election and again in the 2004 State of the

Union Address.

       In our quantitative estimation of the effects of the policy, we were agnostic about the

public’s expectations about the sunset. To this end, we presented estimates with and without the

sunset. The sunset was far enough in the future that it does not affect the temporal pattern

economic activity during the years of the phase in, though it affects the overall level of activity.



B.     Budget Rules and the 2003 Tax Law

The 2003 tax law was also shaped by a debate that focused on the 10-year budget window.

President Bush originally proposed a bill that would have eliminated the personal taxation of

dividends and accelerated the tax rate cut provisions of the 2001 law and made them permanent.

In their original analysis of the administration’s proposal, the Joint Committee on Taxation




                                                 27
scored the revenue loss from the President’s proposals at $725 billion over the eleven-year

period 2003 through 2013 (see Joint Tax Committee (2003c)).

       There was resistance, however, to a tax cut of this size from moderate Republican

Senators. In particular, Senator George Voinovich, a pivotal member of the Finance Committee,

announced he would support a cut of no more than $350 billion over ten years. Senator

Voinovich cosponsored a resolution limiting the cuts to that amount. Though that resolution

failed in a vote in the Senate on March 21, the $350 billion figure continued to frame the debate.

       The House passed a bill with a revenue cost on $550 billion early in the morning on April

11. The Senate, later that day, approved a bill with a $350 billion 10-year revenue cost.

Approval was narrowly won in the Senate—Vice President Cheney had to vote to break a tie—

only because Finance Committee Chairman Senator Grassley promised the moderate

Republicans that the bill that emerged from the conference committee would respect the $350

billion 10-year cost in the Senate bill.

       The details of the final law as discussed in the previous section were driven by the $350

billion, ten-year constraint. Unlike in 2001, there was substantial sentiment to front-load the tax

cuts for several reasons. First, there was an aim to address the weak economy though tax cuts.5

Indeed, 83 percent of the total effect on the budget of the 2003 law was in the first three fiscal

years of the 10-year window. (See Joint Tax Committee, 2003b.) Second, there was hope

among those who sought larger tax cuts that the phase-outs (e.g., of the Alternative Minimum

Tax relief and of the dividend and capital gains tax reductions) could be eliminated in the future.

Critics of the law also saw this as a likely outcome, and therefore complained that the budgetary

impact of the law was understated.




                                                 28
       Given that extending provisions of the bill was already part of the debate even as it was

passed, it is very hard to assess how the 2003 law changed expectations about future taxes.

Moreover, to the extent that it was credible that the phase-outs would not be allowed to take

effect, it is hard to understand what the moderates achieved in forcing the $350 billion limit onto

the conference report. In any case, by framing the debate in terms of ten-year sum of budgetary

impact, a law emerged with a complicated pattern of temporary tax changes and with little

certainty about long run tax rates.



C.     Discussion

The history of the 2001 legislation suggests that budget windows and budget rules have a

substantial effect on the timing of tax rate changes. We should emphasize that these influences

are not incorporated in our model. Indeed, it is difficult to do so convincingly.

Auerbach (2003) also identifies budget rules as having potentially significant effects on the

design of tax policy. He considers a political economy model that allows for transitions in

legislative control from one party to another. Budget windows that are too short allow policy

makers understate the true financial cost of policy changes by cutting taxes or raising spending

after the short horizon of the budget window. Budget windows can also be too long. Long

windows allow policy makers to take credit for tax levies or spending cuts that are very far in the

future even though there is no way to commit to the policy.

       Although his model is quite stylized, Auerbach’s approach is clearly fruitful for making

sense of the very complicated reality of the political process. It also highlights how innovations

such as moving from 5-year to 10-year budget windows, which were meant to improve

5
  When the Bush Administration proposed the 2001 tax bill, little emphasis was placed on
stimulus. The 2001 tax rebates were introduced by Democrats, though as the economy slowed in

                                                29
budgeting by focusing on the longer term, can have perverse implications for policy. Finally, we

would emphasize how rules inherited from history, e.g., the supermajority requirements of the

Byrd Rule, can have considerable, though unintended, consequences for policy.



V.     Conclusions

Phased-in tax changes have significant incentive effects that should not be overlooked when

evaluating economic policy. Phased-in tax cuts on labor income give workers and firms an

incentive to delay production until the tax cut takes effect. In contrast, phased-in tax cuts on

capital income provide immediate incentives to work and produce and especially to accumulate

capital to take advantage of tax rates that will be low in the future.

       The 2001 tax law featured phased-in reductions in labor taxes and capital taxes. The

calculations we present show that the short run effects of the phase in may have reduced output,

employment, and investment relative to trend. The phased-in tax cuts also reduced economic

activity relative to what it would have been with a smaller, but immediate tax cut. Accordingly,

the 2001 tax law may account in part for the slow recovery from the business cycle trough of

2001. The analysis also indicates that phasing in tax rate cuts contributed to the poor

performance of both investment and equity markets. The long-run effect of the tax cuts, which is

not the focus of this paper, depends critically on how the budget is eventually balanced.

       The 2003 tax legislation reversed the phased-in nature of the 2001 law and also called for

substantial temporary reductions in tax rates on capital income. The immediate tax rate cuts

under the 2003 law provided incentives for production and investment to rise substantially

relative to a baseline with phased-in tax rate cuts. These incentives likely contributed to the

stronger economic performance in late 2003.


2001, the rebates were embraced by the Bush administration as a stimulus measure.
                                                  30
        Why might policymakers implement tax changes that phase in and phase out over time?

It is possible that policymakers are intentionally trying to affect the timing of households’ and

firms’ decisions. For example, temporary investment incentives are sometimes advocated for

short run stimulus. Moreover, as we have already discussed, delayed reductions in capital

taxation stimulate investment without giving a windfall to previously installed capital.

        In contrast, the effects of the timing of labor taxes hardly features in the professional or

political debate. Perhaps no one thinks intertemporal effects are important for labor. As our

robustness analysis makes clear, however, for parameter values where the timing of the tax cut

has little effect on the allocation of labor across time, the tax cuts also have little effect on the

steady-state level of labor. Hence, it not possible to advocate that tax cuts have favorable long-

run supply side impacts while ignoring the intertemporal effects.

        Perhaps features of behavior or institutions not captured by the model could rationalize

large steady state effects of tax cuts, but minimize the intertemporal effects. Candidates include

adjustment costs in labor supply or labor demand, or institutional rigidities. We believe such

frictions are important for very short-run changes in tax rates. For example, we would not expect

to see large intertemporal effects on labor supply of the one-month payroll tax holiday proposed

by some Democratic leaders in early 2003. Yet, there are reasons to doubt that such frictions are

substantial for the multi-year horizons analyzed in this paper. First, econometric estimates of

adjustment costs for production workers and their hours over quarterly horizons are small.

Second, periods of several years should be long enough to overcome institutional rigidities.

Third, if there are substantial steady-state impacts of tax rates on labor supply, adjustment costs

and institutional rigidities must be overcome at some point. Instead, those who doubt the

intertemporal effect of tax changes such as we analyze are likely adhering to a low estimate of




                                                   31
the elasticity of labor supply with the implication that the long run effects of tax changes are also

low.

       Phasing in of tax cuts on labor is difficult to rationalize with standard economic models.

That basic economic reasoning cannot rationalize phased-in tax cuts lends credence to the view

presented in the previous section—that the phased-in and temporary tax increases witnessed

since 2001 are a sub-optimal outcome driven by the legislative process. In particular, the

absence of a strong majority in the Senate, interacting with strict adherence to procedural and

accounting rules for legislating tax policy, may have lead to compromises that resulted in phase

ins and sunsets of tax rate changes. In 2003, when the objective of short-run stimulus was

prominent, the same rules and a similar political balance led to tax cuts that were temporary and

front-loaded.




                                                 32
                                          References

Auerbach, Alan J. 2002. “The Bush Tax Cut and National Saving.” National Tax Journal
55(3), pp. 387-407.

Auerbach, Alan J. 2003. “Budget Windows, Sunsets, and Fiscal Control.” Unpublished
manuscript, University of California, Berkeley (June).

Auerbach, Alan J. and James R. Hines Jr. “Anticipated Tax Changes and the Timing of
Investment.” In The Effects of Taxation on Capital Accumulation, Martin Feldstein, ed.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1987.

Auerbach, Alan J. and Laurence J. Kotlikoff. 1987. Dynamic Fiscal Policy. Cambridge, UK:
Cambridge University Press.

Barro, Robert J. 1979. “On the Determination of the Public Debt.” Journal of Political Economy,
87(5), pp. 940-971.

Barro, Robert J. 1989. “The Neoclassical Approach to Fiscal Policy.” In Modern Business Cycle
Theory, R. J. Barro ed. Cambridge MA, Harvard University Press.

Barsky, Robert B., F. Thomas Juster, Miles S. Kimball and Matthew D. Shapiro. 1997.
“Preference Parameters and Behavioral Heterogeneity: An Experimental Approach in the Health
and Retirement Study.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 112(2), pp. 537-579.

Baxter, Marianne and Robert G. King. 1993. “Fiscal Policy in General Equilibrium.” American
Economic Review 83, pp. 315-334.

Blouin, Jennifer L., Jana Smith Raedy, Douglas A. Shackelford. 2004. “Did Dividends
Increase Immediately After the 2003 Reduction in Tax Rates?” NBER Working Paper No.
10301

Burman, Leonard E., Gale, William G. and Jeffrey Rohaly. 2003. “The AMT: Projections and.”
July, Tax Notes

Calomiris, Charles and Hassett, Kevin. 2002, “Marginal Tax Rate Cuts and the Public Tax
Debate.” National Tax Journal 55(1), March, pp. 119-131.

Campbell, John and Mankiw, N. Gregory. 1989. “Consumption, Income and Interest Rates:
Reinterpreting the Time Series Evidence.” NBER Macroeconomics Annual 4: 185-216.

Chamley, Christophe. 1986. “Optimal Taxation of Capital Income in General Equilibrium with
Infinite Lives.” Econometrica 54(3), pp. 607-622.

Congressional Budget Office. 2001. “The Budget and Economic Outlook: An Update.”
August.



                                              33
Congressional Budget Office. 2003. “An Analysis of the President’s Budgetary Proposals for
Fiscal Year 2004. March.

Farber, Henry S. 2003. “Is Tomorrow Another Day? The Labor Supply of New York City Cab
Drivers.” Industrial Relations Section, Princeton University, Working Paper No. 473.

Gale, William G. and Peter R. Orszag. 2003. “Sunsets in the Tax Code.” January, Tax Notes

Gale, William G. and Samara R. Potter. 2002. “An Economic Evaluation of the Economic
Growth and Tax Relief Reconciliation Act of 2001.” National Tax Journal 55(1), March, pp.
133-186.

Hall, Robert E. 1988. “Intertemporal Substitution in Consumption.” Journal of Political
Economy 96(2), April, pp. 339-357.

Hall, Robert E. 2002. “Industry Dynamics with Adjustment Costs.” Unpublished paper,
Stanford University.

House, Christopher L. and Matthew D. Shapiro. 2004. “Accelerated Depreciation and the
Timing of Tax Cuts.” Unpublished working paper, University of Michigan.

Joint Tax Committee. 2001. “Summary of Provisions Contained in the Conference Agreement
for H.R. 1836, The Economic Growth and Tax Relief Reconciliation Act of 2001.” JCX-50-01

Joint Tax Committee. 2003a. “Summary of Conference Agreement on H.R. 2,
The Jobs and Growth Tax Relief Reconciliation Act of 2003.” JCX-55-03

Joint Tax Committee. 2003b. “Estimate Budget Effects of the Conference Agreement on H.R. 2,
The Jobs and Growth Tax Relief Reconciliation Act of 2003.” JCX-54-03

Joint Tax Committee. 2003c. “Estimated Budget Effects Of The Revenue Provisions Contained
In The President's Fiscal Year 2004 Budget Proposal” JCX-15-03

Judd, Kenneth L. 1985. “Redistributive Taxation in a Simple Perfect Foresight Model.” Journal
of Public Economics, 64(6), pp. 1299-1310.

Kimball, Miles and Matthew D. Shapiro. 2003. “Labor Supply: Are Income and Substitution
Effects Both Large or Both Small?” Unpublished paper, University of Michigan.

Mankiw, N. Gregory. 1987. “Government Purchases and the Real Interest Rate” Journal of
Political Economy 95(2), April, pp. 407-19.

Prescott, Edward. 1986. “Theory Ahead of Business Cycle Measurement.” Federal Reserve
Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly Review 10, Fall, pp. 9-22.

Poterba, James. 2004. “Taxation and Corporate Payout Policy.” NBER working paper # 10321.



                                              34
Shapiro, Matthew D. 1986. “The Dynamic Demand for Capital and Labor.” Quarterly Journal of
Economics 101, August, pp. 513-542.

Shapiro, Matthew D. and Joel Slemrod. 2003a. “Consumer Response to Tax Rebates.” American
Economic Review 93(1), March, pp. 382-396.

Shapiro, Matthew D. and Joel Slemrod. 2003b. “Did The 2001 Tax Rebate Stimulate Spending?
Evidence From Taxpayer Surveys” In Tax Policy and the Economy, James Poterba, ed.
Cambridge: MIT Press.

Summers, Lawrence H. 1981. “Taxation and Corporate-Investment: A Q-Theory Approach.”
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity (1) pp. 67-140.




                                            35
                       Table 1. Baseline Parameters
                    Parameter                         Baseline Value
Discount factor, annual rate (β)                          0.98
Capital share (α)                                         0.35
Depreciation Rate, annual (δ)                             0.10
Labor supply elasticity (η)                               0.5
Elasticity of intertemporal substitution (σ)              0.2
Curvature of adjustment cost function ( φ )                 0




                                    36
  Table 2. Time Path of Upper-Bracket Marginal Income Tax Rates Under the 2001 Tax Law
                                           Tax Brackets (Joint Returns)
Date                       $45,200-        $109,250-            $166,340-     $297,300
                           109,250           166,340              297,300     and above
pre-EGTRRA                    28                31                 36             39.6
2001:3-2001:4                 27.5              30.5               35.5           39.1
2002:1-2003:4                 27                30                 35             38.6
2004:1-2005:4                 26                29                 34             37.6
2006:1 and beyond             25                28                 33             35


       Note: The table shows tax rates for tax brackets above the 15 percent rate. The 2001 tax
changes were retroactive of January, though enacted in the middle of the year. The tax brackets
are for 2001, married filing jointly, and are adjusted annually for inflation. Under the EGTRRA
of 2001, tax rates revert to their pre-EGTRRA levels in 2011.




                                               37
      Table 3. Time Path of Effective Marginal Tax Rates Resulting from the 2001 Tax Law
  Time (quarters)              Date           Labor tax rate ( τ N )    Capital tax rate ( τ K )
initial steady state   pre-EGTRRA                   36.2                   18.3
0,1                    2001:3-2001:4                35.92                  18.22
2-9                    2002:1-2003:4                35.64                  18.14
10-17                  2004:1-2005:4                35.08                  17.99
18 and beyond          2006:1 and beyond            34.4                   17.8


        Source: Congressional Budget Office (2001) for initial and 2006 figures interpolated as
described in the text. Under the EGTRRA of 2001, tax rates revert to their pre-EGTRRA levels in
2011.




                                               38
                                             Figure 1. Immediate versus Delayed Labor Tax Rate Reductions

                                                      Labor Tax Rate
                                  0.5
                                                            Delayed Tax Cut
                                                            Immediate Tax Cut
  Percentage Points




                                    0

                                  -0.5

                                   -1

                                  -1.5
                                         0        5        10          15       20
                                                      Tax Revenue                                   Debt/GDP
                                    0                                                 10
Deviation from Steady State (%)




                                  -0.5                                                 8

                                   -1                                                  6

                                  -1.5                                                 4

                                   -2                                                  2

                                  -2.5                                                 0
                                         0        5        10          15       20          0   5      10        15   20
                                                       Employment                                     GDP
Deviation from Steady State (%)




                                  0.5                                                0.5

                                    0                                                  0

                                  -0.5                                               -0.5

                                   -1                                                 -1

                                  -1.5                                               -1.5

                                   -2                                                 -2
                                         0        5        10          15       20          0   5      10        15   20
                                                       Consumption                                  Investment
Deviation from Steady State (%)




                                  0.5                                                0.5

                                  0.4                                                  0

                                  0.3                                                -0.5

                                  0.2                                                 -1

                                  0.1                                                -1.5

                                    0                                                 -2
                                         0        5        10          15       20          0   5      10        15   20
                                                          Years                                       Years
                                         Figure 2. Immediate versus Delayed Capital Tax Rate Reductions:
                                                      Economic Depreciation Allowances
                                                   Captial Tax Rate
                                  0.5
                                                          Delayed Tax Cut
                                                          Immediate Tax Cut
Percentage Points




                                    0

                                  -0.5

                                   -1

                                  -1.5
                                         0     5         10           15      20
                                                    Tax Revenue                                   Debt/GDP
Deviation from Steady State (%)




                                  0.4                                              1.5

                                  0.2                                                1

                                    0                                              0.5

                                  -0.2                                               0

                                  -0.4                                             -0.5
                                         0     5         10           15      20          0   5      10        15   20
                                                     Employment                                     GDP
Deviation from Steady State (%)




                                  0.4                                              0.4

                                  0.3
                                                                                   0.3
                                  0.2
                                                                                   0.2
                                  0.1
                                                                                   0.1
                                    0

                                  -0.1                                               0
                                         0     5         10           15      20          0   5      10        15   20
                                                    Consumption                                   Investment
Deviation from Steady State (%)




                                  0.2                                              1.5

                                  0.1
                                                                                     1
                                    0
                                                                                   0.5
                                  -0.1

                                  -0.2                                               0
                                         0     5         10           15      20          0   5      10        15   20
                                                        Years                                       Years
                                          Figure 3. Immediate versus Delayed Capital Tax Rate Reductions:
                                                               Investment Expensing
                                                    Captial Tax Rate
                                   0.5
                                                           Delayed Tax Cut
                                                           Immediate Tax Cut
Percentage Points




                                     0

                                   -0.5

                                    -1

                                   -1.5
                                          0     5         10           15      20
                                                     Tax Revenue                                   Debt/GDP
Deviation from Steady State (%)




                                   0.4                                              1.5

                                   0.2                                                1

                                     0                                              0.5

                                   -0.2                                               0

                                   -0.4                                             -0.5
                                          0     5         10           15      20          0   5      10        15   20
                                                      Employment                                     GDP
 Deviation from Steady State (%)




                                   0.4                                              0.4

                                   0.3
                                                                                    0.3
                                   0.2
                                                                                    0.2
                                   0.1
                                                                                    0.1
                                     0

                                   -0.1                                               0
                                          0     5         10           15      20          0   5      10        15   20
                                                     Consumption                                   Investment
 Deviation from Steady State (%)




                                   0.2                                              1.5

                                   0.1
                                                                                      1
                                     0
                                                                                    0.5
                                   -0.1

                                   -0.2                                               0
                                          0     5         10           15      20          0   5      10        15   20
                                                         Years                                       Years
                                                            Figure 4. 2001 Tax Law with Sunset Provision
                                                       Labor Tax Rate                                   Capital Tax Rate
                                    0.5                                               0.5
                                                 2001 Tax Law
                                      0          Immediate Tax Cut                     0
Percentage Points




                                    -0.5                                             -0.5

                                     -1                                                -1

                                    -1.5                                             -1.5

                                     -2                                                -2
                                           2002 2004 2006            2011                   2002 2004 2006           2011

                                                        Tax Revenue                                          Debt/GDP
  Deviation from Steady State (%)




                                      1                                                8

                                      0
                                                                                       6
                                     -1

                                     -2                                                4

                                     -3
                                                                                       2
                                     -4

                                     -5                                                0
                                           2002 2004 2006            2011                   2002 2004 2006           2011

                                                            Employment                                         GDP
Deviation from Steady State (%)




                                      1                                                1



                                    0.5                                               0.5



                                      0                                                0



                                    -0.5                                             -0.5
                                           2002 2004 2006            2011                   2002 2004 2006           2011

                                                        Consumption                                          Investment
Deviation from Steady State (%)




                                    0.5                                                4

                                    0.4                                                3

                                                                                       2
                                    0.3
                                                                                       1
                                    0.2
                                                                                       0
                                    0.1                                                -1

                                      0                                                -2
                                           2002 2004 2006            2011                   2002 2004 2006           2011
                                                     Figure 5. 2001 Tax Law without the Sunset Provision

                                                        Labor Tax Rate                                  Capital Tax Rate
                                     0.5                                             0.5
                                                                 2001 Tax Law
                                       0                         Immediate Tax Cut     0
     Percentage Points




                                     -0.5                                            -0.5

                                      -1                                              -1

                                     -1.5                                            -1.5

                                      -2                                              -2
                                            2002 2004 2006        2011                      2002 2004 2006            2011

                                                         Tax Revenue                                         Debt/GDP
   Deviation from Steady State (%)




                                       0                                              15

                                      -1
                                                                                      10
                                      -2

                                      -3
                                                                                       5
                                      -4

                                      -5                                               0
                                            2002 2004 2006        2011                      2002 2004 2006            2011

                                                         Employment                                             GDP
                                       1                                               1
   Deviation from Steady State (%)




                                     0.5                                             0.5



                                       0                                               0



                                     -0.5                                            -0.5
                                            2002 2004 2006        2011                      2002 2004 2006            2011

                                                         Consumption                                         Investment
Deviation from Steady State (%)




                                     0.5                                             0.5

                                     0.4
                                                                                       0

                                     0.3
                                                                                     -0.5
                                     0.2

                                                                                      -1
                                     0.1

                                       0                                             -1.5
                                            2002 2004 2006        2011                      2002 2004 2006            2011
                                                   Figure 6. 2001 and 2003 Laws with Sunset Provision

                                                      Labor Tax Rate                               Capital Tax Rate
                                   0.5                                          0.5
                                                 2003 Tax Law
                                     0           2001 Tax Law                     0
 Percentage Points




                                   -0.5                                         -0.5

                                    -1                                           -1

                                   -1.5                                         -1.5

                                    -2                                           -2
                                          2002 2004 2006           2011                2002 2004 2006           2011

                                                       Tax Revenue                                      Debt/GDP
Deviation from Steady State (%)




                                     1                                           10

                                     0                                            8
                                    -1
                                                                                  6
                                    -2
                                                                                  4
                                    -3

                                    -4                                            2

                                    -5                                            0
                                          2002 2004 2006           2011                2002 2004 2006           2011

                                                           Employment                                     GDP
 Deviation from Steady State (%)




                                     1                                            1



                                   0.5                                          0.5



                                     0                                            0



                                   -0.5                                         -0.5
                                          2002 2004 2006           2011                2002 2004 2006           2011

                                                       Consumption                                      Investment
Deviation from Steady State (%)




                                   0.5                                            3

                                   0.4
                                                                                  2

                                   0.3
                                                                                  1
                                   0.2

                                                                                  0
                                   0.1

                                     0                                           -1
                                          2002 2004 2006           2011                2002 2004 2006           2011
                                               Figure 7: 2001 Phased-In Tax Reductions: Alternative Elasticities

                                                     Consumption                     Employment                      Investment
                                           4                              3
                                                              η = 0.2                                    4
                                                              η = 0.5     2
                                           3
                                                              η = 2.0                                    2
                                                                          1
                                  σ = .2




                                           2
                                                                                                         0
                                                                          0

                                           1                                                             -2
                                                                          -1

                                           0                              -2                             -4
                                            2002 2004 2006         2011     2002 2004 2006        2011     2002 2004 2006         2011


                                           4                              3
                                                                                                         4
                                                                          2
                                           3
                                                                                                         2
                                                                          1
                                  σ = .5
Deviation From Steady State (%)




                                           2
                                                                                                         0
                                                                          0

                                           1                                                             -2
                                                                          -1

                                           0                              -2                             -4
                                            2002 2004 2006         2011     2002 2004 2006        2011     2002 2004 2006         2011


                                           4                              3
                                                                                                         4
                                                                          2
                                           3
                                                                                                         2
                                                                          1
                                  σ=1




                                           2
                                                                                                         0
                                                                          0

                                           1                                                             -2
                                                                          -1

                                           0                              -2                             -4
                                            2002 2004 2006         2011     2002 2004 2006        2011     2002 2004 2006         2011


                                           4                              3
                                                                                                         4
                                                                          2
                                           3
                                                                                                         2
                                                                          1
                                  σ=2




                                           2
                                                                                                         0
                                                                          0

                                           1                                                             -2
                                                                          -1

                                           0                              -2                             -4
                                            2002 2004 2006         2011     2002 2004 2006        2011     2002 2004 2006         2011
                     Figure 8: 2001 Phased-In Tax Rate Reductions: Alternative Adjustment Costs

                                                      Consumption                                     Employment
                                  0.5                                           1

                                  0.4
                                                                              0.5
                                  0.3

                                  0.2
                                                                        φ=0     0
                                  0.1                                   φ=2
                                                                        φ=6
                                    0                                         -0.5
                                         2002 2004 2006          2011                2002 2004 2006           2011

                                                           GDP                                        Investment
Deviation from Steady State (%)




                                    1                                           1

                                                                              0.5

                                  0.5                                           0

                                                                              -0.5

                                    0                                          -1

                                                                              -1.5

                                  -0.5                                         -2
                                         2002 2004 2006          2011                2002 2004 2006           2011

                                                          Tobins Q                                Tax Revenue
                                  0.5                                           0

                                                                               -1
                                    0
                                                                               -2

                                                                               -3
                                  -0.5
                                                                               -4

                                   -1                                          -5
                                         2002 2004 2006          2011                2002 2004 2006           2011
