                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        COMPETITION IN IMPERFECT MARKETS:
                    DOES IT HELP CALIFORNIA’S MEDICAID MOTHERS?

                                               Anna Aizer
                                               Janet Currie
                                              Enrico Moretti

                                          Working Paper 10429
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w10429


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       April 2004




The authors thank Cairan Phibbs for generously providing data on neonatal intensive care units, and we thank
seminar participants at the University of Kentucky and Princeton University and Jeffrey Kling and W.
Bentley MacLeod for helpful comments. Currie also thanks the Center for Health and Well-Being at Princeton
University for support while this paper was being written. The authors are grateful for support from National
Science Foundation, grant #NSF 0241861, but remain solely responsible for its contents. Benjamin Bolitzer
and Yan Lee provided excellent research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s)
and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2004 by Anna Aizer, Janet Currie, and Enrico Moretti. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Competition in Imperfect Markets: Does it Help California’s Medicaid Mothers?
Anna Aizer, Janet Currie, and Enrico Moretti
NBER Working Paper No. 10429
April 2004
JEL No. I11, I12, I18
                                        ABSTRACT


            Poor and uneducated patients may not know what health care is desirable and, if

fully insured, have little incentive to minimize the costs of their care. Partly in response to these

concerns, most states have moved a substantial portion of their Medicaid caseloads out of

traditional competitive fee-for-service (FFS) care, and into mandatory managed care (MMC)

plans that severely restrict the choice of provider.

            We use a unique longitudinal data base of California births in order to examine the

impact of this policy on pregnant women and infants. California phased in MMC creating

variation in the timing of MMC. We identify the effects of MMC using changes in the regime

faced by individual mothers between births. Some counties adopted single-carrier plans, while

others adopted regimes with at least two carriers. Hence, we also ask whether competition

between at least two carriers improved MMC outcomes. We find that MMC reduced the quality

of prenatal care and increased low birth weight, prematurity, and neonatal death. Our results

suggest that the competitive FFS system provided better care than the new MMC system, and

that requiring the participation of at least two plans did not improve matters.

Anna Aizer                        Janet Currie                       Enrico Moretti
Department of Economics           Department of Economics            Department of Economics
Brown University                  UCLA                               UCLA
Box B, 64 Waterman Street         405 Hilgard Avenue                 405 Hilgard Avenue
Providence, RI 02912              Los Angeles, CA 90095-1477         Los Angeles, CA 90095-1477
anna_aizer@brown.edu              and NBER                           and NBER
                                  currie@simba.sscnet.ucla.edu       moretti@econ.ucla.edu
       There is a vast literature focusing on imperfections in the market for health care.1 In the

case of public health insurance for the indigent, it has been argued that poor and uneducated

patients may be even less likely than others to know what health care is really desirable, and that

if these patients are fully insured by public plans, then they will have little incentive to minimize

the costs of their medical care. Hence, poor people were thought to be easy marks for shady

providers who billed government for many services of dubious quality (e.g. “Medicaid Mills”);

were more likely than others to use high cost providers such as emergency rooms rather than

lower cost providers such as doctors’ offices; and were less likely than others to receive

preventive care.

       In the U.S., Medicaid is the main public health insurance program for low income women

and children. Over the 1990s, most states moved a substantial portion of their Medicaid

caseloads out of traditional competitive fee-for-service (FFS) care, and into mandatory managed

care (MMC) plans.2 State governments argued that this change would improve access to care,

and the quality of care for Medicaid patients, by linking patients to approved providers. In

contrast to FFS, in which patients may chose any provider willing to serve them, MMC plans

typically severely restrict the choice of provider, and pay the provider(s) a fixed (capitated) fee

per patient.

       This feature of MMC removed Medicaid providers from the discipline of the market by


       1
         For example, many chapters in the Handbook of Health Economics (Culyer and
Newhouse, 2000) deal with this issue, and Glied (2000) discusses it in the context of managed
care organizations.
       2
         In this way, Medicaid patients became more similar to the majority of the privately
insured, who had already become subject to managed care–by 1992, about 70% of the privately
insured were already in managed care plans (Glied, 2000).

                                                  1
giving them a largely captive patient base. Patient advocates point out that in contrast to FFS

providers, capitated MMC plans have incentives to minimize costs by providing as little care as

possible, and by discouraging the sickest patients from enrolling in the plans. These are the

same concerns that have been expressed with respect to privately enrolled patients in managed

care plans.

       In this paper, we use a unique longitudinal data base of California births in order to

examine the impact of switching from a competitive FFS system to MMC on the utilization of

care and outcomes among the disadvantaged pregnant women who became subject to MMC.

This file is formed by using the confidential birth records to link mothers between births.

Beginning in 1994, California phased in MMC on a county-by-county basis, creating a great deal

of variation in the timing of MMC which we exploit. We control for individual heterogeneity

using mother fixed effects and identify the effects of the different plans by focusing on changes

in the Medicaid regime faced by a mother between births. This strategy allows us to overcome

one of the key weaknesses of earlier studies, which is that Medicaid mothers may differ from

other mothers in unobserved ways, and that MMC may change the way that mothers are selected

into the Medicaid program.

       A second feature of California’s MMC implementation is that while some counties

adopted a single-insurance-carrier plan, the state mandated that others adopt regimes with at

least two carriers. It was thought that mandating at least two competing plans would help to

assure quality by allowing patients unhappy with one plan to “vote with the feet” and move to

the other plan. We therefore ask whether mandating the participation of more than one carrier

improved MMC outcomes.


                                                 2
       In contrast to previous examinations of MMC which have found some evidence of effects

on health care utilization but little evidence of effects on health outcomes, we find that MMC

plans were associated with reductions in the quality of prenatal care and increases in low birth

weight, prematurity, and neonatal death relative to FFS Medicaid.     The difference in results

may be due to the fact that our study design overcomes many of the limitations of previous work.

By following the same mothers over time and examining changes in the enrollment patterns,

utilization of care, and birth outcomes of mothers who became subject to different types of

MMC, we are better able to isolate the effects of these plans. By focusing on the population that

was actually subject to MMC, we avoid drawing inferences about its effects from the

experiences of the large numbers of women who were not required to enroll. And by merging

data from several sources, we are able to examine a wide range of outcomes, and to judge

whether the estimated effects are consistent across these outcomes.

       Our estimates are robust to several changes in specification including: a “regression

discontinuity” design in which we focus only on women who had a birth in the three years before

or after a change in MMC; an “intent-to-treat” design in which we assign MMC status based on

the state’s original plan for each county (disregarding changes in MMC which were not in the

state plan); controlling for the endogeneity of location by assigning MMC status to each women

based on the first county in which she is observed only; and including both both county-specific

time trends and time trends interacted with the mother’s demographic characteristics. We also

show that while MMC has strong effects on the target group, it had no effect on other similar

groups who were not subject to MMC.

       Our results suggest that despite its well-documented failings, the old, competitive, fee-


                                                3
for-service system with many atomistic providers of Medi-Cal services provided care that was

better in many respects than either MMC system. Moreover attempts to mandate a degree of

competition by requiring the participation of at least two plans did little to improve matters.

Ultimately, it appears that these poor, uneducated women did a better job of navigating the FFS

health care system than the government was able to do for them.

       The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section 1 provides background about the

implementation of MMC in California. Section 2 describes our data sources, and section 3 lays

out our methods. Results are discussed in section 4, and section 5 concludes.



1. Background

a) The Implementation of Medicaid Managed Care in California

       Until 1994, the vast majority of California’s Medicaid recipients were in fee-for-service

plans in which recipients could choose any provider who would accept them, and providers

would then seek reimbursement from Medi-Cal, California’s Medicaid agency. Several

counties had managed care plans available to Medi-Cal recipients on a voluntary basis, but

enrollments in these plans were very small. Although two California counties (Santa Barbara

and San Mateo) were allowed to implement experimental mandatory MMC plans, it was not

until the early 1990s that the state made definitive moves in this direction.3 It was first necessary

to pass state enabling legislation, and to obtain a waiver of the federal government’s requirement

that Medicaid patients be allowed a choice of providers.



       3
         Tai-Seale et al. (2001) find that these two counties had lower utilization of prenatal
care, and a higher number of one-day stays compared to a third county with FFS care.

                                                 4
       MMC was adopted according to The Department of Health Services’ Plan for Expanding

Medi-Cal Managed Care (DHS, 1993). In the cover letter to this document, the director of the

Department of Health Services, Molly Joel Coye, laid out the case for an expansion of

mandatory managed care in California as follows:

“The care our patients receive is fragmented, patchwork, and out-dated. Instead of being cared
for in a doctor’s office or a clinic, our patients wind up waiting hours in emergency rooms for
simple problems like a child’s ear infection. Thousands of Medi-Cal beneficiaries are
hospitalized each year for serious health conditions that could have been prevented by primary
care...There is an alternative that makes sense: organized health care...Because the state is in
such a severe budget crisis, many people assume that we are speeding up the transition to
managed care in order to save money. But the purpose of our accelerated transition–designed to
double managed care enrollments by April 1995 and to take nearly half of all Medi-Cal
beneficiaries into managed care arrangements by the year 1996–is to improve quality and
access” (Coye, 1993).


Whether the impetus for the expansion was cost savings or improving access to care, it seems

clear that the primary impetus for the change came from the state rather than from individual

counties.

       Three main models of MMC are discussed in the planning document: the County

Organized Health System (COHS); the Two-Plan Model; and the Geographic Managed Care

(GMC) model.4 In a COHS county, there is one public, county-run Medicaid managed care

plan, and people who are required to enroll in managed care must enroll in that plan if they wish

to receive Medicaid services. In a Two-Plan County, there is a county-managed plan and a

private managed care plan that has a contractual arrangement with the county to accept Medicaid


       4
          Three small experimental managed care programs have been excluded from our
analysis, Prepaid Health Plans, Primary Care Case Management, and Fee-For-Service Managed
Care. In June 2001, these accounted for .02%, .01%, and .73% of all Medi-Cal beneficiaries.
The first two are voluntary managed care plans, while the last is a FFS plan in which the state
contractor acts as a care-coordinator and gate-keeper.

                                                5
patients. People required to enroll in managed care must choose between the two plans.

Finally, in a GMC county, there is no public, county-managed plan; the county contracts with

different private managed care organizations to provide services to the Medicaid caseload. All

private plans involved in MMC are selected by competitive bidding, and must offer a minimum

bundle of services.

       The planning document specified that 13 of California’s 58 counties would adopt MMC

using the Two-Plan model, a further three counties (Orange, Santa Cruz and Solano) would

adopt the COHS, and that GMC would be implemented in Sacramento. The main criteria for

determining which counties would get which plan were the county’s population (there had to be

a minimum of 45,000 Medi-Cal beneficiaries) and the extent of private managed care infra-

structure that already existed in the county at the time of the planning document. Given the

small number of counties with GMC plans, we will look at Two Plan and GMC counties together

in what follows.

       The state plan inspired a great deal of controversy about what type of plan would best

serve Medi-Cal recipients and other indigents. The state favored the Two-Plan model, which is

why it mandated that it be adopted in most MMC counties. The state held that competition

between plans would offer patients choice and assure quality. However, in federal

Congressional hearings held to discuss the state’s plans, many stakeholders expressed

reservations (Committee on Energy and Commerce, 1994).

       It was feared that commercial plans would place new burdens on safety net providers by

identifying the low-cost patients and leaving the rest for the safety net to serve, and by denying

services to people so that they ended up in emergency rooms. For example, Michele Melden, an


                                                 6
attorney with the National Health Law Program discussed one managed care organization that

routinely “emergency disenrolled” members who were brought into the San Bernardino trauma

unit, with the disenrollment being effective the date of injury (Committee on Energy and

Commerce, page 44).

       Witnesses also raised the possibility that diverting paying Medi-Cal patients from

traditional safety-net providers to private plans would reduce the ability of these providers to

care for non-paying, indigent patients, and that it would threaten the “disproportionate share”

payments that these providers received from the federal government. One study in Sacramento

found that community clinics experienced 40 to 45 percent declines in usage after the

introduction of MMC (Korenbrot, Miller and Green, 1998).

       In the end, events unfolded according to the state’s plan: 12 of the 13 counties

designated to adopt the Two-Plan model did so (San Diego eventually adopted the GMC model

instead but in what follows we treat Two-Plan and GMC similarly). The three counties

earmarked for COHS adopted it, as did two other counties, Napa and Monterey. (Yolo county

also adopted COHS, but after our sample period). By June 2001, some 2.8 million people, half

of those enrolled in Medi-Cal, were in managed care (Klein and Donaldson, 2002). Moreover,

while counties had been asked to have their new plans in place by April 1996 at the latest, 15 of

the 17 originally designated counties had implemented a plan by April 1997 (the two laggards

were San Diego and Tulare). In general then, it appears that counties cooperated remarkably

closely with the master plan that had been laid out by the state.5


       5
        Some delay may have been difficult for counties to avoid. For example, Los Angeles
county began planning to set up their Two-Plan model in February 1993, before the state plan
had even been officially released. In Sept. 1994, the governor signed legislation enabling the

                                                 7
       Table 1 lists the counties that adopted MMC, the type of plan that they adopted, the date

at which enrollment began, the fraction of the caseload enrolled in a privately-run plan as of July

2000, the size of the county as proxied by the number of births in 2000, and median household

income in the county.

       Table 1 shows that the counties that adopted MMC were much larger on average than

those that did not, as one would expect given the rationale for selecting counties given in the

state plan. COHS counties were somewhat wealthier than Two Plan/GMC counties, which in

turn were wealthier than those that did not adopt. These differences suggest that it will be

important to control for heterogeneity when examining the effects of MMC adoption on

outcomes. Table 1 also shows that in a typical Two Plan county, between 20 to 40 percent of the

caseload was enrolled in a private plan, so that the private plans were important, and might have

been expected to provide some competition for the publicly run plans.

       It is however, very important to note that some categories of pregnant women are not

required to join managed care plans. The most important exceptions for our purposes are

pregnant women eligible for Medicaid only because their incomes are above the threshold for

cash welfare, but less than 200 percent of poverty, and undocumented pregnant women.6 In

2000, 11.6% of Medi-Cal deliveries were of women in the first category, while 38.9% of




creation of the county-managed plan. Creation of the plan was completed by Dec. 1995 and it
was licensed to serve Medi-Cal eligibles in April 1997. However, it did not receive permission
from the Health Care Financing Administration to move FFS beneficiaries into managed care
until Sept. 1997 (www.lacare.org/ lacare/lacare01.nsf/0/9ef4e855697f82f68825688d005a4fb1?
OpenDocument).
       6
       Currie and Gruber (1996) discuss extensions of Medicaid eligibility to pregnant women
who were not on cash assistance over the late 1980s and early 1990s.

                                                 8
California Medicaid deliveries were of undocumented women (Rains, 2000). In general,

women who were only eligible for Medi-Cal because they were pregnant, and who were only

eligible for coverage of prenatal care and delivery, were not required to join managed care

organizations.

       In order to focus on women likely to be subject to MMC, we restrict our analysis sample

to unmarried native-born women with a high school education or less.       These criteria remove

the undocumented (who by definition are foreign-born) and also remove the better-educated

and/or married women who are likely to be eligible only because of the income criteria.7 By

focusing on this disadvantaged population, we can also ask whether there were spillover effects

of MMC on other disadvantaged women in Two-Plan counties, as critics of the scheme feared.



b) Possible Effects of Medicaid Managed Care

       Under a traditional FFS plan, a provider receives payment for every service rendered.

Hence, provided that reimbursements are set high enough to make the provision of services

profitable, the provider will have an incentive to provide as many services as the patient will

accept. The main feature of an MMC plan is that the plan receives a fixed payment for each

patient. Thus, at any point in time, the plan has an incentive to provide as few services as

possible, though to the extent that they are responsible for the same patient over time, they may



       7
          It is unfortunate that we also lose foreign-born women who are legal residents, but it is
impossible to determine from the data who is legal and who is not. Moreover, among foreign-
born women language and culture may create additional barriers to care, and the growth in the
undocumented category raises the possibility that foreign-born women who were otherwise
ineligible for Medi-Cal presented themselves as undocumented in order to gain access to these
services.

                                                 9
also have an incentive to insure that patients receive effective preventive care. Plans receiving

capitated payments also have a clear incentive to “dump” or “cream skim”. That is, to

discourage people who are likely to be costly patients from enrolling and instead target those

who are likely to be inexpensive. Arlen and MacLeod (2003) point out that a third reason why

managed care organizations may provide substandard care is that the organization is not liable

for errors made by affiliated physicians; only the individual physician is liable.

       These features of managed care may also make managed care less attractive to patients,

especially to those most likely to incur large medical expenses. If plans have incentives to avoid

serving sick patients, then sick patients have incentives to steer clear of these plans. Hence, one

might expect the Medicaid caseload to change after the introduction of managed care, to the

extent that patients are able to choose between Medicaid and other options.8

       It is not clear a priori how increasing the degree of competition between MMC plans is

likely to affect outcomes for those who remain enrolled in Medicaid. To the extent that patients

who are dissatisfied with their plan have the option to switch plans without losing Medicaid

services, competition may help to ensure that the package of services offered does not fall below

some minimum level. On the other hand, in a single plan system, it may be more difficult to

discourage high-cost patients from enrolling than in a system in which patients can be

encouraged to move to another plan.


       8
          Currie and Fahr (forthcoming) show for example, that black and Hispanic children were
less likely to be enrolled in Medicaid following the introduction of MMC in California, which
may reflect the fact that many were able to take advantage of a well-developed network of
indigent care services instead. As discussed below, we find that black women were more likely
to be enrolled, and Hispanic women less likely to be enrolled after the implementation of MMC,
which seems less consistent with cream-skimming arguments (Hispanic babies tend to be
healthier than other babies of similar socio-economic status) than with consumer preferences.

                                                 10
       And it is not certain that a public MMC plan run by the county would behave differently

than a privately managed plan. There is a large literature on the differences between non-profit

and for-profit organizations which highlights the fact that they may have somewhat different

objectives; at the same time, both may be subject to similar market forces (c.f. Sloan, 2000).

Given the complexity of the problem, it seems that only an empirical test can answer the

questions of how the introduction of MMC affected patients, and whether mandating competition

between MMC plans benefits patients.



c) Previous Examinations of the Effects of Medicaid Managed Care

       Kaestner, Dubay, and Kenney (2002) provide an overview of the literature on the effects

of MMC on the utilization of care and on health. They point out that most of the previous

literature deals with effects on utilization of care rather than health outcomes, and that even the

conclusions regarding utilization are mixed. Infants are the one group for whom there has been

an attempt to link MMC to health outcomes, but the evidence here too is mixed, clouded by

difficulties in controlling for potentially important unobserved characteristics of the women in

MMC plans.9


       9
          For example, Levinson and Ullman (1998) analyze a cross section from three Wisconsin
counties and find that MMC increases both the utilization of prenatal care and birth weight
compared to FFS. Moreno (1999) examined prenatal care and outcomes in Tennesee before and
after the implementation of managed care, and find declines in some measures of prenatal care
utilization, but there is no control group. Conover, Rankin and Sloan (2001) re-examine the
impact of managed care in Tennessee using North Carolina as a control group and conclude that
MMC may have reduced the utilization of high tech procedures without affecting outcomes.
Other studies which suffer from similar limitations, and come to similarly mixed conclusions
include Krieger et al. (1992), Goldfarb, Hillman, and Eisenberg (1991), Carey, Weis, and Homer
(1991), Oleske, Brana and Schmidt (1998), and Griffin (1999). Sommers, Kenney and Dubay
(2002) and Kenney, Sommers and Dubay (2003) use difference-in-difference methods to

                                                 11
       The study most closely related to the present work also examines the impact of MMC

implementation on pregnant women in California. Baker, Schmitt, and Phibbs (2003) use

Medicaid claims data to examine the impact of the introduction of MMC on utilization of care,

costs, and outcomes. They therefore focus only on Medicaid mothers, and do not examine

possible effects of MMC on the selection of mothers into Medicaid. This may be an important

omission in view of evidence that women may decline to take up private health insurance

coverage available through their employment in order to use Medicaid (Cutler and Gruber,

1996); and that many women eligible for Medicaid coverage of their pregnancies do not take up

the coverage until relatively late in pregnancy (Ellwood and Kenney, 1995).     It is also of

interest to ask how MMC may have affected other low-income mothers. Baker et al. do not

distinguish between types of MMC, and so do not ask whether the degree of competition makes

a difference.   However, the most important limitation of this study may be that they use the

fraction of 15 to 44 year old Medi-Cal women who are in enrolled in managed care as the key

independent variable measuring the effect of MMC. This variable includes women on Medi-Cal

who were not pregnant (e.g. welfare recipients and the disabled), and does not adjust for the fact

that many pregnant Medi-Cal recipients were not required to enroll in managed care, as

discussed above. In Orange county in 2000, Baker et al. report that 75% of Medi-Cal women

15-44 were in MMC; however, in the same year, only 27% of deliveries were in aid categories

subject to MMC (Rains, 2000).



examine MMC in Missouri and Ohio respectively, while Kaestner, Dubay and Kenney (2002)
examine a national sample drawn from the Vital Statistics Detail Natality files, and look at
whether being in a county with a MMC plan affects birth outcomes. These three studies
generally find little effect on birth outcomes, though the Ohio studies finds a positive impact on
prenatal care.

                                                12
       Given the growing share of Medi-Cal deliveries accounted for by undocumented women,

the fraction of Medi-Cal deliveries subject to MMC often actually moves in the opposite

direction to the fraction of all 15 to 44 year old Medi-Cal women subject to managed care. For

example, Baker et al. show that in Alameda county, the fraction of 15 to 44 year old Medi-Cal

women who were in managed care rose from 60 to 70 percent between 1998 and 2000.

However, the fraction of Medi-Cal deliveries that were in aid categories subject to mandatory

managed care in Alameda fell from 63% to 48% over the same two year interval (Rains, 2000).

       Still, variations in both series after the implementation of MMC are smaller than the

sharp jump that occurred when MMC was implemented, suggesting that the Baker et al. measure

could capture large changes associated with the introduction of MMC. For example, if there are

large changes in utilization but more subtle changes in outcomes, then the use of a noisy measure

of MMC impact could capture changes in utilization but obscure changes in outcomes. In any

case, Baker et al. conclude that the adoption of MMC did not reduce Medicaid spending, and

may have increased it. They also find some differences in the utilization of health services after

the adoption of MMC, including, for example, increases in access to high-level NICUs among

low birth weight infants, and conclude that MMC may have improved outcomes among low

birthweight infants.

       Finally, in work in progress, Barham, Gertler, and Raube (2003) examine the impact of

MMC in California using the California natality data. They do distinguish between COHS

counties and Two-Plan counties, and attempt to control for unobserved characteristics of the

MMC moms by using a difference-in-difference-in-differences design. In COHS counties, they

compare the before/after MMC change in outcomes among Medi-Cal mothers to the change in


                                                13
outcomes among self-pay (uninsured) mothers. A problem with this procedure is that there are

very few self-pay mothers over this time period. In Two-Plan counties, they compare the change

in outcomes among Medi-Cal mothers to the change in outcomes among privately insured

mothers.

       However, if selection into MMCs is important, then neither the uninsured nor the

privately insured are valid control groups, because the composition of these groups will be

affected by a womans’ decisions to enroll or not to enroll in Medi-Cal. Moreover, if the

introduction of Two Plan or GMC systems affected health care for non-Medi-Cal women, then

this will also invalidate the use of the non-Medi-Cal women as controls. In contrast, in our

mother fixed effects design, each woman serves as her own control.

       Our study design overcomes many of the limitations of previous work. By following the

same mothers over time and examining changes in the enrollment patterns, utilization of care,

and birth outcomes of mothers who became subject to different types of MMC, we will be better

able to isolate the effects of these plans. By focusing on the population that was actually subject

to MMC, we avoid drawing inferences about its effects from large numbers of women who were

not required to enroll. And by merging data from several sources, we are able to examine a

wide range of outcomes, and to judge whether the estimated effects are consistent across these

outcomes.



2. Data

       The main sources of information on birth outcomes are the California Birth Statistical

Master File 1990-2000, and the Birth Cohort files for the same period. Both files have


                                                14
information about all of the births in California over the period, drawn from individual birth

records. These files have maternal age, education, marital status, race/ethnicity, parity, county

and zip code of residence, whether or not the delivery was paid for by Medicaid or a private

payer, and a hospital code. In addition, they report outcomes including birth weight, as well as

information about some procedures of labor and delivery. The Master file has confidential

information including the mother’s name and birth date, which has enabled us to link records for

siblings, which allows us to estimate models with mother fixed effects. The Birth Cohort files

link birth and death certificates. Hence, by using the common information about births in the

Master files and the Birth Cohort files, we have created a longitudinal data base that has

information about both births and deaths.

        Information about the type of neo-natal intensive care unit (NICU) available in each

hospital was generously supplied by Cairan Phibbs. In addition, we have generated hospital-

level information from the Vital Statistics records about the neo-natal infant mortality rate (i.e.

deaths in the first 28 days divided by the number of births). We focus on neo-natal mortality as

it is arguably more likely to be affected by hospital quality and the type of medical care received

than infant mortality (death in the first year) which could reflect factors such as SIDS (Sudden

Infant Death Syndrome) and accidental deaths. Since hospital-level mortality rates are likely to

vary with the patient case-mix, we focus on “case-mix adjusted” neonatal mortality rates from

residuals of regressions of the rates on maternal and child characteristics.10

        10
          We estimate linear probability models for the probability of neonatal death controlling
for the following maternal characteristics (all dummies): black, white, hispanic, asian, other race, teen
mom, mom 20-29, mom 30-34, mom 35+, < high school, high school, some college, college or more,
single, foreign-born, no pregnancy complications; the following child characteristics: first born, lbw,
vlbw, twin, male, and the year. We then take the residuals from these regressions and aggregate them to
the hospital level. This procedure identifies hospitals that were good or bad on average over the period,

                                                   15
        We start with data about 5,535,538 births. We dropped data from the 15 smallest

counties, since these are very rural, and not at risk for managed care adoption.11 We also

dropped multiple births, since these have a much higher incidence of negative outcomes, and

differences in outcomes between multiples cannot be due to changes in the managed care

environment.

        The first two columns of Table 2a show sample statistics from a random 30 percent

sample of this group of births in 1990, and 2000. The Table shows that about 40 percent of all

deliveries in the state were covered by Medicaid, and this fraction was relatively constant over

time.   The data suggest some broad changes in the characteristics of hospitals delivering babies

over time: There was a small increase in the fraction of infants born in hospitals with a NICU

(neo-natal intensive care unit) of level 3 or higher, and the size of the average hospital where

women delivered also fell appreciably. The increase in access to high-level NICUs might be

expected to improve outcomes, while the shift away from large hospitals might in fact lead to a

deterioration in infant health–while larger hospitals are not necessarily pleasant places to deliver,

they are typically well equipped to handle emergencies and difficult cases, and there is a great

deal of evidence that hospitals that perform more of any given medical procedure have better

patient outcomes than those with smaller volumes.

        Raw hospital-level neonatal death rates (i.e. deaths in the first month of life) decline from

about 4.5 per 1,000 to 3.7 per 1,000.      The comparison of the 1990 and 2000 caseload adjusted



so that we can interpret our estimates as the effect of shifting between hospitals of different average
quality.
        11
        We dropped Alpine, Amador, Calaveras, Colusa, Del Norte, Glenn, Inyo, Lassen,
Mariposa, Modoc, Mono, Plumas, Sierra, Siskiyou, and Trinity counties.

                                                     16
rates suggest that over time, births shifted to better hospitals, in terms of neonatal mortality rates.

Note that we set rates for hospitals with fewer than 500 births per year to missing, in order to

avoid unreliable rate calculations for small cells.

       Turning to prenatal care, the state saw a large improvement in the fraction of women

beginning prenatal care in the first trimester. This is an important indicator of the quality of

prenatal care, and is also an indicator of the ease with which the newly pregnant women can get

access to care. On the other hand, there was a large (relative to baseline) increase in the

probability that an infant was transferred to another hospital after delivery. A higher rate of

transfers can be regarded as a failure of prenatal care, since ideally, high risk infants should be

identified before birth so that their mothers can be directed to hospitals with the necessary

facilities. Infants who are transferred face a much higher risk of death than infants born into

high tech hospitals to begin with.

       Delivery care became more high-tech over time, with a doubling of the probability that

labor was induced or stimulated, and a 37 percent increase in the use of fetal monitors.

However, the use of Cesarian sections increased only 3.6 percent, perhaps because of efforts by

hospitals and health insurers to monitor unnecessary use of this procedure. It is not clear

whether these changes would be expected to lead to any improvement in average infant

outcomes, because many of these procedures may be medically unnecessary, and conducted

more for the convenience of the mother or doctor than for the benefit of the infant. However,

more intensive care during delivery would be expected to be associated with higher costs.

       Consistent with other research, there was little state-wide trend in the incidence of low

birth weight (defined as birth weight less than 2,500 grams), a widely used indicator of the health


                                                  17
of the infant at birth. Nor is there much trend in the incidence of short gestation (gestation less

than or equal to 258 days). This can be contrasted with the decline in the probability of neonatal

death. The fact that the underlying health of infants delivered was stable, while the probability

of death declined suggests that the decline was due to interventions at the time of delivery and in

the first month. Thus, to the extent that the change to MMC affected the quality of hospital

used, it could have a large impact on mortality.

       The next two columns provide a comparison with our “analysis sample” of 255,000

births. This sample consists of all births to native-born, unmarried women with high school or

less, who had two or more singleton births over our sample period. These women had a much

higher than average probability of having a Medicaid delivery, although this probability fell by

approximately 8 percentage points over time. Conversely, it is striking to note that even in this

very disadvantaged group, 19 percent had private insurance for delivery, and that this proportion

had increased to 27 percent by 2000.

       The data on hospital characteristics show that the analysis sample’s probability of

delivering in a hospital with an advanced NICU started much lower, but converged towards that

of the whole sample. Our sample women also tended to deliver in somewhat smaller hospitals

than average. The data on neonatal mortality rates indicate that sample women moved to

hospitals with lower raw death rates over time, but at a slower rate than among other women.

       It is striking that in contrast to the overall trends, the analysis sample showed a decrease

in the incidence of low birth weight and short gestation over time. These means reflect the way

that the sample is selected. For example, Table 2b, which shows means for the control variables

that we include in our regressions, indicates that there are virtually no first born children in the


                                                   18
analysis sample in 2000. This is because women had to have two or more children in order to be

included. This criteria affects the rate of low birth weight and short gestation because first born

children tend to be at higher risk. For similar reasons, in 2000 women in our analysis sample

are older than the average mother, and much less likely to be teenage mothers. It is striking that

neonatal mortality also falls, but much less than in the overall population.

       The fifth column Table 2a shows the number of mothers experiencing a change in the

outcome variable in question during the sample period. This information is important given that

models that include mother fixed effects are identified by these changers. For all but very rare

outcomes, such as transfers and deaths, there is a large sample with changes. The last column

shows the mean change. If equal numbers experienced positive and negative changes in these

largely dichotomous variables, then the mean would be zero. A positive number indicates that

on average mothers moved from zero to one. These means indicate that for all our variables of

interest, there are many changes in either direction.

       Table 2b indicates that the analysis sample is more likely to be African-American than

the whole sample. The restriction to native-born mothers reduces the proportion of Hispanics

slightly, though it is still 50 percent in 2000. The greatest effect of this restriction appears to be

the elimination of most Asian mothers.

       The last three columns of Table 2b show changes in the characteristics of women

delivering in the sample as a whole, over the 1990 to 2000 period, by whether the county

eventually adopted COHS, Two-Plan/GMC, or no MMC. These columns suggest that the

populations of women giving birth were evolving somewhat differently in the three types of

counties. For example, the fraction of women who were black or Hispanic grew more rapidly in


                                                  19
the Two-Plan/GMC counties than in the other types of counties, as did the fraction of mothers

with less than a high school education, and the fraction of single mothers. Given these changes

in the characteristics of mothers, we might expect outcomes to deteriorate in Two-Plan GMC

counties relative to other counties. Thus, the Table illustrates the importance of controlling

adequately for maternal characteristics when assessing the effect of MMC.



3. Methods

       We estimate models of the following form:



(1) Outcomeit = b0 + b1Xit + b2yeart + b3COHSt + b42Plan/GMCt + b5county_trendt + b6FE + eit,



where Outcome is one of the variables listed in the first 5 panels of Table 2a, X is the vector of

maternal and child characteristics included in Table 2b, year is a vector of year dummies, and

county_trend is a county-specific time trend which accounts for under-lying trends in the

variables that we consider. Standard errors are clustered at the county-year level in order to

account for factors that might affect all the observations in a particular county and year.

       FE refers to a vector of fixed effects, and we estimate two versions of (1) which include

different types of fixed effects. The first model controls only for county level fixed effects.

This model is in the same spirit as earlier work that has controlled for county fixed effects. The

second model includes mother-specific fixed effects, which has not been done before. These

models control for unobserved characteristics associated with the same mother, and identify the

effects of MMC by using mothers who became subject to it between pregnancies. These models


                                                 20
can be compared to those that control only for county fixed effects in order to guage the

importance of controlling for unobserved characteristics of mothers.

        In models of the form (1) we look at the effect of implementing MMC on the entire

analysis sample of disadvantaged women. However, it is possible that the effects differ for those

on Medi-Cal and those who are not. In particular, we may be concerned that MMC will cause

reductions in the ability of safety net producers to serve uninsured women in Two Plan and

GMC counties, as discussed above. Hence, we estimate a second set of models of the following

form:



(2) Outcomeit = b0 + b1Xit + b2yeart + b3COHSt + b42Plan/GMCt + b5MediCalit +

b6MediCalit*COHSt + b7MediCalit*2Plan/GMCt + b8county_trendt + b6FE + eit,



where the other variables are defined as above (except that we do not use insurance coverage as

an outcome), and MediCal is whether or not the woman’s delivery was covered by Medi-Cal.

        Note that these fixed effects estimates are likely to be biased towards zero by random

measurement error (caused, for example, by different nurses recording things more or less

carefully, or by different hospital reporting practices). On the other hand, to the extent that

measurement errors are associated with maternal reporting, and such reporting is constant over

time, including fixed effects could help to deal with such errors and increase the precision of our

estimates.

        In addition to these basic models, we report the results of several specification checks.

First, we re-estimate all of our models using less educated, native-born married women. While


                                                 21
these women may be quite similar to our sample mothers in many respects, they are highly

unlikely to be on welfare, and thus quite unlikely to be subject to MMC. As we show below,

county MMC adoption had no impact on these mothers.

       Secondly, mothers may experience a change in MMC either because they change

counties, or because the law changed in the county that they were in. This observation raises the

possibility that mobility between counties could be affected by the MMC environment. (Note

that MMC status is determined by county of residence, not county of delivery, so we focus on

county of residence). In order to deal with this possibility, we also estimate models in which we

use the MMC environment the mother would have experienced had she remained in the county

in which we first observe her, and ignore subsequent moves. While the county of the first (in

our sample) birth is also a choice, factors influencing this choice can be controlled for via the

inclusion of mother fixed effects. As we show below, this change also has no effect on our

findings.

       Thirdly, readers may be concerned that the estimated effects of MMC reflect a time trend

of some kind, given that the MMC indicators turn “on” over time but generally do not turn “off”.

We approach this problem in two ways. The first is to examine only counties that eventually

adopted MMC, and adopt a “regression discontinuity design” in which we eliminate any births

that occurred more than three years before adoption, or more than three years after adoption. In

this design the effect of MMC is identified by changes between births that took place over a

relatively short interval, so the estimated effects are unlikely to be driven by trends. While this

reduces our sample size considerably, it generally strengthens our results as shown below.

       Secondly, we added interactions between a time trend and indicators for whether the


                                                 22
mother was black, hispanic, teen-aged, aged 20 to 29, aged 30 to 39, or had less than a high

school education. If, for example, blacks were more likely than others to be subject to MMC,

and the coefficient on “black” in the outcome equations was changing over time, then these

trends would help to pick up any spurious correlation between MMC and outcomes that could

result. However, since the results of this exercise produced estimates very similar to those

shown below, we do not report them.

       Finally, some readers may be concerned that the adoption of MMC was not really an

exogenous event, since some counties took actions that were not in the original state plan. In

particular, Napa and Monterey adopted COHS even though they were not mandated to do so.

We have estimated alternative “intent-to-treat” models in which we assign MMC status on the

basis of the state’s planning document and ignore deviations. That is, we treat Napa and

Monterey as though they never adopted COHS. Since Napa and Monterey are relatively small

counties (as shown in Table 1) this has little impact on our estimates, and we do not report this

specification below.



4. Results

a) Effects on Insurance Coverage

       We begin the empirical analysis by asking whether the imposition of MMC had any

effect on the probability that a woman was enrolled in Medi-Cal for the delivery. Note that very

few women were uninsured at delivery during the 1990s, so if women did not have Medi-Cal,

then they generally had private health insurance. One might expect that in our very

disadvantaged population, the scope for leaving Medi-Cal and gaining private coverage would


                                                23
be rather small.       Still, the estimated effects of MMC implementation on insurance coverage

shown in Table 3 indicate that in 2Plan/GMC counties, women were 3 percent less likely to have

Medicaid covered deliveries, and 3 percent more likely to have privately covered deliveries

following the implementation of MMC. The results are virtually identical when mother fixed

effects are included. Although Table 1 indicated that a sizeable fraction of these mothers did

have private coverage, it is possible that these estimates are contaminated by reporting bias. For

example, if the private MMC plan is Blue Cross, then perhaps women or providers identify the

payor as a private plan rather than as Medi-Cal.

       The second panel of Table 3 offers another look at the selection issue by asking whether

the characteristics of mothers on Medi-Cal change after the implementation of MMC. Columns

(1) and (2) show that Hispanic women became less likely to be covered by Medi-Cal following

the introduction of MMC, especially in COHS counties, while black women became more likely

to be covered in COHS counties.     On average, black women tend to have poorer birth outcomes

than similar whites, while Hispanic women tend to have better birth outcomes. On the whole

then, the second half of Table 3 suggests that the Medi-Cal caseload became more negatively

selected, in that the women covered by Medi-Cal after the implementation of MMC were more

likely to have bad birth outcomes. Hence, these results emphasize the importance of adequately

controlling for maternal characteristics when examining the effects of MMC.12




       12
          We have estimated similar models for Medicaid coverage of prenatal care, and private
coverage of prenatal care (since coverage of prenatal and delivery care are distinguished on the
California birth certificate). The results were similar although slightly stronger for prenatal care
than for deliveries.


                                                24
b) Effects on Prenatal Care, Hospital Quality, Delivery Care, and Outcomes

       Table 4 explores the effect of MMC on prenatal care, hospital quality, delivery care and

outcomes. Panel A shows county-fixed effects models, while mother-fixed effects models are

shown in Panel B. In general, the addition of mother fixed effects reduces the estimated effects

somewhat (an exception is fetal monitoring, where the Panel B coefficient for COHS counties

greatly exceeds the equivalent coefficient in Panel A). In what follows, we will therefore focus

on the mother fixed effects models.

       Perhaps surprisingly, in view of the state’s goals and the idea that managed care

organizations promote preventive care, MMC implementation was associated with large

decreases in the probability that disadvantaged women started prenatal care in the first trimester.

The estimates suggest that this probability declined by 4 to 6 percentage points in both COHS

and 2Plan/GMC counties. It is remarkable that the decline occurred against the backdrop of

large overall increases in the early initiation of prenatal care as documented in Table 2a. COHS

counties also experienced increases in the fraction of infants transferred, which remain

marginally statistically significant (t=1.93) when mother fixed effects are added to the model.

       The next three columns of Table 4 explore the effects of MMC on hospital quality.

Column (3) shows an 11.2 percentage point increase in the probability that disadvantaged

women in COHS counties delivered in a hospital with a high-level NICU, as well as a shifting of

these women towards delivery in larger hospitals. It is interesting to contrast this result with

that for transfers: If there is both an increase in the number of women going to hospitals with

NICUs, and an increase in the number of infants being transferred in the COHS counties, then

this suggests that the “wrong” women are going to the hospitals with NICUs, which is


                                                25
inefficient.

        In 2Plan/GMC counties, there were no gains in NICU availability, and a smaller increase

in the size of hospitals used for deliveries. Perhaps more importantly, in 2Plan/GMC counties

disadvantaged women were shifted to hospitals with higher residual neonatal mortality rates,

indicating hospitals of worse quality.

        Columns (6) through (8) examine effects of MMC on delivery care. The estimates

indicate that MMC had no effect on the probability of Cesarian delivery, but was associated with

a shift towards higher-tech births in COHS counties: In these counties, the use of

induction/stimulation of labor increased by 3.9 percentage points, and the use of fetal monitors

increased by 11.9 percentage points following the introduction of MMC. In contrast, in

2Plan/GMC counties, there was a slight decline in the use of fetal monitors. As discussed above,

it is not clear what implications these findings are likely to have for infant health, but the

increased intensity of delivery services in COHS counties could well have increased costs. It is

possible that these predominantly public-sector plans were under less pressure to cut costs than

the private sector managed care organizations involved in the 2Plan/GMC counties.13

        Finally, the last three columns of Table 4 indicate that the incidence of low birth weight,

short gestation, and neonatal death all increased among Medi-Cal women following the

introduction of MMC. Moreover, we cannot reject the null hypothesis that the effects were

similar in COHS and 2Plan/GMC counties. Changes in the incidence of low birth weight and

short gestation likely reflect inadequacies in prenatal care, while changes in the neonatal death


        13
         Similarly, Duggan’s (2000) work on the way that hospitals reacted to the incentives
provided by the federal “disproportionate share” program suggests that public hospitals did not
respond to these incentives while private hospitals did.

                                                  26
rate reflect the effects of prenatal care as well as care that is received during and after the

delivery.14

       In summary, Table 4 shows that MMC implementation was associated with reductions in

the quality of prenatal care. There were some potentially off-setting improvements in hospital

quality in COHS counties, as well as an increase in high-tech delivery care to Medi-Cal mothers

in these counties which is likely to have increased costs. However, infant health outcomes

deteriorated in both COHS and 2Plan/GMC counties, to a roughly equal extent.



c) Interacting Medi-Cal Delivery with MMC Implementation

       Table 5 shows estimates of model (2), in which Medi-Cal status is interacted with the

dummy variables for MMC implementation. Table 2a showed that over 70% of our sample of

disadvantaged women had Medi-Cal deliveries, so it may be difficult to separately identify

effects on Medi-Cal and non-Medi-Cal women. However, it is interesting to ask whether MMC

did actually have effects on non-Medi-Cal women in 2Plan/GMC counties, as its critics allege.

       Table 5 indicates, for example, that in COHS counties, declines in the probability of

beginning prenatal care in the first trimester were concentrated among Medi-Cal women, while

in 2Plan/GMC counties, both Medi-Cal and non-Medi-Cal women experienced roughly equal

declines. We interpret this finding as evidence that MMC did have a negative impact on non-

Medi-Cal women in 2Plan/GMC counties. Presumably, this occurred in 2Plan/GMC counties


       14
          There is some controversy about whether it is possible for prenatal care to affect the
incidence of short gestation. On the one hand, until very recently, there were no known medical
interventions that could affect the incidence of prematurity. On the other hand, factors such as
infections, poor diet, and smoking are all thought to contribute to prematurity, so that holistic
care that emphasized better health habits could have an impact.

                                                  27
but not in COHS counties, because the traditional safety-net providers organized into the COHS

plans were not harmed by a diversion of revenues to private Medi-Cal contractors.

       However, an alternative, “difference-in-differences” interpretation would be that prenatal

care declined among Medi-Cal women in COHS counties, but that in 2Plan/GMC counties,

prenatal care use was declining among sample women for reasons unrelated to MMC. In this

difference-in-difference framework, it would appear then, that COHS caused declines in prenatal

care utilization, while 2Plan/GMC did not. We reject this alternative interpretation for several

reasons: First, as discussed above, MMC may have affected non-Medi-Cal women in

2Plan/GMC counties; second, trends in prenatal care utilization were strongly positive, even in

our disadvantaged sample, as shown in Table 2a; third, as we will show below, the introduction

of MMC had no impact on less educated, married, native-born women in 2Plan/GMC counties,

who were unlikely to be subject to it. Hence, it seems unlikely that we are confusing an

underlying trend in prenatal care utilization in 2Plan/GMC counties with the effects of

2Plan/GMC utilization.

       Table 5 indicates that in general the effects of MMC were the same for both Medi-Cal

and non-Medi-Cal mothers in 2Plan/GMC counties. The one exception is for high-level NICUs,

where the Medi-Cal mothers experience no significant change, while the non-Medi-Cal mothers

experience a decline in access. In the COHS counties, it is somewhat easier to distinguish

between Medi-Cal and other mothers. It is the Medi-Cal mothers in COHS counties who

experience declines in prenatal care, increases in access to high-level NICUs, and increases in

the use of fetal monitoring. They are, however, less likely than other mothers to shift to large

hospitals which might offset the other gains in hospital quality.


                                                28
       The last three columns of Table 5 indicate that these interactive models are not

particularly informative about the effects of MMC on infant health outcomes, since the

coefficients are not precisely estimated. However, the t-statistics shown at the bottom of the

table indicate significant increases in low birth weight, short gestation, and neonatal death for

Medi-Cal mothers in both COHS and 2Plan/GMC counties.



d) Specification Checks

       Table 6 presents three sets of alternative estimates. Panel A shows estimates using

married (rather than single) native-born less-educated women. These women have a much

lower probability of being subject to MMC than the single women that we focus on. In the state

as a whole in 2000, 65% of deliveries to native-born, less educated, single women were covered

by Medi-Cal, while the comparable figure for similar married women was 28%. Moreover,

because married women are generally not eligible for welfare, the married women would have

been much more likely to be in an aid category that was not subject to MMC.15 On the other

hand, if our estimates were picking up a trend among less-educated women, then one would

expect the trend to show up here also. Table 6 shows, however, that MMC had no effect on this

sample of women. We have also estimated models for married, native-born women with more

than a high school education, with similar results.

       The second panel of Table 6 presents estimates in which the woman’s MMC status is



       15
        Recall that in 2000, 11.6% of Medi-Cal deliveries were not subject to MMC because
the women were eligible due to low-income only. Births to married, less-educated, native-born
women constituted only 3.4% of the Medi-Cal caseload in 2000, so in principal, all of these
women could have been in this non-MMC category.

                                                 29
calculated using her initial county of residence only. As discussed above, these estimates are

purged of any bias due to endogenous mobility, at the cost of introducing some measurement

error in MMC status. The results are remarkably similar to those shown in Table 4, except that

the COHS coefficient on induction/stimulation of labor becomes statistically insignificant, and

the MMC coefficients in the models of short gestation and neonatal death are now significant at

the 90% rather than the 95% level of confidence.

       Panel C presents estimates based on births that occurred within plus or minus 3 years of

MMC implementation. In these models, the MMC coefficients are identified using the sample of

women who had one birth just prior to MMC implementation, and one birth just afterwards.

Although the sample size is considerably reduced by this procedure, the estimates remain

qualitatively similar, and in most cases the point estimates are larger–for example, the estimated

effects of COHS on transfers gains in both size and statistical significance. Standard errors also

increase, however, with the result that the estimated effects of COHS on infant outcomes are no

longer statistically significant, although 2Plan/GMC is still estimated to increase low birth

weight, short gestation, and neonatal death (the t-statistics are 1.83, 2.00, and 1.81, respectively),

and we cannot reject the null hypothesis of equal coefficient estimates in the two types of

counties.

       Finally, as discussed above, we added interactions between a time trend and indicators

for whether the mother was black, hispanic, teen-aged, aged 20 to 29, aged 30 to 39, or had less

than a high school education. However, since the results of this exercise produced estimates




                                                 30
very similar to those shown in Table 4, we do not report them.16



5. Discussion and Conclusions

        Our estimates suggest that the introduction of MMC was associated with increases in the

incidence of low birth weight, short gestation, and neonatal death among the population of very

disadvantaged women who were subject to the law. These deteriorations in infant health

occurred despite a generally stable or improving picture in the state as a whole, and are quite

robust to changes in specification.

        Our estimates point to declines in access to prenatal care as a potential reason for the

negative results. In COHS counties, the quality of hospitals where women delivered, and the

intensity of delivery care increased, but apparently not enough to offset the other negative effects

of MMC. In 2Plan/GMC counties, declines in access to prenatal care were reinforced by a

shifting of disadvantaged women to hospitals of worse quality.

        These results suggest that despite its well-documented failings, the old, competitive, fee-

for-service system with many atomistic providers of Medi-Cal services provided care that was

better in many respects than either MMC system. Moreover, attempts to legislate competition by

mandating the participation of two or more providers did not improve matters, indicating that

some other method must be found to increase the quality of services rendered to Medicaid


        16
           We also estimated models including interactions of mother and county fixed effects.
These models are identified using mothers who stayed in the same county and experienced a
change in MMC regime. The results were the same as those reported above with the important
exception that the MMC variables were no longer jointly significant at the 90% level of
confidence in the models for neonatal mortality. Since the point estimates are stable, we believe
that this loss of statistical significance is a reflection of the smaller effective sample size, and the
fact that neonatal mortality is a rare outcome.

                                                   31
recipients in mandatory managed care plans. Finally, it is interesting to speculate on the extent

to which these results might also apply to private managed care patients, who also often have

little choice of health care provider.




                                                32
                                          References

Arlen, Jennifer and W. Bentley MacLeod. “Malpractice Liability for Physicians and Managed
Care Organizations,” New York University Law Review, 78 #6, Dec. 2003, 1929-2006.

Baker, Laurence, Susan Schmitt and Ciaran Phibbs. “Medicaid Managed Care in California and
Health Care for Newborns,” Dept. of Health Research and Policy Stanford University, March
2003.

Barham, Tania, Paul Gertler, and Kristiana Raube. “Making Babies Healthier by Providing a
Managed Care Option to California’s Poor,” Hass School of Public Administration, Berkeley,
June 2003.

Conover, C.J., P.J. Rankin and Frank Sloan. “Effects of Tennesee Medicaid Managed Care on
Obstetrical Care and Birth Outcomes,” Journal of Health Politics, Policy and Law, 26 #6, 2001,
1291-1324.

Coye, Molly Joel. Cover letter for “The Department of Health Services’ Plan for Expanding
Medi-Cal Managed Care,” (Sacramento CA: Department of Health Services), March 31, 1993.

A.J. and J.P. Newhouse (eds.) Handbook of Health Economics (Amsterdam: North Holland),
2000.

Committee on Energy and Commerce House of Representatives. “Medicaid Managed Care in
California: Hearing before the Subcommittee on Health and the Environment April 20, 1993,”
(Washington D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office) ISBN 0-16-043412-2, 1994.

Currie, Janet and John Fahr. “Medicaid Managed Care: Effects on Children’s Medicaid
Coverage and Utilization,” Journal of Public Economics, forthcoming.

Currie, Janet and Jon Gruber. “Saving Babies: The Efficacy and Cost of Recent Expansions of
Medicaid Eligibility for Pregnant Women,” Journal of Political Economy, 104, Dec. 1996, 1263-
1296.

Cutler, David and Jon Gruber. “Does Public Insurance Crowd Out Private Insurance?” The
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 111 #2, 1996, 391-430.

Duggan, Mark. “Hospital Ownership and Public Medical Spending,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, CXI, November 2000, 1343-1374.

Glied, Sherri. “Managed Care,” Handbook of Health Economics, A.J. Culyer and J.P. Newhouse
(eds.) (Amsterdam: North Holland) volume 1A, 2000.

Griffin, J.F., J.W. Hogan, J.S. Buechner, and T.M. Leddy. “The Effect of a Medicaid Managed

                                              33
Care Program on the Adequacy of Prenatal Care Utilization in Rhode Island,” American Journal
of Public Health, 89 #4, 1999, 497-501.

Kaestner, Robert, Lisa Dubay and Genevieve Kenney. “Medicaid Managed Care and Infant
Health: A National Evaluation,” (Cambridge MA: National Bureau of Economic Research)
Working Paper #8936, May 2002.

Kenney, Genevieve, Anna Sommers, and Lisa Dubay. “Moving to Mandatory Medicaid
Managed Care in Ohio: Impacts for Pregnant Women and Infants,” (Washington D.C.: The
Urban Institute) April 10, 2003.

Klein, Jim. “Managed Care Annual Statistical Report,” (Sacramento CA: California Dept. of
Health Services Medical Care Statistics Section) various years.

Klein, Jim and Celine Donaldson. “Managed Care Annual Statistical Report,” (Sacramento CA:
California Dept. of Healht Services Medical Care Statistics Section) March 2002.

Korenbrot, Carol, G. Miller, and J. Greene. “The Impact of Medicaid Managed Care on
Community Clinics in Sacramento County, California,” American Journal of Public Health, 89
#6, 1989, 913-917.

Krieger, J.W., F.A. Connell, and J.P. LoGerfo. “Medicaid Prenatal Care: A Comparison of Use
and Outcomes in Fee-for-service and Managed Care,” American Journal of Public Health, 82 #2,
1992, 185-190.

Levinson, A. and F. Ullman. “Medicaid Managed Care and Infant Health,” Journal of Health
Economics, 17, 1998, 351-368.

Moreno, L. “The Influence of TennCare on Perinatal Outcomes. Perspectives on Medicaid
Managed Care,” (Princeton NJ: Mathematica Policy Research) June 1999.

Oleske, D.M., M.L. Branca, J.B. Schmidt, R. Ferguson, and E.S. Linn. “A Comparison of
Capitated and Fee-for-service Medicaid Reimbursement Methods on Pregnancy Outcomes,”
Health Services Research, 33 #1, 1998, 55-73.

Sloan, Frank. “Not for profit Ownership and Hospital Behavior,” Handbook of Health
Economics, A.J. Culyer and J.P. Newhouse (eds.) (Amsterdam: North Holland) volume 1B,
2000.

Sommers, Anna, Genevieve Kenney and Lisa Dubay. “The Impact of Mandatory Medicaid
Managed Care in Missouri: A Difference-in-Difference Approach,” (Washington D.C.: The
Urban Institute) Dec. 15, 2002.

Tai-Seale, M. A.T. LoSasso, D.A. Freund, and S.E. Gerber. “The Long-term Effects of Medicaid

                                             34
Managed Care on Obstetric Care in Three California Counties,” Health Services Research, 36
#4, 2001, 751-771.




                                             35
Table 1: The Adoption of Medicaid Managed Care
                                                      2000, Percent
                                           Date         Enrollment                        Median HH
      County             Type             Began        Private Plan    # births, 2000    Income, 1999
Santa Barbara            COHS             Sep-83                            5601            46,677
San Mateo                COHS             Dec-87                           10343            70,819
Solano                   COHS             May-94                            5831            54,099
Orange                   COHS             Oct-95                           46654            58,820
Santa Cruz               COHS             Jan-96                            3382            53,998
Napa                     COHS             Mar-98                            1474            51,738
Monterey                 COHS             Oct-99                            6835            48,305
Average for COHS:                                                          11,446           54,922

Sacramento             GMC                Apr-94           100%             17987            43,816
Alameda                2-Plan             Jan-96          27.80%            21825            55,946
San Joaquin            2-Plan             Feb-96          19.60%             9515            41,282
Kern                   2-Plan             Jul-96          36.20%            11542            35,446
San Bernardino         2-Plan             Sep-96          23.40%            28329            42,066
Riverside              2-Plan             Sep-96          23.60%            24633            42,887
Santa Clara            2-Plan             Oct-96          38.40%            27388            74,335
Fresno                 2-Plan             Nov-96          18.00%            14141            34,725
San Francisco          2-Plan             Jul-96          39.00%             8525            55,221
Contra Costa           2-Plan             Feb-97          11.20%            13065            63,675
Los Angeles            2-Plan             Apr-97          39.90%           156006            42,189
Stanislaus             2-Plan             Oct-97          42.00%             7200            40,101
San Diego              GMC                Jul-98           100%             43759            47,067
Tulare                 2-Plan             Feb-99          11.50%             7194            33,983
Average for 2Plan/GMC:                                                     27,936            46,624

Avg. for 22 included counties that did not adopt:                           1089             41,859

Avg. for 15 counties excluded from our sample:                                187             35,324
Notes: Counties that did not adopt, but are included in our sample include: Butte, El Dorado,
Humboldt, Imperial, Kings, Lake, Madera, Marin, Mendocino, Merced, Nevada, Placer, San Benito
San Luis Obispo, Shasta, Sonoma, Sutter, Tehema, Tuolumne, Ventura, Yuba & Yolo. Yolo county
implemented a managed care plan in 2001. Percent enrollments are for July 2000, except
for Stanislaus county where the commercial plan ended in March 2000, so we use enrollments
for July 1999.

Source: Klein and Donaldson, 2002 and authors' tabulations from Vital Statistics and 2000 U.S. Census.
Table 2a: Mean Outcomes for All Births and for Analysis Sample
                                                                                   # Mothers
                                    All          All        Sample       Sample     with any        Mean
Insurance Coverage                 1990         2000         1990         2000     Changes         Change
Medicaid for Delivery              0.389        0.404        0.775        0.697      39131         -0.064
Private Ins. for Delivery          0.518        0.553        0.191        0.271      36370          0.097

Hospital Characteristics
Level 3 or higher NICU             0.484        0.529        0.430        0.517        47260        0.077
# Births                           3607         2867         3308          2724       198064         -195
Neonatal Mort. Rate*100            0.449        0.372        0.458        0.413       196786        -0.015
Adjusted NMR*100                   0.009       -0.005        0.001        -0.006       89606        -0.002

Prenatal Care
Began in 1st Trimester             0.722        0.834        0.553        0.704       62714         0.051
InfantTransferred                  0.003        0.005        0.004        0.006        1845         0.107

Delivery Care
Induction/Stimulation Labor        0.107        0.212        0.089        0.176       45768         0.035
Fetal Monitor                      0.488        0.668        0.458        0.644       60753         0.161
Cesarian                           0.221        0.229        0.201        0.211       23675         0.073

Infant Outcomes
Low Birth Weight                   0.052        0.055        0.078        0.061       18512         -0.058
Gestation < 37 weeks               0.095        0.097        0.135        0.127       31332         0.035
Neonatal Death*100                 0.424        0.344        0.313        0.301        1222         0.026

Mother Chronic Condition           0.024        0.032        0.015        0.025        6090         0.178


Notes: "All" is a 30% sample of singleton births excluding the 15 counties with the fewest births in 2000
The analysis sample is all native born mothers with >=2 births in the sample, who had <=highschool, & who
were unmarried at each point at which they were observed.
Table 2b: Means of Mother/Child Characteristics for Full Sample, and Analysis Sample

                                                                         All           All         All
                                                                     1990-2000     1990-2000 1990-2000
                         All        All      Sample      Sample      Change in     Change in   Change in
                        1990       2000        1990        2000        COHS       2Plan/GMC    No MMC
Black                   0.079      0.065      0.296       0.237         0.017         0.044       0.009
White                   0.416      0.321      0.321       0.241         0.061         0.027       0.066
Hispanic                0.408      0.490      0.367       0.500        -0.024        -0.016      -0.064
Asian                   0.060      0.081      0.002       0.006        -0.037        -0.040      -0.006
Mother < High School    0.339      0.297      0.530       0.409         0.101         0.145       0.105
Mother High School      0.313      0.287      0.470       0.591         0.061         0.043       0.056
Mother Some College     0.195      0.200         0           0         -0.041        -0.076      -0.058
Foreign Born            0.413      0.456         0           0         -0.045        -0.024      -0.041
Mother Single           0.304      0.324         1           1          0.159         0.223       0.157
Teen Mother             0.114      0.105      0.417       0.123         0.042         0.060       0.043
Mother 20-29            0.561      0.494      0.511       0.716         0.105         0.062       0.057
Mother 30-34            0.219      0.241      0.060       0.112        -0.062        -0.053      -0.037
Child First Born        0.401      0.386      0.461       0.002         0.038         0.012       0.008
Child Male              0.513      0.512      0.511       0.512        -0.001         0.002      -0.002
#Obs                   175564     155112      25945       17762

See Table 2a notes.
Table 3: Effect of MMC on Enrollments in Medi-Cal/Private Insurance
                                 [1]           [2]            [3]                    [4]
                             MediCal       MediCal         Private                 Private
                             Delivery      Delivery       Delivery                 Delivery
County FE                        yes           no            yes                      no
Mother FE                         no           yes            no                     yes
Panel A
COHS                           -0.026         -0.01         0.015                    0.017
                              [0.017]       [0.023]        [0.019]                  [0.021]
2Plan/GMC                      -0.027        -0.025         0.026                    0.023
                             [0.006]**     [0.006]**      [0.006]**                [0.006]**
#Obs.                         255018        255018         255018                   255018
R-squared                       0.060          0.7          0.070                     0.71

Test COHS=2Plan/                    10.21            8.06           11.27            7.21
 GMC=0                              0.000           0.000           0.000           0.001
Test COHS=2Plan/GMC                  0.01            0.44            0.34            0.07
                                    0.034           0.506           0.558           0.785

Panel B: Mother Fixed Effects Models of Prob(Medi-Cal Delivery)
Include Interactions of Indicated Maternal Characteristics with MMC

  Characteristic:                  Chronic        Hispanic            Black
COHS*Characteristic                  0.03            -0.065            0.048
                                   [0.032]        [0.022]**         [0.023]*
2Plan/GMC*                          -0.003           -0.024            0.011
 Characteristic                    [0.020]        [0.008]**          [0.008]
COHS                                -0.011           0.022            -0.016
                                   [0.023]          [0.026]          [0.021]
2Plan/GMC                           -0.025           -0.015           -0.028
                                  [0.006]**        [0.007]*        [0.007]**
Main Effect                         -0.023           0.004             0.012
 Characteristic                   [0.009]**         [0.013]           [.017]
#Obs.                              255076           255018           255018
R-squared                             0.7              0.7              0.7

Notes: Robust standard errors in brackets are clustered at county-year level. P-values for F-statistics in
italics. Panel A regressions included all of the mother and child characteristics in Table 2, except
chronic conditions. All regressions also included year fixed effects and county-specific
time trends. Regressions without mother fixed effects include county fixed effects.
Table 4: Effects of MMC on Prenatal Care, Hospital Quality, Delivery Care and Outcomes

                        [1]        [2]                     [3]           [4]          [5]       [6]     [7]                        [8]     [9]     [10]                     [11]
                    Prenatal     Infant                                 Log         Residual Induction Fetal                            Low Birth Short                   Neonatal
                     1st tri.  Transfer                  NICU          Births        NMR Stim.Labor Monitor                    Cesarian  Weight Gestation                  Death
Panel A: County Fixed Effects Models
COHS                  -0.075      0.427                  0.103         0.086          0.151         -0.006          0.016         0.019         0.022         0.022         0.295
                    [0.021]** [0.214]*                 [0.047]*      [0.029]**       [0.096]       [0.011]        [0.029]       [0.012]       [0.009]*       [0.012]       [0.206]
2Plan/GMC             -0.078      0.055                  0.005         0.055            0.1         -0.002         -0.025        -0.006         0.024         0.024          0.19
                    [0.012]**   [0.064]                 [0.010]      [0.011]**      [0.040]*       [0.007]       [0.012]*       [0.003]      [0.003]**      [0.006]**     [0.056]**
Observations         255018     255018                  255018        254953         248438        255018         255018        255018         255007        242314        255018
R-squared              0.04         0                     0.19          0.25           0.08          0.06            0.14          0.01          0.01          0.01            0

Test COHS=                  26.29          2.39           2.74         16.85           4.29          0.17           2.13          2.98         44.92           8.29             6.34
 2Plan/GMC=0                0.000         0.092          0.065         0.000          0.014         0.842          0.112         0.051         0.000          0.000            0.002

Test COHS=                   0.02          2.75           4.01          1.03           0.25          0.08           1.62          3.82          0.02           0.01             0.25
 2Plan/GMC                  0.891         0.097          0.045         0.310          0.618         0.782          0.203         0.051         0.880          0.918            0.616

Panel B: Mother Fixed Effects Models
COHS                  -0.058     0.327                   0.112         0.094          0.088          0.039         0.119         -0.003         0.014         0.025          0.308
                    [0.019]**   [0.169]                [0.032]**     [0.016]**       [0.095]       [0.017]*     [0.037]**       [0.008]       [0.007]*      [0.012]*        [0.160]
2Plan/GMC             -0.044     0.005                   0.005         0.022          0.082          0.002        -0.023          0.001         0.013         0.015          0.160
                    [0.008]**   [0.090]                 [0.009]       [0.012]       [0.034]*        [0.007]      [0.009]*       [0.003]      [0.003]**      [0.007]*       [0.070]*
Observations         255018     255018                  255018        254953         248438         255018        255018        255018         255007        242314         255018
R-squared               0.6       0.52                    0.76          0.79           0.72           0.6           0.69           0.82          0.61          0.59           0.54

Test COHS=                  15.52          1.97           7.02          17.3           3.12          2.73           7.68          0.19         12.11           3.74             3.65
 2Plan/GMC=0                0.000         0.139          0.001         0.000          0.044         0.065          0.001         0.829         0.000          0.024            0.026

Test COHS=                   0.58          3.59           9.64         18.79           0.00          4.55          13.36          0.31          0.02           0.73             0.86
 2Plan/GMC                  0.448         0.058          0.002         0.000          0.948         0.033          0.000         0.577         0.876          0.394            0.354

Notes: Robust standard errors in brackets are clustered at the county-year level. P-values for F-tests in italics. All regressions also include indicators for maternal race
and ethnicity, maternal education, mother age, whether the child was first born, and whether the child was male as well as year dummies and county-specific time
trends. Coefficients and standard errors on hospital death rates are multiplied by 1,000. Coefficients and standard errors on transfers and neonatal death are multiplied
by 100.
Table 5: Effects of MMC Interacted with Medi-Cal Delivery, Mother Fixed Effects Models

                                  [1]         [2]      [3]            [4]        [5]     [6]        [7]      [8]          [9]    [10]       [11]
                            Prenatal      Infant                    Log     Residual Induction    Fetal             Low Birth  Short    Neonatal
                              1st tri.   Transfer     NICU        Births      NMR Stim.Labor Monitor       Cesarian  Weight Gestation     Death
COHS                           -0.029       -0.02      0.058        0.144      0.036    0.038     0.049      -0.003     0.006   0.024      0.258
                              [0.021]     [0.272]    [0.042]    [0.029]**    [0.104]  [0.023]   [0.031]     [0.010]   [0.008] [0.014]    [0.172]
COHS                           -0.046       0.529      0.081       -0.076      0.106    0.001     0.108          0      0.012   0.003      0.071
 * MediCal                   [0.020]*     [0.276]   [0.026]**    [0.033]*    [0.172]  [0.022]  [0.038]**    [0.010]   [0.008] [0.012]    [0.162]
2Plan/GMC                      -0.049      -0.034     -0.039         0.05      0.015    0.006    -0.003      -0.001     0.009   0.012      0.043
                            [0.012]**     [0.104]   [0.014]**   [0.019]**    [0.051]  [0.009]   [0.013]     [0.004]  [0.004]* [0.009]    [0.110]
2Plan/GMC                       0.006        0.05      0.055       -0.037      0.075   -0.006    -0.027       0.003     0.005   0.004      0.151
 * MediCal                    [0.010]     [0.099]   [0.015]**     [0.020]    [0.057]  [0.009]   [0.014]     [0.004]   [0.004] [0.007]    [0.107]
MediCal delivery               -0.031      -0.008     -0.065       -0.011     -0.024   -0.003    -0.033       0.006    -0.004  -0.006     -0.077
                            [0.005]**     [0.063]   [0.011]**     [0.014]    [0.042]  [0.005]  [0.011]**   [0.002]*   [0.002] [0.003]    [0.051]
Observations                  255018      255018     255018       254953    254953    255018    255018      255018    255007  242314     255018
R-squared                        0.61        0.52       0.76         0.79       0.72     0.6       0.69        0.82      0.61    0.59       0.54

Test Sum COHS                13.89         8.43      22.84       13.80        1.12      5.18     12.37       0.16     5.17     4.29       3.33
 terms=0                     0.000        0.004      0.000       0.000       0.290     0.023     0.000      0.689    0.023    0.038      0.068

Test Sum 2Plan/GMC           24.81         0.03       2.58        1.00        5.49      0.00      8.22       0.33    22.55     5.02       6.97
 terms=0                     0.000        0.867      0.109       0.318       0.019     0.977     0.004      0.565    0.000    0.025      0.008

Test all MMC                  9.28         2.48      12.37        9.01        1.73      1.46      5.15       0.17     6.35     1.94       2.34
 terms=0                     0.000        0.042      0.000       0.000       0.141     0.213     0.001      0.952    0.000    0.100      0.052

Notes: See Table 4 notes.
Table 6: Specification Checks (Mother Fixed Effects Models)

                       [1]        [2]         [3]        [4]        [5]        [6]       [7]     [8]            [9]      [10]     [11]           [12]
                  Medi-Cal    Prenatal    Infant                   Log       Residual Induction Fetal                  Low Birth Short         Neonatal
                  Delivery     1st tri.  Transfer     NICU        Births      NMR Stim.Labor Monitor          Cesarian  Weight Gestation        Death
Panel A: Married Native-Born Mothers with Highschool or Less
COHS                 -0.001     -0.046     -0.102      0.026       0.086      0.052       0.045     0.082      -0.019    0.002        0.005     0.118
                    [0.036]    [0.037]    [0.730]    [0.060]      [0.073]    [0.127]    [0.064]   [0.060]     [0.028]   [0.020]     [0.025]    [0.405]
2Plan/GMC            -0.008     -0.032      0.174     -0.037       0.003      0.027      -0.003    -0.016       0.009    0.005       -0.007     0.441
                    [0.022]    [0.025]    [0.515]    [0.033]      [0.035]    [0.123]    [0.029]   [0.030]     [0.016]   [0.014]     [0.023]    [0.319]
#Obs.               134023     134023     134023     134023       133998     128890     134023    134023      134023    134015      129032     134023
R-squared             0.96       0.91        0.92       0.95        0.95       0.94        0.9       0.93        0.96     0.92         0.91      0.9

Test COHS=2Plan/      0.06       1.24        0.10       0.87       0.70        0.09      0.27       1.27        0.47      0.06        0.09       1.01
 GMC=0               0.938      0.290       0.909      0.421      0.498       0.911     0.767      0.280       0.626     0.944       0.913      0.365

Panel B: MMC Classification Based on Initial County Only
COHS                -0.015      -0.059        0.205    0.103       0.080       0.108     0.024       0.096     0.000       0.014     0.017      0.258
                   [0.022]    [0.018]**     [0.179]  [0.029]**   [0.015]**    [0.086]   [0.016]   [0.029]**   [0.007]    [0.006]*   [0.010]    [0.151]
2Plan/GMC           -0.026      -0.044       -0.055    0.006       0.022       0.081     0.004      -0.021     0.001       0.012     0.011      0.130
                  [0.006]** [0.008]**       [0.091]   [0.009]     [0.012]    [0.034]*   [0.007]    [0.009]*   [0.003]   [0.003]**   [0.006]    [0.068]
#Obs.              255018      255018       255018    255018      254953      248438    255018      255018    255018      255007    242314     255018
R-squared             0.7         0.6          0.52     0.76        0.79        0.72      0.6         0.69      0.82        0.61      0.59       0.54

Test COHS=            7.89      17.37        1.07       7.59      13.84        3.35      1.27       7.65        0.04     10.15        2.60       2.73
 2Plan/GMC=0         0.000      0.000       0.344      0.001      0.000       0.035     0.282      0.001       0.959     0.000       0.074      0.065
Test COHS=            0.24       0.61        2.08       9.24      12.63        0.09      1.54      13.96        0.01      0.11        0.36       0.71
 2Plan/GMC           0.627      0.435       0.150      0.002      0.000       0.761     0.214      0.000       0.930     0.746       0.549      0.399

Panel C: Births Within +/- 3 years of Implementation of MMC Only
COHS                  -0.011      -0.083      0.761       0.079    0.102       0.087     0.006      0.128       0.003    0.016        0.039     0.208
                     [0.039]    [0.027]** [0.338]* [0.016]** [0.025]**        [0.116]   [0.017]   [0.056]*    [0.013]   [0.010]      [0.028]   [0.232]
2Plan/GMC             -0.026      -0.042      0.002       0.012    0.042       0.136     0.000      0.006      -0.004    0.011        0.026     0.235
                    [0.010]** [0.014]**      [0.181]     [0.015] [0.014]**   [0.054]*   [0.008]    [0.012]    [0.006]   [0.006]     [0.013]*   [0.130]
#Obs.                115035      115035     115035      115035    115018      112517    115035     115035     115035    115034       109118    115035
R-squared              0.83        0.77        0.73        0.87     0.88        0.85      0.78       0.84        0.9      0.77         0.76      0.72

Test COHS=            3.45       6.89        2.59      13.03      10.38        3.27      0.06       2.65        0.32      3.12        2.71       1.79
 2Plan/GMC=0         0.032      0.001       0.075      0.000      0.000       0.038     0.939      0.071       0.728     0.044       0.066      0.167
Test COHS=            0.15       2.59        4.49       9.74       5.24        0.17      0.12       4.70        0.29      0.24        0.19       0.01
 2Plan/GMC           0.703      0.108       0.034      0.002      0.022       0.680     0.727      0.030       0.591     0.621       0.661      0.913
