                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   HEDONIC PRICE INDEXES FOR PERSONAL
            COMPUTER OPERATING SYSTEMS AND PRODUCTIVITY SUITES

                                             Alan G. White
                                             Jaison R. Abel
                                            Ernst R. Berndt
                                            Cory W. Monroe

                                         Working Paper 10427
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w10427


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       April 2004




This research was originally sponsored by Microsoft Corporation in the context of various antitrust
allegations, and was conducted under the direction of Ernst Berndt. The opinions expressed herein are those
of the authors and not necessarily those of Microsoft Corporation, its legal counsel, MIT, or the NBER. The
authors gratefully acknowledge the assistance and input of many on this project – in particular, Sarita
Digumarti and Eric Korman for careful and thorough research assistance, other staff at Analysis Group, and
Microsoft counsel for helpful comments and suggestions. The views expressed herein are those of the
author(s) and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2004 by Alan G. White, Jaison R. Abel, Ernst R. Berndt, and Cory W. Monroe. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Hedonic Prices Indexes for Personal Computer Operating Systems and Productivity Suites
Alan G. White, Jaison R. Abel, Ernst R. Berndt, and Cory W. Monroe
NBER Working Paper No. 10427
April 2004
JEL No. D4, E3, L86
                                         ABSTRACT

Results of hedonic price regressions for personal computer operating systems and productivity suites

advertised in PC World magazine by retail vendors during the time period 1984 to 2000 are reported.

Among the quality attribute variables we use are new measures capturing the presence of network

effects in personal computer operating systems, such as connectivity and compatibility, and product

integration among components of productivity suites. Average annual growth rates of quality-

adjusted prices of personal computer operating systems range from -15 to -18 percent, while those

for productivity suites generally range between -13 and -16 percent. Price declines are generally

greater in the latter half of the samples.

Alan G. White
Analysis Group
Boston, MA
awhite@analysisgroup.com

Jaison R. Abel
Analysis Group
Boston, MA
jabel@analysisgroup.com

Ernst R. Berndt
Sloan School of Management
MIT, E52-452
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
eberndt@mit.edu

Cory W. Monroe
Sloan School of Management
MIT
cwmonroe@sloan.mit.edu
I.     Introduction

       The introduction of the IBM personal computer in 1981 marked the beginning of a
revolution in information technology that has continued to present day.1 The IBM PC set the
standard for personal computing, and with its wide appeal, helped produce a new industry that
would change forever the way in which people would live and work. Powered by an Intel 8088
microprocessor and Microsoft’s PC DOS 1.0 operating system, users of the IBM PC at that time
could create modest documents, make basic spreadsheets, and play simple games. Through time,
rapid technological advances in computer hardware have lead to the development of new and
improved software that have allowed users to accomplish significantly more with their personal
computer.
       While a significant amount of research has been conducted examining the quality-
adjusted prices of personal computer hardware,2 a surprisingly small amount of research has
focused on measuring such prices for software. In addition, the research that does exist on this
topic has focused exclusively on stand-alone applications, such as spreadsheets and word
processors.3 Since the mid-1990s, however, stand-alone applications have increasingly been sold
as components of integrated productivity suites.4 Hence the relevance of this previous research
to contemporary product forms is unclear. Moreover, the existing hedonic price index literature
has ignored personal computer operating systems all together. In this paper, we seek to fill this
void in the existing literature by reporting on research estimating quality-adjusted measures of
price change for prepackaged personal computer operating systems and productivity suites over
the time period 1984 to 2000. To the best of our knowledge, this research represents the first
hedonic pricing analysis for personal computer operating systems and productivity suites.
       Using price quotes collected from monthly issues of PC World magazine for the years
1984 through 2000, along with information on product attributes drawn from a variety of sources


1
       The Altair 8800, which was introduced by MITS in 1975, is generally regarded as the world’s first “personal
       computer.” However, this product was generally purchased by hobbyists and kit makers, rather than the every day
       consumer. The IBM PC, on the other hand, was the first personal computer to gain mass appeal.
2
       See, for example, Lynch, Rao, and Lin [1990], Berndt [1991] ch. 4, Berndt and Griliches [1993], Rao and Lynch
       [1993], Berndt, Griliches, and Rappaport [1995], Berndt and Rappaport [2001, 2002], and Pakes [2003].
3
       Gandal’s [1994] study of prepackaged spreadsheet software is the first known hedonic analysis of personal computer
       software.
4
       See, for example, the discussion in Abel, Berndt, and White [2003].
                                                                                                                       1
on personal computer operating systems and productivity suites, we estimate parameters in
hedonic regression equations that measure price changes adjusted for the impact of quality
variation. Among the quality attribute measures we develop are ones capturing connectivity and
compatibility for operating systems and product integration for productivity suites. We construct
such measures to account for the important phenomena of network effects and product
integration in the market for prepackaged software.5 In this respect, our study also contributes to
the small but growing literature seeking to empirically identify and measure the presence of
network effects in information technology markets.
       A limitation of our research is that it focuses on sales of prepackaged personal computer
software sold through retail outlets.             While the previous literature has also focused on this
distribution channel, sales of software through the retail channel of distribution have become
increasingly unrepresentative of prepackaged software transactions.6 Instead, today’s software
transactions are now most commonly through large-account distributors or bundled with
personal computer hardware sold by original equipment manufacturers (“OEMs”) such as
Compaq, Dell, and Gateway.
       Our principal conclusion is that the quality-adjusted prices of personal computer
operating systems and productivity suites have declined substantially over time. While we
investigate a number of alternative model specifications, our results are remarkably robust. The
prices of operating systems have declined at average annual growth rates (“AAGRs”) ranging
approximately from 15 to 18 percent over the period 1987 to 2000, with slightly lower declines
between 1987 to 1993 compared to 1993 to 2000.                         For productivity suites, over the longer
period from 1984 to 2000, AAGRs are generally between -13 to -16 percent, with prices falling
more rapidly in the 1992 to 2000 time period compared to 1984 to 1992. Matched-model price
indexes in most, but not all cases, reveal considerably slower rates of price decline than we find
for hedonic quality-adjusted price indexes. We make a number of observations concerning the
differences in estimated rates of price decline based on hedonic compared to matched-model



5
       A network effect exists when the value of a product increases with the number of users of compatible products.
       Network effects have previously been examined in the context of prepackaged software by Gandal [1994, 1995]
       through the inclusion of product compatibility measures and by Brynjolfsson and Kemerer [1996] by including
       measures of a product’s installed base in their hedonic regressions.
6
       See Abel, Berndt, and White [2003] for a complete discussion of this issue for Microsoft’s prepackaged software.
                                                                                                                          2
methods, and also comment on recent literature that proposes an alternative price index
measurement methodology.


II.    Background on Hedonic Quality-adjustment Techniques

       The literature and research on hedonic quality-adjustment techniques is extensive and
spans a number of decades. Early studies of quality-adjustment techniques can be found in
Waugh [1928] (for asparagus, hothouse tomatoes, and cucumbers) and Court [1939] (for
automobiles). Zvi Griliches’ seminal work in 1961 is widely recognized as having formed much
of the modern basis of hedonic price analysis, based on the application of multivariate regression
techniques to adjust price indexes for quality change over time.7
       The importance of the need to adjust price measures for quality change continues to be a
topic of current interest. Given the dynamic nature of certain sectors within the economy and the
continual introduction of a range of new products each year with improved quality, the need for
measures of quality-adjusted price changes has become ever more important. In addition to the
much-publicized Boskin Commission Report of 1996 that estimated the extent of upward-biased
growth in the U.S. Consumer Price Index (“CPI”), detailed studies have also been conducted by
The Conference Board [1999] and the National Academy of Sciences [2002]. In addition, the
U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics (“BLS”) is continuing to sponsor in-house and external research
focusing on estimating hedonic price indexes for various components of the consumer and
producer price indexes (“PPI”), including, among others, personal computers, DVD players,
camcorders, refrigerators, and microwave ovens.
       Among issues prominent in the recent literature on hedonic price indexes are the presence
and interpretation of temporal instability in estimated coefficients of hedonic price equations
(e.g., Berndt, Griliches, and Rappaport [1995], Berndt and Rappaport [2001, 2002], Aizcorbe
[2003a, b], Heravi and Silver [2002]; Pakes [2003], and Triplett [2003], chs. 3 and 5); factors
affecting differences between price indexes computed using matched-model compared to
hedonic regression methods (e.g., Aizcorbe [2003b, c], Aizcorbe, Corrado, and Doms [2003],
Heravi and Silver [2002], and Triplett [2003] ch. 5); choice of functional form (e.g., Berndt and



7
       A useful recent discussion of econometric estimation issues in hedonic regressions in general, and with a specific
       application to personal computer hardware, is that by Pakes [2003].
                                                                                                                       3
Rappaport [2002], Diewert [2003], Feenstra [1995], Pakes [2003] and Triplett [2003], ch. 5); and
the use of fixed-effects econometric specifications instead of explicit product characteristics
measures as regressors in hedonic price equations (e.g., Aizcorbe, Corrado, and Doms [2003]).
We address the implications of our analyses for some of this literature later in the paper.


III.   Existing Research on Prepackaged Software Price Measurement

       Before proceeding with a discussion of our implementation of hedonic price estimation
for personal computer operating systems and productivity suites, we first briefly review the
existing research on price measurement for prepackaged software. Table 1 summarizes the main
findings of the studies of which we are aware. This research shows that prepackaged software
prices have generally been declining over time, although rates of price decline in some cases
differ considerably across products and time periods.

       1. Consumer Price Indexes

       Relatively few published papers report measures of quality-adjusted price changes for
prepackaged software over time. An early effort by Oliner and Sichel [1994] employs matched-
model price index methods to control for quality change over time by intertemporally comparing
prices for only similar software products. Using price quotes collected from various personal
computer magazines for the period 1985 to 1993, they find AAGR declines in prepackaged
software prices of 2.6, 4.5, and 4.7 percent for word processors, spreadsheets, and databases,
respectively. Estimates of quality-adjusted price declines for the U.S. prepackaged software
market using hedonic regression techniques are reported in Gandal [1994, 1995], Brynjolfsson
and Kemerer [1996], and McCahill [1997]. Over the 1986 to 1991 time period, Gandal [1994]
finds declines in hedonic quality-adjusted prices for spreadsheets of 15 percent per annum,8
generally consistent with the final declines reported by Brynjolfsson and Kemerer [1996] that lie
in the range of 14.8 to 16.5 percent per annum covering 1987 to 1992, and by McCahill [1997] in
the range of 9.0 to 16.9 percent per annum for the period 1986 to 1993.9 McCahill [1997] also


8
       Gandal [1995] also finds declines in quality-adjusted prices for spreadsheets of 4.4 percent per annum over the shorter
       time period 1989 to 1991.
9
       Earlier estimates by Brynjolfsson and Kemerer, cited by Oliner and Sichel, reported considerably smaller rates of price
       decline.
                                                                                                                            4
reports declines in quality-adjusted prices for word processors in the range of 15.1 to 18.5
percent annually, while Gandal [1995] reports a smaller decline of 1.5 percent annually for
databases over the period 1989 to 1991. Finally, using an alternative quality-adjustment
methodology, based on counts of function points, McKinsey Global Institute [2001] reports a
price decline of 11.7 percent for Microsoft’s operating systems from 1988 to 1998.
       The number of non-U.S. studies is even smaller. Grohn [n.d.] reports hedonic estimates
of declines in quality-adjusted price indexes for word processors in the range of 11.3 to 36.9
percent per annum for Germany over the 1985 to 1995 time period. Harhoff and Moch [1997]
also analyze prepackaged software price trends in Germany from 1986 to 1994. Based on price
quotes from German personal computer magazines, they compare price trend results using both
matched-model and hedonic price index methods. Interestingly, they report a decline in their
price index for databases of 9.25 percent per annum using matched-model methods, a greater rate
of price decline than that found based on hedonic methods (7.41 percent). Harhoff and Moch
attribute this finding to the fact that older versions of database software were sold at greatly
reduced retail prices as newer versions were introduced to the market.
       The only other non-U.S. study of software price change of which we are aware is that by
Prud’homme and Yu [2002] for Canada, based on Nielsen scanner data. They report price
declines for an aggregate of all prepackaged software in the range of 4.4 to 7.9 percent per
annum using matched-model price indexes for the period 1996 to 2000, and for a substantial
number of sub-aggregates covering a wide range of prepackaged software products, including
games. Two prominent findings in Prud’homme and Yu are that rates of price decline differ
considerably across various types of prepackaged software (high for games, smaller for operating
systems), and that because of rapidly changing market shares, growth rates of price indexes
differ substantially (even, in some cases, in sign) depending on whether one uses base-period
Laspeyres weights or current-period Paasche weights.
       It is worth noting that these findings are limited in scope and relevance for the majority of
software sales today, for several reasons. First, with the exception of Prud’homme and Yu
[2002], the studies referenced in Table 1 report results that employ data ending in the early to
mid-1990s.    Second, these studies of software price measurement have focused almost
exclusively on retail or mail order transactions. As noted in Abel, Berndt, and White [2003], for
a software company like Microsoft, sales of full-packaged products sold through the retail

                                                                                                  5
channel have become an ever smaller and unrepresentative portion of sales over time, with
volume-related sales constituting a greater percentage of software application sales. Moreover,
OEM sales such as those to Compaq and Dell are not tracked by these studies, which instead
tend to focus on the final software consumer. Although some of these transactions are better
captured by a producer rather than a consumer price index, the fact remains that much
prepackaged software is sold in bundled form with hardware, most likely at implicit prices quite
different from retail shrink-wrapped prepackaged software. Third, the existing literature has
focused on measuring price trends for applications sold as stand-alone products, which have
increasingly been replaced by productivity suites. A final limitation of some of these studies is
their use of list price measures in computing a consumer price index. Most studies (notably,
Gandal [1994, 1995], Brynjolfsson and Kemerer [1996], and McCahill [1997]) focus on the list
price (such as the suggested retail price reported by National Software Testing Laboratories)
when computing a consumer price index, in contrast to the more appropriate transactions price as
in Prud’homme and Yu [2002]. The prices used in our study are collected from advertisements,
which we believe closely approximate transactions prices.

       2. Producer Price Indexes

       Abel, Berndt, and White [2003] compute price indexes for products sold by Microsoft at
the first line of distribution. To the best of our knowledge, this is the only published producer
price index for software, other than that published by the BLS. Price index calculations are
based on the universe of Microsoft’s sales in the U.S. at the first line of distribution, and
encompass sales both to the finished goods (i.e., distributors and resellers) and OEM channels of
distribution. Full versions, upgrades, and volume-licensing sales are also incorporated into the
analyses. Using a Fisher matched-model price index, Abel, Berndt, and White report average
annual declines in prices from 1993 to 2001 for Office (4.78 percent), Word (10.64 percent),
Excel (8.17 percent), and personal computer operating systems (0.39 percent). Price indexes are
also computed treating the Office suite as a product distinct from its stand-alone Word and Excel
components, and by combining stand-alone and productivity suite sales for Word and for Excel.

       3. Official Government Price Indexes

       As part of its expanded producer price index coverage, the BLS first began publishing a
monthly producer price index for prepackaged software in December 1997.               The BLS

                                                                                                6
prepackaged software price index is based on a survey of producer selling prices, i.e., at the first
line of distribution, collected from a sample of manufacturers of prepackaged software. The
BLS collects price quotes from both the OEM and finished goods channels, for full versions and
upgrades. To preserve continuity in the index, the BLS attempts to collect price quotes for
comparable products over time.               The current methodology of the index is a fixed basket
matched-model Laspeyres price index with plans to update the company-specific index weights
every five to seven years.10 Over the period December 1997 to December 2003, the BLS PPI for
prepackaged software declined at an annual rate of 1.06 percent. In comparison, over the same
time period the BLS CPI for prepackaged software declined at an annual rate of 8.51 percent.11
       The Bureau of Economic Analysis (“BEA”) also computes a software price index for
purposes of reporting quarterly measures of U.S. real gross domestic product and real gross
domestic product by industry. The BEA software price index draws on research from a number
of the prepackaged software studies listed in Table 1. As noted by Grimm and Parker [2000],
with respect to the hedonic price index studies for prepackaged software, the existing literature
reveals that hedonic quality-adjusted prices for spreadsheets and word processors have generally
fallen more rapidly than have corresponding matched-model price indexes.12 This occurs since
matched-model methods typically fail to capture fully many quality improvements between
different versions and generations of prepackaged software products over time,13 particularly
when new product introductions do not result in substantial price changes.14
       Because of the widely recognized potential understatement of true price declines (or
overstatement of true price increases) as measured by matched-model price indexes, in 2000 the
U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis began to make a “bias-adjustment” to the BLS prepackaged




10
       Within-company weights can change annually, however, as a company’s product mix undergoes sales variations.
11
       http://www.bls.gov.      Monthly BLS index values for September through December 2003 are preliminary and are
       subject to revision.
12
       As mentioned above however, Harhoff and Moch [1997] report results contrary to this general finding.
13
       On this, see Oliner and Sichel [1994] and Gordon [1994].
14
       Triplett [2003], chs. 3, 5.
                                                                                                                     7
software producer price index.15 The adjustment is based on the following calculation: Grimm
and Parker [2000] compare two sets of indexes over the 1985 to 1993 time period: (1) the Oliner
and Sichel [1994] matched-model price indexes for spreadsheets, word processors, and
databases; and (2) a BEA hedonic price index for spreadsheets and word processors.16 The
average annual difference between these two sets of price indexes over the 1985 to 1993 time
period is -6.3 percent for spreadsheets and word processors. Therefore, when compiling and
publishing its quarterly measures of U.S. real gross domestic product and real gross product by
industry, the BEA calculates its bias adjustment as one-half of this -6.3 percent annual
difference, or -3.15 percent annually.


IV.    Hedonic Price Indexes for Personal Computer Operating Systems and Productivity
       Suites
       1. Data Sources

       The operating systems analyzed in this study include those of Microsoft (MS DOS,
Windows), IBM (PC DOS, OS/2), and DRI (DR DOS). For productivity suites, we measure
quality-adjusted price changes for products from a number of manufacturers, including Microsoft
(Works, Office), Lotus (Symphony), Ashton Tate/Borland (Framework), IBM (SmartSuite), and
the WordPerfect Corporation (WordPerfect Suite). Our price data come from monthly editions
of the personal computer magazine PC World from July 1987 to December 2000 for operating
systems,17 and for productivity suites, from July 1984 to December 2000.                                   We collected
advertised price data for each personal computer operating system and productivity suite product
that appeared in the advertisements of the monthly issues of PC World. We confined our
attention to advertisements that were at least one-quarter page in size. The prices used in this
analysis are representative primarily of retail brick-and-mortar and mail-order outlets.
Information on the product name, version number (where available), and date of the


15
       As stated in Grimm and Parker [2000], “….[a]n annual bias adjustment is made because it is likely – assuming less
       than complete market equilibrium – that matched-model indexes understate quality-adjusted price declines; quality
       improvements, such as enhanced power and performance, tend to be introduced in new versions of software, so they
       are not captured by the matched-model estimates.” (p. 15). A further discussion of the BEA’s software price estimates
       is found in Eugene P. Seskin [1999].
16
       The BEA hedonic price index is an extension of research performed by Gandal [1994], Brynjolfsson and Kemerer
       [1996], and McCahill [1997].
17
       Price quotes for operating systems were not available from PC World advertisements prior to 1987.
                                                                                                                          8
advertisement was also collected. We confined the scope of our price coverage to full versions
because of spotty and intermittent coverage of upgrades. Information on any relevant discounts
or rebates, taxes, and shipping charges was also collected. The prices used in this analysis are
net of discounts and rebates.
       In collecting information on product attributes, we consulted numerous sources. We
utilized information from a variety of product reviews (such as those contained in the monthly
editions of PC World and PC Magazine), various Internet websites, and software product
manuals. Many of the attributes are binary in nature, e.g., whether or not a particular operating
system has a graphical user interface. Other attribute measures are continuous, e.g., the number
of processors an operating system can use simultaneously.           The attribute database was
constructed so as to ensure a consistent set of attributes existed over time. A summary of the
attribute information used in the hedonic regressions is contained in Table 2 (for operating
systems) and Table 3 (for productivity suites), including mean, minimum, and maximum values
of the various attribute variable measures.          While most attribute variables are readily
interpretable, several are worth discussing in greater detail.
       In this paper, we attempt to identify and measure the presence of network effects among
prepackaged software products and estimate their impact on quality-adjusted prices.           For
operating systems, we measure the degree of compatibility of the given operating system. First,
we consider the degree of connectivity of the operating system, i.e., whether the operating
system supports built-in networking or is USB compatible (“CONNECT”). Second, we consider
the number of file systems with which the given operating system is compatible (“FILESYS”).
Finally, we consider the number of platforms with which the operating system is compatible
(“PLATFORM”). We include these measures as explanatory variables in our hedonic price
equations. The time series of values taken by the CONNECT variable (included in our Base
Case regression, see section IV.3 below) is shown in Figure 1. Note that, on average, this
variable increases over time as operating systems’ built-in networking capabilities improve over
the 1987 to 2000 time period. As described below, we also estimate versions of these hedonic
equations where we exclude such network-effects variables from the regressions.
       For productivity suites, we construct a measure of the degree of integration of the product
with respect to its component applications that we refer to as an “absolute integration score.”
We define a productivity suite to be fully integrated if each component of the suite is compatible

                                                                                                9
with each other in the sense of allowing data interchange between the component applications.
As an example of full integration, for Microsoft Office, tables or charts created in Excel can be
embedded in Word, and vice versa.
         If a productivity suite contains four applications, then the maximum absolute integration
value it can attain is 12 (i.e., each application allows for data interchange with each of the other
three applications in the productivity suite).        Our absolute integration score expresses the
integration value of a particular product as a fraction of the maximum possible integration value
over all products in our data. In our analysis the maximum possible integration value is 30, i.e.,
a productivity suite with six fully integrated component applications. Continuing our example of
a productivity suite with four fully integrated component applications, the absolute integration
score is 0.4, i.e., 12/30. The time series of values of the average absolute integration score over
time is shown in Figure 2.       Note that, on average, productivity suites have become more
integrated over time.

         2. Econometric Specification Issues

         We employ the same general hedonic regression specification when estimating changes
in the quality-adjusted prices of both personal computer operating systems and productivity
suites over time.    The dependent variable is the natural logarithm of the price from each
advertisement for each product in a given quarter. As discussed below, in some cases we
averaged a product’s price over all advertisements of that product appearing in that quarter, and
in other cases we treated each advertised price as a separate observation.
         In addition to the quality attribute variables described in Tables 2 and 3, common
quarterly time dummy variables (across years) and annual time dummy variables were added as
explanatory variables. Thus our Base Case regression takes the form:


                             ln p = α + β i X i + β y Dy + Bq Dq + ε                     (1)
where:
            p = Advertised price for a given product, quarter, and advertisement;
         β i = Regression coefficients for i quality characteristics, i = 1,…n;
         β y = Regression coefficients for 13 or 16 annual dummy variables (1988 to 2000 for
                operating systems, 1985 to 2000 for productivity suites);
         βq   = Regression coefficients for three quarterly dummy variables (quarters 2, 3, 4);

                                                                                                  10
        α    = Intercept term, representing reference case (1987 for operating systems, 1984 for
                productivity suites, and zero values of other indicator variables); and
        ε    = Independently distributed random disturbance term.


        We refer to Eqn. (1) as our Base Case hedonic regression, which also includes measures
of connectivity and product integration, respectively, for operating systems and productivity
suites. We also estimated a version of (1) that omitted the measures of compatibility (“No
Compatibility”) and product integration (“No Integration”).            In addition, we estimated
parameters in a number of alternative specifications to Eqn. (1).             A fully temporally
parameterized (“Fully Parameterized”) version of Eqn. (1) was also estimated, using separate
quarterly dummy variables for each quarterly time period, instead of restricting the quarterly
coefficients to be equal across years.
       Note that ordinary least squares (“OLS”) estimation of parameters in the Base Case
specification can be envisaged as weighting a product’s price by the number of times its
advertisement is observed that quarter.      Such parameter estimation is efficient under the
assumption of homoskedasticity of the disturbances; if these disturbances are heteroskedastic,
however, the OLS standard error estimates are biased. Therefore, the standard error estimates
reported here are White-corrected heteroskedastic-consistent standard errors.
       The fact that some products are advertised more frequently than others suggests an
alternative specification that involves dealing with a differing type of heteroskedasticity among
the residuals. In particular, we specify and estimate parameters in an alternative specification
where the dependent variable is the logarithm of the arithmetic mean of the advertised price of
each product observed during that quarter, i.e., the advertised price of each product averaged
over all advertisements for that product in a given quarter (“Quarterly Average”), where this
quarterly average price is then transformed logarithmically.      Relative to the Base Case, this
specification reduces the number of observations employed in the estimation, and therefore tends
to downweight products whose advertised prices are observed more frequently.
       As yet another alternative, we employed intuition based on the Dorfman and Steiner
[1954] theorem that relates the optimal ratio of dollar advertising to sales revenue to the ratio of
marketing and (the absolute value) of the price elasticities of demand for a firm facing a
downward sloping demand curve. To the extent such a relationship holds here, if one wants to

                                                                                                 11
obtain sales-weighted hedonic price coefficients, one could approximate this by weighting the
log quarterly average prices (from the Quarterly Average specification) by the number of
advertisements observed that quarter. This raises, of course, the issue of whether one wants to
use sales weighted or unweighted hedonic parameter estimates. This is a longstanding issue in
hedonic price analyses; for recent discussions, see Triplett [2003] and Diewert [2003]. Rather
than taking a definitive stand on this long-simmering dispute, here we merely report the
sensitivity of our hedonic price coefficient estimates to use of alternative weighting schemes.
Specifically, we report a Weighted Least Squares (“WLS”) version of the Quarterly Average
specification where the weights are the number of advertisements appearing for a given product
in a given quarter.
       For completeness, we also specify and estimate a fixed-effects (“Fixed Effects”) variant
of the Quarterly Average model, where each distinct product (e.g., Microsoft Office 2000,
Microsoft Windows 98) is assigned a separate dummy variable, and while annual and quarterly
time dummy variables are also incorporated as regressors, none of the quality attribute measures
is included as a regressor.    This Fixed-Effects specification has been advocated by Aizcorbe,
Corrado, and Doms [2003], who argue that when prices are observed at relatively short time
intervals (e.g., monthly or quarterly rather than annually), and when each product’s price is
observed frequently, then a fixed-effects specification without quality attribute variables will
approximate rather closely the traditional hedonic specification.
       It is worth commenting briefly on this Fixed-Effects specification.           As discussed in
contemporary econometrics textbooks (see, for example, Wooldridge [2000], ch. 14, “Advanced
Panel Data Methods”), use of a fixed-effects specification is tantamount to time demeaning each
cross-sectional variable (in our context, each distinct software product), and doing pooled OLS
using the time-demeaned observations. For these reasons, the resulting estimates are typically
called “within-estimators,” for they capture the time variation within each distinct software
product.   Since they focus only on within-product variation, these fixed-effects specification
estimates can in fact be viewed as being analogous to matched-model price index computations;
indeed, it is reasonable to think of these fixed-effects specification estimates as being “matched-
model econometric estimates.”
       One other point worth making in this context is that if a model is observed only once, and
if it is assigned a fixed effect, then of course the fit of the regression equation will be perfect for

                                                                                                    12
all such only once-observed products, for the implicit product-specific intercept term will just
equal what would otherwise be the residual between the observed and predicted price. An
implication of this is that OLS parameter estimates for all the remaining estimated coefficients
will be numerically invariant regardless of whether or not these only once-observed products are
included in the estimation.18            Since the fixed-effects specification parameter estimates are
invariant in this case, in essence the specification is not making use of any information obtained
in the only once-observed products.19 Our intuition, therefore, is that when the proportion of only
once-observed products is rather high (as it might be, for example, in annual data for personal
computer hardware manufacturers), one would expect the fixed-effects econometric specification
to generate parameter estimates for the time dummies whose time trend approximated that of the
matched-model price index procedures. If, however, the proportion of only once-observed
products in the sample is rather low, then the fixed-effects econometric and matched-model price
index procedures could yield rather differing AAGRs.
       Finally, as noted previously, in recent years attention has focused on issues regarding the
interpretation of intertemporal instability of estimated hedonic parameters.                       In fact, this issue
already concerned Griliches in his classic 1961 study, where parameters of the automobile
model’s weight varied considerably over time. To check for possible parameter instability over
time, we divide the 1984 to 2000 productivity suite and the 1987 to 2000 operating system
samples into approximate halves, and report on implications of this for the estimation of quality-
adjusted price declines.


       3. Price Indexes for Personal Computer Operating Systems

            Hedonic Price Indexes

       Parameter estimates for the Base Case and various alternative specification regressions
for personal computer operating systems are presented in Table 4. Recall that in the Base Case,
each advertisement for each product is treated as a separate observation, e.g., if there are ten
advertisements for Windows 95 in a given quarter then this product appears ten times in the
regression for that quarter (with the same product attributes as explanatory variables). The Base


18
       For a numerical demonstration of this, see Exercise 7 in Berndt [1991], ch. 3, pp. 48-50.
19
       For a more formal discussion, see Wooldridge [2000], pp. 448-449.
                                                                                                                   13
Case also employs common quarterly dummy variables for each of the years 1988 through 2000,
which is more parsimonious in the parameters than the Fully-Parameterized model, whose
estimates are given in the second set of columns. The full-sample regressions in the first three
sets of columns each have sample sizes consisting of 340 individual observations.
       As seen in the first three sets of columns, parameter estimates for each of the five product
attributes (presence of graphical user interface, presence of hardware auto-detection, extent of
multitasking, extent of multiprocessing, and presence of full-screen text editor) are positive,
consistent with the view that the presence of, or increase in such attributes is associated with
higher consumer valuations. Except for the multitasking measure, each is also statistically
significant, with p-values < 0.05. The coefficient on the CONNECT variable (representing the
sum of dummy variables for operating systems that support built-in networking and USB
compatibility) is positive and highly significant, indicating positive network effects among
personal computer operating systems.20                   The robustness on the various quality attribute
coefficients with respect to the Base Case estimates carries over to the Quarterly Average and
WLS specifications, although in the Quarterly Average case the coefficient estimates on the
GUI, AUTO_HW and MULTI and CONNECT variables become statistically insignificant, and
in the WLS case the coefficient estimates on the GUI, AUTO_HW and MULTI variables
become insignificant. However, all parameter estimates remain positive.
       Turning now to coefficient estimates on the annual and quarterly time dummy variables,
the most striking result in Table 4 is the relative robustness of the implied AAGRs of price
change across the entire range of alternative specifications. As seen in the bottom rows of Table
4, over the full 1987 to 2000 time period, AAGRs are -16.83 percent for the Base Case, -17.52
percent with the Fully-Parameterized specification, -15.72 percent for the Base Case with
compatibility measures omitted as regressors, -16.21 for the Quarterly Average, and -16.90
percent for WLS. In terms of comparisons of AAGRs in the first and second half of the full


20
       The three network-effects variables we considered are positively correlated with each other. The correlation coefficient
       between FILESYS and CONNECT is 0.78, and that between PLATFORM and CONNECT is 0.77. When these three
       variables are all included as regressors, the estimate on FILESYS becomes negative and significant, although the
       resulting AAGR over the 1987 to 2000 time period changes to -18.16 percent, compared to -16.83 percent for the Base
       Case regression. We also estimated a variation of the Base Case excluding the FILESYS variable and kept both
       CONNECT and PLATFORM as regressors. The parameter estimate on PLATFORM was negative and significant and
       that on CONNECT was positive and significant. The resulting AAGR for 1987 to 2000 was -17.18 percent. For a
       discussion of parameter estimates in hedonic regressions having the “wrong” sign, see Pakes [2003].
                                                                                                                           14
1987 to 2000, for the Base Case regression price declines are greater in 1993 to 2000 compared
to 1987 to 1993 (18.40 percent compared to 14.96 percent), and this inequality holds across all
specifications.
       As a check on the temporal parameter stability of our hedonic regressions, we re-
estimated our Base Case regression for the two sub-periods 1987 to 1993, and 1993 to 2000.
The resulting AAGRs from the two separate regressions were -14.71 percent for 1987 to 1993
and -18.57 percent for 1993 to 2000. These compare with the AAGRs of -14.96 and -18.40
percent, respectively, for the periods 1987 to 1993 and 1993 to 2000 based on the regression
using data for the entire 1987 to 2000 time period. Thus the resulting AAGRs are reasonably
robust over these different specifications.
       Finally, AAGRs from the Fixed-Effects regression specification are presented in the
bottom rows of the final set of columns in Table. 4. Over the entire 1987 to 2000 time period,
the AAGR at -14.63 percent represents the smallest rate of price decline in the various
specifications, although the difference in most cases is a little over 1-2 percentage points.
However, averaged separately over the 1987 to 1993 and 1993 to 2000 time periods, the Fixed-
Effects specification yields a much smaller rate of price decline for 1987 to 1993, -10.0 percent,
than over the later 1993 to 2000 time frame, -18.41 percent. Price index values over the entire
1987 to 2000 time period, based on the various regressions and on the traditional matched-model
price index procedure (discussed below), are presented in Appendix A.

           Matched-model vs. Hedonic Price Indexes

       We now turn to a comparison of time trends of the hedonic-based price indexes relative
to the more traditional matched-model price indexes.           Analogous to the fixed-effects
specification, in the context of personal computer operating systems, a matched-model price
index would compare the prices of Windows 95 over time, but the prices of Windows 95 would
not be compared with those of, say, Windows 98 since such products would be considered to be
different. Examples of such matched-model price indexes for personal computer software have
been reported by Oliner and Sichel [1994], Prud’homme and Yu [2002] and Abel, Berndt, and
White [2003]. We have computed a matched-model price index for personal computer operating
systems based on a chained geometric average of quarterly average price relatives over time, as
discussed in Diewert [1995]. Since we did not have information on unit shipments, this index is

                                                                                               15
an unweighted price index. The resulting index declines at an AAGR of 7.02 percent over the
1987 to 2000 time period. Note that this matched-model price index is calculated using the same
underlying data as that used in the Quarterly Average regression, rather than using individual
price quotes. Notably, as shown in Figure 3, the Quarterly Average hedonic declines at a greater
rate of 16.21 percent between 1987 and 2000, more than double the matched-model rate of price
decline of 7.02 percent. This approximate 9 percentage point differential between the hedonic
and matched-model AAGRs compares to the 3.15 percent annual adjustment the BEA applies to
the BLS prepackaged software PPI.21 When the matched-model price index is recomputed as a
chained Fisher price index (using the number of advertisements as weights, as in the WLS
regression), the resulting AAGR is very similar. Finally, an index of simple average prices that
makes no control for changes in product quality over time, declines at approximately 1.16
percent over the 1987 to 2000 time period. Note that this simple arithmetic average price suffers
from the drawback that the prices of Windows 2000, for example, are compared with those of
MS-DOS – which are very different products in terms of features and functionality.

       4. Price Indexes for Productivity Suites

           Hedonic Price Indexes

       We estimate parameters from a hedonic regression for productivity suites, analogous to
that for personal computer operating systems. As in the case of operating systems, the natural
logarithm of the individual advertised prices from advertisements in monthly editions of PC
World were used as the dependent variable in the Base Case hedonic regression.                                   To be
considered a productivity suite, a product must have both a word processor and a spreadsheet as
components. Therefore, the presence of additional component application products as well as
the absolute integration score are used as independent variables. Results from our Base Case
regression consisting of 1,717 individual observations are shown in Table 5.
       The Base Case, Fully Parameterized, Quarterly Average, and WLS regressions each
contain nine quality attribute variables in addition to the absolute integration score. In all cases,




21
       In fact, this adjustment is based on one half of the average difference of 6.3 percentage points between a matched-
       model and hedonic price index over the shorter time period 1985 to 1993.
                                                                                                                      16
the coefficient estimate on the absolute integration score is positive and highly significant.22 As
seen in the various columns of Table 5, parameter estimates on the DB (database) attribute
measure are sensitive to whether the absolute integration score measure is included in the
hedonic regression; estimates on the DB variable change sign from negative to positive when the
absolute integration measure is excluded and is statistically significant in this regression. Base
Case parameter estimates on the GRPH, PRES, and PUB variables are positive and significant
(that for GRPH being particularly significant), while those on the DB, COMM, CAL,
REFEREN, FINANCE and SPEECH variables are negative.
       While estimates on the quality attribute variables are somewhat sensitive to the choice of
specification, this is clearly not the case for coefficients on the year and quarterly dummy
variables. Not only are most of the annual time dummy variables negative and statistically
significant with p-values < 0.01, but remarkably, across the six hedonic price regressions,
AAGRs of estimated quality-adjusted price changes between 1984 to 2000 range only from -
14.97 percent to -16.25 percent per year; the Fixed-Effects specification is also reasonably close
at -13.00 percent per year.23
       This robustness of estimates of AAGRs of quality-adjusted price changes holds
reasonably well even when one examines sub-periods. As shown in the bottom rows of Table 5,
for the six hedonic price equation specifications, average annual price changes in the 1984 to
1992 half of the sample range between -11.49 and -14.56 percent, but are all smaller than the
declines of -17.91 percent to -18.43 percent obtained during the 1992 to 2000 half of the sample.
While this inequality of AAGRs between sub-periods still holds for the fixed-effects
specification, here it becomes much larger, being -0.69 percent in the 1984 to 1992 time period,
and -23.78 percent in the more recent 1992 to 2000 time frame.                         Price index values over the




22
       We also estimated a version of the Base Case regression that excluded the absolute integration score as a regressor
       (“No Integration”). The resulting AAGR of this regression dropped to -14.97 percent over the 1984 to 2000 time
       period, compared to -15.35 percent when the absolute integration score is included. Since we were unable to define an
       absolute integration score for every productivity suite in our sample, we had an additional 889 observations with
       undefined absolute integration scores. When we estimated the No Integration hedonic based on the larger sample of
       2,606 observations, the resulting AAGR for 1984 to 2000 was virtually unchanged at -15.03 percent (-14.97 percent for
       the smaller sample).
23
       The fixed-effects specification was also estimated over the larger sample for which some productivity suites did not
       have a defined absolute integration score. The resulting AAGR increased from -13.00 to -15.84 percent.
                                                                                                                        17
entire 1984 to 2000 time period, for all econometrically estimated regressions, as well as that
based on the traditional matched-model price index procedure, are presented in Appendix B.
       As a check on the temporal parameter stability of our hedonic regressions, we re-
estimated our Base Case regression for the two sub-periods 1984 to 1992 and 1992 to 2000. The
resulting AAGRs from the two separate regressions were -8.88 percent for 1984 to 1992 and -
17.90 percent for 1992 to 2000. These compare with the AAGRs of -12.31 percent and -18.29
percent, respectively, for the periods 1984 to 1992 and 1992 to 2000 based on the regression
using data from the entire 1984 to 2000 time period. Thus the resulting AAGRs are reasonably
robust over these different specifications.


                Matched-model vs. Hedonic Price Indexes


         We have also computed matched-model price indexes for the productivity suites, again
based on a chained geometric average of quarterly price relatives for matched products. We find
that with the matched-model procedure, prices fall at an annual rate of 15.36 percent, a slightly
lower decline than the corresponding Quarterly Average hedonic regression which yields
declines in quality-adjusted prices of 16.25 percent per annum (see bottom rows of Table 5,
Appendix B and Figure 4). Although it is well documented that matched-model price indexes
tend in general to decline less rapidly (rise more quickly) than those based on a corresponding
hedonic regression, we find that for the 1992 to 2000 time period, the matched-model index
declines at a rate of 28.69 percent per annum, greater than the 17.91 percent decline in the
corresponding hedonic price index.24 The only other such finding in the literature of which we
are aware is that reported by Harhoff and Moch [1997]. Although our result may appear slightly
counterintuitive, it is largely driven by the huge declines in the prices of such products as
WordPerfect Suite and Lotus SmartSuite, whose retail prices were slashed considerably in the
late 1990s in an effort to boost sales. When the AAGRs are computed over the shorter time
period 1984 to 1998, the declines in prices are 15.41 and 3.22 percent for the hedonic and
matched-model price indexes, respectively, consistent with a priori expectations. A chained


24
       For completeness, the matched-model price indexes have also been calculated over the larger sample including those
       productivity suites for which we did not have a defined product integration score (n=347). The resulting AAGR is
       almost 2 percentage points lower over the 1984 to 2000 time period (-17.22 compared to -15.36 percent).
                                                                                                                     18
Fisher price index version of the matched-model price index using the number of advertisements
as weights resulted in almost no change in the AAGRs.
       As shown in Figure 4, we have also computed an index of the average price level
(normalized to equal 100 in 1984). This average price for productivity suites declines at an
average rate of 7.18 percent per annum between 1984 and 2000. Note that this average price
does not account for the fact that Lotus SmartSuite, for example, is a different product from
Office 98 Professional, since all products are treated symmetrically in computing the average.
Furthermore, average price levels do not take into account the changes in quality of the
productivity suites over time; quality-adjusted prices decline, on average, over 10 percentage
points more than average price levels between 1984 and 2000.

V.     Conclusion

       Rapid technological advances in personal computer hardware have lead to significant
improvements in the quality of the software used by consumers. Nowhere is this change in
quality more clear than for personal computer operating systems, where esoteric character-based
operating systems have been replaced by powerful operating systems with user-friendly
graphical user interfaces and advanced networking capabilities. For applications, feature-rich
software products previously sold in stand-alone form have increasingly been added to fully
integrated productivity suites.
       In this paper, we have augmented the relatively sparse literature on quality-adjusted
personal computer software price indexes to include personal computer operating systems (1987
to 2000) and productivity suites (1984 to 2000). Although we estimate a variety of alternative
hedonic specifications, we obtain remarkably robust estimates of annual quality-adjusted price
declines in these software product categories. Specifically, for personal computer operating
systems, we find AAGRs ranging between -15 and -18 percent, while for productivity suites they
generally vary between -13 and -16 percent. For both product categories, the rates of price
decline are larger in the last half of the sample than in the first half. Fixed-effects models also
tend to yield slightly smaller rates of price decline than traditional hedonic-attribute
specifications. Finally, in most but not all cases, hedonic price indexes are associated with
greater rates of price decline than are those based on matched-model price index computations.



                                                                                                19
       Among the explanatory variables we employ in our hedonic regressions are several
variables constructed to capture the presence of network effects for personal computer operating
systems, such as connectivity and compatibility, and product integration among the components
of productivity suites.    We generally find positive and statistically significant coefficient
estimates on these variables, indicating that consumers place a value on software products that
exhibit a high degree of compatibility and product integration. These findings are consistent
with the small but growing literature seeking to identify the presence of network effects in
information technology markets.
       As with previous studies of personal computer software prices, we employ data covering
retail sales. It is worth noting, however, that sales in this channel of distribution have become
increasingly unrepresentative of prepackaged personal computer software transactions, which are
now most commonly through large-account distributors and OEMs. Therefore, extending this
line of research to include the prices from all channels of distribution used in the prepackaged
software industry is an important, but potentially difficult, area for future research.




                                                                                              20
REFERENCES

Abel, Jaison R., Ernst R. Berndt, and Alan G. White [2003], “Price Indexes for Microsoft’s
Personal Computer Software Products,” Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic
Research, Working Paper No. 9966, September.

Aizcorbe, Ana M. [2003a], “The Stability of Dummy Variable Price Measures Obtained from
Hedonic Regressions,” Washington DC: Federal Reserve Board, draft manuscript, January 2.

Aizcorbe, Ana M. [2003b], “Hedonic Regression Coefficients as Averages of Reduced Form
Coefficients,” Washington DC: Federal Reserve Board, draft manuscript, October 23.

Aizcorbe, Ana M. [2003c], “Price Indexes for Intermittent Purchases: Are Price Declines for
High-Technology Goods Overstated?” Washington DC: Bureau of Economic Analysis, draft
manuscript, December.

Aizcorbe, Ana M., Carol Corrado, and Mark Doms [2003], “When Do Matched-Model and
Hedonic Techniques Yield Similar Price Measures?” Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco,
Working Paper No. 2003-14, June 16.

Berndt, Ernst R. [1991], The Practice of Econometrics: Classic and Contemporary, Reading,
MA: Addison-Wesley.

Berndt, Ernst R. and Zvi Griliches [1993], “Price Indexes for Microcomputers: An Exploratory
Study,” in Murray Foss, Marilyn Manser and Allan Young, eds., Price Measurements and Their
Uses, Chicago: University of Chicago Press for the National Bureau of Economic Research, pp.
63-93.

Berndt, Ernst R., Zvi Griliches, and Neal J. Rappaport [1995], “Econometric Estimates of Price
Indexes for Personal Computers in the 1990s,” Journal of Econometrics, 68, pp. 243-268.

Berndt, Ernst R. and Neal J. Rappaport [2001], “Price and Quality of Desktop and Mobile
Personal Computers: A Quarter Century Historical Overview,” American Economic Review,
91(2), May, pp. 268-273.

Berndt, Ernst R. and Neal J. Rappaport [2002], “Hedonics for Personal Computers: A
Reexamination of Selected Econometric Issues,” Cambridge, MA: MIT Sloan School of
Management, draft manuscript, July 18.

Boskin, Michael J., Ellen R. Dulberger, Robert J. Gordon, Zvi Griliches, and Dale W. Jorgenson
[1996], Toward a More Accurate Measure of the Cost of Living, Final Report to the U.S. Senate
Finance Committee from the Advisory Commission to Study the Consumer Price Index,
Washington DC: US Government Printing Office.




                                                                                           21
Brynjolfsson, Erik and Chris F. Kemerer [1996], “Network Externalities in Microcomputer
Software: An Econometric Analysis of the Spreadsheet Market,” Management Science, 42, pp.
1627-1647.

Conference Board [1999], Measuring Prices in a Dynamic Economy: Re-Examining the CPI,
New York.

Court, Andrew T. [1939], “Hedonic Price Indexes with Automotive Examples,” in The
Dynamics of Automobile Demand, New York: The General Motors Corporation, pp. 99-117.

Diewert, W. Erwin [1995], “Axiomatic and Economic Approaches to Elementary Price Indexes,”
UBC Department of Economics Discussion Paper No. 95-01.

Diewert, W. Erwin [2003], “Hedonic Regressions: A Consumer Theory Approach,” in Robert C.
Feenstra and Matthew D. Shapiro, eds., Scanner Data and Price Indexes, Chicago: University of
Chicago Press for the National Bureau of Economic Research, pp. 317-348.

Dorfman, Robert and Peter O. Steiner [1954], “Optimal Advertising and Optimal Quality,”
American Economic Review, 44:5, December, 826-836.

Feenstra, Robert C. [1995], “Exact Hedonic Price Indexes,” Review of Economics and Statistics,
77(4), November, pp. 634-653.

Gandal, Neil [1994], “Hedonic Price Indexes for Spreadsheets and an Empirical Test of Network
Externalities,” RAND Journal of Economics, 25, pp. 160-170.

Gandal, Neil [1995], “Competing Compatibility Standards and Network Externalities in the PC
Software Market,” The Review of Economics and Statistics, 77, pp. 599-608.

Griliches, Zvi [1961], “Hedonic Price Indexes for Automobiles: An Econometric Analysis of
Quality Change,” in The Price Statistics of the Federal Government, General Series No. 73, New
York: Columbia University Press for the National Bureau of Economic Research, pp. 137-196.

Grimm, Bruce and Robert Parker [2000], “Software Prices and Real Output: Recent
Developments at the Bureau of Economic Analysis,” paper presented at the National Bureau of
Economic Research, Program on Technological Change and Productivity Measurement,
Cambridge, MA, March 17.

Grohn, Andreas [n.d.], “Network Effects in PC Software: An Empirical Analysis,” unpublished
manuscript, Kiel, Germany: Kiel University.

Gordon, Robert J. [1994], “’Comment’ on Oliner and Sichel,” Brookings Papers on Economic
Activity, 2, pp. 324-328.

Harhoff, Dietmar and Dietmar Moch [1997], “Price Indexes for PC Database Software and the
Value of Code Compatibility,” Research Policy, 26, pp. 509-520.

                                                                                           22
Heravi, Saeed and Mick Silver [2002], “On the Stability of Regression Coefficients and their
Implications for Quality-Adjusted Price Change Measurement,” paper presented at the NBER
Summer Institute, Cambridge, MA.

Lynch, Brian D., H. Raghav Rao, and Winston T. Lin [1990], “Economic Analysis of
Microcomputer Hardware,” Communications of the ACM, 33, pp. 119-129.

McCahill, Robert J. [1997], “An Hedonic Study of Prepackaged Software,” Master's Thesis,
Department of Economics, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University, Blacksburg, VA.

McKinsey Global Institute [2001], “United States Productivity Growth, 1995-2000,” Washington
DC: McKinsey Global Institute, October.

National Academy of Sciences [2002], At What Price? Conceptualizing and Measuring the Cost-
of-Living and Price Indexes, Panel on Conceptual, Measurement and Other Statistical Issues in
Developing Cost-of-Living Indexes, Charles Schultze and Christopher Mackie, eds., Committee
on National Statistics, National Research Council.

Oliner, Stephen D. and Daniel E. Sichel [1994], “Computers and Output Growth Revisited: How
Big is the Puzzle?” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2, pp. 273-330.

Pakes, Ariel [2003], “A Reconsideration of Hedonic Price Indexes with an Application to PC’s,”
American Economic Review, 93(5), December, pp. 1578-1596.

Prud-homme, Marc and Kam Yu [2002], "A Price Index for (Prepackaged) Computer Software
Using Scanner Data," draft manuscript, Ottawa: Statistics Canada, Prices Division, July.

Rao, H. Raghav and Brian D. Lynch [1993], “Hedonic Price Analyses of Workstation
Attributes,” Communications of the ACM, 36, pp. 95-102.

Seskin, Eugene P. [1999], “Improved Estimates of the National Income and Products Accounts
for 1959 to 1998: Results of the Comprehensive Revision,” Survey of Current Business, 79, pp.
15-39.

Silver, Mick and Saeed Heravi [2002], “Why The CPI Matched Models Method May Fail Us:
Results from an Hedonic and Matched Model Experiment Using Scanner Data,” paper presented
at the Brookings Institution, Workshop on Hedonic Price Indexes: Too Fast, Too Slow, or Just
Right?” February.

Triplett, Jack E. [2003], “Handbook on Quality Adjustment of Price Indexes for Information and
Communication Technology Products,” Directorate for Science, Technology and Industry,
Industrial Committee, Paris, OECD. Draft manuscript, Washington DC: The Brookings
Institution, December 31.

United States Bureau of Labor Statistics, www.bls.gov.

                                                                                           23
Waugh, Frederick V. [1928], “Quality Factors Influencing Vegetable Prices,” Journal of Farm
Economics, 10, pp. 185-196.

Wooldridge, Jeffrey M. [2000], Introductory Econometrics: A Modern Approach, South-Western
College Publishing, A Division of Thomson Learning.




                                                                                        24
                                                                                        Table 1
                                                               Summary of Prepackaged Software Price Measurement Research




               Author(s)                Products Considered                       Method Used               Country         Years Covered   Annual Price Change
Gandal [1994]                      Spreadsheets                 Hedonic                                       U.S.A           1986-1991              -15%

Oliner and Sichel [1994]           Word Processors              Matched-model                                 U.S.A           1985-1993             -2.6%

                                   Spreadsheets                 Matched-model                                 U.S.A           1985-1993             -4.5%

                                   Databases                    Matched-model                                 U.S.A           1985-1993             -4.7%

Gandal [1995]                      Spreadsheets                 Hedonic                                       U.S.A           1989-1991             -4.4%

                                   Databases                    Hedonic                                       U.S.A           1989-1991             -1.5%

Grohn [n.d.]                       Word Processors              Hedonic                                     Germany           1985-1995        -11.3% to -36.9%

Brynjolfsson and Kemerer [1996]    Spreadsheets                 Hedonic                                       U.S.A           1987-1992        -14.8% to -16.5%

McCahill [1997]                    Spreadsheets                 Hedonic                                       U.S.A           1986-1993         -9.0% to -16.9%

                                   Word Processors              Hedonic                                       U.S.A           1985-1994        -15.1% to -18.5%

Harhoff and Moch [1997]            Databases                    Hedonic                                     Germany           1986-1994             -7.41%

                                   Databases                    Matched-model                               Germany           1986-1994             -9.25%

Grimm and Parker [2000]            General                      Interpolation, Matched-model, and Hedonic     U.S.A           1959-1998             -10.9%

McKinsey Global Institute (2001)   Operating Systems            Function points                               U.S.A           1988-1998             -11.7%

Prud'homme and Yu [2002]           General                      Matched-model                                Canada           1996-2000         -4.4% to -7.9%

Abel, Berndt, and White [2003]     Word Processors              Matched-model                                 U.S.A           1993-2001             -10.6%

                                   Spreadsheets                 Matched-model                                 U.S.A           1993-2001             -8.2%

                                   Productivity Suites          Matched-model                                 U.S.A           1993-2001             -4.8%

                                   Desktop Operating Systems    Matched-model                                 U.S.A           1993-2001             -0.4%

BLS [2003]                         General                      Matched-model                                 U.S.A           1997-2003             -1.1%
                                                                                                              Table 2
                                                                                       Attributes of Personal Computer Operating Systems




                   Variable                         Abbreviation                                Function                                               Description                             Minimum   Maximum   Mean
Graphical User Interface                                  GUI              A GUI allows a user to access information and           Takes on a value of 1 if the operating system supports        0.00      1.00    0.62
                                                                           perform operations by pointing and clicking with a      a GUI, else 0.
                                                                           mouse.



Hardware Auto-detection                                AUTO_HW             Hardware auto-detection allows a user to augment      Takes on a value of 1 if the operating system supports          0.00      1.00    0.22
                                                                           existing personal computers with additional devices   hardware autodetection, else 0.
                                                                           without requiring manual installation of hardware and
                                                                           drivers.


Multi-tasking                                            MULTI             Cooperative multi-tasking allows a user to switch     Takes on a value of 1 if the operating system supports          0.00      2.00    1.08
                                                                           between active tasks, but the switched-away task does cooperative multi-tasking, 2 if it supports preemptive
                                                                           not continue to execute in the background.            multi-tasking, else 0.
                                                                           Preemptive multi-tasking allows multiple tasks to
                                                                           execute concurrently.

Multi-processing                                          SMP              Multi-processing improves the speed of the operating The number of processors that the operating system               1.00      2.00    1.19
                                                                           system.                                              can use simultaneously.




Full-screen Text Editor                              TXT_EDITOR            Allows a user to view and edit and view a full screen   Takes on a value of 1 if the operating system has a full-     0.00      1.00    0.78
                                                                           of text at one time.                                    screen text editor, else 0.




Application Platform Support/Compatibility            PLATFORM             A personal computer operating system can be      The number of applications platforms with which the                  1.00      4.00    2.27
                                                                           compatible with DOS, Windows 16-bit, Windows 32- operating system is compatible.
                                                                           bit, OS/2 32-bit, and/or Posix applications.



Supported File Systems                                  FILESYS            Allows a user to read data from FAT, FAT32, NTFS,       The number of file systems with which an operating            1.00      3.00    1.32
                                                                           and/or HPFS file systems.                               system is compatible.




Connectivity                                           CONNECT             Allows a user to have additional connectivity features. The sum of dummy variables indicating whether an              0.00      2.00    0.47
                                                                                                                                   operating system supports built-in networking and/or
                                                                                                                                   USB capability.




Sources:
1. PC World magazine, 1987-2000.
2. Various issues of PC Magazine , Internet websites, and software product manuals.
                                                                                                                  Table 3
                                                                                                     Attributes of Productivity Suites




                   Variable                          Abbreviation                                 Function                                                 Description                             Minimum   Maximum   Mean
Absolute Integration Score                          INT_ABS_SCORE           Productivity suites with high integration scores are  Score indicates degree of integration among component              0.30      1.00    0.64
                                                                            highly compatible, allowing exchange of               applications of a productivity suite, normalized between
                                                                            data/information among components of the productivity 0 and 1.
                                                                            suite.


Database                                                    DB              A database application allows a user to manage and        Takes on a value of 1 if the productivity suite includes a     0.00      1.00    0.92
                                                                            analyze large datasets.                                   desktop database application, else 0.




Communications                                            COMM              A communications application allows a user to             Takes on a value of 1 if the productivity suite includes       0.00      1.00    0.98
                                                                            communicate with other users via e-mail, or by            an e-mail communications application, or a utility for
                                                                            providing a utility for connecting to a modem.            connecting to a modem, else 0.



Calendar                                                   CAL              A calendar application allows a user to track and         Takes on a value of 1 if the productivity suite includes a     0.00      1.00    0.23
                                                                            maintain appointments electronically.                     calendar application, else 0.




Graphing                                                  GRPH              A graphing capability (either a separate graphing        Takes on a value of 1 if the productivity suite includes        0.00      1.00    0.99
                                                                            application or included in another application) allows a graphing capabilities, else 0.
                                                                            user to transform numerical data into charts and graphs.



Presentation                                              PRES              A presentation application allows a user to transform     Takes on a value of 1 if the productivity suite includes a     0.00      1.00    0.15
                                                                            text and images into a presentation slide set.            presentation application, else 0.




Desktop Publishing                                         PUB              A desktop publishing application allows a user to         Takes on a value of 1 if the productivity suite includes a     0.00      1.00    0.04
                                                                            control the type, graphics, layout and design of pages.   desktop publishing application, else 0.




Reference                                               REFEREN             A reference application allows a user to access a digital Takes on a value of 1 if the productivity suite includes a     0.00      1.00    0.00
                                                                            encylopedia.                                              reference application, else 0.




Personal Finance                                        FINANCE             A personal finance application allows a user to track and Takes on a value of 1 if the productivity suite includes a     0.00      1.00    0.00
                                                                            analyze personal finances such as cash holdings and       personal finance application, else 0.
                                                                            stocks.



Speech Recognition                                        SPEEC             A speech recognition capability allows a user to          Takes on a value of 1 if the productivity suite includes       0.00      1.00    0.03
                                                                            communicate verbally with a productivity suite.           speech recognition capabilities, else 0.




Sources:
1. PC World magazine, 1987-2000.
2. Various issues of PC Magazine , Internet websites, and software product manuals
                                                                                                              Table 4
                                                                               Hedonic Regression Results for Personal Computer Operating Systems

                                                         Base Case                 Fully Parameterized             No Compatibility              Quarterly Average                  WLS                      Fixed Effects
              Variable                              Coeff.         S.E.            Coeff.        S.E.             Coeff.       S.E.             Coeff.        S.E.           Coeff.       S.E.            Coeff.         S.E.
Intercept                                             3.7310         0.1026   **     3.6426         0.1051   **     3.5886        0.0967   **     3.8034        0.1682 **      3.7366       0.2675   **     4.5366         0.1186 **
GUI                                                   0.1646         0.0398   **     0.1934         0.0401   **     0.1655        0.0399   **     0.2280        0.1091         0.1643       0.1182
AUTO_HW                                               0.3115         0.1397   *      0.1073         0.1275          0.6276        0.0740   **     0.2372        0.2227         0.3045       0.2206
MULTI                                                 0.0823         0.0538          0.0438         0.0618          0.0899        0.0524          0.0872        0.0920         0.0849       0.1040
SMP                                                   1.0443         0.0966   **     0.9967         0.1042   **     1.1760        0.0899   **     0.9409        0.1551 **      1.0430       0.1753   **
TXT_EDIT                                              0.4776         0.0685   **     0.4937         0.0607   **     0.4780        0.0669   **     0.4580        0.0931 **      0.4815       0.1974   **
CONNECT                                               0.3104         0.1142   **     0.4655         0.0972   **                                   0.3165        0.1697         0.3164       0.1560   *
Windows_2000_Pro                                                                                                                                                                                             2.7081       0.2009   **
Windows_NT_Workstation_40                                                                                                                                                                                    2.0479       0.2078   **
Windows_98                                                                                                                                                                                                   1.6784       0.2278   **
Windows_95                                                                                                                                                                                                   1.3658       0.1352   **
Windows_31                                                                                                                                                                                                   0.5767       0.0996   **
OS2_Warp_30                                                                                                                                                                                                  0.4778       0.1297   **
OS2_20                                                                                                                                                                                                       1.0587       0.1005   **
MS_DOS_622                                                                                                                                                                                                   0.3754       0.2780
MS_DOS_50                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.4580       0.0938   **
PC_DOS_33                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.2248       0.0949   *
DR_DOS_60                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.3298       0.1039   **
q2                                                      -0.1150     0.0452    *                                     -0.1068      0.0446    *      -0.0661      0.0825         -0.1190      0.0722           -0.0618       0.0585
q3                                                      -0.1504     0.0420    **                                    -0.1372      0.0423    **     -0.1501      0.0804         -0.1541      0.0723    *      -0.1556       0.0603   *
q4                                                      -0.1646     0.0430    **                                    -0.1633      0.0434    **     -0.1449      0.0818         -0.1697      0.0718    *      -0.1739       0.0656   **
t88                                                     -0.1364     0.0257    **                                    -0.1335      0.0246    **     -0.1308      0.0563   *     -0.1361      0.2145           -0.0959       0.0723
t89                                                     -0.1385     0.0303    **                                    -0.1334      0.0290    **     -0.1246      0.0582   *     -0.1395      0.2305           -0.1343       0.0548   *
t90                                                     -0.3197     0.0414    **                                    -0.3153      0.0407    **     -0.2587      0.0885   **    -0.3158      0.2099           -0.1559       0.0811
t91                                                     -0.4852     0.0416    **                                    -0.4803      0.0400    **     -0.4487      0.0646   **    -0.4860      0.2421    *      -0.2335       0.1151   *
t92                                                     -0.8564     0.0786    **                                    -0.8609      0.0764    **     -0.8153      0.1208   **    -0.8610      0.2891    **     -0.5348       0.1435   **
t93                                                     -0.9721     0.0879    **                                    -0.9718      0.0862    **     -0.9751      0.1413   **    -0.9762      0.3023    **     -0.6322       0.1475   **
t94                                                     -1.0685     0.0917    **                                    -1.0714      0.0893    **     -1.0891      0.1436   **    -1.0715      0.3160    **     -0.6775       0.1591   **
t95                                                     -1.0949     0.0997    **                                    -1.1040      0.0937    **     -1.1010      0.1546   **    -1.1028      0.3222    **     -0.6714       0.1566   **
t96                                                     -1.2329     0.1576    **                                    -1.2489      0.1505    **     -1.2700      0.2831   **    -1.2412      0.3441    **     -0.6291       0.1768   **
t97                                                     -1.3273     0.1683    **                                    -1.2148      0.1425    **     -1.2121      0.2581   **    -1.3399      0.3595    **     -0.9373       0.2619   **
t98                                                     -1.6071     0.1566    **                                    -1.4241      0.1398    **     -1.5948      0.2395   **    -1.5966      0.3509    **     -1.3176       0.2561   **
t99                                                     -1.9590     0.1457    **                                    -1.7914      0.1263    **     -1.9415      0.2110   **    -1.9549      0.3485    **     -1.6578       0.2284   **
t00                                                     -2.3952     0.1662    **                                    -2.2227      0.1543    **     -2.2988      0.2454   **    -2.4063      0.3756    **     -2.0568       0.2284   **

N                                                          340                          340                            340                            96                          96                            96
R2                                                       0.7039                       0.7958                        0.6913                        0.7231                       0.7569                       0.8705
Adjusted R2                                              0.6833                       0.7528                        0.6709                        0.6397                                                    0.8191

AAGR (1987-2000)                                        -16.83%                     -17.52%                        -15.72%                       -16.21%                      -16.90%                      -14.63%
AAGR (1987-1993)                                        -14.96%                     -15.05%                        -14.95%                       -15.00%                      -15.01%                      -10.00%
AAGR (1993-2000)                                        -18.40%                     -19.68%                        -16.36%                       -17.23%                      -18.48%                      -18.41%

Connectivity, Platform and Filesys Variables Included

AAGR (1987-2000)                                        -18.16%                     -18.89%                                                      -16.70%                      -18.24%

AAGR (1987-1993)                                        -14.91%                     -14.57%                                                      -14.94%                      -14.98%
AAGR (1993-2000)                                        -20.85%                     -22.57%                                                      -18.17%                      -20.94%

Connectivity and Platform Variables Included

AAGR (1987-2000)                                        -17.18%                     -17.70%                                                      -16.53%                      -17.26%

AAGR (1987-1993)                                        -15.63%                     -15.48%                                                      -15.69%                      -15.70%
AAGR (1993-2000)                                        -18.48%                     -19.64%                                                      -17.24%                      -18.57%

Notes:
* significant at the 5% level.
** significant at the 1% level.
                                                                                                                            Table 5
                                                                                                        Hedonic Regression Results for Productivity Suites

                                       Base Case                 Fully Parameterized            No Integration (n=1,717)         No Integration (n=2,606)          Quarterly Average                   WLS                   Fixed Effects (n=234)          Fixed Effects (n=347)
               Variable           Coeff.         S.E.            Coeff.        S.E.              Coeff.          S.E.             Coeff.          S.E.            Coeff.        S.E.            Coeff.       S.E.            Coeff.          S.E.           Coeff.          S.E.
Intercept                           8.0649         0.2561   **     8.0734         0.3148   **        7.7509        0.2554   **        6.3193        0.0994   **      7.9597       0.4425   **     8.1418       0.6649   **      5.5459         0.0731 **       5.1625         0.2317 **
DB                                 -0.1187         0.0768         -0.1066         0.0747             0.1929        0.0731   **        0.1862        0.0581   **     -0.1226       0.1556         -0.0860       0.1551
COMM                               -2.6635         0.2227   **    -2.6634         0.2754   **       -2.4045        0.2213   **       -0.9130        0.0688   **     -2.4983       0.3783   **    -2.7522       0.6178   **
GRPH                                0.4529         0.0355   **     0.4724         0.0353   **        0.6776        0.0304   **        0.6143        0.0292   **      0.4331       0.0983   **     0.4748       0.1568   **
PRES                                1.2725         0.1125   **     1.3211         0.1168   **        1.6069        0.1101   **        1.6343        0.0596   **      1.4822       0.2387   **     1.2972       0.1961   **
CAL                                -0.4345         0.0811   **    -0.4698         0.0816   **       -0.4860        0.0842   **       -0.4570        0.0488   **     -0.4325       0.1295   **    -0.4308       0.1192   **
REFEREN                            -0.5812         0.1963   **    -0.4633         0.5069            -0.5685        0.1969   **       -0.3711        0.1688   *      -0.6036       0.2666   *     -0.5772       0.6201
FINANCE                            -0.4848         0.1825   **    -0.7529         0.5288            -0.4623        0.1839   *         0.3948        0.3090          -0.3008       0.3217         -0.5881       0.7606
SPEECH                             -1.1736         0.1458   **    -1.2259         0.1669   **       -1.1704        0.1455   **       -1.0357        0.1348   **     -1.3079       0.1995   **    -1.1744       0.1915   **
PUB                                 1.1270         0.1497   **     1.1193         0.1757   **        1.1442        0.1497   **        0.9745        0.1343   **      1.0749       0.2121   **     1.1314       0.1992   **
INT_ABS_SCORE                       0.8544         0.0625   **     0.8236         0.0608   **                                                                        0.9948       0.2790   **     0.8281       0.3096   **
Ability_Plus_1X                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0.2710        0.2185
AlphaWorks_1X                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 -0.0106        0.2179
AlphaWorks_2X                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 -0.2742        0.2186
Electric_Desk_1X                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.2770        0.2174
Enable_1X                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0.6212        0.0769   **      0.9020        0.2209   **
Enable_2X                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0.6192        0.0545   **      1.2536        0.2173   **
Framework_1X                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.6572        0.0626   **      0.9359        0.2308   **
Framework_2X                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.6867        0.0510   **      1.2142        0.2134   **
Framework_3X                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.7066        0.0600   **      1.3192        0.2231   **
Framework_XE                                                                                                                                                                                                                   -0.8753        0.0599   **     -0.2090        0.2186
Lotus_SmartSuite_2X                                                                                                                                                                                                             0.7348        0.0703   **      1.4035        0.2221   **
Lotus_SmartSuite_3X                                                                                                                                                                                                             0.7804        0.1094   **      1.6156        0.2376   **
Lotus_SmartSuite_4X                                                                                                                                                                                                             0.5232        0.2225   *       1.6160        0.2565   **
Lotus_SmartSuite_97                                                                                                                                                                                                             0.2367        0.2808           1.1415        0.3625   **
Lotus_SmartSuite_Millennium                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.4236        0.2860           1.3219        0.3550   **
Microsoft_Home_Essentials_98                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.9204        0.2381   **      1.8282        0.3319   **
Microsoft_Office_1X                                                                                                                                                                                                             0.6769        0.0607   **      1.3522        0.2186   **
Microsoft_Office_2000                                                                                                                                                                                                           1.8045        0.2722   **      2.7040        0.3465   **
Microsoft_Office_3X                                                                                                                                                                                                             0.7599        0.0653   **      1.3642        0.2208   **
Microsoft_Office_4X                                                                                                                                                                                                             0.9012        0.0979   **      1.7339        0.2395   **
Microsoft_Office_95                                                                                                                                                                                                             0.7051        0.2144   **      1.8073        0.2546   **
Microsoft_Office_97                                                                                                                                                                                                             1.1887        0.2047   **      2.1293        0.2930   **
Microsoft_Office_Premium_2000                                                                                                                                                                                                   2.9023        0.2884   **      3.7976        0.3596   **
Microsoft_Office_Pro_2000                                                                                                                                                                                                       2.3478        0.2626   **      3.2556        0.3404   **
Microsoft_Office_Pro_95                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.9415        0.1665   **      1.9450        0.2416   **
Microsoft_Office_SBE_2000                                                                                                                                                                                                       1.5164        0.2396   **      2.4051        0.3284   **
Microsoft_Office_SBE_97                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.8440        0.1984   **      1.8435        0.2530   **
Microsoft_Works_for_DOS_1X                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.0665        0.2219
Microsoft_Works_for_DOS_2X                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    -0.1963        0.2189
Microsoft_Works_for_DOS_3X                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    -0.2439        0.2302
Microsoft_Works_for_Windows_1X                                                                                                                                                                                                 -0.5832        0.0603 **        0.0921        0.2186
Microsoft_Works_for_Windows_3X                                                                                                                                                                                                 -1.4273        0.2042 **       -0.4215        0.2489
Microsoft_Works_for_Windows_5X                                                                                                                                                                                                 -0.9430        0.2109 **       -0.0255        0.3146
PFS_First_Choice_1X                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           -0.1639        0.2172
PFS_First_Choice_3X                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           -0.1347        0.2189
PerfectOffice_3X                                                                                                                                                                                                                0.6841        0.2140 **        1.7801        0.2528   **
PerfectOffice_Pro_3X                                                                                                                                                                                                            0.9157        0.2133 **        2.0069        0.2517   **
Smart_System_2X                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                1.2529        0.2291   **
Smart_System_3X                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                1.3916        0.2181   **
SmartWare_2X                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1.2784        0.2185   **
Symphony_1X                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.8005        0.0498   **      1.2440        0.2142   **
Symphony_2X                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.7313        0.0579   **      1.3742        0.2184   **
WordPerfect_Office_2000                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.7598        0.2742   **      1.6589        0.3474   **
WordPerfect_Office_7X                                                                                                                                                                                                          -0.4161        0.3755           0.5476        0.4492
WordPerfect_Office_8X                                                                                                                                                                                                           0.3860        0.2295           1.2899        0.3246   **
WordPerfect_Office_8X_Dragon                                                                                                                                                                                                    1.7677        0.2370   **      2.6788        0.3315   **
WordPerfect_Office_Pro_2000                                                                                                                                                                                                     1.8091        0.3989   **      2.7138        0.4531   **
WordPerfect_Office_Pro_8X                                                                                                                                                                                                       0.9230        0.2175   **      1.8277        0.3162   **
WordPerfect_Works_1X                                                                                                                                                                                                           -0.6784        0.1889   **      0.0019        0.2736
q2                                  -0.0412       0.0246                                            -0.0421       0.0249             -0.0279       0.0345          -0.0482       0.0892          -0.0400      0.0560           -0.0343        0.0385          -0.0277        0.0355
q3                                  -0.0846       0.0233    **                                      -0.0834       0.0236    **       -0.0567       0.0350          -0.1304       0.0896          -0.0835      0.0563           -0.0668        0.0404          -0.0447        0.0351
q4                                  -0.1110       0.0231    **                                      -0.1067       0.0234    **       -0.1002       0.0355    **    -0.1860       0.0862    *     -0.1185      0.0567    *      -0.0948        0.0414   *      -0.0722        0.0357   *
t85                                 -0.1015       0.0445    *                                       -0.1051       0.0472    *        -0.1509       0.0472    **    -0.1690       0.0529    **    -0.0969      0.1609           -0.1268        0.0429   **      0.0063        0.0864
t86                                 -0.1614       0.0440    **                                      -0.1609       0.0466    **       -0.2812       0.0544    **    -0.2550       0.0521    **    -0.1705      0.1612           -0.1990        0.0518   **     -0.1448        0.0991
t87                                 -0.1452       0.0422    **                                      -0.1312       0.0449    **       -0.5269       0.0616    **    -0.2445       0.0513    **    -0.1684      0.1612           -0.1975        0.0435   **     -0.4723        0.1214   **
t88                                 -0.1692       0.0427    **                                      -0.1468       0.0456    **       -0.7556       0.0588    **    -0.2630       0.0537    **    -0.1933      0.1621           -0.2166        0.0450   **     -0.4618        0.1178   **
t89                                 -0.1492       0.0429    **                                      -0.1295       0.0453    **       -0.7188       0.0628    **    -0.2133       0.0516    **    -0.1745      0.1645           -0.1601        0.0509   **     -0.4297        0.1144   **
t90                                 -0.1257       0.0436    **                                      -0.0891       0.0459             -0.6583       0.0654    **    -0.1841       0.0550    **    -0.1508      0.1714           -0.1113        0.0537   *      -0.3635        0.1171   **
t91                                 -0.2702       0.0639    **                                      -0.2301       0.0667    **       -0.7744       0.0768    **    -0.4633       0.1312    **    -0.2968      0.1847           -0.0801        0.0541          -0.3669        0.1173   **
t92                                 -1.0511       0.0795    **                                      -0.9765       0.0818    **       -0.9863       0.0712    **    -1.2592       0.1579    **    -1.0761      0.1758    **     -0.0554        0.0566          -0.3601        0.1176   **
t93                                 -0.9818       0.1460    **                                      -0.8806       0.1459    **       -0.9988       0.0999    **    -1.2785       0.2787    **    -1.0109      0.2429    **     -0.1472        0.0647   *      -0.3617        0.1253   **
t94                                 -1.5195       0.1010    **                                      -1.4463       0.1025    **       -1.4577       0.0758    **    -1.8324       0.1530    **    -1.5340      0.2197    **     -0.3064        0.0972   **     -0.6549        0.1443   **
t95                                 -1.5493       0.1047    **                                      -1.4777       0.1061    **       -1.4560       0.0762    **    -1.8014       0.1827    **    -1.5689      0.2265    **     -0.1783        0.1093          -0.6367        0.1492   **
t96                                 -1.4965       0.1239    **                                      -1.4037       0.1254    **       -1.4945       0.0948    **    -1.7648       0.2125    **    -1.5224      0.2056    **     -0.1347        0.2191          -0.8569        0.1757   **
t97                                 -1.6781       0.1686    **                                      -1.5928       0.1700    **       -1.6837       0.1291    **    -1.9081       0.2537    **    -1.7043      0.2710    **     -0.2719        0.2029          -0.9026        0.1799   **
t98                                 -2.1091       0.1338    **                                      -2.0210       0.1360    **       -2.0988       0.1170    **    -2.3435       0.2525    **    -2.0443      0.2185    **     -0.7874        0.2032   **     -1.3280        0.2482   **
t99                                 -2.7197       0.1475    **                                      -2.6352       0.1483    **       -2.6150       0.1262    **    -2.8051       0.2619    **    -2.7420      0.2315    **     -1.5147        0.2358   **     -2.0424        0.2728   **
t00                                 -2.6672       0.1449    **                                      -2.5954       0.1467    **       -2.6057       0.1262    **    -2.8378       0.2189    **    -2.7054      0.2513    **     -2.2282        0.2589   **     -2.7592        0.2833   **

N                                     1717                           1717                             1717                             2606                            234                          234                            234                            347
R2                                  0.6604                         0.6828                            0.651                           0.3425                         0.7039                      0.720228                        0.9442                         0.9367
Adjusted R 2                        0.6546                         0.6683                           0.6452                           0.3354                         0.6618                                                      0.9265                         0.9213

AAGR (1984-2000)                   -15.35%                        -15.97%                          -14.97%                          -15.03%                        -16.25%                       -15.56%                      -13.00%                        -15.84%
AAGR (1984-1992)                   -12.31%                        -13.83%                          -11.49%                          -11.60%                        -14.56%                       -12.59%                       -0.69%                         -4.40%
AAGR (1992-2000)                   -18.29%                        -18.12%                          -18.32%                          -18.33%                        -17.91%                       -18.43%                      -23.78%                        -25.91%

Notes:
* significant at the 5% level.
** significant at the 1% level.
                                                                           Figure 1
                                             Average Connectivity Score of Personal Computer Operating Systems
                                                                         1987 - 2000
                     1.8



                     1.6



                     1.4



                     1.2
Connectivity Score




                      1



                     0.8



                     0.6



                     0.4



                     0.2



                      0
                       1987   1988   1989   1990    1991      1992     1993      1994     1995      1996     1997   1998   1999   2000
                                                                                   Figure 2
                                                            Average Absolute Integration Score of Productivity Suites
                                                                                  1984-2000
                              1


                             0.9


                             0.8


                             0.7
Absolute Integration Score




                             0.6


                             0.5


                             0.4


                             0.3


                             0.2


                             0.1


                              0
                               1984   1985   1986   1987   1988   1989   1990   1991    1992   1993    1994    1995     1996   1997   1998   1999   2000
                                                                      Figure 3
                                            Hedonic, Matched-model, and Average Price Level Price Indexes
                                                       Personal Computer Operating Systems
                                                                     1987-2000
              250.00




              200.00
                             AAGR          1987-1993 1993-2000 1987-2000
                             Hedonic        -15.00%   -17.23%   -16.21%
                             Matched-model -5.93%      -7.99%    -7.02%
                             Average Price  -4.35%    +1.78%     -1.16%
              150.00
Index Value




              100.00




               50.00




                0.00
                    1987   1988      1989      1990      1991       1992      1993   1994     1995   1996      1997   1998   1999   2000

                                                        Quarterly Average Hedonic    Matched-model    Price Level
                                                                         Figure 4
                                               Hedonic, Matched-model, and Average Price Level Price Indexes
                                                                   Productivity Suites
                                                                        1984-2000
              120.00




              100.00




               80.00
Index Value




               60.00




               40.00
                           AAGR          1984-1992 1992-2000 1984-2000
                           Hedonic        -14.56%    -17.91% -16.25%
                           Matched-model -0.07%       -28.69% -15.36%
                           Average Price   -6.87%     -7.50%    -7.18%
               20.00




                0.00
                    1984    1985    1986     1987    1988     1989       1990   1991    1992     1993    1994   1995    1996    1997   1998   1999   2000

                                                            Quarterly Average Hedonic          Matched-model      Price Level
                                                                                                                  Appendix A
                                                                                    Price Index Values for Personal Computer Operating Systems, 1987-2000


                                                                       Hedonics                                                                           Fixed Effects and Matched-models                    Price Levels
   Year                   Base Case          Fully Parameterized *      No Compatibility          Quarterly Average      WLS              Fixed Effects              Geometric *             Fisher *    Index of Price Levels *

   1987                       100.00                    100.00                   100.00                   100.00          100.00               100.00                    100.00                 100.00       100.00
   1988                        87.25                     91.97                    87.50                    87.74           87.27                90.85                     92.07                  92.07        91.82
   1989                        87.06                     93.42                    87.51                    88.28           86.98                87.44                     93.40                  93.40        93.40
   1990                        72.64                     78.53                    72.95                    77.21           72.92                85.56                     94.00                  93.46        82.86
   1991                        61.55                     65.28                    61.86                    63.85           61.51                79.18                     93.57                  90.71        87.85
   1992                        42.47                     45.15                    42.28                    44.25           42.27                58.58                     80.12                  72.38        90.34
   1993                        37.83                     39.54                    37.84                    37.72           37.68                53.14                     71.60                  64.28        78.18
   1994                        34.35                     37.09                    34.25                    33.65           34.25                50.79                     69.65                  62.53        77.27
   1995                        33.46                     39.35                    33.15                    33.25           33.20                51.10                     71.50                  64.09       120.78
   1996                        29.14                     36.86                    28.68                    28.08           28.90                53.31                     94.00                  64.08       140.97
   1997                        26.52                     31.62                    29.68                    29.76           26.19                39.17                     73.78                  68.19       196.89
   1998                        20.05                     20.51                    24.07                    20.29           20.26                26.78                     74.88                  66.98       160.40
   1999                        14.10                     15.23                    16.67                    14.35           14.16                19.06                     49.81                  41.07       121.20
   2000                         9.12                     10.11                    10.83                    10.04            9.02                12.79                     43.20                  37.49       111.19

AAGR (1987-2000)            -16.83%                   -17.52%                   -15.72%                  -16.21%         -16.90%             -14.63%                    -7.02%                 -7.43%        -1.16%
AAGR (1987-1993)            -14.96%                   -15.05%                   -14.95%                  -15.00%         -15.01%             -10.00%                    -5.93%                 -7.53%        -4.35%
AAGR (1993-2000)            -18.40%                   -19.68%                   -16.36%                  -17.23%         -18.48%             -18.41%                    -7.99%                 -7.34%         1.78%

* Annual index values are arithmetic averages of quarterly index values, rebased to equal 100 in 1987.
                                                                                                     Appendix B
                                                                                 Price Index Values for Productivity Suites, 1984-2000


                                                                                                         Hedonic
   Year                  Base Case              Fully Parameterized *                No Integration (n=1,717)         No Integration (n=2,606)     Quarterly Average   WLS

   1984                      100.00                             100.00                                    100.00                          100.00              100.00    100.00
   1985                       90.35                              88.93                                     90.02                           86.00               84.45     90.76
   1986                       85.09                              84.92                                     85.14                           75.49               77.49     84.32
   1987                       86.48                              84.11                                     87.71                           59.04               78.31     84.50
   1988                       84.44                              83.97                                     86.34                           46.97               76.88     82.42
   1989                       86.14                              85.94                                     87.86                           48.74               80.79     83.99
   1990                       88.19                              88.71                                     91.48                           51.77               83.19     86.00
   1991                       76.32                              76.38                                     79.45                           46.10               62.92     74.32
   1992                       34.95                              34.92                                     37.66                           37.29               28.39     34.09
   1993                       37.46                              37.29                                     41.45                           36.83               27.85     36.39
   1994                       21.88                              21.27                                     23.54                           23.28               16.00     21.57
   1995                       21.24                              20.70                                     22.82                           23.32               16.51     20.83
   1996                       22.39                              22.44                                     24.57                           22.44               17.12     21.82
   1997                       18.67                              18.27                                     20.34                           18.57               14.84     18.19
   1998                       12.13                              12.99                                     13.25                           12.26                9.60     12.95
   1999                        6.59                               6.95                                      7.17                            7.32                6.05      6.44
   2000                        6.94                               7.24                                      7.46                            7.38                5.86      6.68



AAGR (1984-2000)            -15.35%                           -15.97%                                    -14.97%                         -15.03%             -16.25%   -15.56%
AAGR (1984-1992)            -12.31%                           -13.83%                                    -11.49%                         -11.60%             -14.56%   -12.59%
AAGR (1992-2000)            -18.29%                           -18.12%                                    -18.32%                         -18.33%             -17.91%   -18.43%

* Annual index values are arithmetic averages of quarterly index values, rebased to equal 100 in 1984.
                                                                                                                         Appendix B (continued)
                                                                                                           Price Index Values for Productivity Suites, 1984-2000

                                               Fixed Effects                                                                                           Matched-models                                              Price Levels

   Year                  Fixed Effects (n=234)                 Fixed Effects (n=347)             Geometric Unweighted (n=234) *         Geometric Unweighted (n=347) *      Fisher (n=234) *    Fisher (n=347) *   Index of Price Levels *

   1984                                   100.00                            100.00                                      100.00                                     100.00              100.00            100.00        100.00
   1985                                    88.09                            100.63                                       96.07                                      96.73               93.04             93.50         82.82
   1986                                    81.96                             86.52                                       92.03                                      85.69               88.80             87.42         77.91
   1987                                    82.08                             62.36                                       90.58                                      71.92               87.42             82.39         83.38
   1988                                    80.53                             63.02                                       89.28                                      71.03               85.99             81.37         80.45
   1989                                    85.21                             65.07                                       93.16                                      69.09               87.19             80.25         83.88
   1990                                    89.47                             69.52                                       97.26                                      71.09               90.98             82.60         88.06
   1991                                    92.30                             69.29                                      100.65                                      71.03               95.72             84.66         69.43
   1992                                    94.61                             69.76                                      101.30                                      70.53               94.88             83.63         62.17
   1993                                    86.31                             69.65                                       90.58                                      71.92               88.78             79.47         90.69
   1994                                    73.61                             51.95                                       88.31                                      65.70               84.53             75.93         77.39
   1995                                    83.67                             52.90                                       84.03                                      60.19               80.46             71.48         80.86
   1996                                    87.40                             42.45                                       84.77                                      59.88               81.96             72.40         72.39
   1997                                    76.19                             40.55                                       88.47                                      61.67               82.59             72.63         68.00
   1998                                    45.50                             26.50                                       63.22                                      44.07               44.62             39.24         42.15
   1999                                    21.99                             12.97                                       31.46                                      21.93               16.45             14.47         33.76
   2000                                    10.77                              6.33                                        7.72                                       5.38                9.02              7.93         41.07




AAGR (1984-2000)                        -13.00%                            -15.84%                                     -15.36%                                -17.22%                -14.17%           -14.84%         -7.18%
AAGR (1984-1992)                         -0.69%                             -4.40%                                      -0.07%                                 -4.49%                 -1.66%            -3.12%         -6.87%
AAGR (1992-2000)                        -23.78%                            -25.91%                                     -28.69%                                -28.58%                -25.41%           -25.45%         -7.50%

* Annual index values are arithmetic averages of quarterly index values, rebased to equal 100 in 1987.
