NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE NOBEL MEMORIAL PRIZE FOR ROBERT F. ENGLE
Francis X. Diebold
Working Paper 10423
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10423
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2004

The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
©2004 by Francis X. Diebold. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Nobel Memorial Prize for Robert F. Engle
Francis X. Diebold
NBER Working Paper No. 10423
April 2004
JEL No. A0
ABSTRACT

I review and interpret two of Robert Engle's most important contributions: the theory and application
of cointegration, and the theory and application of dynamic volatility models. I treat the latter much
more extensively, de-emphasizing technical aspects and focusing instead on the intuition, nuances
and importance of the work.
Francis X. Diebold
Department of Economics
University of Pennsylvania
3718 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6297
and NBER
fdiebold@sas.upenn.edu

The Nobel Memorial Prize for Robert F. Engle1
Francis X. Diebold
University of Pennsylvania and NBER
February 2004
1. Prologue
Engle’s footsteps range widely. His major contributions include early work on band-spectral
regression, development and unification of the theory of model specification tests (particularly Lagrange
multiplier tests), clarification of the meaning of econometric exogeneity and its relationship to causality,
and his later stunningly influential work on common trend modeling (cointegration) and volatility modeling
(ARCH, short for AutoRegressive Conditional Heteroskedasticity).2 More generally, Engle’s cumulative
work is a fine example of best-practice applied time-series econometrics: he identifies important dynamic
economic phenomena, formulates precise and interesting questions about those phenomena, constructs
sophisticated yet simple econometric models for measurement and testing, and consistently obtains results
of widespread substantive interest in the scientific, policy, and financial communities.
Although many of Engle’s contributions are fundamental, I will focus largely on the two most
important: the theory and application of cointegration, and the theory and application of dynamic volatility
models. Moreover, I will discuss much more extensively Engle’s volatility models and their role in
financial econometrics, for several reasons. First, Engle’s Nobel citation was explicitly “for methods of
analyzing economic time series with time-varying volatility (ARCH),” whereas Granger’s was for “for
methods of analyzing economic time series with common trends (cointegration).” Second, the credit for

1

Prepared at the invitation of the Scandinavian Journal of Economics. Financial support from the
Guggenheim Foundation and the National Science Foundation is gratefully acknowledged. Comments from
Tim Bollerslev, David Hendry and Frank Schorfheide improved the exposition, but they are in no way
responsible for remaining flaws.
2

See Engle (1973), Engle (1984), Engle, Hendry and Richard (1983), Engle and Granger (1987),
and Engle (1982), respectively.

creating the ARCH model goes exclusively to Engle, whereas the original cointegration idea was
Granger’s, notwithstanding Engle’s powerful and well-known contributions to the development. Third,
volatility models are a key part of the financial econometrics theme that defines Engle’s broader
contributions, whereas cointegration has found wider application in macroeconomics than in finance. Last
and not least, David Hendry’s insightful companion review of Granger’s work, also in this issue of the
Scandinavian Journal, discusses the origins and development of cointegration in great depth.
In this brief and selective review, I attempt a description of “what happened and why” (as a
popular American talk show host puts it). My approach has been intentionally to avoid writing a long
review, as several extensive surveys of the relevant literatures already exist. In addition, I have deemphasized technical aspects, focusing instead on the intuition, importance, and nuances of the work. 3 In
Section 2, I discuss cointegration in the context of Engle’s previous and subsequent work, which facilitates
the extraction of interesting and long-running themes, several of which feature prominently in Engle’s
volatility models. I discuss the basic ARCH volatility model in Section 3, and I discuss variations,
extensions and applications in Section 4. I conclude in Section 5.
2. Cointegration
Despite my declared intent to focus on volatility models, here I will highlight some aspects of
cointegration. It is important to do so, because Engle’s work on cointegration (as well as his earlier work,
which I will also touch upon) reveals central and sometimes-subtle themes of the modeling approach that
permeates all of his work, including that on volatility modeling. I give only the briefest possible intuitive
sketch of the cointegration idea; those hungry for details may consult any of several fine surveys, including

3

See also Engle’s recent interview in Econometric Theory (Diebold, 2003) for additional insights
into the development and impact of his work.
-2-

Watson (1995) and Johansen (1995).4
Basic Structure
Engle and Granger (1987) is the seminal paper on cointegration and perhaps the most cited paper
in the history of econometrics, treating specification, representation, estimation, and testing. The basic
specification is simple. Consider, for example, two nonstationary series, x and y, both of which are
integrated of order 1, or I(1), and therefore have no tendency to revert to any fixed mean (e.g., two random
walks). In general, there is no way to form a weighted average of x and y to produce a stationary meanreverting series integrated of order 0, or I(0), but in the special case where such a weighting does exist, we
say that x and y are cointegrated. Suppose, for example, that,
(1)

where both

and

are white noise. Both x and y are I(1), but they are cointegrated, because

, which is I(0). Cointegration causes variables to move together in the long run, which produces
stationarity of the cointegrating combination (in this case

) despite the nonstationary of its

components. The long-run comovements of variables in cointegrated systems is ultimately driven by their
dependence on underlying common stochastic trends (in this case

).

Cointegration has strong and appealing economic motivation, because both theory and observation
suggest that common stochastic trends arise naturally in macroeconomics and finance. In modern
macroeconomic models, for example, the equilibrium dynamics of a large number of observed variables are
typically driven by a small number of underlying shocks, or “factors” (e.g., technology shocks and
preference shocks). This factor structure produces cointegration when the underlying shocks are I(1). The
empirical facts accord with the theory: the great macroeconomic ratios (consumption / output, investment /

4

The collection edited by Engle and Granger (1991) also nicely illustrates many variations and
extensions of the basic theory, as well as the wide variety of applications.
-3-

output, etc.) often appear stationary despite the fact that their components clearly are not. Financial asset
prices behave similarly: spreads or ratios (e.g., bond yield spreads across different maturities) often appear
stationary whereas their components do not.
Cointegrated vector autoregressions (VARs) turn out to be closely related to the error-correction
model long-associated with the “LSE School” of econometrics, thus unifying models and communities.
Error-correction models involve long-run equilibrium relationships augmented with short-run adjustment
dynamics, in a way that captures the key idea that the sign and size of the current deviation from
equilibrium should impact the future evolution of the system.
Consider again a two-variable system, and suppose that in long-run equilibrium y and x are related
by y=bx, so that the deviation from equilibrium is z=y-bx. We acknowledge that the current deviation from
equilibrium may impact the future by modeling the change in each variable as a function of lagged changes
of all variables (to capture short-run dynamics in the standard VAR tradition), and the lagged value of z,
the so-called error-correction term (to capture adjustment toward long-run equilibrium). Allowing for one
lag of )x and one lag of )y, we write
(2)

So long as one or both of

and

are nonzero, the system is very different from a VAR in first

differences; the key distinguishing feature is the inclusion of the error-correction term, so that the current
deviation from equilibrium affects the future evolution of the system. As can be readily verified, for
example, the cointegrated system (1) has error-correction representation
(3)

where

,

, and

. This illustrates the central and much more general result

alluded to above, introduced by Granger (1981) and refined by Engle and Granger (1987): cointegrated
-4-

VARs and error-correction models are equivalent – a VAR is cointegrated if and only if it has an errorcorrection representation.
Cointegration in the Context of Engle’s Broader Research Agenda
Engle’s work on cointegration lends insight into several central themes that run throughout his
research, including his research on volatility modeling. First, it shows a keen interest in differences in
economic dynamics across frequencies. That is, one sees a clear distinction between “long run” vs. “short
run” dynamics, “permanent” vs. “transitory” shocks, and so on. A cointegrated VAR, for example, is
effectively an econometric implementation of the idea of long-run equilibrium supplemented with short-run
dynamics, producing higher coherence among variables at low frequencies than at high. Engle’s early work
also emphasizes this idea of the decomposition of dynamics by frequency, with possibly different models
for different frequencies, as made starkly explicit in Engle’s band-spectral regression (e.g., Engle, 1973)
and unobserved-components models of trend, seasonal and cyclical dynamics (e.g., Engle, 1978). The
theme continues to the present. For example, Engle and Smith’s (1999) “StoPBreak” model allows for
endogenous time-variation in the persistence of the effects of shocks. Similarly, Engle and Lee’s (1999)
unobserved components model for volatility facilitates decomposition of volatility fluctuations into
permanent and transitory components. Finally, the analysis of ultra-high-frequency data pioneered by
Engle and Russell (1998) and Engle (2000) is intrinsically concerned with aspects of high-frequency
dynamics, such as microstructure noise, intra-day calendar effects, and the arrival of quotes and trades in
real time.
Second, awareness of the practical relevance yet econometric intractability of high-dimensional
systems, and the economic appeal and econometric convenience of factor structure as a potential solution,
permeates Engle’s work. Factor structure is economically appealing because macroeconomic and financial
theorizing leads naturally to environments with far fewer underlying sources of dynamic variation than

-5-

variables observed.5 Factor structure is econometrically convenient because it implies that highdimensional dynamic modeling of hundreds or even thousands of variables, which in general would be
empirically intractable (indeed, absurdly so), can in fact be done quite simply: beneath the superficial
appearance of a plethora of series, there are just a few parameters to be estimated. Early on (e.g., Engle
and Watson, 1981; Engle, Lilien and Watson, 1985), Engle worked productively with dynamic factor
models. Models of cointegration are also very explicit dynamic factor models, in which the common
factors are the I(1) common trends. Engle’s subsequent work on “common features” (e.g., Engle and
Kozicki, 1993; Engle and Vahid, 1993) is a direct outgrowth of models of cointegration and hence factor
models.6 Finally, much of Engle’s work on high-dimensional volatility modeling proceeds by invoking
factor structure and closely-related ideas (e.g., Bollerslev and Engle, 1993).
Third, Engle’s work shows a preference for models that are parametric, parsimonious, and indeed
typically linear, estimated by (Gaussian) maximum likelihood. The themes of unobserved components
modeling, factor models, cointegration, and common features all support this claim, as does Engle’s
prowess in state space modeling, Kalman filtering, and Gaussian likelihood evaluation via prediction-error
decomposition (e.g., Engle and Watson, 1985). Engle’s volatility models, although nonlinear because they
involve variances, which are expectations of squares, are effectively just linear (and typically conditionally
Gaussian) models of squared variables. Hence, when appropriately interpreted, they also fit the
linear/Gaussian mold.
Fourth, and intimately related to Engle’s preference for parametric, parsimonious models, is the

5

For example, as has already been mentioned, macroeconomic models typically involve just a few
shocks, which determine a much larger number of variables in equilibrium. Similarly, financial asset
pricing models are factor models; the classic CAPM is a one-factor model, and more recent generalizations
are three- or four-factor models.
6

If two variables have property X but there exists linear combination that does not, we say that
they have common feature X.
-6-

concern with forecasting – a key task in practical policy, financial, and business applications – that runs
throughout Engle’s work. Parsimonious models guard against in-sample overfitting, or “data mining,”
which typically produces models that fit well historically but perform miserably in out-of-sample
forecasting. Hence the tightly parametric – and perhaps seemingly naive – approach favored by Engle is
intentional, and not at all naive. Rather, his models are simultaneously sophisticated and simple, precisely
in keeping with Zellner’s (1992) version of the “KISS principle” (Keep It Sophisticatedly Simple).
Concern with forecasting has not only influenced Engle’s general approach, but also produced a
variety of specific forecasting contributions. In the cointegration context, for example, Engle and Yoo
(1987) show that as the forecast horizon lengthens, optimal forecasts of cointegrated variables will satisfy
the cointegrating relationship(s) arbitrarily closely. In the volatility context, the very essence of Engle’s
contribution is allowance for forecastable forecast-error variances. From a traditional forecasting
viewpoint, this allows confidence intervals on forecasts appropriately to expand and contract as volatility
fluctuates. The explosion of interest in Engle’s volatility models in financial contexts, moreover, reflects
interest not only in improved confidence intervals around point forecasts, but also, and crucially, intrinsic
interest in volatility forecastability, which profoundly influences fundamental financial tasks, including
asset pricing, portfolio allocation, and risk management.
3. ARCH
Good dynamic economic theorists, like all good theorists, naturally want to get the facts straight
before theorizing. Time-series tools are tailor-made for providing precise quantification of dynamics; hence
the explosive growth of time-series econometric methods and applications in the last forty years. A short
list of active sub-fields – many of which were touched upon in section 2 – includes vector autoregressive
macroeconomic modeling, dynamic factor models, causality, integration and persistence, cointegration,
seasonality, unobserved-components models, state-space representations and the Kalman filter, regimeswitching models, nonlinear dynamics, and nonlinear filtering. But all of those topics concern aspects of
-7-

linear or nonlinear conditional mean dependence. What about conditional variance dependence – that is,
what about conditional heteroskedasticity?
Historically, economists viewed heteroskedasticity as largely a cross-sectional, as opposed to a
time-series, phenomenon. Hence economists are almost always introduced to heteroskedasticity in crosssectional contexts, such as when the variance of a cross-sectional regression disturbance depends on one or
more of the regressors. A classic example is Engel curve estimation, in which the variance of the
disturbances in expenditure equations tend to grow with income. It turns out, however, that
heteroskedasticity is pervasive in the time-series context of financial asset returns, in which volatility
clustering (that is, contiguous periods of high or low volatility) features prominently.7 Moreover, it also
turns out that acknowledgment and modeling of return volatility dynamics is crucially important for
financial economics. Unfortunately, cross-sectional heteroskedasticity models are ill-suited to dynamic
environments, and specification and econometric treatment of an appropriate dynamic volatility model
involves many subtleties and is far from a trivial extension.
Engle’s ARCH model and subsequent volatility modeling research program provided a workable
and elegant solution, solving many problems and stimulating a huge amount of related research that
advanced not only the econometrics of dynamic volatility and correlation modeling, but also forecasting,
asset pricing, portfolio allocation, risk management, market microstructure modeling, duration modeling,
and ultra-high-frequency data analysis. Hence any list of the last forty years’ crucial time-series
econometric developments must also include the dynamic volatility models pioneered by Engle. Indeed, the
originality, importance and influence of Engle’s ARCH models put them at the top of the list, tied for first
place with Granger’s cointegration models.
The Basic ARCH Model

7

In what follows, I use interchangeably the terms volatility clustering, volatility dynamics,
volatility persistence, volatility forecastability, and volatility predictability.
-8-

Engle (1982), another of the most widely-cited papers in the history of econometrics, started it all.
Surveys of the massive ensuing literature include Bollerslev, Chou and Kroner (1992), Gourieroux (1992),
Bera and Higgins (1993), Bollerslev, Engle and Nelson (1994), Diebold and Lopez (1996), Andersen,
Bollerslev and Diebold (2004), and Diebold (2004). The collection edited by Engle (1995) nicely
illustrates many variations and extensions of the basic theory, as well as a wide variety of applications.
Engle’s basic contribution cuts to the core of modern time series analysis. To understand it, recall
that Wold's (1938) celebrated decomposition theorem establishes that any linearly indeterministic
covariance stationary process {xt} can be written as a one-sided moving average of (weak) white noise
innovations. In an obvious notation,
(4)
(5)
where

,

, and

. The uncorrelated innovation sequence {gt} need not be

Gaussian and therefore need not be independent. But in the Gaussian case, the lack of correlation does of
course imply independence, and for some four decades after Wold, the profession implicitly adopted a
Gaussian perspective, focusing almost exclusively on linear models of conditional mean dependence with
iid innovations.
To appreciate the limitations of the traditional linear/iid model, consider a Wold representation
with iid, as opposed to merely uncorrelated, innovations. The unconditional mean and variance are
and

both of which are constant, as must be the case under covariance

stationarity. Now consider the conditional mean and variance. The conditional mean naturally adapts to
the conditioning information and is given by
,
where

(6)

. One would hope that the conditional variance would adapt to the conditioning

information as well, but unfortunately it does not. Instead, it is constant:
-9-

(7)
This asymmetric treatment of conditional mean and conditional variance dynamics – allowance for flexible
linear conditional mean dynamics but no allowance for conditional variance dynamics – proves crippling in
financial contexts.
Now let us introduce Engle’s (1982) ARCH process by considering a richer Wold representation,
with ARCH innovations:
(8)
(9)
(10)
where

,

innovation

,

, and

, which satisfies Wold’s theorem (in particular, the

is serially uncorrelated) while nevertheless explicitly incorporating dynamic conditional

heteroskedasticity. Both the unconditional mean and variance are constant, again as required for
covariance stationarity. However, both the conditional mean and the conditional variance are time-varying:
(11)
(12)
This model desirably treats conditional mean and variance dynamics in a symmetric fashion, by allowing
for movement in each.
Interestingly, the serial correlation in volatility afforded by the ARCH conditional variance
function (10) had been observed empirically, decades earlier. In his classic analysis of returns on
speculative markets, Mandelbrot (1963, p.418) was very clear, noting that “large changes tend to be
followed by large changes – of either sign – and small changes tend to be followed by small changes.” But
Mandelbrot emphasized the unconditional non-normality of returns, rather than their volatility clustering.
For the next twenty years volatility clustering generated little interest; instead, the literature focused

-10-

primarily on the non-normality, and in particular the fat tails, of unconditional return distributions.8
In a huge conceptual advance, Engle’s work changed the situation radically, by proposing a
rigorous, probabilistic, likelihood-based framework for volatility estimation and forecasting. Moreover,
Engle was not content with purely theoretical contributions. Beginning with the original application to
U.K. inflation in Engle (1982), he actively pursued empirical applications in the macroeconometric context
of volatility dynamics in the price level, including Engle (1983) and Engle, Granger and Robins (1986).
And crucially, when work such as Diebold (1988) and Bollerslev, Engle and Wooldridge (1988) revealed
very strong and pervasive ARCH effects in foreign exchange and equity markets (in contrast to aggregate
inflation and other macroeconomic variables, for which it had by then become clear that the evidence was
mixed), Engle quickly switched from macroeconomic to financial economic applications. He recognized,
moreover, that many parts of financial economics would change fundamentally in the presence of
forecastable return volatility, and he followed through for some twenty years, building major parts of the
new field of financial econometrics.9
The appeal of the linear/ARCH framework (8)-(10) is essentially three-fold. First, it reflects an
appreciation of the fact that the linear/iid framework embraces only a small part of Wold’s vision, because
it neglects the possibility of nonlinear dependence in .
Second, it reflects two implicit judgements, which turn out to be correct in many economic and
financial contexts. The first is that the linear conditional mean dynamics associated with B(L) (or ARMA
approximations to B(L)) are likely to be roughly adequate approximations to the true conditional mean
dynamics, in which case nonlinear dependence in

would come primarily from higher-ordered conditional

moment dependence rather than from neglected nonlinear conditional mean dependence. The second

8

See, for example, Fama (1965), Blattberg and Gonnedes (1974), and the references therein.

9

For interesting commentary on the furious pace of development, both retrospective and
prospective, see Engle (2002b).
-11-

implicit judgement is that the key neglected conditional moment is the conditional variance.
Third, it uses a natural and powerfully simple strategy for modeling conditional variance dynamics,
which precisely parallels the Wold representation for the conditional mean, namely modeling the
conditional variance – the conditionally expected value of

– as a linear function of

,

, and so on.

Structure and Properties of the ARCH Process
Many features of the ARCH process are novel relative to more traditional setups. For example,
and most obviously, the fact that the conditional variance,

, is now a serially correlated random variable

has many implications. For example, unlike the traditional linear/iid model, in which the conditional
prediction error variance depends only on the forecast horizon, it now depends on the conditioning
information set, and this dependence can be exploited to produce accurate volatility forecasts, which have
numerous uses in asset pricing, portfolio allocation, and risk management.
The conditional variance (12) of an ARCH process is a deterministic function of the conditioning
information. This is entirely natural and appropriate, just as, for example, the conditional mean (11) is also
a deterministic function of conditioning information. One can, however, entertain the possibility that a
separate stochastic “volatility shock” is also operative, which leads directly to the class of so-called
stochastic volatility models, which itself has been the focus of a huge research effort since the mid-1980s,
motivated by and spurred onward by Engle’s ARCH research.10
In addition to the fact that the ARCH conditional variance is a deterministic function of past
observations, the ARCH process is specified directly in terms of the conditional density, (9). Hence, for
any given set of parameter values, the Gaussian likelihood can be evaluated trivially via a prediction-error
decomposition – that is, by recognizing that the likelihood, which is the joint density of the observed data, is
simply the product of the conditional densities (9) – and then maximized numerically. Hence estimation of

10

See Taylor (1986) and Ghysels, Harvey and Renault (1996), and Shephard (2004).
-12-

ARCH models is in principle straightforward, in sharp contrast to the estimation of stochastic volatility
models, the estimation of which is notoriously challenging, due to the latency of the separate volatility
shock.
It is instructive to view ARCH from the vantage point of volatility proxy construction. One
obvious proxy for the true underlying volatility,
error as

, is simply

. Unfortunately, the variance of

variance of

. Define the corresponding measurement

(the noise) is generally large relative to the

(the signal). One would like to find a way to reduce the noise, perhaps by smoothing, which

is precisely what the ARCH model does: it replaces the noisy volatility proxy,
proxy, a weighted average of the history of
autoregressive model for

,

, with a much less noisy

. Indeed, the ARCH model is effectively an

, and the ARCH conditional variance function is simply the conditional mean

function of the autoregressive model for

. To see this, substitute

variance function (10), which produces the autoregressive representation for

into the ARCH conditional
,

.

(13)

Hence the name “ARCH.”
Finally, it can be shown that the implied unconditional distribution of even a conditionally
Gaussian ARCH process is leptokurtic (and of course conditionally fat-tailed ARCH processes are even
more unconditionally leptokurtic), and that the leptokurtosis vanishes under temporal aggregation. 11 The
three key properties of ARCH processes – volatility clustering, fat-tailed unconditional distributions, and
reduction of those fat tails under temporal aggregation – match closely the properties of actual high-

11

The unconditional leptokurtosis of ARCH processes follows from the persistence in conditional
variance, which produces the clusters of “low volatility”and “high volatility” episodes associated with
observations in the center and in the tails of the unconditional distribution. The reduction of leptokurtosis
under temporal aggregation follows from the facts that (1) a low-frequency change is simply the sum of the
corresponding high-frequency changes; for example, an annual change is the sum of the internal quarterly
changes, each of which is the sum of its internal monthly changes, and so forth, and (2) Gaussian central
limit theorems hold for sums of covariance stationary ARCH processes, as shown by Diebold (1988).
-13-

frequency financial asset returns. Hence the ARCH process provides an appealing unification of the three
key properties – previously believed to be disparate – of financial asset return dynamics and distributions.
4. Variations, Extensions and Applications
The ARCH idea is both simple and very powerful, and the huge and vibrant literature that it
stimulated continues its brisk pace of advance. Here I will attempt to provide a feel for the flavor and
nuances of that literature. Variations and extensions of the basic ARCH model are nicely intertwined with
applications, so I will discuss them simultaneously.
GARCH
Engle’s (1982) breakthrough launched a huge research program, with both theoretical and
empirical fronts. On the theoretical front, steady progress was made on important tasks such as refining
the associated asymptotic theory, including quasi-maximum likelihood estimation and testing,
characterization of moment structure, calculation of diffusion limits, and so on. Monte Carlo explorations
of small-sample properties of various estimators and tests also proved informative, as in Engle, Hendry and
Trumble (1985).
On the empirical front, applications were initially hindered by the fact that estimation of the
ARCH(4) model (10) is of course infeasible in practice, and simple low-ordered truncation of
invariably appeared inadequate in financial market contexts, in which volatility tends to be highly
persistent. Hence early empirical studies often adopted high-ordered ARCH(p) models, truncated at some
point for tractability rather then realism, often with constraints on the lag weights such as linear decay,
again for tractability rather than realism. Bollerslev’s (1986) GARCH model quickly remedied this
unfortunate situation.
To understand and appreciate GARCH, recall that ARMA processes can be viewed as
approximations to infinite-ordered autoregressive processes, in which infinite-ordered autoregressive lag
operator polynomials are approximated by ratios of low-ordered lag operator polynomials. This is useful
-14-

when modeling conditional mean dynamics in economic time series if the required autoregressive lag
operator polynomial turns out to be very high-ordered, which sometimes happens. The accuracy of such
rational approximations, which motivates the use of ARMA processes, led to Bollerslev’s (1986) brilliant
parallel proposal for ARCH processes: approximate the infinite-ordered ARCH autoregressive lag
operator polynomial

by the ratio of two low-ordered lag operator polynomials,

of order p, say,

of order q. Doing so produces the GARCH(p,q) process,12

and

(14)
where

,

GARCH is to ARCH (for

conditional variance dynamics) as ARMA is to AR (for conditional mean dynamics). Indeed, it can be
shown that if a series

is GARCH(p,q), then

is ARMA((max(p,q), p). Interestingly, the simple

GARCH(1,1) model,
(15)
is so often empirically adequate that it has achieved something of a canonical status.
Asymmetric Response and the Leverage Effect
Numerous alternative functional forms for the conditional variance function (14) have been
suggested, several of which allow for an asymmetric volatility response to the lagged squared innovations,
depending on their sign, so that the effect of a negative innovation on volatility may differ from that of a
positive innovation. This allowance for asymmetric response proves useful for modeling the “leverage
effect” often observed in stock returns, in which a negative innovation boosts volatility by more than a
positive innovation of the same absolute magnitude. Engle and Ng (1993) go much farther, with a
contribution that has subsequently found use in numerous contexts. Instead of allowing for a single

12

GARCH stands for generalized ARCH. It is actually a specialization, not a generalization, of
the ARCH(4) model (10), although it is of course a generalization of a finite-ordered ARCH process. The
point is that although it is a specialization of (10), it is tremendously useful empirically, whereas (10) is
not.
-15-

threshold, with differing effects on each side of zero, they allow for piecewise linear “news impact curves”
with many kinks, rather than just one kink at zero. Visual examination of such curves often proves
revealing and is now a standard empirical tool.
Non-Gaussian Conditional Densities
It is sometimes desirable to allow for non-Gaussian conditional densities in the GARCH model,
because it is sometimes found that the Gaussian GARCH model does not explain all of the leptokurtosis in
asset returns. That is, although conditionally Gaussian GARCH processes are unconditionally fat-tailed,
their implied unconditional densities are sometimes not fat-tailed enough to match the unconditional
distribution of actual high-frequency asset returns. Hence various proposals have been made for allowing
for non-Gaussian conditional densities. One of the most interesting is by Engle and González-Rivera
(1991), who propose a semiparametric methodology in which the conditional variance function is
parametrically specified and consistently estimated by quasi-ML in the usual fashion, after which the
conditional density is then estimated nonparametrically from the standardized returns.
Very High Volatility Persistence
GARCH volatility persistence is governed by the dominant root of

, and roots near

unity are common in high-frequency financial data. Thus, motivated by the 1980s research boom in
conditional-mean unit-root dynamics, Bollerslev and Engle (1986) proposed and explored a special case of
the GARCH model, the so-called integrated GARCH (IGARCH) model. Roughly, IGARCH is to GARCH
as ARIMA is to ARMA, although there are some interesting twists (e.g., IGARCH processes remain
strictly stationary).
Although conditional variance dynamics are often empirically found to be highly persistent, it is
difficult to ascertain whether they are actually integrated.13 However, circumstantial evidence against

13

This difficulty obviously parallels the literature on unit roots and trend breaks; see Stock, 1994,
for a fine overview.
-16-

IGARCH arises from consideration of temporal aggregation. Because of the infinite unconditional second
moment of IGARCH processes, temporal aggregation does not produce unconditional normality, whereas
actual series displaying GARCH effects seem to approach normality when temporally aggregated.
Thus began the search for richer models of highly-persistent volatility, which actively continues to
this day. Prominently featured in the ensuing literature are models of long memory volatility, which are
covariance stationary but display persistence stronger than that achievable within the covariance stationary
GARCH class. One route to long memory is through superposition of conventional short-memory volatility
models – that is, through multi-factor volatility models – as emphasized for example in Barndorff-Nielsen
and Shephard (2001). Interestingly, the permanent-transitory component model of Engle and Lee (1999) –
written many years before it was eventually published – is roughly in that spirit.
Another route to long memory is completely nonparametric estimation of volatility from the highfrequency return data that is increasingly available. This approach, which in principle can produce
arbitrarily accurate volatility and correlation estimates, is the focus of the rapidly growing “realized
volatility” literature, surveyed by Andersen, Bollerslev and Diebold (2004). The methods of this new
literature – and its emphasis on long memory – very much stand on the shoulders of Engle’s path-breaking
work, in this case Ding, Granger and Engle (1993), who showed clear evidence of long memory in daily
absolute returns.
Multivariate Models, Dimensionality Reduction, and Factor Structure
From the beginning, it was widely recognized that extension of the GARCH model to the
multivariate case was crucial, due to the centrality of correlation structures in financial applications. It
took ten years of hard work for Engle and Kroner (1995) to provide a fully general treatment, with what is
now known as the BEKK model, in reference to Baba, Engle, Kraft and Kroner (Baba and Kraft made
important early contributions but eventually withdrew to pursue other interests). The BEKK model is
useful for predicting covariance matrices in low-dimensional situations. In all but the lowest-dimensional
-17-

situations, however, unrestricted volatility models quickly become unworkable, due to the huge number of
parameters that must be estimated by numerical optimization. Not surprisingly, then, various strategies for
facilitating high-dimensional volatility modeling emerged at the top of the research agenda.
Initial ad hoc attempts at dimensionality reduction such as the “diagonal model” of Bollerslev,
Engle and Wooldridge (1988), although major advances at the time, ultimately proved less than fully
satisfying.14 What was needed was economic guidance for dimensionality reduction. Factor structure,
which is at the heart of modern financial asset pricing, delivered the goods, as formalized in the “factor
GARCH” model of Bollerslev and Engle (1993). Factor GARCH is effectively a model of cointegration in
variance, or more generally, a model of a common feature (persistence) in variance, as for example in
Engel and Susmel’s (1993) application to common volatility in international equity markets. Note the
beautiful continuity and coherence in the sequence from integration to cointegration, to common features, to
integrated GARCH, to cointegration in variance, to co-persistence in variance. Progress continues to be
made, as for example in Engle (2002a, 2002b).
Time-varying Risk Premia, Options Pricing, and the Value of Volatility Forecasts
When financial asset return volatility varies, one naturally suspects that time-varying risk premia
may be operative, and huge literatures have used GARCH methods to quantify and test hypotheses
concerning risk premia in stock, bond, foreign exchange, and commodities markets. Bollerslev, Engle and
Wooldridge (1988) provide an early and important stock market application, implementing a conditional
capital asset pricing model with time-varying covariance structure, and ultimately time-varying market
betas. In a parallel series of path-breaking bond market applications, Engle models time-varying risk
premia in the term structure of bond yields using the Engle, Lilien and Robins (1987) ARCH-in-mean
model, which allows the conditional variance of a yield also to affect its conditional mean. Successful

14

In a diagonal model, variances depend only on own lagged variances and own lagged squared
innovations, and covariances depend only on own lagged covariances and own lagged cross products.
-18-

modeling of term premia premia promotes successful forecasting of future spot interest rates, as in Engle,
Ng and Rothschild (1990), despite the fact that forward interest rates do not provide good forecasts
(precisely because of the time-varying risk premia).15 Finally, GARCH perspectives also produce very
general approaches to empirical asset pricing, as with the empirical pricing kernels of Engle and Rosenberg
(2002).
GARCH methods prove useful not only for spot asset pricing, but also for derivative asset pricing;
indeed, the impressive cross-fertilization between GARCH econometrics and asset pricing is even more
pronounced in options contexts. The key object in option pricing is a forecast of the underlying asset’s
volatility path over the course of the option’s life. This suggests that GARCH models should be useful for
improved pricing of options and related derivative products, and subsequent research supports that
conjecture. One strand of literature (e.g., Engle, Hong, Kane and Noh, 1993; Engle, Kane and Noh, 1994),
compares the returns on options-based trading strategies implemented using GARCH volatility forecasts to
those from strategies implemented using alternative volatility forecasts. The results generally indicate
superior risk-adjusted returns from the GARCH-based strategies, implying superiority of the GARCH
volatility forecasts under a highly-relevant loss function.
Another strand of the literature examines not the GARCH pricing of options portfolios, but rather
the complementary issue of GARCH hedging of options portfolios, with similar success. For example,
Engle and Rosenberg (1995, 2000) show that delta-gamma hedging of options (using GARCH gamma)
outperforms traditional delta hedging, both in simple situations involving a single maturity of fluctuating
volatility, and in more complicated situations involving complex fluctuations of the entire volatility term
structure.
Finally, although the discussion thus far has focused on using GARCH econometrics for superior

15

See also Engle and Rothschild (1992).
-19-

results in financial markets, one can reverse direction, using financial markets for potentially improved
GARCH econometrics, an idea that has also met with success. For example, Engle and Mustafa (1992)
develop an estimation procedure for GARCH models in the spirit of indirect inference, proceeding by
finding the GARCH parameters that make implied model-based options prices maximally close to observed
market options prices.
Financial Market Microstructure
A central concern in international finance is the cross-market transmission of shocks. The
volatility models pioneered by Engle facilitate the study of cross-market transmission of volatility shocks.
In an important series of papers that memorably phrase the question in terms of “heat waves vs. meteor
showers,” Engle investigates whether volatility bursts tend to stay in one place as the earth turns (like a
heat wave) or whether they tend to move across the earth from market to market (like the appearance of a
meteor shower), documenting strong volatility spillovers across international equity markets (e.g., Engle,
Ito and Lin, 1990, 1992, 1994; Engle and Susmel, 1994).
Focus on cross-market volatility interactions in the world economy leads naturally to consideration
of cross-asset interactions in a single market, such as individual stocks on an exchange, which, particularly
when one approaches the transactions level, raises a host of important questions in the general area of
financial market microstructure. In addition, when one considers that transactions data are now quite
commonly available due to improvements in electronic markets, data processing, and data storage, it is easy
to understand the recent explosion of interest in the analysis of ultra-high-frequency return data and its
links to microstructural concerns. Not surprisingly, Engle has also led this charge, producing important
tools for analyzing irregularly-spaced transactions data, with emphasis on modeling and forecasting intraquote and intra-trade durations, quote-trade linkages, price impacts of trades, and market depth.
Engle and Russell (1998) provide a key contribution, the autoregressive conditional duration

-20-

(ACD) model.16,17 The ACD model assumes Poisson transactions arrivals, in which the Poisson intensity
rate varies in an autoregressive fashion. Maximum likelihood estimation of the model is readily achieved
by prediction-error decomposition of the likelihood, precisely as with the GARCH model. As subsequently
became clear, moreover, the ACD and GARCH models are related in much more than the mere mechanics
of estimation. In particular, the persistence of the time-varying ACD transaction arrival intensity produces
transactions clustering, which corresponds to volatility clustering in calendar time. Roughly speaking,
then, ACD duration clustering in transaction time corresponds to ARCH volatility clustering in calendar
time!
5. Epilogue
In the past forty years, time-series econometrics developed from infancy to relative maturity. A
significant part of that development is due to Robert F. Engle, whose rigorous yet immensely practical
work is distinguished by exceptional creativity in empirical dynamic modeling, particularly volatility
modeling in financial contexts. Engle’s contributions spawned a huge amount of additional work – indeed
they spawned new literatures, both theoretical and applied – with contributions not only by leading
established econometricians worldwide, but also by a large army of Engle’s graduate students, a list of
whom now reads like a who’s who in the younger generation of time-series econometricians. Engle’s
contributions form a key pillar of a new discipline, financial econometrics, which is now taught routinely in
economics departments and business schools worldwide, and they have been spectacularly successful in
bridging academics and industry, influencing modern asset pricing, portfolio allocation, and risk
management.

16

See also Engle and Russell (1997), Engle (2000), and Engle and Russell (2004).

17

Subsequent and important work includes extensions to modeling the bivariate point process of
trades and quotes, as in Engle and Lunde (2003) and Engle and Patton (2004), and related analyses of
aspects of liquidity, including market depth and the price impacts of trades, as in Engle and Lange (2001)
and Dufour and Engle (2000).
-21-

The Nobel Memorial Prize for Engle and Granger is a long-awaited and well-deserved prize for
time-series econometrics in general – appropriately paralleling the earlier Heckman-McFadden prize for
microeconometrics – and for two of its most important contributions in particular: models of volatility
(ARCH) and common trends (cointegration). Of crucial importance is the fact that the Engle-Granger
prize, like the Heckman-McFadden prize, is a prize for economic research that is not only scientifically
path-breaking, but also of great and immediate practical relevance. It is no exaggeration to assert that
millions of people, worldwide, have been made better off by the work of Robert F. Engle and Clive W.J.
Granger.

-22-

References
Andersen, T.G., Bollerslev, T. and Diebold, F.X. (2004), “Parametric and Nonparametric Volatility
Measurement,” forthcoming in L.P. Hansen and Y. Ait-Sahalia (eds.), Handbook of Financial
Econometrics. Amsterdam: North-Holland.
Barndorff-Nielsen, O.E. and Shephard, N. (2001), “Non-Gaussian Ornstein-Uhlenbeck-Based Models and
Some of Their Uses in Financial Economics,” (with discussion), Journal of the Royal Statistical
Society B, 63, 167-241.
Bera, A.K. and Higgins, M.L. (1993), “ARCH Models: Properties, Estimation and Testing,” Journal of
Economic Surveys, 7, 305-362.
Blattberg, R. and Gonnedes, N. (1974), “A Comparison of the Stable and Student Distributions as
Statistical Models for Stock Prices,” Journal of Business, 47, 244-280.
Bollerslev, T. (1986), “Generalized Autoregressive Conditional Heteroskedasticity,” Journal of
Econometrics, 31, 307-327.
Bollerslev, T., Chou, R.Y., Kroner, K.F. (1992), “ARCH Modeling in Finance: A Selective Review of the
Theory and Empirical Evidence,” Journal of Econometrics, 52, 5-59.
Bollerslev, T. and Engle, R.F. (1986), “Modeling the Persistence of Conditional Variances,” (with
discussion), Econometric Reviews, 5, 1-50.
Bollerslev, T. and Engle, R.F. (1993), “Common Persistence in Conditional Variances,” Econometrica, 61,
166-187.
Bollerslev, T., Engle, R.F. and Nelson, D.B. (1994), “ARCH Models,” in R.F. Engle and D. McFadden
(eds.), Handbook of Econometrics, Volume IV. Amsterdam: North-Holland.
Bollerslev, T., Engle, R.F. and Wooldridge, J.M. (1988), “A Capital Asset Pricing Model with Time
Varying Covariances,” Journal of Political Economy, 95, 116-131.
Diebold, F.X. (1988), Empirical Modeling of Exchange Rate Dynamics. New York: Springer-Verlag.
Diebold, F.X. (2003), “The ET Interview: Professor Robert F. Engle,” Econometric Theory, 19, 11591193.
Diebold, F.X. (2004), Measuring and Forecasting Financial Market Volatilities and Correlations. New
York: W.W. Norton, forthcoming.
Diebold, F.X. and J.A. Lopez (1995), “Modeling Volatility Dynamics,” in K.V. Hoover (ed.),
Macroeconometrics: Developments, Tensions and Prospects, 427-472. Boston: Kluwer
Academic Press.
Ding, Z., Granger, C.W.J. and Engle, R.F. (1993), “A Long Memory Property of Stock Market Returns
-23-

and a New Model,” Journal of Empirical Finance, 1, 83-106.
Dufour, A. and Engle, R.F. (2000), “Time and the Price Impact of a Trade,” Journal of Finance, 55,
2467-2498.
Engle, R.F. (1973), “Band Spectrum Regression,” International Economic Review, 15, 1-11.
Engle, R.F. (1978), “Estimating Structural Models of Seasonality,” in A. Zellner (ed.), Seasonal Analysis
of Economic Time Series. Washington: U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of Census.
Engle, R.F. (1982), “Autoregressive Conditional Heteroskedasticity with Estimates of the Variance of U.K.
Inflation,” Econometrica, 50, 987-1008.
Engle, R.F. (1983), “Estimates of the Variance of U.S. Inflation Based on the ARCH Model,” Journal of
Money, Credit and Banking, 15, 286-301.
Engle, R.F. (1984), “Wald, Likelihood Ratio and Lagrange Multiplier Tests in Econometrics,” in Z.
Griliches and M. Intrilligator (eds.), Handbook of Econometrics, Volume 2. Amsterdam: North
Holland, 775-826.
Engle, R.F., ed. (1995), ARCH: Selected Readings. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Engle, R.F. (2000), “The Econometrics of Ultra High Frequency Data,” Econometrica, 68, 1-22.
Engle, R.F. (2002a), “Dynamic Conditional Correlation: A Simple Class of Generalized Autoregressive
Conditional Heteroskedasticity Models,” Journal of Business and Economic Statistics, 20, 339350.
Engle, R.F. (2002b), “New Frontiers for ARCH Models,” Journal of Applied Econometrics, 17, 425-446.
Engle, R.F. and González-Rivera, G. (1991), “Semiparametric ARCH Models,” Journal of Business and
Economic Statistics, 9, 345-359.
Engle, R.F. and Granger, C.W.J. (1987), “Co-Integration and Error Correction: Representation,
Estimation and Testing,” Econometrica, 55, 251-276.
Engle, R.F. and Granger, C.W.J., eds. (1991), Long Run Economic Relations: Readings in
Cointegration. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Engle, R.F., Granger, C.W.J. and Robins, R. (1986), “Wholesale and Retail Prices: Bivariate Modeling
with Forecastable Variances,” in D. Belsley and E. Kuh (eds.), Model Reliability. Cambridge:
MIT Press.
Engle, R.F., Hendry, D.F. and Richard, J.-F. (1983), “Exogeneity,” Econometrica, 51, 277-304.
Engle, R.F., Hendry, D.F. and Trumble, D. (1985), “Small-Sample Properties of ARCH Estimators and
Tests,” Canadian Journal of Economics, 18, 66-93.
-24-

Engle, R.F., Hong, C.-H., Kane, A. and Noh, J. (1993), “Arbitrage Valuation of Variance Forecasts with
Simulated Options,” in D. Chance and R. Tripp (eds.), Advances in Futures and Options
Research. Greenwich, CT: JIA Press.
Engle, R.F., Ito, T. and Lin, W. (1990), “Meteor Showers or Heat Waves? Hetroskedastic Intra-daily
Volatility in the Foreign Exchange market,” Econometrica, 1990.
Engle, R.F., Ito, T. and Lin, W. (1992), “Where Does the Meteor Shower Come From? The Role of
Stochastic Policy and Coordination,” Journal of International Economics, 32, 221-140.
Engle, R.F., Ito, T. and Lin, W. (1994), “Do Bulls and Bears Move Across Borders? International
Transmission of Stock Returns and Volatility,” Review of Financial Studies, 7, 507-538.
Engle, R.F., Kane, A. and Noh, J. (1994), “Forecasting Volatility and Option Prices of the S&P 500
Index,” Journal of Derivatives, 2, 17-30.
Engle, R.F. and Kozicki, S. (1993), “Testing for Common Features,” Journal of Business and Economic
Statistics, 11, 369-380.
Engle, R.F. and Kroner, K.F. (1993), “Multivariate Simultaneous Generalized ARCH,” Econometric
Theory, 11, 122-150.
Engle, R.F. and Lange, J. (2001), “Predicting VNET: A Model of the Dynamics of Market Depth,”
Journal of Financial Markets, 4, 113-142.
Engle, R.F. and Lee, G.J. (1999), “A Permanent and Transitory Component Model of Stock Return
Volatility,” in R.F. Engle and H. White (eds.), Cointegration, Causality, and Forecasting: A
Festschrift in Honor of Clive W.J. Granger. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 475-497.
Engle, R.F., Lilien, D.M. and Robins, R.P. (1987), “Estimating Time-Varying Risk Premia in the Term
Structure: The ARCH-M Model,” Econometrica, 55, 391-408.
Engle, R.F., Lilien, D. and Watson, M.W. (1985), “A DYMIMIC Model of Housing Price Determination,”
Journal of Econometrics, 28, 307-326.
Engle, R.F. and Lunde, A. (2003), “Trades and Quotes: A Bivariate Point Process,” Journal of Financial
Econometrics, 1, 159-188.
Engle, R.F. and Mustafa, C. (1992), “Implied ARCH Models from Options Prices,” Journal of
Econometrics, 52, 289-311.
Engle, R.F. and Ng, V.K. (1993), “Measuring and Testing the Impact of News on Volatility,” Journal of
Finance, 48, 1749-1778.
Engle, R.F., Ng, V.K. and Rothschild, M. (1990), “Asset Pricing with a Factor ARCH Covariance
Structure: Empirical Estimates for Treasury Bills,” Journal of Econometrics, 45, 213-237.

-25-

Engle, R.F. and Rothschild, M., eds. (1992), “ARCH Models in Finance,” Journal of Econometrics, 52,
245-266.
Engle, R.F. and Patton, A. (2004), “Impacts of Trades in an Error-Correction Model of Quote Prices,”
Journal of Financial Markets, 7, 1-25.
Engle, R.F. and Rosenberg, J.V. (1995), “GARCH Gammas,” Journal of Derivatives, 2, 47-59.
Engle, R.F. and Rosenberg, J.V. (2000), “Testing the Volatility Term Structure Using Option Hedging
Criteria,” Journal of Derivatives, 8, 10-28.
Engle, R.F. and Rosenberg, J.V. (2002), “Empirical Pricing Kernels,” Journal of Financial Economics,
64, 341-372.
Engle, R.F. and Russell, J.R. (1997), “Forecasting the Frequency of Changes in Quoted Foreign Exchange
Prices with the Autoregressive Conditional Duration Model,” Journal of Empirical Finance, 12,
187-212.
Engle, R.F. and Russell, J.R. (1998) “Autoregressive Conditional Duration: A New Model for Irregularly
Spaced Transaction Data,” Econometrica, 66, 1127-1162.
Engle, R.F. and Russell, J.R. (2004), “Analysis of High Frequency and Transaction Data,” forthcoming in
L.P. Hansen and Y. Ait-Sahalia (eds.), Handbook of Financial Econometrics. Amsterdam:
North-Holland.
Engle, R.F. and Smith, A. (1999), “Stochastic Permanent Breaks,” Review of Economics and Statistics,
81, 553-574.
Engle, R.F. and Susmel, R. (1993), “Common Volatility in International Equity Markets,” Journal of
Business and Economic Statistics, 11, 167-176.
Engle, R.F. and Susmel, R. (1994), “Hourly Volatility Spillovers Between International Equity Markets,”
Journal of International Money and Finance, 13, 3-25.
Engle, R.F. and Vahid, F. (1993), “Common Trends and Common Cycles,” Journal of Applied
Econometrics, 8, 341-360.
Engle, R.F. and Watson, M.W. (1981), “A One-Factor Multivariate Time Series Model of Metropolitan
Wage Rates,” Journal of the American Statistical Association, 76, 774-781.
Engle, R.F. and Watson, M.W. (1985), “The Kalman Filter: Applications to Forecasting and Rational
Expectations Models,” in T. Bewley (ed.), Advances in Econometrics: The Fifth World Congress
of the Econometric Society, Volume 1. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 245-283.
Engle, R.F. and Yoo, B.S. (1987), “Forecasting and Testing in Co-integrated Systems,” Journal of
Econometrics, 35, 143-159.

-26-

Fama, E.F. (1965), “The Behavior of Stock Market Prices,” Journal of Business, 38, 34-105.
Ghysels, E., Harvey, A. and Renault, E. (1996), “Stochastic Volatility,” in G.S. Maddala (ed.), Handbook
of Statistics Vol. 14, Statistical Methods in Finance, 119-191. Amsterdam: North-Holland.
Gourieroux, C. (1992), Modeles ARCH et Applications Financieres. Paris: Economica. (English version,
ARCH Models and Financial Applications, 1997. New York: Springer-Verlag.)
Granger, C.W.J. (1981), “Some Properties of Time Series Data and Their Use in Econometric Model
Specification,” Journal of Econometrics, 16, 121-130.
Johansen, S. (1995), Likelihood-Based Inference in Cointegrated Vector Autoregressive Models. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Mandelbrot, B. (1963), “The Variation of Certain Speculative Prices,” Journal of Business, 36, 394-419.
Shephard, N., ed. (2004), Stochastic Volatility: Selected Readings. Oxford University Press.
Stock, J.H. (1994), “Unit Roots, Structural Breaks and Trends,” in R.F. Engle and D. McFadden (eds.),
Handbook of Econometrics, Volume 4, 2740-2843.
Taylor, S.J. (1986), Modelling Financial Time Series. Chichester: John Wiley and Sons.
Watson, M.W. (1995), “Vector Autoregressions and Cointegration,” in R.F. Engle and D. McFadden
(eds.), Handbook of Econometrics, Volume 4, 2843-2915.
Wold, H.O. (1938), The Analysis of Stationary Time Series. Uppsala: Almquist and Wicksell.
Zellner, A. (1992), “Statistics, Science and Public Policy,” Journal of the American Statistical
Association, 87, 1-6.

-27-

