NEER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ELASTICITIES OF DEMANDFOR EDUCATED LABOR ATD
ELASTICITIES OF SUPPLY OF EDUCATED LABOR

Richard B. Freeman

Working Paper No. 1042

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge MA 02138

December 1982

Written for the International Encyclopedia of Education, Economics
of Education Section, George Psacharopoulos, editor. The research
reported here is part of the NBER 's research program in Labor
Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the author and not
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #1042
December 1982

Elasticities of Demand for Educated Labor
and Elasticities of Supply of Educated Labor

ABSTPACT

a variety of estimates of the dnd and supply
elasticities of educated labor. It finds that elasticities of substitution
This paper reviews

between irore and less educated labor range fran 1.0 to 2.0 and that elas-

ticities of the supply of students to colleges are also on the order of
1.0 to 2.0 while elasticities of supply to specific professions are on
the order of 2.0 to 3.0. With elasticities of this magnithde, wages
and tploynent depend on both supply and dand factors, with shifts of
either schedule influencing both market outcane variables.

Richard B. Freeman

California Institute of Technology

317 Baxter Hall
Pasadena, CA 91135
(213) 356—4077

National Bureau of Economic Research
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02i38
Harvard University
Department of Economics
Cambridge, MA 02138

SUPPLY ELASTICITIES FOR UCTED LABOR

The number of persons choosing to enroll for higher education
overall and in various specialties'has varied greatly over the years.
In the 1960s, enrollment in colleges and universities grew throughout
the world, leveling off and in some cases declining relative to the

relevant age group. Among fields, some expanded at some periods of
time while contracting at others. As Figure 1 shows 'for the U.S. the
supply of new educated labor to various disciplines has shown
remarkable change over time.
To what extent do these changes represent the response of
persons making education and career decisions to economic incentives?
The key concept used to answer this question is the elasticity
of the supply of educated labor, -e s-ur-e-&-a-s--t-h-e percentage change in

the number of persons choosing various forms of education per

percentage change in the relevant economic incentive. The magnitudes
of the elasticities depend on the relative number of persons who are
"on the margin" among various alternatives ——

that

is to say, the

number who, at existing pecuniary and nonpecuniary rewards to various

careers, are potentially movable across fields. Since older workers
have often made sizeable investments in their careers in the past, the
responsive "margin" consists largely of the young, who are in the
process of making career choices.
Whether or not supply elasticities of educated labor are large

or small has long been an issue of concern. In the aftermath of
Sputnik (1956), many doubted whether individual career decisions were
sufficiently flexible to permit free market economies to produce as

FIGURE 1 :

Ghanges Over Time in the Supplies of Educated Labor

Bsoi'& Dere.s

M.stsr's D.gr..*
6

155
5

-o

C

0

-C

0C

C

C

w

uJ

C

0
-c

C
C

0

0

I

C

135•0

0

0

2O
U)

U)

Education 115

25

1969-70

C

I

125

Enis

3o

History
73-74
75-76
Academic years

71-72

History
Ph.D
1969-70

77-78

71-72

73-

75—76

Academic years

Source: National center for Educational Statistics
First—year Enrollments
in Engineering

0
0
E

z0

Year

Source: American Association of Engineering Societies

77—78

10

3

large a supply of scientists and engineers as planned economies. The
human capital "revolution" in economic thinking about labor supply also

directed attention to the magnitude of the supply elasticities. One
key assumption of the human capital model is that individuals make
investments in education in response to market incentives, which should
be revealed in significant elasticities of the supply of educated
labor..

Efforts to estimate elasticities of supply of educated labor

have taken several forms. Some studies have analysed the impact of the
salaries of college workers relative to high school workers on the
proportion of the young enrolled in college; some have focused on the
effect of tuition and scholarship charges on enrollments; while others
have studied the relation between salaries in specific disciplines and
the relative number of young persons choosing to study in those areas.
Several of the studies have used time series data to estimate supply
elasticities, identifying supply behavior from demand behavior by the
fact that, because education takes a number of years, the decision to
study in a field depends on salaries and related market conditions

prior to the individuaYs graduation into the job market. Other
studies have compared the relative number of persons obtaining
different levels or types of education across geographic areas to

salaries in these areas. Another body of literature has concentrated
on the decision of individuals to enroll in higher education and/or the
type of education or institution they choose.
The various studies have yielded generally consistent results

4

regarding the magnitude of the elasticities of supply of educated

labor. They show that the decisions of young persons to enroll in
college and to choose various fields of study are quite responsive to

economic incentives, producing substantial elasticities of supp1y.
They indicate, further, that elasticities of supply to specific fields
tend to be higher, in general, than elasticities of supply to higher

education as a whole. Surveys of students regarding the importance of
salary and career considerations in their educational decisions

buttress these conclusions: a large number take explicit consideration
of monetary factors in decision—making.
Table 1 summarizes some estimates of the responsiveness of the

overall supply of young persons to higher education. Panel A treats
studies that have focused on the elasticity of supply to salary or wage
incentives while Panel B treats studies that estimate responsiveness to
tuition charges.
Despite differences in the nature of the studies, the estimates

in Panel A fall into a range of around one to two. The studies for the
U.K.

are

comparable to those for the U.S. The Mattila study, which is

the only one to estimate responses to calculated rates of return rather
than starting or average salaries, yields figures analogous to studies

using these measures of incentives. All told, the various studies
reveal considerable responsiveness, which goes a long way to accounting
for observed swings in the proportion of young persons enrolled in
college in postwar years.
Studies of responses to changes in tuition rates, summarized by

5

TABLE 1: Estimates of the Supply of Persons to Higher Education

A. Studies of Responses to Salaries
Study

Sample

Elasticity Response
to Salaries

Tinbergen (1974)

countries

0.54 to 2.64

Freeman (1975)

time series, USA

1.3 to 1.7

Freeman and Hansen (1982)

time series, USA

1.82

Individuals in

about 2.00

Willis & Rosen (1979)

•NBER—Thorndike
sample, U.S.A.

Pissarides (1979)

time series, UK

1.12 to 1.31

Dolphin (1981)

time series, UK

0.7

Mattila (1982)

time series, USA

.86 to 1.39

B. Studies of Responses to Tuition

Response of Enrollment
Rate per $100 Change
in Tuition

Study

Sample

Corazzini, Dugan, Grabowski
(1963)

National cross
section

0.62

Hopkins (1963)

State cross section

0.75

Barnes (1970)

Individual students

1.53

Radner and Miller (1966)

Individual students

0.05

Kohn, Manski, Mundel (1966)

Individual students

0.92

Hoenack (1965)

High school districts 0.71

Hoenack and Weiler (1972)

Individual students

1.46

Spies (1971)

Individual students

0.05

Campbell and Siegel (1919—64) Time series
BishopS (1963)

Individual students

0.20
0.90

Source: All studies listed in bibliography. Panel B from McPherson,
'he Demand for Higher Education," in Public Policy and Private Higher
Education, D. Breneman and C. Finn (eds), p.181, Table 3—9.

6

McPherson, tell a similar story. All of the reviewed studies found
that tuition affected enrollment, with a magnitude that roughly
indicates that a $100 change in tuition would alter the proportion

enrolled by perhaps .8 or so percentage points. Translated into an
elasticity of response, the tuition—elasticity of enrollment is about

0.3 (McPherson, p. 181). Since tuition is only a fraction of the
salaries received by students, this low number makes intuitive sense
and is, indeed, consistent with a supply elasticity of the magnitude
found in Panel A.

Finally, U.S. survey evidence provides additional support for
the notion that students are highly responsive to economic rewards in

decisions to enroll in college. Nearly 80 percent of freshment
surveyed by the American Council of Education in 1977 agreed, for
example that a major reason for going to college was that it would

enable them to get a better job. One—third cited "ability to make

money"

as a very important reason for going to college. While some may

doubt the meaningfulness of these responses, they are consistent with
the

statistical studies cited in Table 1.
As for elasticities of supply to specific fields of study, a

substantial literature has examined time series fluctuations in

enrollment and degrees, of the type shown in Figure 1. Supply
elasticities have been estimated for a wide variety of professional

specialties. Physics (Freeman, 1976), Economics (L. Hansen, 1980),
Engineering (Freeman, 1976, Sirbu et al, 1978), Law (Freeman, 1976,
Freebairn and Withers, 1979, Pashigan, 1977), in the U.S.; teachers in

7

the U.K. (Zabaiza, 1979), among other areas. The principal result of
this work is that supply elasticities to various professions are quite
sizeable and, in conjunction with observed wage changes, explain a
large proportion of the changes in degrees and enrollments of the type
shown in Figure 1.

An important prerequisite for labor supply to be responsive to
economic incentives is that decision—makers be knowledgeable about

market conditions. Surveys of several thousand college students have
shown them to be aware of the ranking of fields by salary, of
differences in lifetime income profiles, and of recent changes in
salaries, providing further support for the high estimated supply
elasticities (Freeman 1971).

Many studies distinguish between short—run and long—run

elasticities of response. The short—run response is defined as the
percentage

change in one years supply due to a change in economic

incentives; the long run response represents the percentage change in
supply

a number of years in the future assuming the new wage pattern

persists. As a rough generalization, short—run supply elasticities are
typically below 1.00, while long—run elasticities are in the range of

3.0 to 4.0. The long—run responses tend to exceed those estimated for
college enrollments overall, presumably because any given field can
attract persons from other college fields as well as from persons on
the margin between attending college and working.
There is some evidence that the supply of educated labor to
specialties such as engineering fluctuates according to "cobweb—type"

8

dynamics in which a large supply in one period depresses wages and
market opportunities, which in turn reduces enrollment and future

supply, thereby raising wages and improving conditions, and so on. The
impact of this market dynamics on suppiy in engineering can be seen in

the swings in enrollment in Figure 1. Estimates of the supply and
demand elasticities in the market do, however, indicate that these
fluctuations are stable and dampened (Freeman, 1976, Freeman and
Hansen, 1982), which means that it takes considerable shocks to set off
supply responses that greatly overshoot the appropriate levels in the
market.

Overall, it appears that supply elasticities for educated labor

are quite substantial among new entrants to the job market. Because of
the relative stability of the supply of older specialists, relatively
few of whom go back to school to change their fields of specialization,
however, elasticities of total supply are much smaller.

9

B IBL IOGRAPHY

American Council on Education (1966) National Norms for Entering
College Freshmen Fall.

American Council on Education (1974, 1979) The American Freshmen:
National Norms Fall.

Barnes, Gary T., "Determinants of the College Going and College Choice
Decision," University of North Carolina at Greensboro, n.d.

Bishop, John and Van Dyk, Jane, "Can Adults Be Hooked on College? Some
Determinants of Adult College Attendance," Journal of Higher
Education, vol. 48, (January/February 1977), p. 51.

Campbell, Robert and Siegel, Barry N., "The Demand for Higher Education
in the United States, 1919 — 1964," American Economic Review,
vol. 57, (June 1967) pp. 482—94.

Corazzini, Arthur, Dugan, Dennis, and Grabowski, Henry, "Determinants
and Distributional Aspects of Enrollment in U.S. Higher
Education," Journal of Human Resources, vol. 7, (Winter 1972),
pp. 39—59.

10

Dolphin,

A.M.,

"The Demand for Higher Education," The Employment

Gazette, July 1981, 302—305.

Fairbairn,

J.W., and Withers, G., (1979) "Welfare Effects of Salary

Forecast

Error

in Professional Labour Market," Review of

Economics and Statistics, LXI, pp. 234—291.

Freeman, Richard, (1971) The Labor Market for College—Trained Manpower,
Cambridge: Harvard University Press.

Freeman, Richard, (1975a) "Legal Cobwebs: a Recursive Model of the
Labor Market for New Lawyers,t' Review of Economics and
Statistics, 1975.

Freeman, Richard, (1975b) "Supply and Salary Adjustments to the
Changing Science Manpower Market," American Economic Review,
1975.

Freeman, Richard, "Overinvestment in College Training?", Journal of
Human Resources, Summer, 1975.

Freeman, Richard, (1976) The Overeducated American, New York: Academic
Press.

11

Freeman, Richard, (1976a) "A Cobweb Model of the Supply and Starting
Salary of New Engineers," Industrial Labor Relations Review,
January.

Freeman, Richard, and Hansen, John, "Forecasting the Changing Market
for College—Trained Workers," paper prepared for Second Annual
Policy Forum on Employability Development, Responsiveness to

Changing Labor Market Demands. September 1982.

Hansen, W.L. et al, "Forecasting the Market for New Ph.D. Economists,"
The American Economic Review, vol. 70, No. 1, (March 1980), 49—
63.

Hoenack, Stephen, "Private Demand for Higher Education in California,"
(Ph.D. dissertation, University of California, Berkeley, 1967).

Hoenack, Stephen and Weiler, William "Cost—Related Tuition Policies and
University Enrollments," Journal of Human Resources, vol. 10,
(Summer 1975), pp. 332—360.

Hopkins, Thomas, "Higher Education Enrollment Demand," Economic
Inquiry, vol. 12, (March 1974) pp. 53—65.

12

Kohn, Meir, Manski, Charles, and Mundel, David, "An Empirical
Investigation of Factors Which Influence College Going

Behaviors," R1470—NSF (Santa Monica, Calif.: Rand Corporation,
1974).

Mattila, J. Peter, (1982) "Determinants of Male School Enrollments: A
Time Series Analysis," Review of Economics and Statistics,

LXIV, (May 1982) pp. 242—251.

McPherson, Michael, "The Demand for Higher Education," in Public Policy
and Private Higher Education, David Breneman and Chester Finn,
editors,
pp.

(Washington, D.C.: The Brookings Institution), 1978,

143—196.

Pashigan, P., (1977) "The Market for Lawyers: The Determinants of the
Demand for and Supply of Lawyers," Journal of Law of Economics,
20, pp. 53—86.

Pissarides,

R.A., "Staying on at School in England and Wales —— and Why

9% of the 1976 Age Group Did Not," London School of Economics
Discussion Paper No. 63, (November 1979).

Radner, Roy and Miller,

Leonard, Demand and Supply in U.S.

Education (McGraw—Hill, 1975).

Higher

13

Sirbu, Marvin, et al. Improved Methodologies for Forecasting New

Entrants in Science and Engineering. (Cambridge: Center for
Policy Alternatives, September 1978, Center for Policy Analysis
Report #CPA—7 8—15.

Spies, Richard, The Future of Private Colleges: The Effect of Rising
Costs on College Choice, (Princeton University, Industrial
Relations Section, 1973).

Tinbergen, J., "Substitution of Graduates by Other Labour," Kykios,
vol. 27, No. 2, pp. 217—226.

Willis, B.., and Rosen, S., (1975) "Education and Self—Selection,"
Journal of Political Economy, 87, 817—836.

Zabalza, A., (1979) "The Determinants of Teacher Supply," Review of
Economic Studies, No. 142, pp. 1310—1348.

ASTICITY OF

DAND

FOR EDUCAT L?BOR
1

The elasticity of demand for educated labor measures the
percentage change in the number of workers with specified levels of
education demanded by employers per percentage change in the wage of

these workers, other wages and input prices assumed fixed. It is a
central concept in the analysis of the market for labor skills, as it
represents the responsiveness of employers to price incentives to

employ workers of varying levels of education. When the elasticity of
demand is relatively small (as in case A of figure 1) enormous changes
in wages are needed to induce employers to alter the number of workers

hired. In this case, one can practically ignore responses to wage
changes and analyze demand for labor as if it did not depend on wages.
When the elasticity of demand is moderate, by contrast, the concept is
a critical element in understanding the effect of economic changes on

demand for labor and wages (case B in figure 1). When the elasticity
of demand is near infinite, it is probably not useful to think of
educated labor as a distinct input in production at all, as it is
likely that other inputs are perfectly substitutable for it (case C in
figure 1).

2

FIGURE 1: ELASTICITY OF DEMAND FOR EDUCATED LABOR

wage

wage

number
demanded

A: Near zero elasticity
of demand: changes
in wages induces only
slight changes in
number demanded

wage

number
demanded

B: Moderate elasticity
of demand: changes
in wages induce
moderate changes
in number demanded

number
demanded

C: Near infinite
elasticity of
demand: changes
in wages cause
enormous changes
in number demanded

The magnitude of the elasticity of demand for educated labor
depends critically on the extent to which educated labor is

substitutable for other inputs in production. The ease of
substitutability is generally measured by the elasticity of
substitution, defined as the percentage change in the number of
educated workers relative to the amount of other inputs (say, less
educated workers) per percentage change in the wages of educated
workers relative to the price of other inputs (say, the wages of less

educated labor). Formally, if

measures the number of educated

workers and E0 the number of other inputs and if w1 and w0 are the
respective factor prices, the elasticity of substitution a is
(1)

a

=

E1(%E1/E0)/(%w1Iw0)

where %measures percentage changes. In analyses which treat employer
demand responses at a given level of output, the elasticity of demand

is just a function of elasticities of substitution. When the level of
output varies in response to changes in prices, the elasticity of
demand for educated labor, like other inputs, depends on the elasticity
of demand for the final product as well.
The elasticity of substitution between more and less educated
workers (or other inputs) has been at the center of analyses of demand

for educated labor for two reasons. First, because the validity of
widely used 'fixed coefficIent' methods for forecasting educational
demands or "needs" and the potential economic worth of educational
planning to meet such demands or "needs" hinges critically on the size
of the elasticity. Standard "fixed coefficient" forecast methods assume

4

zero elasticities of substitution in order to focus on the impact of
changes in the composition of industries on the demand for educated

labor. The greater are actual elasticities, the less valuable are such
forecasts. Similarly, planning education to meet future labor market
demands is useful only if elasticities of substitution are small; if
the elasticities are large, employers can readily substitute less
educated for more educated labor, so that even accurate planning will

be of little economic value. Second, the elasticity of substitution
between more and less educated labor is important in analyzing the
impact of changes in relative supplies of workers on the distribution

of earnings. When the elasticity is high, large increases in the
supply of graduates relative to nongraduates will have little effect on

their relative wages. When the elasticity of substitution is small,
large increases in the relative supply of graduates will cause sizeable
changes in relative wages and thus will alter the distribution of
earnings.

Given these issues, it is not surprising that economists have
undertaken empirical studies designed to measure the elasticity of
substitution between more and less educated or skilled workers.
Because the number of workers with varying levels of education is
predetermined in any given year by supply decisions made years earlier
due to the length of training, most analyses actually examine the
inverse of the elasticity of substitution, the elasticity of
complementarity, which measures the percentage change in relative wages

due to percentage changes in relative supplies. While it is

)

reasonable to assume that supplies are fixed in analyses that treat
time series data, this assumption is less defensible in comparisons

across geographic regions at a point in time: within a country, the
supply of educated workers to an area can migrate in response to wage
incentives and thus cannot be regarded as ttexogenousll to wage

determinatiofl across countries, differences in supply may reflect

responses to differences in the rewards to education that persist over
time, weakening the assumption that supplies can be taken as

independent of the wages. Accordingly, some studies have also used
simultaneous equations' techniques to estimate the relevant

elasticities of substitution. In these studies demand and supply of
educated labor are estimated conjointly in a system.

What is the result of these studies? What is currently known
about the elasticity of substitution between more and less educated
labor?

Table 1 summarizes the findings of the most important empirical
studies.

Initial

work on elasticities of substitution focused on cross—

sectional data, with most attention given to cross country comparisons.
While the early evidence on U.S.

relatively

states

supported

moderate elasticities (Johnson, Welch) the work of several

analysts led many to believe that the elasticity was rather high,

sufficiently

so to yield practically horizontal demand curves. Bowles

book on Planning Educational

particular,

Systems for Economic Growth produced, in

an elasticity between workers with some college education

6

TABLE 1: Estimates of the Elasticity of Substitution Between Highly
Educated and Less Educated Workers
Elasticity of
Substitution
Sample
Study
Bowles (1969)

countries

202

Johnson (1970)

states, U.S.A.

1.3

Welch (1970) (Agriculture Sector)

states, U.S.A.

1.4

Dougherty (1972)

states, U.S.A.

8.2

Psacharopoulos & Hinchliffe (1972)
(countries)

developed
less developed

1000
2.1—2.5

Tinbergen (1974)

countries
states

0.6—1.2
0.4—2.1

Freeman (1975)

years, U.S.A.

1.0—2.6

Layard and Fallon (1975)

countries

0.6—3.5

Grant (1979)

SMSAs

1.2

Note: Definitions of highly educated to less educated vary somewhat
between samples. All except Layard and Fallon treat college
relative to some other group. Layard and Fallon relate groups
with 8 or more years to less than 8.
Sources: Bowles, 5, Planning Educational Systems for Economic Growth,
Harvard University Press, 1969.
Johnson, G. "The Demand for Labor by Educational Category,"

Southern Economic Journal, (October 1970) 190—204.

Welch, F., Education in Production," Journal of Political
Economy, 78 (January 1970) 764—771.
Dougherty, C.R.S., "Estimates of Labour Aggregation Functions,"
J.P.E., 80, No. 6, 1101—1119.
Psacharopoulos, G. and Hinchliffe, K., "Further Evidence on
the Elasticity of Substitution Among Different Types of
Educated Labour," J.P.E., 80, No. 4, 786—791.
Tinbergen, J., "Substitution of Graduates by Other Labour,"
Kyklos, Vol. 27, No. 2, 217—226.
Freeman, R., "Overinvestment in College Training?", J.H.R..
Summer 1975.
Layard, P.R.G. and Fallon, P.R., "Capital—Skill

Complementarity, Income Distribution, and Output
Accounting", J..P.E., 83, No. 2, 279—302.
Grant, S. "Separability and Substitution Among Labor
Aggregates
#40, 1981.

and Capital," Wellesley College Working Paper

7

and those with 8 to 11 years of school of 202, and smaller but still

sizeable elasticities (6 to 12) between other educational groups. With
a sample of 28 states from the United States, Dougherty obtained a more

moderate but still high estimate of over 8. Psacharopoulos and
Hinchliffe divided the international sample by degree of development,
obtaining an essentially infinite elasticity (implying perfect
substitutability at the relevant wage ratios) in the developed

countries but a more modest value in the less developed countries. As
the relative earnings of graduates remained constant or increased in
the 1950s and 1960s, despite increased supplies of graduates frOm
colleges and universities, these estimates were generally accepted as

being in accord with reality. Some viewed them as casting serious
doubt on the concept of educational bottlenecks as a barrier to

economic growth and on the value of the fixed coefficient model of
labor demand, then being used by the Organization for Economic
Cooperation and Development, among others, to analyse the graduate and
skilled worker labor markets for the purpose of educational planning.
In the 1970s, concurrent with the observed decline in the

relative earnings of college graduates throughout the developed world,

analysts began to re—examine these results. New estimates based on
better data and models provided a very different picture of the
elasticity of substitution between educated and less—educated labor.

Nobel—laureate Jan Tinbergen amplified the country and state analyses
to take account of the likely simultaneous determination of relative
wages and relative supplies in cross—sections and obtained quite

8

different results from Bowles and Dougherty using their data sets. His
elasticities ranged from 0.50 to 2.00, which were consistent with the

earlier cross U.S. state work of Welch and Johnson. Freeman used time
series data for the United States to estimate the effect of the growth
in the number of college graduates relative to high school graduates on
their relative earnings and obtained estimated elasticities of a

similar magnitude, ranging from 1.0 to 2.6. Layard and Fallon examined
a large cross—section of countries, with the comparable results shown

in the table. Grant developed estimates in a complete translogarithmic
systems equation which included capital in the analysis and obtained a

value of 1.2. All told, the current evidence suggests a value of the
elasticity of substitution between more and less educated labor in the

range of 1.0 to 2.0. This magnitude is consistent with changes in the
supply of graduate.s altering their relative earnings and does not

invalidate the potential economic worth of educational planning based
on fixed coefficient models.

A large number of additional studies on substitution among

groups of workers have used occupational disaggregation. While these
results show a wider range than those given for educational groups in
Table 1, the estimates are consistent with elasticities of substitution

between highly educated and less educated workers of 1 — 2.

In the

Hamermesh and Grant review of 20 estimates of elasticities of
substitution between production (blue collar) and nonproduction (white
collar) workers, the mean estimate was 2.3, with half the studies
yielding estimates below 1.0 and half above that value.

9

The relationship between capital and more educated or skilled
labor and the relationship between capital and less educated or skilled
labor has also been studied as important elements in the demand for

labor of varying educational qualities. The key hypotheses in this
work had been that capital is less substitutable (more complementary)

for educated than for less educated labor (Griliches). If this is the
case increases in capital raise the demand for educated labor relative
to less educated labor and changes in the price of capital cause
employers to alter employment of the less educated more than employment

of the more educated. The extant evidence appears to support this
hypethesis. Of the twelve studies in the Hamerinesh—Grant review

article, eight show capital to be more easily substituted for blue
collar labor than for white—collar labor, and half indicate that white—
collar labor is actually complementary with capital, so that changes in
the price of capital raise demand for white collar labor rather than

reduce it. The only study to examine labor by education also shows
lower substitutability between the more educated and capital than
between the less educated and capital (Grant).
With moderate elasticities of substitution between educated and
less educated labor and with relatively small (or even oppositely
signed) elasticities of substitution between more educated labor and
capital, current evidence suggests that the elasticity of demand for

educated labor is of a moderate magnitude. In terms of Figure 1, the
evidence suggests that case B represents actual labor markets. Hence,
analyses of the impact of economic changes or policies on employment or

10

wages of educated labor cannot ignore the employment response to
changes in wages.

11

B IBLIOGRAPHY

Allen, R.G.D.,

Mathematical Analysis for Economists. London: 1938.

Bowles, S., Planning Educational Systems for Economic Growths Harvard
University Press, 1969.

Dougherty, C.R.S., "Estimates of Labour Aggregation Functions,"

Journal of Political Economy, 80, No. 6, 1101—1119.

Freeman, R., "Overinvestment in College Training?", Journal of Human
Resources, Summer 1975.

Grant, James, "Labor Substitution in U.S. Manufacturing." Ph.D.
dissertation, Michigan State University, 1979.

Grant, S., "Separability and Substitution Among Labor Aggregates and
Capital," Wellesley College Working Paper #40, 1981.

Griliches, Zvi, "Capital—Skill Complementarity," Review of Economics
and Statistics, 51 (November 1969): 465—468.

12

Hamermesh, Daniel and Grant, James, "Econometric Studies of Labor—Labor
Substitution and Their Implications for Policy," Journal of
Human—Resources, XIV, 4, 518—542.

Johnson, C. "The Demand for Labor by Educational Category," Southern
Economic Journal, (October 1970) 190—204.

Layard, P.R.G. and Fallon, P.R., "Capital—Skill Complementarity, Income
Distribution, and Output Accounting," Journal of Political
Economy, 83, No. 2, 279—302.

Psacharopoulos, G. and Hinchliffe, K., "Further Evidence on the
Elasticity of Substitution Among Different Types of Educated
Labour," Journal of Political Economy, 80, No. 4, 786—791.

Sato, Ryuzo and Koizumi, Tetsunori, 'n the Elasticities of
Substitution and Complementarity," Oxford Economic Papers 25
(March 1973): 44—56.

Welch, F., "Education in Production," Journal of Political Economy, 78
(January 1970) 764—771.

