                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       WHICH COUNTRIES HAVE STATE RELIGIONS?

                                           Robert J. Barro
                                         Rachel M. McCleary

                                         Working Paper 10438
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w10438


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       April 2004




This research has been supported by the National Science Foundation and the John Templeton Foundation.
We particularly appreciate assistance on the econometric estimation from Jiaying Huang and Silvana
Tenreyro. We are also grateful for helpful comments from Alberto Alesina, Terry Anderson, Gary Becker,
Gary Chamberlain, Ed Glaeser, Douglas Hibbs, Bill Hutchison, Steve Levitt, Casey Mulligan, Andrei
Shleifer, Francesco Trebbi, and participants in seminars at Harvard University, University of Chicago, and
Clemson University. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2004 by Robert J. Barro and Rachel M. McCleary. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.
Which Countries Have State Religions?
Robert J. Barro and Rachel M. McCleary
NBER Working Paper No. 10438
April 2004
JEL No. O1, Z1, P5
                                             ABSTRACT


For 188 independent countries in 2000, 72 had no state religion in the years 2000, 1970, and 1900;

58 had a state religion at all three dates; and 58 had some kind of transition. Among the 58

transitional countries, 12 had two transitions, 4 of which (former Soviet Republics in Asia) involved

two forms of state religion. The probability of having a state religion in 2000 or 1970 depends

strongly on the status of state religion in 1900 but much more so for countries that experienced no

major change in political regime during the 20th century. Communist governments tend not to have

state religion – only one Communist country (Somalia in 1970) had a state religion in the usual

sense. However, a past history of Communism does not have much influence on the probability of

state religion. Greater concentration of religious adherence is positively related to state religion, and

most of this relation seems to reflect causation from religious concentration to state religion, rather

than the reverse. Theoretically, state religion is more probable when the population adheres to a

monotheistic religion. We find this effect for Muslim adherence, but the relationship is not robust.

State religion is less likely in sub-Saharan Africa, possibly because of the intense competition for

converts in this region among the major world religions. The probability of state religion does not

differ significantly between former colonies and non-colonies but is higher for British colonies than

for Spanish and Portuguese colonies. Variables that have little effect on the probability of state

religion include per capita GDP, country size, and the extent of democracy, civil liberties, and the

rule of law.

Robert J. Barro                                         Rachel M. McCleary
Department of Economics                                 Weatherhead Center
Harvard University                                      Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138                                     Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER                                                mccleary@wcfia.harvard.edu
rbarro@harvard.edu
       State religion plays a central role in Adam Smith’s vision of the religion market

(Smith [1791, Book V, Article III]). According to Smith, the key aspect of state religion

is its promotion of the monopoly position of the favored religion. This promotion works

partly through limitations on entry of competitors and partly through subsidies. Smith’s

analysis focuses on the adverse consequences from the monopoly positions of the

Anglican Church in England and the Catholic Church in other countries. He argues that

monopoly providers of religious services tend—as monopolies do generally—to become

non-innovative and indolent. Consequently, service quality and religious participation

decline. This argument has been broadened in modern analyses of the “religion-market

model” by Stark and Bainbridge (1987), Finke and Stark (1992), Iannaccone (1991), and

Finke and Iannaccone (1993).

       Our previous research (McCleary and Barro [2003]) investigated the effects of

state religion on religiosity. We found from country averages of survey data for the

1980s and 1990s that the presence of state religion raised religious participation and

beliefs. Our interpretation was that the subsidy element in state religion—which

typically encourages investment in organized religion—dominated over the monopoly

element—which curtails competition and, thereby, reduces religious participation. These

relationships applied when we held fixed a measure of government regulation of the

religion market and an index of religious pluralism. Consistent with the religion-market

model, we found that religious participation and beliefs fell with regulation (in the sense

that the government appointed or approved religious leaders) and with a decrease in

religious pluralism.
        In another paper (Barro and McCleary [2003]), we used our findings about the

determinants of religiosity to estimate the effects of church attendance and religious

beliefs on economic growth in a panel of countries from 1965 to 1995. Our estimation

procedure isolated causation from religiosity to economic performance, rather than the

reverse, by using instrumental variables for religiosity. The instruments were dummy

variables for the presence of state religion and state regulation of religion and measures

of the composition of religious adherence. This analysis assumed that the presence or

absence of a state religion was exogenous with respect to economic growth. Hence, we

neglected the possibility—emphasized by secularization theorists—that increasing

incomes would induce countries to drop state religions.1

        In the present study, we try to explain the choice of state religions. This choice is

a political calculus that involves interactions between the government and the religion

sector. Thus, we can analyze establishment as a political-institutional decision that

involves benefits and costs from the promotion of a monopoly religion.

        The benefits from state religion include gains from monopoly power for the

dominant religion provider. Benefits to the state may involve control over the religion

sector. For example, in Communist countries and some other dictatorships, avoidance of

state religion is part of a policy to weaken the power of organized groups that would

otherwise compete with the state. However, in theocracies such as present day Iran, the

maintenance of an official state religion becomes part of the government’s plan for

controlling society.




1
 This idea appears in Weber (1930) and has been extended in Wilson (1966), Berger (1967), and Chaves
(1994).


                                                  2
       The costs from state religion include losses for excluded providers and to

individuals who are taxed or whose choices are constrained. However, as in Olson’s

(1965) analysis, free-rider problems involved in organizing collective action may mean

that the costs to individuals are not effectively transmitted through the political process as

constraints on government policy.

       Gill (2002) has argued that studies of religious liberty should take the form of

positive analyses of why the government regulates religious organizations in a particular

way. Our approach to the existence of state religion accords in spirit with the one

proposed by Gill.

       We want to understand the determinants of state religion for two reasons. First,

we found before that the presence of a state religion has important consequences for the

workings of the religion market and, hence, for the extent of religious participation and

beliefs. These relationships matter, in turn, for economic growth. That is, by influencing

religious participation and beliefs, the establishment of a state religion ultimately has

consequences for economic growth and probably for other economic, political, and social

variables. Given these effects from state religion, it is useful to isolate the underlying

factors that influence the establishment decision.

       Second, more narrowly, our investigation of economic growth hinged on the

treatment of the state-religion variable as exogenous with respect to per capita GDP. Our

analysis of the determinants of state religion will help to ascertain whether this treatment

was satisfactory. It may turn out—as we believe it does—that the presence of state

religion is nearly exogenous with respect to the dependent variable that we focused on—

economic growth—so that our analysis of the effects of religiosity on growth was




                                              3
satisfactory. Nevertheless, the presence of a state religion is endogenous in a fuller sense

that includes variables other than per capita GDP. We isolate some of these variables in

the present study.

        Previous research has sought to explain other forms of political choices and

institutions across societies. For example, a research program initiated by Aristotle

(1932) and taken up by Lipset (1959), Barro (1999), and Przeworski, et al (2000)

analyzes why some countries are democratic and others are not. Empirical analyses have

stressed the effects of economic development on political and legal structure, including

the extent of electoral rights, civil liberties, rule of law, and official corruption. This

research program relates to modernization theory, whereby economic development is

posited to lead to an array of changes in social and political institutions. This theory,

discussed in Bell (1973) and Inglehart and Baker (2000), is reminiscent of the economic

determinism of Marx (1913, pp. 11-12). Modernization theory has sometimes been

applied to state religion, notably in the secularization view that economic development

makes state religion less likely. However, our study does not find an important influence

of economic development on the propensity to have state religion.



I. Historical Context

        Many state religions go back hundreds of years and were introduced for reasons

that are likely to be independent of forces that operated in the 20th century. For example,

we will not attempt to explain the Protestant Reformation initiated by Luther and Calvin

in the early 1500s, but this event continues to be important in the Christian world. One

well-known sidelight of the Reformation was Henry VIII’s ouster of the Roman Catholic




                                                4
Church in 1534, purportedly over the Pope’s refusal to grant permission for a divorce.

The divorce issue was only one of many conflicts between Henry VIII and Rome, and the

confiscation of church property was probably a more significant motivation for the

change of official religion. However, our main point is that, for purposes of 20th century

analysis, we can reasonably take as given the establishment of the Anglican Church in

England in 1536-40. Moreover, this exogenous event seems to have a lot to do with the

continuing presence of the Anglican state religion in England.

        Although Henry’s actions are familiar, less well known is the ouster of the Roman

Catholic Church in Sweden by King Gustaf Vasa in 1527. The establishment of the

Lutheran church seemed motivated primarily by the desire to confiscate the Catholic

Church’s wealth, following a period of expensive and bloody warfare through 1520, after

which Sweden separated from Denmark. The continuing presence of the Lutheran state

church in Sweden and the rest of Scandinavia likely stems from these long ago events at

the time of the Reformation. (Sweden abandoned its official state religion only in 2000,

but Lutheranism remains the state religion in the other Scandinavian countries.)

        Our analysis does not attempt to explain Henry VIII’s actions in 1534 or Gustaf

Vasa’s in 1527. Going back further, we also do not explain why the Orthodox Church

separated from the Roman Catholic Church in the Great Schism of 1054, why

Catholicism and Islam became the state religions of many countries much earlier, or why

Buddhism arose out of Hinduism in India some 500 years before Christ and gradually

became prominent in parts of East Asia. Operationally, we take as given the status of

state religion in a region at some point in the past and, for us, the relevant date is a




                                               5
relatively recent one, 1900. This year is the earliest time at which we have a broad

classification of countries in terms of state religions.

         The starting date of 1900 means that we do not analyze relatively recent events

from the 1500s through the 1800s. For example, we do not explain the counter-

Reformation, which led to more religious tolerance with the Peace of Augsburg in 1555

and its eventual confirmation and extension in the Treaty of Westphalia in 1648. The

Peace of Augsburg granted tolerance to Lutherans in the Hapsburg Empire. The Treaty

of Westphalia extended this tolerance to the Reformed (Calvinist) Church. Thus, by

1648, tolerance applied to the three great religious communities of the Empire—Roman

Catholicism, Lutheranism, and Calvinism. With the Peace of Westphalia, the member

states agreed to respect private worship, liberty of conscience, and rights of migration for

religious minorities and dissidents within their domains.

         Other events that we do not explain include the establishment of Catholicism in

the Spanish and Portuguese colonies in Latin America and of forms of Protestantism in

most of the colonies of what was to become the United States.2 In our main analysis, this

variety of historical experience shows up as initial conditions in 1900. Our focus is on

how state religion evolved over the next 100 years—specifically, we concentrate on data

on the presence of state religion in 1970 and 2000.

         In this study, we categorize official state religion as an all-or-nothing choice.

However, the official state church in some countries—say England or Scandinavia—

2
  The Anglican Church was the official religion of the largest number of colonies, notably in the South.
However, the Congregationalist Church (related to Presbyterianism) dominated in New England, except for
Rhode Island, which lacked an official religion. The Congregationalist Church was not disestablished until
1818 in Connecticut, 1819 in New Hampshire, and in two parts—in 1824 and 1833—in Massachusetts.
The prohibition against establishment of an official religion, a part of the Bill of Rights, was not applied to
state governments until the extension of the equal-protection clause of the 14th Amendment to state
governments starting in the late 1800s. This extension culminated in a Supreme Court decision in 1934.
For discussions, see Norman (1968, chs. 1 and 2), Finke and Stark (1992, ch. 3), and Olds (1994).


                                                      6
represents less of a restriction on religious expression than in other countries—say Iran.

We could extend our analysis to consider the relation between government and religion

as a continuum, and we could examine a variety of forms of interaction between

government and religion. In an ongoing project, Fox and Sandler (2004) are assembling

a Religion and State data base. They classify the relation between religion and state in

numerous categories, which are arranged into four broad groupings: separation of

religion and state, discrimination against minority religions, restrictions on majority

religions, and religious legislation. Although each individual measure is a (0,1) dummy

variable, indexes based on the large number of individual components would be nearly

continuous. The Fox-Sandler data will eventually be available for most countries back to

1960 but are presently available only since 1990. We plan to use their data eventually to

investigate more aspects of the interaction between government and religion.

         Our study covers 188 countries that were independent in 2000.3 The 188

represent the countries for which we have data on state religion and other relevant

variables. Among these 188, 40%—75 countries—are classified as having state religions

in 2000. Going back in time, 39% of 189 countries—73—had state religions in 1970,

and 59% of 188—111—had state religions in 1900.4 Thus, the crude data for the 20th

century indicate a downward trend in state religion in the first part of the century but no

trend over the last 30 years.




3
  The criterion of legal independence in 2000 excludes, for example, Bermuda, Hong Kong, and Macao.
4
  The 189 countries in 1970 include East and West Germany as separate entities. Many of the 188
independent countries that existed in 2000 were not independent in 1970 and, even more so, in 1900. For
countries that were not independent in 1970 or 1900, the designation of state religion pertains to the regime
applying to the comparable region. Some of these regions were colonies—for example, in Africa—and
others were parts of larger countries—for example, republics of the Soviet Union or Yugoslavia in 1970 or
pieces of the Ottoman Empire in 1900.


                                                      7
        Our classifications of state religion come primarily from Barrett (1982, pp. 800-

801) and Barrett, Kurian, and Johnson (2001, pp. 834-835).5 These sources have the

advantage of providing global coverage over time on a reasonably consistent basis.

Although the designations are influenced by a country’s legal provisions, including

statements about religion in constitutions, the concept employed is ultimately de facto.

The classifications are clearer in some cases than others. In some of the straightforward

situations, the constitution designates an official state church and restricts or prohibits

other forms of religion. However, even without these designations or prohibitions, the

government may systematically favor a specified religion through subsidies and tax

collections or through the teaching of religion in public schools. These considerations

caused Barrett, et al to classify some countries as having a “state religion,” despite the

absence of an official state church in the constitution. Controversial cases of this type in

2000 include Italy, Portugal, and Spain, which Barrett, et al deem to have a Catholic state

religion. We consider later whether our results are sensitive to changes in designations

for these cases.

        Barrett (1982) and Barrett, Kurian, and Johnson (2001) classify some

governments as favoring multiple religions or religion in general, although not

maintaining a single religion. Examples in 2000 are Australia, Belgium, Brazil, Cyprus,

Philippines, South Africa, and Switzerland. These countries lack a state religion in the




5
 We corrected a number of typos in the designations in Barrett, Kurian, and Johnson (2001). We also
updated for two recent events: Sweden dropping Lutheranism as the state religion in 2000 and Bulgaria
adopting Orthodoxy as the state religion in 2001. Finally, in accordance with the U.S. State Department
Survey of Religious Freedom and other sources, we classified Cambodia as having a state religion
(Buddhist) in 2000. The discussion in Barrett, Kurian, and Johnson (2001, p. 165) reveals that events after
1975 in Cambodia were not taken into account, including the reestablishment of a Buddhist state religion in
1989.


                                                    8
sense of having or favoring a monopoly religion. Therefore, we classified these countries

as not having a state religion.6

           Tables 1a-1g describe the data on state religion. The tables are organized to

facilitate thinking about changes in the status of state religion since 1900. In terms of

transitions, the 188 countries in 2000 break down into seven types. Table 1a shows the

72 countries that maintained no form of state religion throughout, that is, in 1900, 1970,

and 2000. Examples are Australia, Canada, France, Germany, Mexico, and the United

States.7

           Table 1b shows the 58 countries that had a state religion at all three dates: 1900,

1970, and 2000.8 (Each of these countries maintained only one type of state religion at

the three dates.) Among these, 21 had Catholic state religions, 22 had Muslim, 9 had

Protestant (where we include Anglican with Protestant), 1 had Orthodox, 4 had Buddhist,

and 1 had Hindu.

           The remaining 58 countries had some kind of transition between the presence and

absence of state religion from 1900 to 2000. (Among these, 12 countries had two

transitions.) Table 1c shows the 29 countries with state religions in 1900 that abandoned

state religion by 1970 and did not reinstitute state religion by 2000. Examples are Brazil

and Chile (which dropped the Catholic state church), Turkey (Muslim), Indonesia (which

dropped the Dutch Reformed Church that had been imposed by the former colonial ruler),

6
  In 1993, the new Guatemalan constitution recognized indigenous and Protestant religions, in addition to
the Catholic religion. However, we followed Barrett, et al (2001) in labeling Guatemala as having a state
religion (Catholic) in 2000.
7
  The French republic separated completely from the Catholic Church in 1905. However, under the Third
Republic, which started in 1871, there was a gradual movement toward universal and secular education.
Probably for this reason, Barrett, et al label France as not officially Catholic in 1900.
8
  We have not investigated in detail whether lapses in state religion occurred in these countries at other
dates in the 20th century. Two cases that we know of are Afghanistan lacking a state religion from the time
of the Marxist coup in 1978 until the rise of the Taliban in the mid 1990s and Cambodia lacking a state
religion from the rise of Communism in the mid 1970s until 1989.


                                                     9
Russia (Orthodox), Japan (Shinto, a form of Buddhism), and China and Korea

(Confucianism). Table 1d shows the 12 countries with state religion in 1900 that

abandoned state religion between 1970 and 2000. This group includes Ireland (which

dropped Catholic9), Syria (Muslim), and Sweden (Protestant).

         Table 1e shows 12 countries that had a state religion in 1900, dropped the state

religion by 1970, but then reinstated a state religion by 2000. These cases are all former

republics of the Soviet Union or Yugoslavia. Four Asian countries that were previously

parts of the Soviet Union had Orthodox state religions in 1900 (as parts of the Russian

empire) but adopted Muslim state religions by 2000. Five other former Soviet republics,

including Armenia and Ukraine, reinstated an Orthodox state religion by 2000. Croatia is

designated as having a Catholic state religion in 1900 and 2000 but no state religion, as

part of Yugoslavia, in 1970.

         Finally, Tables 1f and 1g show countries that had no state religion in 1900 but

introduced one by 1970 (3 cases) or 2000 (2 cases). The three countries that adopted by

1970 were not independent entities in 1900: Bangladesh10 and Pakistan, which instituted

a Muslim state religion, and Israel, which adopted a Jewish state religion. The two

countries that adopted between 1970 and 2000 are Vanuatu, which introduced a

Protestant state religion upon independence in 1979, and Bulgaria, which established the

Orthodox Church (in 2001, rather than 2000).11


9
  Our classification follows Barrett, et al’s designation of Ireland as having a Catholic state church in 1900
and 1970. However, the official status of the Catholic Church in Ireland, such as it was, was not
established until after Irish independence in 1921. Moreover, the Anglican Church was disestablished in
Ireland in 1869. Therefore, it might be preferable to treat Ireland as lacking a state religion in 1900 and
having one in 1970. A 1972 referendum eliminated the Catholic Church’s official status.
10
   Bangladesh lacked a state religion from the time of its independence from Pakistan in 1972 until the
military coup of 1975.
11
   Barrett, et al classify Bulgaria as not having an Orthodox state religion in 1900, when the country was
subject to competing influences from the Russian and Ottoman empires. If Bulgaria were classified instead


                                                     10
II. Conceptual Issues

         The decision to implement or maintain a state religion involves interactions

between the government and the religion sector. Part of this interaction involves the

degree of separation between church and state—in some countries with state religions,

church and state are inseparable.

         Our general perspective is that a state religion is more likely to exist when the net

benefits to the state and the potential monopoly religion are greater. We describe in

subsequent paragraphs a number of factors that influence this net benefit. However,

given these factors, we assume that the mere existence of a state religion makes it more

likely that the state religion will continue into the future. In this sense, state religion is

like other political and legal institutions. Changing any of these institutions requires the

reaching of a political consensus or the application of a strong force from the central

political authority. Typically, the maintenance of the status quo is the option of lowest

cost and, hence, highest net benefit. In our context, we find that this force remains

important over a 100-year horizon.

         Although institutional changes are costly, a change in any one feature—such as

the implementation or removal of a state religion—is easier when other regime changes

are already taking place. For example, for a former colony, independence entails the

creation of a new form of government, which typically involves the enactment of a

constitution and other aspects of a legal system. At such times, changes in the status of

state religion are also likely to occur. Similarly, when a large country breaks apart—such

as having a state religion (Orthodox) in 1900, the country would fall into Table 1e—in this case, an eastern
European country that dropped a state religion under Soviet influence and then reintroduced it when the
Soviet Union collapsed.


                                                    11
as the disintegrations of the Ottoman Empire, the Soviet Union, and Yugoslavia—the

newly independent states can readily change the legal treatment of religion.

       To capture this force, we classified countries in 1970 and 2000 as to whether they

had experienced at least one major regime change since 1900. The question of what

constitutes a major regime change is subjective. However, to enhance our objectivity, we

labeled as a major regime change only an occurrence of one of the following three

events: a transition from colonial status to independence, a split-off of part of a larger

country into a separate state, and the adoption or elimination of Communism. Based on

these criteria, our classification for 1970 has 113 of 189 countries or 60% with at least

one major regime change since 1900. In 2000, 136 of 188 countries or 72% had

experienced such a change. Most of our classifications of major regime changes are

straightforward but some are not. For example, we do not label as major regime changes

war-related occupations of countries and the associated post-war shifts in governing

institutions. Debatable classifications of this type include Japan, South Korea, and

Turkey, each of which we classify as having no major regime change since 1900. We

explore later how our results change if we shift the classifications for these cases.

       One important influence on the net benefit from state religion is the degree of

homogeneity of the population with respect to religious adherence. Gill (2002) argues

that, in a pluralistic setting, all religion providers will favor a framework that allows for

free entry into the religion market. We measure homogeneity of religious adherence by

standard measures of concentration—Herfindahl indexes for adherence shares in 1900,

1970, and 2000. These indexes—the sum of the squares of the population shares among

11 groups—can be interpreted as the probability that two randomly selected persons




                                              12
belong to the same religion.12 The maintenance of religious monopoly—notably the

deterrence of entry by outside groups—is less costly when more of the population

adheres to the monopoly faith. More generally, homogeneity of the population with

respect to other characteristics, such as ethnicity and language, might help to install a

monopoly religion.

         An important issue for the empirical analysis is that state religion and the

structure of religious adherence may have a two-way interaction. More homogeneity

promotes state religion, but state religion likely promotes concentration of religious

adherence in the monopoly faith. As an attempt to sort out these interactions, we use

variables from 1900 as instruments for the concentration of religion in 1970 and 2000.

         Governments may use the absence or presence of state religion as a way to control

the religion sector. Important examples are Communist governments, some of which

promoted “scientific atheism” as an alternative to usual forms of organized religion.13

The anti-religious nature of Communist regimes is so powerful that our sample has only

one example of a Communist government that maintained a state religion—Somalia with

a Muslim state religion in 1970.14 Our analysis treats the presence of a Communist


12
    The data on religious adherence are from Barrett (1982) and Barrett, Kurian, and Johnson (2001). We
use the breakdown: Catholic, Protestant, Orthodox, other Christian, Muslim, Hindu, Buddhist, other
Eastern religions, Jewish, other religions, and non-religious. The last category includes atheists and
persons professing no religion. This classification differs from the one used in our prior work by the
inclusion of the non-religion group and by the addition of the category for other Christians (which includes
adherents to independent Christian churches, marginal Christians, such as Mormons and Jehovah’s
Witnesses, and unaffiliated Christians). Barrett, et al do not provide a breakdown of Muslim or Buddhist
adherence by type.
13
    For a discussion of the promotion of atheism under Communism, especially in East Germany, see Froese
and Pfaff (2003).
14
   In 2000, we classed 5 of the 188 countries as having Communist regimes, based on the descriptions of
governmental systems in CIA World Fact Book. The five are China, Cuba, Laos, North Korea, and
Vietnam. (North Korea is actually classed as “authoritarian socialist, one-man dictatorship.”) In 1970, we
used Kornai’s list (1992, Table 1.1) to classify 35 of 189 countries (separating Germany into East and
West) as having Communist governments. Many of the Communist “countries” in 1970 were parts of
larger states (republics of the Soviet Union and Yugoslavia) or were Eastern European countries that were


                                                    13
government as exogenous to the religion market—that is, we view the relation between

Communism and state religion as causation from the former to the latter. In addition to

examining the contemporaneous effect, we investigate whether Communist governments

have a lasting influence that persists after the Communist regime has ended.

        Some religions may have more to gain than others from the imposition of a state

religion. Notably, a religion that regards its own faith as essential for salvation is more

likely to press for a state religion as a way to suppress “inappropriate” worship by other

religions. Stark (2001, 2003) argues that this outlook on salvation applies especially to

the three great monotheistic religions—Judaism, Christianity, and Islam: “Those who

believe there is only One True God are offended by worship directed toward other Gods.”

(Stark [2003, p. 32]). He argues accordingly that these monotheisms have the most to

gain by allying with the state to secure a religious monopoly. In our empirical analysis of

state religion in 1970 and 2000, we find some evidence for a positive effect from Muslim

adherence. Catholic and Protestant religions may have had similar influences at earlier

times, but these effects do not show up in the data for the 20th century.

        In 1900, much of sub-Saharan Africa represented reasonably open territory in

which the major world religions could compete for influence. For unweighted averages

of 48 sub-Saharan African countries that existed in 2000, the fraction of the adhering

population professing the Catholic religion rose from 0.06 in 1900 to 0.23 in 2000, the

fraction Protestant or other Christian rose from 0.03 to 0.26, the fraction Muslim


heavily influenced by the Soviet Union. Also classed as Communist were China, Congo (Brazzaville),
Cuba, Mongolia, North Korea, North Vietnam, and Somalia. Since our data for Vietnam are not separated
into North and South, we entered the Communism dummy for Vietnam in 1970 as one-half, corresponding
to the roughly equal breakdown of the population between North and South. South Yemen was also
Communist in 1970, but our data for 1970 refer only to non-Communist North Yemen (roughly 80% of the
combined population of Yemen). Our data for Communism in 1955 also come from Kornai’s list, and our
data for Communism in 1985 come from CIA World Fact Book and individual country sources.


                                                 14
increased from 0.20 to 0.30, and the fraction associated with indigenous and other

religions fell from 0.69 to 0.16.15 Thus, especially for the Christian religions, the main

religious conversions in Africa occurred in the 20th century. This potential for conversion

should have created opportunities for establishments of state religions. However, in

contrast with the Americas in the 1500s and 1600s, the strong competition among the

major world faiths in sub-Saharan Africa may have impeded the implementation of

legally supported monopoly religions. Our analysis would pick up this effect from the

inclusion of a measure of religious concentration. However, a separate dummy variable

for sub-Saharan Africa turns out also to have a negative influence on the likelihood of

state religion.

        An important issue for evaluating our previous analysis of economic growth is

whether the level of economic development, represented by per capita real GDP,

influences the probability of having a state religion. The secularization hypothesis posits

that an increase in per capita GDP lowers the demand for organized religion. If this

hypothesis is correct, then an increase in per capita GDP likely lowers the net benefits to

a potential monopoly religion from having a state religion. Therefore, this view predicts

that an increase in per capita GDP would lower the probability of having a state religion.

We find little support for this hypothesis.

        A country’s prior colonial status may matter for state religion. Woodberry (2003)

argues that missionaries were especially important in influencing educational systems

and, thereby, affecting future political systems, including the extent of democracy. Along

similar lines, we might predict that former colonies of Britain would be likely to have a


15
  These numbers do not include the fraction Orthodox, which rose from 0.01 in 1900 to 0.02 in 2000. The
data on religious adherence shares are discussed in n.12.


                                                  15
Protestant state religion, whereas former colonies of France, Spain, and Portugal would

be likely to have a Catholic state religion. Our empirical findings show no overall

difference between colonies and non-colonies in the propensity to have a state religion.

However, British colonies are more likely than Spanish or Portuguese countries to have a

state religion.

        La Porta, et al (1988) argue that continuing effects from former colonial rulers

often work through legal systems—for example, former British colonies having common-

law systems and former colonies of France, Spain, and Portugal having statute-law

systems. Categorizations of countries by former colonial status are similar to but not

identical to classifications by legal systems. For example, Thailand and Bhutan are

classified as non-colonies but have British style common-law systems; Iran is classed as a

non-colony but has a French style statute-law regime; and Egypt, Iraq, Malta, and

Mauritius are classified as former British colonies but have French style statute-law

systems. We lack a theoretical argument for why common-law versus statute-law

arrangements would relate to the choice of state religion, and the empirical results do not

show an effect that can be distinguished from colonial history more generally.

        The choice of a state religion can be viewed as one form of limitation on

individual freedom. From this perspective, we might expect the presence of state religion

to relate to other dimensions of democracy and legal structure. On the other hand, a

casual view of the data indicates that weakening or elimination of state religion is

sometimes a part of broad liberal reform but at other times is the work of a dictator

(notably in Communist governments). Consistent with these opposing forces, our




                                             16
empirical analysis does not show a clear relation of state religion to indicators of

democracy, civil liberties, and the rule of law.

           We can also think of state religion as a particular form of market regulation.

Mulligan and Shleifer (2004) model the choice of regulation in a political-economy

setting. Given fixed costs of regulating, they argue that larger jurisdictions tend to have

more regulation. An extrapolation of the Mulligan-Shleifer idea to our setting would

predict that larger countries would be more likely to have state religions. We find no

supporting evidence for this hypothesis.



III. Empirical Findings

           Our empirical analysis focuses on linear probability models for the presence of

state religion. The obvious problem with these linear specifications is that the fitted

values for explaining state religion need not lie in the interval (0, 1), as would be true for

a probability. This problem can be handled by a binary-model specification, such as the

probit form that we consider later. The results from probit estimation are similar to those

for the linear model. Since the linear models are more tractable, especially for imposing

theory-based restrictions on coefficients and for assessing causation, we focus on these

results.



           A. Estimates of Linear Probability Models with no Allowance for

Endogeneity

           Table 2 shows the means and standard deviations of the variables used in the

analysis. Table 3 has estimates of the linear probability models. The first set of results




                                                17
neglects the potential endogeneity of some of the right-hand side variables. These results

are labeled as SUR (for seemingly-unrelated regression model) in the table. Another set

of results takes account of possible endogeneity of some of the right-hand side variables.

These results are labeled as 3SLS (for three-stage least-squares). We consider the 3SLS

results in the next section.

        The dependent variable is a (0, 1) dummy for the presence of a state religion in

2000 or 1970. Thus, we investigate only whether a state religion exists, not the particular

form of state religion. The reasoning for the inclusion of the various explanatory

variables has already been presented. Column 1 of Table 3 includes a dummy variable

for the presence of state religion in 1900, the Herfindahl index for concentration of

religion in 2000 or 1970, the presence of a Communist regime (for 2000 and 1985 in the

2000 equation, for 1970 and 1955 in the 1970 equation), the fraction of the population

that is Muslim in 2000 or 1970, and a dummy variable for sub-Saharan Africa.

        We use a specification that allows for persistence of state religion over time but

that distinguishes countries with at least one major regime change from those without

such a change. Let St be a zero-one dummy variable for the presence of state religion for

a country in year t. Let Rt be a (0, 1) dummy variable for whether the country has

experienced at least one major regime change since 1900. The specification of the

deterministic part of our linear probability model is then

        (1)       St = S1900·[λ1·(1-Rt) + λ2·Rt] + [1 - λ1·(1-Rt) - λ2·Rt]·βZt + constant,

where S1900 is a dummy variable for the presence of state religion in 1900, the

coefficients λ1 and λ2 (0<λ1<1 and 0<λ2<1) determine the persistence over time in the

probability of state religion for countries without and with regime changes, respectively




                                               18
(Rt = 0 or Rt = 1), and βZt represents the long-run influence of a set of explanatory

variables, Zt, on the probability of state religion. The vector Zt includes the concentration

index for religious adherence in year t, the presence of Communism in year t and in the

past, and so on.

       The coefficients λ1 and λ2 would differ depending on whether St is observed in

2000 or 1970. Since 100 years have elapsed since 1900 in 2000 and only 70 years in

1970, we anticipate that λ1 and λ2 would each be higher in 1970 than in 2000. That is,

more of the persisting influence from the status of state religion in 1900 would remain in

1970. In any event, we estimate one pair of coefficients, (λ1, λ2), for 2000 and another

pair for 1970.

       The other coefficients, given by β in equation (1), represent the long-run effects of

the variables Zt on the probability of state religion. Hence, the coefficients β should be

the same in the equations for 2000 and 1970. We therefore carry out the estimation under

the restriction that these coefficients are the same for the two years. The imposition of

these restrictions sharpens the precision of our estimates. We can also test the hypothesis

of equality for the coefficients β in 2000 and 1970. These tests reveal that the data accord

with the hypothesis of equality.

       Consider first the results in Table 3, column 1. This SUR estimation treats the

equations for state religion in 2000 and 1970 as a system, where the error terms for each

country are allowed to be correlated over time. However, as mentioned, this method

makes no allowance for endogeneity of any of the right-hand-side variables. (The

method also weighs countries the same, independently of size, geographical proximity to

other countries, and so on.)




                                             19
        Given the other explanatory variables, the existence of a state religion in 1900

matters a great deal for the probability of state religion in 2000 and 1970. For a country

that has experienced no major regime change since 1900, the estimated coefficients are

0.75 for 2000 and 0.91 for 1970. These coefficients are each statistically significantly

different from zero with p-values less than 0.01.16 The coefficient in the 1970 equation is

higher than that for 2000 with a p-value for the difference of 0.025.17 This result makes

sense because it signifies that less of the effect from the initial condition in 1900 would

have decayed by 1970 than by 2000.

        For a country with at least one major regime change, the coefficients on the

dummy variable for state religion in 1900 are 0.31 for 2000 and 0.28 for 1970. These

coefficients are statistically significantly different from zero with p-values less than

0.01.18 Each coefficient is significantly lower, with p-values less than 0.01, than its

counterpart for countries with no major regime change (point estimates of 0.75 and 0.91,

respectively). That is, as expected, the status of state religion in 1900 is substantially

more important for countries with no major regime change than for those with such a

change. Among countries with regime changes, we would have expected a smaller

coefficient for 2000, but the two coefficients (0.31 and 0.28) do not differ statistically

from each other. This outcome may signify that, for countries with regime changes, the

most important influence on the probability of state religion is the fact of such a change

(interacted with the other explanatory variables), rather than the time elapsed since 1900.



16
   Using a one-sided Wald test, each coefficient is also significantly less than one (p-value of 0.002 for
2000 and 0.043 for 1970). However, it may be more appropriate to test for unit coefficients by using some
variant of a unit-root test.
17
   This result applies for a Wald test of equal coefficients against the alternative hypothesis that the
coefficient for 1970 is larger than that for 2000 (that is, a one-sided test).
18
   These coefficients are also significantly less than one.


                                                    20
       For countries with no major regime change, we can view the estimated

coefficients on the 1900 value for the state-religion dummy variable as gauging the rate at

which the historical presence of state religion becomes unimportant for the current

environment. The values of 0.906 for 1970 and 0.748 for 2000 (column 1 of Table 3)

imply decay rates of 0.14% and 0.29% per year, respectively.

       The results can be extrapolated to the very long-term evolution of state religion.

If we assume a decay rate of 0.2% per year, the probability of observing state religion in

2000 would depend on the presence of state religion at the time of the Reformation—say,

470 years earlier—with a coefficient of 0.39. Thus, the establishments around 1530 of

the Lutheran Church in Scandinavia and the Anglican Church in England would still

matter substantially for the likely character of current state religion. An even earlier

event—the Great Schism between the western (Rome) and eastern (Constantinople)

branches of the Catholic Church in 1054— would matter in 2000 with a coefficient

of 0.15.

       One important caveat for these calculations is that the changes during the

Reformation and the Great Schism refer to shifts in the forms of state religion, rather than

movements from state religion to no state religion. It may be that the probability of

eliminating state religion entirely was close to zero for a long time in the years before the

20th century. Another point is that the calculations apply only to countries that do not

experience major regime changes. If changes occur to the basic form of government

(which could itself be modeled probabilistically), the influence from the presence of state

religion in the long ago past would be negligible.




                                             21
         As mentioned, we can think of the coefficients on the other explanatory variables

in column 1 of Table 3 as representing effects on the long-run probability of a state

religion in a country, independent of the situation in 1900. Religion concentration,

gauged by the Herfindahl index, has a statistically significant, positive coefficient.19 The

point estimate of 0.71 means that a one-standard-deviation increase in concentration (by

0.23 in 2000, see Table 2) raises the probability of state religion by 0.16. This

interpretation assumes that the estimated coefficient reveals the influence from religion

concentration to the probability of state religion. In the three-stage least-squares systems,

we allow for reverse causation from state religion to religion concentration.

         The contemporaneous presence of a Communist government has a statistically

significant, negative effect on the probability of a state religion. The presence of

Communism is estimated to reduce the probability of state religion by 0.49. We should

note that, in 2000, our sample has 5 of the 188 countries designated as Communist and, in

1970, 34 of the 189 countries, plus one-half of Vietnam, classified as Communist. The

only one of these countries that had a state religion contemporaneously with Communism

was Somalia in 1970.20

         We also estimated lagged effects of Communism by entering a dummy variable

for Communism in 1985 in the 2000 equation and for 1955 in the 1970 equation.21 The


19
   We also added measures of concentration of the population by ethnicity and language, as constructed by
Alesina, et al (2003), to the specification in Table 3, column 1. The ethnicity variable has a coefficient that
is negative (the wrong sign) and marginally significant: -0.30 (s.e. = 0.15). The language variable (added
separately from ethnicity) is not statistically significant; the coefficient is -0.02 (0.14). In each case, the
coefficient on religion concentration remains positive and statistically significant.
20
   The autocrat Siad Barre, who came to power in 1969, argued that his brand of socialism was consistent
with Islam. Thus, initially, there were no changes in the official status of Islam. However, in the pursuit of
“scientific socialism” in the 1970s, Siad Barre moved increasingly to weaken the political influence of
religious leaders.
21
   In this analysis, the 1985 value of the Communism dummy for unified Germany is set to 0.20, the
population share of the eastern parts.


                                                      22
results in column 1 indicate a significantly negative effect, -0.17, from the presence of

Communism 15 years earlier. However, the significance of this coefficient is not robust

to changes in specification that we consider later. The principal finding is that the

presence of Communism sharply lowers the contemporaneous probability of state

religion but has relatively little influence once Communism is eliminated. The main

changes over time in the Communism variable come from the 28 countries in 2000 that

were no longer Communist because of the collapses in the 1990s of the Soviet Union and

Yugoslavia. Thus, our results imply that the history of Communism in these places did

not have much lasting influence on the probability of state religion.

        The Muslim religion adherence share has a coefficient, 0.37, that is positive and

statistically significant at the 0.05 level.22 However, as with lagged Communism, the

significance of this coefficient turns out not to be robust to changes in specification that

we consider later. If we add the Catholic religion share, the coefficient of this variable is

statistically insignificant from zero. If we go further to include the shares for the other

main monotheistic faiths—Protestant, Orthodox, and Jewish—the only statistically

significant coefficient is a positive and marginally significant one for the Jewish share.

This result is driven by the presence of a state religion in Israel.

        The dummy variable for sub-Saharan Africa has a coefficient, -0.48, that is

negative and statistically significant. Thus, even after holding constant the measure of

religion concentration, presence in sub-Saharan Africa is associated with a lower

probability of state religion. One possible reason for the significance of the Africa

dummy is that the data on religious adherence, which underlie the construction of the


22
  Fox and Sandler (2004, p. 12) observe from simple correlations that predominantly Muslim countries are
particularly likely to have state religions.


                                                  23
religion concentration variable, are particularly subject to measurement error in this

region.23 Hence, the dummy variable for sub-Saharan Africa may enter significantly

because it goes beyond the religion concentration variable in signaling relatively low

concentration of religious adherence in Africa.

        We carried out the estimation for Table 3, column 1, under the restriction that the

coefficients of a set of explanatory variables in the 2000 equation were the same as those

in the 1970 equation. This set of variables comprises religion concentration,

contemporaneous and lagged Communism, the Muslim adherence share, the dummy

variable for sub-Saharan Africa, and constant terms. A joint test for equality of these

coefficients is accepted with a p-value of 0.17.24 Thus, this test validates the model’s

hypothesis—that the coefficients β in equation (1) are the same in 2000 and 1970—and

justifies our imposition of these restrictions for the estimates presented in Table 3.

        Column 3 of Table 3 is the same as column 1, except that we add as an

explanatory variable a measure of the state of economic development—the log of real per

capita GDP. The basic data on GDP are the purchasing-power adjusted numbers from

Heston, Summers, and Aten (2002). We entered the 1995 values, rather than those for

2000, in the equation for 2000 in order to increase the number of observations.

Nevertheless, the necessity of having data on real GDP results in a serious loss of

observations—40 countries in 2000 and 74 countries in 1970. Moreover, the selection of

which countries lack GDP data is not random—for example, only 5 of the 35 countries

designated as Communist in 1970 have GDP data for 1970.

23
   This interpretation is supported by the discussions of data sources for African countries in Barrett
(1982)—see, for example, the discussion for Nigeria on p. 527. Lack of census information, especially
outside of the major cities, is an important problem.
24
   The main differences in the estimated coefficients for 2000 and 1970 are for the Communism variables,
contemporaneous and lagged.


                                                   24
         Since the main idea is to introduce an indicator of the state of economic

development, we used information on life expectancy at birth and some other variables to

construct proxies for real per capita GDP for the countries that lacked GDP data.

Specifically, we used fitted values derived from regressions of the log of per capita GDP

on the following variables: the contemporaneous log of life expectancy at birth, two

geography measures—the absolute value of degrees latitude and a dummy for land-

locked status—dummy variables for Communism, and the contemporaneous share of

Muslim adherence. The R-squared values for these regressions are reasonably high—

0.79 in 1995 and 0.70 in 1970—and we think that the resulting fitted values serve

adequately as proxies for the standard of living.25

         The coefficient for the log of per capita GDP in column 3 of Table 3 is negative,

-0.040, but is not quite statistically significant at the 5% level.26 Thus, we find only weak

support for the secularization view, which predicts a negative effect of economic

development on the likelihood of state religion.27 This interpretation views the

coefficient on the log of per capita GDP as an influence from per capita GDP to the

probability of state religion. In the three-stage least-squares systems, we allow for

reverse causation from state religion to per capita GDP.

         The probability of state religion is unrelated to country size. If we add the log of

population to the equations for 2000 and 1970, the estimated coefficient differs

insignificantly from zero. For example, for the specification that includes the log of per

25
   Life expectancy has the most explanatory power in these regressions (positive). However, absolute
degrees latitude is also important (positive), as is Communism in 1970 (negative). Muslim adherence has
substantial explanatory power for 1995 per capita GDP (negative).
26
   Measurement error in the GDP variable would tend to bias the estimated coefficient toward zero.
However, this consideration should be less important for the three-stage least-squares estimate, which we
consider later.
27
   In McCleary and Barro (2003), we did find statistically significant negative effects of per capita GDP on
religiousness, as gauged by church attendance and religious beliefs.


                                                     25
capita GDP—Table 3, column 3—the estimated coefficient on the log of population is

0.002, s.e. = 0.016. Thus, the size effect predicted by Mulligan and Shleifer (2004) does

not operate for state religion.

        We considered influences from prior colonial status by using a breakdown into

British, French, Spanish or Portuguese, and other colonies.28 We carried out this analysis

as a supplement to the specification in Table 3, column 3, which includes the log of per

capita GDP. If we consider all colonies as a group versus non-colonies, the estimated

coefficient on the colony dummy variable differs insignificantly from zero (0.09,

s.e. = 0.13, using the SUR technique). Column 5 of Table 3 shows the results when the

colonies are broken down into the four types—British, French, Spanish or Portuguese,

and others. In this case, none of the individual coefficients are statistically significantly

different from zero. However, the four dummy variables are jointly significant

(p-value = 0.022). The main effect picked up here is that the point estimate for British

colonies is positive (in comparison with the left-out category of non-colonies), whereas

that for Spanish and Portuguese colonies is negative. In other words, British colonies are

more likely than Spanish or Portuguese colonies to have state religions. This pattern was

not obvious, ex ante.

        To see whether the colonial influences worked through legal origins, we used the

legal-origins variable developed by La Porta, et al (1998). We added dummy variables

for British (common-law) and French (statute-law) legal systems to the specification in




28
  Countries that were contemporaneously or formerly dependent on the Soviet Union, such as those in
Eastern Europe, are not treated as current or former colonies. Similarly, contemporaneous or former
republics of the Soviet Union and Yugoslavia are not classed as current or former colonies.


                                                  26
Table 3, column 3.29 Neither of these legal-origins variables is individually statistically

significant, but the two are jointly significant (p-value = 0.007). If we also include

colony dummies, as in column 5 of Table 3, the two legal-origins variables are no longer

jointly statistically significant (p-value = 0.15). However, when we include the two

legal-origins variables, the four colony dummy variables are also not jointly statistically

significant (p-value = 0.28). Thus, the data do not allow us to distinguish the effects from

legal origins from those of colonial history more generally.

         We examined the relationship of state religion to indicators of democracy, civil

liberties, and the rule of law. We used the Freedom House measures of democracy

(electoral rights) and civil liberties for 1972, the first year of availability. We used the

rule-of-law indicator from Political Risk Services (from their International Country Risk

Guide) for 1985, the first year of broad availability. The result is that all of these

variables, when added one at a time to the equations that include the log of per capita

GDP (column 3 of Table 3), have statistically insignificant coefficients. Thus, we find no

evidence that the political forces that generate state religion are related to the forces that

promote democracy and the rule of law.30

         We mentioned that some of the designations of state religions by Barrett (1982)

and Barrett, Kurian, and Johnson (2001) are controversial. Three noteworthy cases are

Spain, Portugal, and Italy, which Barrett, et al classify as having Catholic state religions

in 2000 (as well as in 1970 and 1900).


29
   The three omitted categories are German, Scandinavian, and socialist. The socialist category is similar to
our Communism variable.
30
   Mulligan, Gil, and Sala-i-Martin (2003, Table 3) report a statistically significant negative relation
between democracy and a measure of regulation of religion. However, their results are hard to relate to
ours because their measure of religious regulation is whether a state religion exists (as indicated by Barrett
[1982] and Barrett, Kurian, and Johnson [2001]) or whether a country is indicated by Barrett, et al to have
lots of atheists.


                                                     27
       For Spain, movements away from the official status of the Catholic Church

occurred after President Franco’s death in 1975—in particular, a 1978 referendum

ratified a new constitution in which the state no longer was deemed to have an official

religion. Barrett, et al argue, however, that the situation remained one in which the

Catholic Church had a special relationship with the government—they note, for example,

that the constitution also says: “The public authorities will keep in mind the religious

beliefs of the Spanish society and will maintain cooperation with the Catholic Church and

other confessions.” Similarly, in Portugal, movements away from the monopoly status of

the Catholic Church occurred after the death of President Salazar in 1969. The monopoly

position of the Church was weakened by the Law of Religious Liberty in 1971 and, even

more so, by actions taken by the left-wing government that came to power with the coup

in 1974. Barrett, et al argue, however, that the prominent legal position of the Catholic

Church was only modified, not eliminated. Again in Italy, the official status of the

Catholic Church was weakened in the 1970s by modifications of the concordat that had

been in place since 1929. However, Barrett, et al argue that the official position of the

Catholic Church remained preeminent.

       To see whether the results are sensitive to the classifications of state religion for

Spain, Portugal, and Italy, we reran the system (Table 3, column 1) with the three

designations changed to no state religion in 2000. With this change, the fit worsens—the

R-squared value for the 2000 equation falls from 0.56 to 0.51. However, the coefficients

do not change greatly from those found before. The main change is that the coefficient

on state religion in 1900 for countries in 2000 with no regime change falls from 0.748

(s.e. = 0.086) to 0.659 (0.092). Thus, our conclusion is that, although Barrett, et al’s




                                             28
designations of state religion are controversial in some cases, the basic results are likely

to be robust to reasonable changes in these designations.

       We also mentioned that our classification of regime change was debatable in

some cases—specifically, we were uncertain about the labeling of Japan, South Korea,

and Turkey as having experienced no major regime change since 1900. If we change the

classifications of these three cases to having regime changes by 1970, our fitted model

improves. For the specification in column 1 of Table 3, the R-squared values rise from

0.56 to 0.58 for the 2000 equation and from 0.73 to 0.76 for the 1970 equation. The

reason for the improvement in fits is that the three countries at issue had state religions in

1900 but dropped them by 1970. Thus, classifying these countries as having experienced

a regime change makes it easier to fit the transitions in state religion. Consistent with this

perspective, the most notable change in the coefficients is an increase for the dummy

variable for state religion in 1900 among countries with no regime change (to 0.797

[0.082] for 2000 and 0.944 [0.054] for 1970).



       B. Three-Stage Least-Squares Estimates of Linear Probability Models

       Columns 2, 4, and 6 of Table 3 use instrumental variables (three-stage least

squares or 3SLS) to deal with two-way causation between state religion and two of the

explanatory variables: religion concentration and the log of per capita GDP. For religion

concentration, our idea is to use information from 1900. Essentially, the 3SLS systems

relate the existence of state religion in 2000 and 1970 not to contemporaneous religion

concentration but rather to the concentration that could have been predicted from the

values of religion concentration that prevailed in 1900.




                                              29
          To sort out directions of causation between state religion and religion

concentration, the main issue in our context is whether the presence of state religion in

1900 has predictive power for religion concentration in 2000 and 1970. If so, reverse

causation from state religion to religion concentration is likely to be important, and the

SUR estimates shown in Table 3 would tend to be biased. Since we use the 1900 value

of religion concentration as an instrument, we also want to know whether this variable

has substantial predictive power for religion concentration in 2000 and 1970. If not, the

instrument would be “weak” and would not give reliable results—see Staiger and Stock

(1997).

          To address these issues, we ran “first-stage” regressions with religion

concentration in 2000 and 1970 as the dependent variables. The explanatory variables

were the values in 1900 for state religion and religion concentration, the

contemporaneous Muslim adherence share,31 and dummy variables for sub-Saharan

Africa and Communism. The state-religion variable for 1900 was interacted with the

regime-change variable for 2000 or 1970.32 Statistically significant variables for

explaining religion concentration in 2000 or 1970 were the 1900 value of religion

concentration (positive), the Muslim adherence share (positive), and the sub-Saharan

African dummy (negative). All of these coefficients had p-values less than 0.01. For

countries with regime changes, the status of state religion in 1900 had no predictive

content. However, for countries with no regime change, the coefficients on state religion

in 1900 were positive and statistically significant—0.089 (s.e. = 0.037) for 2000 and


31
   We also estimated systems in which the contemporaneous Muslim adherence share was treated as
endogenous, with the 1900 Muslim adherence share taken as exogenous. The 3SLS results for the linear
probability models with this specification were very close to those reported in Table 3.
32
   We are treating regime change as exogenous with respect to religion concentration.


                                                  30
0.085 (0.033) for 1970. Thus, there is some evidence that the past presence of state

religion predicts concentration of religious adherence 70 or 100 years later. This result

suggests a possible simultaneity bias in the coefficients estimated by the SUR technique

in Table 3. We deal with this problem by using religion concentration in 1900 as an

instrument for contemporaneous religion concentration—the high explanatory power for

religion concentration in 1900 suggests that this instrument would not be weak.

         Column 2 of Table 3 shows three-stage least-squares estimates of the linear

probability model for state religion in 2000 and 1970. The instrument lists exclude

contemporaneous religion concentration but include the values for 1900. The main

differences from the previous results (shown in column 1) are in the coefficients for

religion concentration and the Muslim adherence share. Religion concentration is still

positive and statistically significant—in fact, the coefficient is higher than before.

Therefore, the allowance for endogeneity of religion concentration leaves intact the

conclusion that greater concentration makes state religion more likely. However, the

coefficient for Muslim adherence becomes smaller and is no longer statistically

significant.33 Hence, the effect of Muslim adherence on the probability of state religion

is not reliably determined—the results are sensitive to the estimation procedure.

         Column 4 of Table 3 shows three-stage least-squares estimates for the model that

includes the log of per capita GDP. We now treat the log of per capita GDP, as well as

religion concentration, as endogenous. Since we lack data on per capita GDP in 1900 for

33
  The result on religion concentration is surprising because, with a positive effect of state religion on
religion concentration, the instrumental estimate of the concentration coefficient would tend to be smaller
than the one estimated by SUR. The reason the point estimate becomes larger seems to involve an
interaction with the Muslim adherence variable. For given religion concentration in 1900, Muslim
adherence in 1970 or 2000 “predicts” higher contemporaneous religion concentration. Therefore, the
instrumental estimate of the concentration coefficient picks up a positive effect from Muslim adherence.
When this effect is held constant, the estimated coefficient on the Muslim adherence variable becomes
smaller.


                                                     31
most of the countries, we include instead as instruments two geographical features

mentioned before that have substantial explanatory power for per capita GDP. These

features are the absolute value of degrees latitude and the dummy variable for land-

locked status.

         To assess the first-stage equations for per capita GDP, we ran least-squares

regressions with the log of per capita GDP in 1995 or 1970 as the dependent variable.

The explanatory variables are the two geography measures, the 1900 values of state

religion and religion concentration, the contemporaneous Muslim adherence share, and

dummy variables for Communism and sub-Saharan Africa. The result is that degrees

latitude has positive coefficients that are significant with p-values less than 0.01, and

landlocked-status has negative coefficients with p-values of 0.011 in the equation for

1995 per capita GDP and 0.008 for 1970 per capita GDP. Also significant in these

equations are the sub-Saharan African dummy (negative with p-values less than 0.01), the

Muslim adherence share (negative with p-values less than 0.01), and the dummy variable

for Communism in 1970 (negative with p-values less than 0.01). State religion from

1900 is negative but only marginally significant. One important finding is that the two

geographical features have substantial explanatory power and would therefore not be

weak instruments for the log of per capita GDP.

         The three-stage least-squares estimate of the coefficient of the log of per capita

GDP (Table 3, column 4) is -0.08, s.e. = 0.06. Thus, as before (column 3), the effect of

per capita GDP is not statistically significantly different from zero.34 We conclude that


34
  One concern is that, over long periods, the land-locked variable is endogenous because it reflects changes
in country borders. For example, Bolivia currently lacks access to the sea because it lost its coastline in a
war with Chile in the late 1800s. Moreover, this military defeat might somehow be related to Bolivia’s
potential per capita GDP. In any event, our results are similar if we drop the land-locked dummy variable


                                                     32
an allowance for the endogeneity of per capita GDP with respect to state religion does not

change the basic finding. We still lack evidence that increases in per capita GDP

decrease the probability of state religion.35

         Column 6 of Table 3 shows three-stage least-squares estimates when the colony

dummy variables are added to the equations from column 4. (The colony dummy

variables and their interactions with the regime-change variables are included in the

instrument lists.) The results for prior colonial status are similar to those found in

column 5.36



         C. Probit Estimates of Probability Models

         Table 4 shows coefficient estimates for a probit model for the probability of state

religion in 2000 and 1970.37 This system parallels the linear probability model in

column 1 of Table 3. As before, the statistically significant coefficients in Table 4 are for

state religion in 1900 (positive for countries without and with a regime change), religion

concentration (positive), contemporaneous Communism (negative), and the sub-Saharan

Africa dummy (negative). The Muslim coefficient is positive but no longer statistically




from the instrument lists. In this case, the estimated coefficient on the log of per capita GDP is -0.05,
s.e. = 0.06.
35
   These results suggest that the dummy variable for the presence of state religion in 1970 was satisfactory
as an instrumental variable for religiosity in our study of economic growth from 1965 to 1995 (Barro and
McCleary [2003]).
36
   If we consider only colonies versus non-colonies, the coefficient on colony is again statistically
insignificant from zero—the estimate is 0.06, s.e. = 0.14.
37
   See Wooldridge (2002, chapter 15) for a discussion of probit estimation. We estimate the probit model
by maximum likelihood, subject to coefficient restrictions implied by the latent model based on Eq. (1).
Specifically, the probit coefficients on the independent variables Z (religion concentration, current and
lagged Communism, Muslim adherence, sub-Saharan Africa dummy, and a constant) are the same for 2000
and 1970. In addition, in 2000 and 1970, the ratio of the probit coefficient on state religion in 1900 for no
regime change to that for a regime change equals the ratio of the coefficients λ1 and λ2 applied to the
independent variables Z. We also allow the error terms for 2000 and 1970 to be correlated.


                                                     33
significant at the 5% level. Lagged Communism has an insignificant effect, as before.38

         Much easier to interpret than the probit coefficients in Table 4 are the implied

marginal effects of each right-hand-side variable on the probability of state religion.

Because these models are non-linear, the marginal effects depend on the values of all of

the independent variables and are, therefore, different for each country and year. The

values shown in column 2 give the sample average of the marginal effects for the

continuous variables—religion concentration and Muslim adherence share. For the

dummy variables, the values give the sample average effect from a change in each

dummy variable from 0 to 1.39 In the main, the marginal effects shown in column 2 are

close to the coefficients of the linear probability model shown in column 1 of Table 3.

Hence, the linear probability models give a reasonable picture of the average marginal

effects of each explanatory variable on the probability of state religion.

         The pseudo R-squared values in Table 4 parallel usual R-squared measures—they

equal one minus the ratio of the unexplained sum of squared residuals to the total sum of

squared deviations of the dependent variable around its mean. These values are

comparable to the R-squared values shown for the linear probability model in column 1

of Table 3. The values in Table 4 are higher because the non-linear aspects of the probit

improve on the fit. Notably, the probit does not err by generating fitted values that are

less than zero or greater than one.

         Another common measure of goodness of fit for probit models is the fraction of

observations correctly predicted by the model. In this calculation, the model is deemed to


38
   If we add the log of per capita GDP to the system, analogous to column 3 of Table 3, we again get a
statistically insignificant coefficient: -0.16, s.e. = 0.20.
39
   For state religion in 1900, the averaging is over the respective sub-samples: 2000 without and with a
regime change and 1970 without and with a regime change.


                                                    34
be correct if an observation of no state religion matches up with a fitted probability less

than 0.5 and if an observation of state religion matches up with a fitted probability greater

than 0.5. Otherwise, the model is deemed to be incorrect. Column 1 of Table 4 shows

that the probit model correctly predicts overall for 90% of the cases (339 of 377). The

breakdown is 86% correct in 2000 (162 of 188) and 94% correct in 1970 (177 of 189).

The percentages correct are similar for cases where state religion is absent or present.

         To get a more modest perspective on the fit, we can compare the probit model

with a naïve model that says that the status of state religion in 1970 and 2000 is the same

as that in 1900. This model would have been correct for 142 of 188 cases or 76% in 2000

and 145 of 189 cases or 77% in 1970. If we add to the naïve model the proposition that

Communist countries lack state religions, we would have been correct for 146 of 188

cases or 78% in 2000 and 168 of 189 cases or 89% in 1970.40 Thus, from Table 4, the

rest of the probit model improves the prediction by 16 countries in 2000 and 9 countries

in 1970.

         We can list the countries that have the largest residuals in the probit equations.

Two notable errors are for Turkey—the absence of state religion matches up with fitted

probabilities of 0.90 in 1970 and 0.97 in 2000.41 Turkey’s surprising status as a secular

state may owe a lot to the individual influence of President Ataturk in the 1920s.

Another large error is for Syria (0 in 2000, fitted of 0.99), which abandoned a Muslim

state religion in 1973 under the new constitution instituted by President El-Assad. Other

large residuals are for Vanuatu (1 in 2000, fitted of 0.06), Bulgaria (1 in 2000, fitted of


40
   For Somalia in 1970, the two naïve rules are inconsistent—the country had a state religion, as in 1900,
but it was also Communist. The calculation assumes that the naïve model incorrectly predicts Somalia.
41
   Note that the 2000 equation does not update for the status of state religion in 1970. The 2000 equation
considers only the status of state religion in 1900.


                                                    35
0.07), Brazil (0 in 1970, fitted of 0.89), Chile (0 in 1970, fitted of 0.89), Japan (0 in 1970,

fitted of 0.89), South Korea (0 in 1970, fitted of 0.88), Ireland (0 in 2000, fitted of 0.86),

Somalia (1 in 1970, fitted of 0.15), and Israel (1 in 2000, fitted of 0.17).



IV. Concluding Observations

        We used a framework of political-institutional choice to assess the probability of

the presence of state religion. Our empirical application of this framework for 2000 and

1970 shows that state religion is far more likely to exist when it existed in 1900.

However, the persistence is much stronger for countries that have experienced no major

change in political regime than for countries that have experienced such a change. For

countries with no major regime changes, the rate of decay is slow enough so that

religious institutions from the distant past—such as those at the time of the Reformation

in the1500s—would still matter substantially for the shape of present day institutions.

        Communism has a strong negative effect on the probability of state religion—our

sample contains only one Communist country (Somalia in 1970) with state religion in the

usual sense. However, past Communism has little influence on the probability of state

religion.

        Consistent with theoretical reasoning, a greater concentration of religious

adherence is positively associated with state religion. Our results indicate that this

association reflects mainly the positive effect of religion concentration on the probability

of state religion, rather than the reverse effect of state religion on concentration.

        Theoretically, we expect that state religion would be more likely in countries with

heavy representation in monotheistic religions. Empirically, we find this positive relation




                                              36
for Muslim adherence, but this relationship is not robust. We find that location in sub

Saharan Africa has a significantly negative effect on the probability of state religion. We

think that this relation reflects the strong competition among the major world religions

for religious converts in Africa.

       The secularization hypothesis predicts that increases in per capita GDP would

reduce the probability of state religion. We find little support for this hypothesis. State

religion is also unrelated to country size and to indicators of democracy, civil liberties,

and the rule of law. Former colonies as a whole do not differ from non-colonies in the

likelihood of state religion. However, British colonies are more likely than Spanish or

Portuguese colonies to have a state religion. Given prior colonial status, the probability

of state religion is unrelated to the presence of British (common-law) or French (statute-

law) legal systems.

       In future research, we plan to look more deeply at the interactions between state

and religion, particularly at freedom of religious expression, regulation and subsidy of

religion, and religiously inspired laws and regulations. We want to consider further how

freedom and regulation in the religion market relate to other forms of freedom and

regulation. Included here are freedoms of speech and mobility and the supervision of

industry.

       Our interest in this study began with the institution of state religion. However, the

methodology that we developed can be applied to studies of the long-term evolution of

other legal and institutional features of countries. For example, the method could be

applied to the long-term evolution of monarchy, forms of electoral systems, government

ownership, and so on. We plan to consider these kinds of applications in future research.




                                             37
                                      References



Alesina, A., A.Devleeschauwer, W. Easterly, S. Kurlat, and R. Wacziarg (2003).

       “Fractionalization,” Journal of Economic Growth, June, 155-194.

Aristotle (1932). Politics, translated by H. Rackham, Cambridge MA, Harvard

       University Press.

Barrett, D.B. (1982). World Christian Encyclopedia, 1st ed., Oxford, Oxford University

       Press.

Barrett, D.B., G.T. Kurian, and T.M. Johnson (2001). World Christian Encyclopedia, 2nd

       ed., Oxford, Oxford University Press.

Barro, R.J. (1999). “Determinants of Democracy,” Journal of Political Economy,

       December, part 2, S158-S183.

Barro, R.J. and R.M. McCleary (2003). “Religion and Economic Growth across

       Countries,” American Sociological Review, October, 760-781.

Bell, D. (1973). The Coming of Post-Industrial Society: A Venture in Social

       Forecasting, New York, Basic Books.

Berger, P.L. (1967). The Sacred Canopy: Elements of a Sociological Theory of Religion,

       Garden City NJ, Doubleday.

Chaves, M. (1994). “Secularization as Declining Religious Authority,” Social Forces,

       March, 749-774.

Finke, R. and L.R. Iannaccone (1993). “Supply-Side Explanations for Religious

       Change,” The Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Sciences,

       May, 27-39.




                                          38
Finke, R. and R. Stark (1992). The Churching of America 1776-1990, New Brunswick

       NJ, Rutgers University Press.

Fox, J. and S. Sandler (2004). “World Separation of Religion and State in the Twenty

       First Century,” prepared for the International Studies Association Conference,

       Montreal, March.

Froese, P. and S. Pfaff (2003). “Bringing Demand into the Supply-Side Model of

       Religion: A Historical Analysis of Atheism in Eastern Germany,” unpublished,

       Baylor University.

Heston, A., R. Summers, and B. Aten (2002). Penn World Tables Version 6.1, Center for

       International Comparisons at the University of Pennsylvania (CICUP), October.

Gill, A. (2002). “The Political Origins of Religious Liberty: Initial Sketch of a Theory,”

       working paper no. 7, Project on Religion, Political Economy, and Society,

       available at www.wcfia.harvard.edu/religion, March.

Iannaccone, L.R. (1991). “The Consequences of Religious Market Structures: Adam

       Smith and the Economics of Religion,” Rationality and Society, April, 156-177.

Inglehart, R. and W.E. Baker (2000). “Modernization, Cultural Change, and the

       Persistence of Traditional Values,” American Sociological Review, February,

       19-51.

Kornai, J. (1992). The Socialist System: The Political Economy of Communism,

       Princeton, Princeton University Press.

La Porta, R., F. Lopez-de-Silanes, A. Shleifer, and R. Vishny (1998). ''Law and Finance,''

       Journal of Political Economy, December, 1113-1155.

Lipset, S.M. (1959). “Some Social Requisites of Democracy: Economic Development




                                            39
       and Political Legitimacy,” American Political Science Review, March, 69-105.

Marx, K. (1913). A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy, Chicago, Kerr.

McCleary, R.M. and R.J. Barro (2003). “International Determinants of Religiosity,”

       National Bureau of Economic Research, working paper no. 10147, December.

Mulligan, C., R. Gil, and X. Sala-i-Martin (2003). “Do Democracies Have Different

       Public Policies than Non-Democracies?” National Bureau of Economic Research,

       working paper no. 10040, October.

Mulligan, C. and A. Shleifer (2004). “Population and Regulation,” National Bureau of

       Economic Research, working paper no. 10234, January.

Norman, E.R. (1968). The Conscience of the State in North America, Cambridge U.K.,

       Cambridge University Press.

Olds, K. (1994). “Privatizing the Church: Disestablishment in Connecticut and

       Massachusetts,” Journal of Political Economy, April, 277-297.

Olson, M. (1965). The Logic of Collective Action; Public Goods and the Theory of

       Groups, Cambridge MA, Harvard University Press.

Przeworski, A., M.E. Alvarez, J.A. Cheibub, and F. Limongi (2000). Democracy and

       Development: Political Institutions and Well-being in the World, 1950-1990,

       Cambridge, Cambridge University Press.

Smith, A. (1791). An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations, 6th

       ed., London, Strahan.

Staiger, D. and J.H. Stock (1997). “Instrumental Variables Regression with Weak

       Instruments,” Econometrica, May, 557-586.

Stark, R. (2001). One True God, Historical Consequences of Monotheism, Princeton,




                                           40
       Princeton University Press.

Stark, R. (2003). For the Glory of God, Princeton, Princeton University Press.

Stark, R. and W.S. Bainbridge (1987). A Theory of Religion, New York, Lang.



Weber, M. (1930). The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism, London, Allen &

       Unwin.

Wilson, B. (1966). Religion in Secular Society: A Sociological Comment, London,

       Watts.

Woodberry, R.D. (2003). “Democratization in Post-Colonial Societies: The Long-Term

       Influences of Religion and Colonial Governments,” unpublished, University of

       Texas.

Wooldridge, J.M. (2002). Econometric Analysis of Cross Section and Panel Data,

       Cambridge MA, MIT Press.




                                           41
                                Table 1a
       Countries with No State Religion in 2000, 1970, 1900 (N=72)

Antigua             Gabon                   Mauritius     Seychelles
Australia           Gambia                  Mexico        Sierra Leone
Austria             Germany*                Micronesia    Singapore
Belgium             Ghana                   Myanmar       Slovak Rep.
Belize              Grenada                 Namibia       Solomon Isl.
Bosnia              Guinea                  Niger         South Africa
Cameroon            Guyana                  Nigeria       Suriname
Canada              Hungary                 Nicaragua     Switzerland
Comoros             India                   Netherlands   Tanzania
Congo (Brazz.)      Ivory Coast             New Zealand   Togo
Cyprus              Jamaica                 Philippines   Trinidad
Czech Rep.          Kenya                   Papua N.G.    Uganda
Djibouti            Kiribati                Poland        United States
Dominica            Lesotho                 St. Kitts     Uruguay
Ecuador             Madagascar              St. Lucia     Vietnam
Estonia             Malawi                  St. Vincent   Yugoslavia
Fiji                Mali                    San Marino    Zambia
France              Marshall Islands        Senegal       Zimbabwe

*Separated into East and West in 1970.




                                       42
                                Table 1b
         Countries with State Religion in 2000, 1970, 1900 (N=58)

Catholic (21)            Muslim (22)                Protestant (9)
Andorra                  Afghanistan*               Bahamas
Argentina                Algeria                    Denmark
Bolivia                  Bahrain                    Finland
Colombia                 Brunei                     Iceland
Costa Rica               Egypt                      Liberia
Dominican Rep.           Iran                       Norway
El Salvador              Iraq                       Samoa
Guatemala                Jordan                     Tonga
Haiti                    Kuwait                     United Kingdom**
Honduras                 Libya
Italy                    Malaysia                   Orthodox (1)
Liechtenstein            Maldives                   Greece
Luxembourg               Mauritania
Malta                    Morocco                    Buddhist (4)
Monaco                   Oman                       Bhutan
Panama                   Qatar                      Cambodia***
Paraguay                 Saudi Arabia               Sri Lanka
Peru                     Somalia                    Thailand
Portugal                 Sudan
Spain                    Tunisia                    Hindu (1)
Venezuela                United Arab Emir.          Nepal
                         Yemen

*Afghanistan lacked a state religion from 1978 until the mid 1990s.
**Anglican in England, Presbyterian in Scotland. Anglican disestablished in
Ireland in 1869 and in Wales in 1919.
***Cambodia lacked a state religion from the mid 1970s until 1989.




                                     43
          Table 1c Countries with State Religion in 1900
          that Abandoned State Religion by 1970 (N=29)

Catholic (7)          Protestant (2)      Confucian (4)
Brazil                Botswana            China
Chile                 Indonesia           North Korea
Congo (Kinshasa)                          South Korea
Cuba                  Orthodox (4)        Taiwan
Equatorial Guinea     Kazakhstan
Lithuania             Latvia              Ethno-religion (7)
Slovenia              Romania             Benin
                      Russia              Burkina Faso
Muslim (3)                                Burundi
Albania               Buddhist (2)        Central African Rep.
Lebanon               Japan*              Chad
Turkey                Mongolia            Rwanda
                                          Swaziland

*Shinto




          Table 1d Countries with State Religion in 1900
          that Abandoned State Religion by 2000 (N=12)

Catholic (6)          Muslim (1)              Orthodox (2)
Angola                Syria                   Eritrea
Cape Verde                                    Ethiopia
Guinea-Bissau         Protestant (2)
Ireland               Barbados                Buddhist (1)
Mozambique            Sweden                  Laos
Sao Tome




                               44
             Table 1e Countries with State Religion in 1900
              that Abandoned State Religion by 1970 but
               Reinstated State Religion by 2000 (N=12)

Catholic (1)                           Orthodox (6)
Croatia                                Armenia
                                       Belarus
Muslim (5)                             Georgia
Azerbaijan                             Macedonia
Kyrgyz Rep.*                           Moldova
Tajikistan*                            Ukraine
Turkmenistan*
Uzbekistan*

*Orthodox in 1900, Muslim in 2000.



         Table 1f Countries with No State Religion in 1900
           that Introduced State Religion by 1970 (N=3)

Muslim (2)
Bangladesh*
Pakistan

Jewish (1)
Israel

*Bangladesh lacked a state religion from 1972 to 1975.



         Table 1g Countries with No State Religion in 1900
           that Introduced State Religion by 2000 (N=2)

Protestant (1)
Vanuatu

Orthodox (1)
Bulgaria*

*2001



                                  45
          Table 2 Means and Standard Deviations of Variables
                 (unweighted averages across countries)

                          Data for 2000 (N=188)
Variable                                 Mean           Stnd. Dev.
State religion                             0.40            0.49
Regime change                              0.72            0.45
Religion concentration                     0.55            0.23
Communist                                  0.03            0.16
Muslim adherence share                    0.23             0.35
Sub-Saharan Africa dummy                   0.26            0.44
log(per capita GDP, 1996 US$)              8.33            1.04
log(population, 1000s)                     8.57            2.09
British colony                            0.31             0.47
French colony                              0.15            0.36
Spanish & Portuguese colony               0.12             0.33
Other colony                               0.08            0.27
Absolute degrees latitude                  25.5            16.8
Land-locked status                         0.22            0.41
British legal origin                      0.32             0.47
French legal origin                        0.43            0.50
Adherence shares:
  Muslim                                  0.235           0.346
  Catholic                                0.289           0.332
  Protestant                              0.137           0.207
  Other Christian                         0.084           0.112
  Orthodox                                0.054           0.163
  Jewish                                  0.005           0.056
  Hindu                                   0.022           0.095
  Buddhist                                0.036           0.141
  Other Eastern religion                  0.019           0.071
  Other religion                          0.057           0.110
  Non-religious                           0.062           0.105




                                   46
                         Table 2, continued
                       Data for 1970 (N = 189*)
Variable                               Mean        Stnd. Dev.

State religion                           0.39         0.49
Regime change                            0.60         0.49
Religion concentration                   0.59         0.24
Communist                                0.18         0.39
log(per capita GDP, 1996 US$)            8.02         1.14
log(population, 1000s)                   8.01         2.11
Adherence shares:
  Muslim                                0.218        0.344
  Catholic                              0.298        0.353
  Protestant                            0.134        0.221
  Other Christian                       0.070        0.107
  Orthodox                              0.050        0.151
  Jewish                                0.006        0.062
  Hindu                                 0.022        0.105
  Buddhist                              0.037        0.153
  Other Eastern religion                0.016        0.071
  Other religion                        0.075        0.146
  Non-religious                         0.074        0.157

*East and West Germany included separately.

                         Data for 1900 (N = 188)
State religion                            0.59        0.49
Religion concentration                    0.74        0.20
Adherence shares:
  Muslim                                 0.214       0.357
  Catholic                               0.259       0.378
  Protestant                             0.127       0.264
  Other Christian                        0.028       0.073
  Orthodox                               0.065       0.200
  Jewish                                 0.005       0.014
  Hindu                                  0.022       0.101
  Buddhist                               0.041       0.164
  Other Eastern religion                 0.014       0.089
  Other religion                         0.222       0.361
  Non-religious                          0.003       0.027




                                  47
            Table 3 Linear Probability Models for State Religion in 2000 and 1970
                       (standard errors of coefficients in parentheses)

Estimation method:         SUR            3SLS            SUR          3SLS         SUR          3SLS
Independent variable        (1)            (2)             (3)          (4)          (5)          (6)
State religion, 1900,
no regime change         0.748**         0.769**        0.749**      0.748**      0.780**      0.784**
  coeff. for 2000:       (0.086)         (0.098)        (0.085)      (0.093)      (0.070)      (0.076)
  coeff. for 1970:       0.906**         0.937**        0.906**      0.934**      0.898**      0.920**
                         (0.055)         (0.057)        (0.055)      (0.060)      (0.047)      (0.050)
State religion, 1900,
regime change            0.311**     0.277**             0.305**      0.264**      0.352**      0.334**
  coeff. for 2000:        (0.055)     (0.060)            (0.055)      (0.060)      (0.055)      (0.058)
  coeff. for 1970:       0.284**     0.263**             0.284**      0.249**      0.323**      0.299**
                          (0.049)     (0.053)            (0.049)      (0.052)      (0.049)      (0.052)
Religion                 0.706**     1.237**             0.730**      1.523**      0.833**      1.663**
concentration             (0.166)     (0.422)            (0.167)      (0.320)      (0.183)      (0.361)
Communism                -0.491**    -0.493**           -0.509**     -0.513**     -0.529**     -0.547**
                          (0.080)     (0.078)            (0.080)      (0.082)      (0.086)      (0.090)
Lagged Communism          -0.170*      -0.105             -0.160       -0.070       -0.066       -0.005
                          (0.086)     (0.090)            (0.085)      (0.086)      (0.125)      (0.127)
Muslim adherence         0.371**       0.166             0.331**       -0.009       0.267*       -0.091
share                     (0.106)     (0.189)            (0.108)      (0.162)      (0.117)      (0.182)
Sub-Saharan Africa       -0.478**    -0.396**           -0.515**     -0.437**     -0.506**     -0.412**
                          (0.073)     (0.094)            (0.076)      (0.103)      (0.084)      (0.112)
log(per capita GDP)          --          --               -0.040       -0.080       -0.045       -0.089
                                                         (0.022)      (0.059)      (0.024)      (0.067)
British colony              --             --                --          --          0.237        0.203
                                                                                   (0.146)      (0.151)
French colony               --             --               --           --          0.087        0.024
                                                                                   (0.151)      (0.156)
Spanish or                  --             --               --           --         -0.206       -0.394
Portuguese colony                                                                  (0.192)      (0.208)
Other colony                --             --               --           --         -0.073       -0.080
                                                                                   (0.156)      (0.169)
p-value, colonies           --          --                 --           --          0.022         0.008
No. observations,        188, 189    188, 189           188, 189     188, 189     188, 189     188, 189
 2000 and 1970
R-squared,              0.56, 0.73   0.54, 0.72         0.56, 0.73   0.52, 0.70   0.58, 0.74   0.55, 0.72
 2000 and 1970


    *p-value < 0.05, **p-value < 0.01.




                                                   48
                                       Note to Table 3

        Constant terms are included but not shown. The dependent variable is a dummy
for the presence of state religion in 2000 or 1970. The sample for 1970, 189 countries,
exceeds that for 2000, 188 countries, because East and West Germany are included
separately in 1970. The estimates weight all countries equally. The equations are
estimated as a system, using the seemingly-unrelated (SUR) technique in columns 1, 3,
and 5, and three-stage least-square (3SLS) in columns 2, 4, and 6. The instrument lists in
columns 2, 4, and 6 exclude the contemporaneous values of religion concentration and the
Muslim adherence share but include the 1900 values (along with interaction terms with the
regime-change variable). The instrument lists for columns 4 and 6 also replace the
contemporaneous value of the log of per capita GDP by the absolute value of degrees latitude and
a dummy variable for land-locked status, along with interactions of these variables with the
regime-change variable. In column 6, the dummy variables for colonial status appear in the
instrument lists, along with interactions with the regime-change variable.




                                              49
                Table 4 Probit Model for State Religion in 2000 and 1970
                     (standard errors of coefficients in parentheses)

                                                               (1)                       (2)
Independent                                                coefficient               marginal
variable                                                                             effect on
                                                                                    probability
State religion in 1900, no regime change,                    3.26**                     0.81
  coefficient for 2000                                       (0.61)
State religion in 1900, no regime change,                    4.37**                      0.89
  coefficient for 1970                                       (0.52)
State religion in 1900, regime change,                       1.78**                      0.32
  coefficient for 2000                                       (0.38)
State religion in 1900, regime change,                       1.81**                      0.20
  coefficient for 1970                                       (0.34)
Religion concentration                                       5.69**                      0.73
                                                             (1.17)
Communism                                                   -3.77**                     -0.42
                                                             (1.08)
Lagged Communism                                              -0.47                     -0.06
                                                             (0.69)
Muslim adherence share                                         1.93                      0.25
                                                             (1.04)
Sub-Saharan Africa                                          -3.22**                     -0.42
                                                             (0.92)
Number of observations, 2000 and 1970                      188, 189
Pseudo R-squared, 2000 and 1970                            0.66, 0.74
% correctly predicted
 overall sample                                         90% (339/377)
 state religion sample                                  91% 134/148)
 no state religion sample                               90% (205/229)
 2000 sample                                            86% (162/188)
 1970 sample                                            94% (177/189)

*p-value < 0.05, **p-value < 0.01.
Note: Constant terms are included but not shown. For the continuous variables (religion
concentration and Muslim religion share), the marginal effects in column 2 show the sample
average of the effect on the probability of state religion from a marginal change in each
independent variable. For the dummy variables, column 2 shows the sample average effect on
the probability of state religion from a shift from zero to one in each variable. For state religion
in 1900, the averaging is over sub-samples defined by 2000 or 1970 and no regime change or
regime change. See the text (n. 28) for a discussion of the probit estimation.




                                                 50
