                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




              THE WELFARE COST OF DISTORTIONS IN THE
               Ui'TITED STATES TAX SYSTEM: A GENERAL
                       EQUILIBRIUM APPROACH


                        Charles L. Ballard

                          John B. Shoven

                           John Whalley


                      Working Paper No. 1043




               NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                     1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                        Cambridge MA 02138


                          December 1982




This paper was presented at the Third Latin American Meeting of the
Econometric Society, Mexico City, July 19—22, 1982, and at the
National Bureau of Economic Research, August 11 and 17, 1982. We
wish to thank Don Fullerton, Joel Slemrod, and Charles Stuart for
helpful comments. The research reported here is part of the NBER's
research program in Taxation. Any opinions expressed are those of
the authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
                                               NBER Working Paper #1043
                                                    December 1982

                                    Abstract


                     THE WELFARE COST OF DISTORTIONS IN THE
                      UNITED STATES TAX SYSTEM: A GENERAL
                          -
                              EQUILIBRIUM APPROACH


        Using   a general equilibrium model of the United States economy,

we examine the combined welfare cost of all taxes in the U.S. revenue system.

We find that the welfare losses caused by distortionary taxation can be very

large, both on average and at the margin.

        The marginal welfare loss to consumers from raising an additional

dollar of revenue is in the range of 34 cents to 48 cents, depending on certain

elasticities. This has very important implications for cost—benefit analysis.

If a public project must be financed by distortionary taxes which cause dead-

weight loss, this excess burden must be taken into account when we decide

whether to undertake the project. Our calculations indicate that the marginal

deadweight loss is between one—third and one—half of marginal revenues. This

large wedge could cause us to approve many fewer projects than we would approve

if we were to use the simple condition that the sum of the marginal rates of

substitution should equal the marginal rate of transformation.

        The average deadweight loss per dollar of revenue is smaller than the

marginal deadweight loss, but it is still substantial. We estimate that the

present value of the gain from replacing the distortionary tax system with

certain lump sum taxes would be in the range of $1.8 trillion to $3.1 trillion,

or 13 cents to 22 cents per dollar of revenue. The gains would be about 60

percent as great if the existing system were replaced with a proportional income

tax. Replacing the existing system with a consumption—type value—added tax would

give even greater gains than those from switching to a proportional income tax.

Charles Ballard                 John B. Shoven                John Whalley
Department of Economics         Department of Economics       Department of Economics
Stanford University             Stanford University           Univ. of Western Ontario
Stanford, CA 94305              Stanford, CA 94305            London, Ontario
                                (415) 497—3273                Canada N6A 5C2
                                                              (519) 679—3973
                    THE WELFARE COST OF DISTORTIONS IN THE
                     UNITED STATES TAX SYSTEM: A GENERAL
                             EQUILIBRIUM APPROACH


      'Every tax ought to be so contrived as both to take out and keep
      out of the pockets of the people as little as possible over and
      above what it brings into the public treasury of the state."

                                       Adam Smith — The Wealth of Nations
                                                    Book V, Ch. II.



I.   Introduction
        In his famous 1776 publication, Adam Smith examined the possibility

that the private cpsts of government revenue are substantially greater than

the tax proceeds. He attributed this excess private burden to compliance

costs, the distortion of economic activity, and administrative overhead.

In this paper, we make a numerical assessment of the second of these costs.

In the past, estimates of the efficiency costs of taxation have concentrated

on particular aspects of the tax code. Here, we examine the combined welfare

cost of all taxes in the United States.

        We present two main sets of results. The first set includes calcula-

tions of the marginal excess burden of distortionary taxes. When the

government collects an additional dollar of revenue, the cost to the private

sector exceeds a dollar by the marginal excess burden. This has obvious

implications for cost—benefit analysis. The greater the marginal excess

burden, the fewer' will be the number of public projects which society ought

to approve. We find that the marginal excess burden is quite substantial.

The welfare loss from a one percent increase in all distortionary tax rates

is in the range of 34 cents to 48 cents per dollar of extra revenue, depending

on certain elasticity assumptions. This means that a public project which


               -
                                      1
                                      2


requires a dollar of tax revenue must produce benefits of more than

$1.34. We also calculate the marginal excess burden from increases

in various parts of the tax system. Capital taxes (such as corporate

and property taxes) and personal income taxes have large marginal excess

burdens, while labor taxes (such as the Social Security payroll tax) are

less distortionary.

        The second set of results includes calculations of the average

welfare gain from replacing all or part of the distortionary tax system

with some alternative tax. If all distortionary taxes were replaced with

a set of lump sum levies, the present value of the welfare gain is in the

range of $1.78 trillion to $3.11 trillion, in 1973 dollars,1' 2 depending

on our elasticity values. The annual value of these efficiency costs is

from 13 to 22 percent of revenues raised. Thus, average welfare costs are

roughly one—half of marginal costs. We also consider replacement of different

parts of the tax system with lump sum taxes. Once again, the most distorionary

taxes are those which fall on capital and personal income, while the labor
                                3
taxes are iess cistortionary.

        Obviously, replacing the existing tax system with lump sum taxes is

not a realistic policy option. However, we have also experimented with

replacing the existing tax system with broadly based but still distortionary

taxes. If the only tax were a progressive income tax, more than one—fourth

of the welfare loss could be eliminated. If the only tax were a proportional

income tax, about three—fifths could be eliminated.4

        Our calculations suggest that the economic efficiency of the tax

system is very important. If the welfare costs of distortionary taxes are

this large, then it is difficult to accept the view that microeconomic issues
                                            3


are of secondary importance compared to macroeconomic ones. Our results

indicate that Harberger triangles may not be nearly as small as Harberger

(1964) himself believed them to be. Moreover, as taxes are increased, the

deadweight loss triangles grow roughly 34 to 48 percent as much as the

revenue rectangles.

          In Section II, we discuss some conceptual issues in the evaluation

of the welfare cost of tax distortions. In Section III, we discuss the

types of distortion generated by various U.S. taxes, and we describe our

general equilibrium model. We give special attention to the specification

of those elasticity parameters which are of central importance to our results.

We   present   our results in Section IV.   Section   V is a brief concluding section.
                                      4


II. Evaluating the Cost of Distortions

        The marginal cost of distortionary taxes can be examined with a

simple partial equilibrium model. Consider the case of a single good

with a downward—sloping compensated demand function an4 a perfectly

elastic supply function, as shown in Figure 1. A proportional tax at rate

t shifts the supply function from P to P(l+t) and this, in turn, reduces

the quantity consumed.

        The welfare loss to the economy from such a tax in partial equilibrium

terms is given by the consumer surplus triangle, ABC. If we assume that the

demand curve is linear, as we have done in Figure 1, the well—known formula

for the welfare loss, L, is:


          L =
(1)             -- cpqt2,

where c is the compensated price elasticity of demand, and p and q are the

initial price and quantity.5 As a first approximation, the revenue raised,

R, is pqt. Thus, the welfare loss per dollar raised is given by
                1         2
          L     Epqt          1
(2)
                    pqt       Et.

This average welfare loss is simply the ratio of the area of triangle ABC

to rectangle BCGF in Figure 1.

        The marginal welfare cost when taxes are raised from t to t' is the

ratio of the increase in the triangle to the additional revenue raised.

Inspection of the figure reveals that, to a close approximation, the

incremental excess burden is proportional to the tax rate, t.   If we

differentiate equation (1) with respect to t, we find
                                            5


    Pric




                                            E
p (l+t'




          P
                                           DB




                                                        q       quantity




              Figure 1——Simple Partial Equilibrium Evaluation of Welfare
                        Cost of a Tax Distortion
                                         6



(3)         dL/dt =   Etpq.

Since revenue is pqt, the marginal revenue is pq. Therefore, the marginal

excess burden is


            Marginal Loss    =
(4)
            Marginal Revenue

          The results summarized in the Introduction correspond with this

simple partial equilibrium analysis. Comparing equations (2) and (4), we

see that the average loss is half the marginal loss. This accords roughly

with our range of marginal excess burden from 34 cents to 48 cents and of

average excess burden from 13 cents to 22 cents. More importantly, our

marginal loss figuresseem consistent with the simple partial equilibrium

analysis above. We should recognize that the t in equation (4) is the tax

rate as a proportion of net expenditure. This means that, for the economy

as a whole, the correct figure for t may be around 0.6 or more.6 It is

difficult to reduce all of the different elasticities to a single elasticity

figure for the entire economy. If we could do so, it seems likely that the

correct figure would be between 0.5 and 1.0. Multiplying these figures

together, as in equation (4), would give us a figure for marginal excess

burden in the same region in which our actual calculations lie.

          We do not   mean to suggest that the only standard for judging our
results is their consonance with partial equilibrium results. The general
equilibrium approach has many advantages. It enables us to consider simul—
taneously   many tax changes in many sectors and it does not rely on local

approximations. Still, we find it encouraging that a simple partial

equilibrium    analysis lends support to our conclusion that welfare costs can
be    very large, both on average and on the margin.
                                      7


        Our actual welfare calculations are more complicated than those

suggested by equation (1), for two reasons. First, we have a large model

with many different goods and tax rates which vary widely. It can be

shown that efficiency loss estimates increase with additional disaggregation

(see Fullerton, Henderson, Shoven [1983)). Further, in this paper we find

that the variance in tax rates adds substantially to the deadweight losses.

Second, we consider the economy's evolution over time explicitly, by calcu-

lating a sequence of equilibria. We have 12 consumer groups, and for each

of them we compute a sequence of values for consumption, leisure, and saving

in each period, both in the presence and absence of the tax change. We

calculate each consumer's utility in each period from current consumption

and leisure. Then we take the present value of these utilities, for the

before—change sequence and the after—change sequence. For each consumer,

we compute the financial transfer necessary to equate the present values

in the absence and presence of the tax change. The sum of these figures

across the 12 households is our measure of the dynamic welfare change. This

calculation is in the spirit of the static Hicksian equivalent variation.
                                         8



III. A General Equilibrium Model of the
      U.S. Economy and Tax System: Structure
      and Data

           To keep the focus of this paper on results and policy implications,

only a brief overview of model structure is given here. We provide a very

detailed description of our model in Chapters 3—7 of Ballard, Fullerton,

Shoven, and Whalley (1983).

           First, we summarize he production side of the model. In any single

period, there are 19 producer good industries that use capital and labor in

constant elasticity of substitution (CES) value—added functions. They also

use the outputs of other industries through a matrix of fixed input—output

coefficients. Tax rates on labor for each industry are derived by taking

payroll taxes and other contributions as a proportion of labor income, while

tax rates on capital for each industry are derived by taking corporate income,

corporate franchise, and property taxes as a proportion of capital income.

Each of these 19 producer goods is used directly for investment, for net

exports, and by the government. The transformation of producer goods into

consumer goods is represented by a matrix of fixed coefficients. This

procedure is necessary because the goods classification of consumer expenditure

data is different from the classification of the outputs of the 19 production

sectors.

           On the consumer side of the model, we have 12 consumer groups, which

are distinguished by their money income7 in 1973 (the basic data year for    the
model).    Each consumer group has an initial endowment of capital and labor.

Consumer decisions regarding factor supplies are made jointly with their

consumption decisions. Each household at any point in time has a nested

CES utility function of the form:
                                      9




(5)       U =          X,
                                CJ
where H is the instantaneous utility function defined over current consumption

commodities X. and leisure 9, and the function U determines the allocation

between current welfare and expected future consumption, Cf. Current consumption

commodities X. are aggregated using a Cobb—Douglas function, whereas both U

and H are CES functions.

        Most of the simulations reported here employ the assumption of myopic

expectations. Because of this assumption, the current rate of return and other

current prices are all that we require to formulate a budget in terms of prices

for present and future consumption. With myopic expectations, the expected

price of future consumption depends inversely on the current rate of return,

which consumers expect will obtain in all future periods. When U is maximized

subject to a budget constraint, we get a desired level of Cf for each consumer.

The demand for Cf is then translated into a demand for saving in the current

period. The latter is, in turn, translated into a vector of investment demands

for the 19 industry outputs.

        The myopic expectations assumption stands at one extreme along a

spectrum of possible assumptions regarding consumer beliefs about future

prices. At the other extreme is the assumption of perfect foresight, under

which consumer beliefs about the future turn out to be correct. Ballard and

Goulder (1982) have investigated the sensitivity of our model's results to

different assumptions about expectations. They define the number of years

of foresight as the number of years into the future over which consumers have

correct beliefs. When the number of years of foresight is zero, consumers

have myopic beliefs. In the limit, as the number of years of foresight grows
                                        10


large, we approach perfect foresight. In this paper, we use the algorithm

developed by Ballard and Goulder to study the sensitivity of our results

to the number of years of foresight. We find that our results are fairly

robust with respect to the assumptions on consumer beliefs about future

prices. Therefore, most of our calculations are of myopic sequences of

equilibria, since these are less expensive to compute.

        Government collects taxes from both the production and demand sides

of the economy and uses the revenue in a balanced budget. The government

purchases producer goods via a Cobb—Douglas utility function, makes direct

transfer payments to consumers, and subsidizes government enterprises. A

simple trade sector closes the model.

        We specify our model with data from 1973 because this is the most

recent year during which the Department of Labor conducted a Consumer

Expenditure Survey. In addition to this survey, we use four other major

data sources. These are the July, 1976, Survey of Current Business, the

Bureau of Economic Analysis Input—Output Matrix, unpublished worksheets of

the U.S. Department of Commerce National Income Division, and the U.S.

Treasury Department's Merged Tax File. In order to use all of these data

together, adjustments are made to ensure that each part is consistent with

the rest. All data on industry and government uses of factors are accepted

as given, while the data on consumer factor incomes and expenditures are

correspondingly adjusted. Tax receipts, transfers, and government endowments

are accepted as given, and government expenditures are adjusted in order to

yield a balanced budget. Similar adjustments ensure that supply equals demand

for all goods and factors, and that trade is balanced.
                                       11


          The fully consistent data set defines a single period benchmark

equilibrium in terms of transactions. These observations on values are

separated into prices and quantities by assuming that a physical unit of

a good or factor is the amount that sells for one dollar. All benchmark

equilibrium prices are $1, and observed values are the benchmark quantities.

          The equilibrium conditions of the model are then used to determine

the behavioral equation parameters, consistent with the benchmark data set.

This procedure calibrates the model to the benchmark data, in the sense

that the benchmark data can be reproduced as an equilibrium solution to the

model before any policy changes are considered. In order to implement this

procedure, we specify the elasticities of substitution between capital and

labor in each industry, on the basis of the econometric literature. We also

specify labor supply and saving elasticities, to which substitution elasticities

in preferences are calibrated. Factor employments by industry are used to

derive production function weights, and expenditure data are used to derive

utility function weights. This calibration procedure allows for a test of

the solution and ensures that the various agents' behaviors are mutually

consistent in our benchmark data before we evaluate policy changes.

          The elasticities of labor supply and saving are important for our

results, so it is appropriate to discuss our choices. There are a large

number of estimates for the uncompensated elasticity of labor supply with

respect to the real, net—of—tax wage. Elasticity estimates for   males are
mostly   small and negative, ranging from —0.40 to zero. Borjas and Heckman

(1978) review these econometric studies and reduce the bounds to —0.19 and

—0.07. The estimates for females are more often positive, and can be large

in absolute value. Killingsworth (1982) finds that the elasticity estimates

for females are mostly between 0.20 and 0.90 in cross—section studies.
                                           12


             We choose a value of 0.15 for each of our consumer groups, which we

take as a weighted average of plausible estimates for males and females.

We use this value to select the elasticity of substitution between present

consumption and present leisure for the "H" function in equation (5) for

each consumer. To test the sensitivity of the model, we also use a zero

uncompensated labor supply elasticity.

             As we pointed out in Section II, the coinpenstated elasticities are

the really important elasticities, from the point of view of our welfare

cost calculations. Even though we specify the labor supply decision in our

model on the basis of an uncompensated elasticity, we still can compute the

implied compensated elasticities. The basic theory of consumer behavior,

from which the econometric literature on labor supply derives, implies that

the compensated labor supply elasticity should exceed the uncompensated

elasticity (i.e., the income effect discourages work). This is borne out

by the numbers in Table 1.

                                        TABLE 1

                        rrMPM Arrn   LABOR SUPPLY ELASTICITTt"
                                                           J_ L..)




    Consumer
  Income Group                         Uncompensated                 Uncompensa ted
(in 1973 dollars)                     Elasticity = 0.0               Elasticity =   0.15
     0 —     3,000                        0.193                          0.342
 3,000  4,000
         —
                                          0.236                         0.385
4,000 — 5,000                             0.274                         0.423
5,000 — 6,000                             0.295                         0.444
6,000 — 7,000                             0.311                         0.460
7,000 — 8.000                             0.330                         0.480
8,000 — 10,000                            0.341                         0.491
10,000   —
             12,000                       0.344                         0. 495

12,000   —
             15,000                       0.356                         0.508
15,000 — 20,000                           0.351                         0.503
20,000 — 25,000                           0.341                         0.495
25,000 +                                  0.270                         0.431
                                      13


         The other key parameter is the elasticity of saving with respect

 to the real, after—tax rate of return. We use the value of this elasticity

to choose values for the elasticity of substitution between present consumption,

H, and future consumPtion-Cf, f or each consumer.

        There is considerable controversy in the econometric literature

regarding the value of the uncompensated saving elasticity. For a long time,

the consensus appeared to favor a zero value for this elasticity. This

proposition was termed Denison's Law, after Denison (1958). In more recent

work, Boskin (1978) has estimated this elasticity to be approximately 0.3 to

0.4. On the other hand, Summers (1981) derives savings elasticities between

1.5 and 3.0, by manipulating the parameters of a life cycle model. Each of

these studies has problems of technique and interpretation. In particular,

for reasons outlined in the paper by Starrett (1982), Summers's elasticity figures

may be high. We report simulations using the values of 0.0 and 0.4 for the

saving elasticity. As is to be expected, the average and marginal excess

burdens increase as the saving elasticity increases. If the elasticity were

in the range suggested by Sunmiers, the welfare gains from reinvoing all

distortions would be more than twice as great as those reported here.

        Another important parameter is the steady—state growth rate of the

benchmark equilibrium sequence. To derive this rate, we compare the amount

of observed 1973 saving to the capital stock. This gives us a rate of growth

of capital, which is 2.89 percent per year. We then assume that the number

of effective units of labor grows at the same rate. Though labor endowments

grow at this fixed annual rate in both the benchmark sequence and the revised

sequence, the demand for leisure is endogenous, which implies that actual

labor supply may differ. Though the capital stock grows at this rate in the
                                      14


 benchmark sequence, endogenous saving implies that capital in the revised

 case may grow at a different rate.

         The 2.89 percent labor growth rate is assumed to be equally divided

 between Harrod—neutral technical change and population growth. Our welfare

 measures of tax changes are adjusted to account only for the initial

 population. If total population were included in the welfare calculations,

 the importance of future periods would be sensitive to population growth.

         A final important parameter is the real net—of—tax return to capital

 in the benchmark data. Since this value is used to calibrate preference

parameters under the assumption of intertemporal
                                                   utility maximization, it
also determines the rate of time preference in the benchmark sequence of

equilibria. We use four percent for the average value of this parameter,

but each income class receives a net—of—tax return that depends on its own

marginal tax rate.

        In Table 2, we present a summary of the way in which we model the

effects of the various taxes. On the basis of this modeling, we calculate

tax rates. Table 3 includes some summary information about these tax rates.

The figures in Table 3 suggest that capital taxes should be candidates for

being major sources of welfare cost. Defining capital tax rates as a

proportion of net income (such that some rates exceed unity), we find that

the average tax rate on capital at the industry level is about 0.97. (Note

that we do not incorporate the reduction in capital tax rates which was part

of the 1981 Economic Recovery Tax Act. For a study of the effects of these

changes, see Fullerton and Henderson 11981].)

        In contrast to capital taxes, labor taxes (Social Security and other

contributions) raise a large amount of revenue, without rates which are high

or widely dispersed.
                                                    TABLE 2

                               UNITED STATES TAXES AND THEIRTREATMENT IN THE MODEL


                                                 Treatment in the Model                 Difficulties of Model Treatment

 1.   Corporate taxes (including state      Ad valorem tax   on use of capital        Some argue for treatment as
        and local) and corporate fran—        services   by industry                    a lump sum tax; model treat—
        chise taxes                                                                     ment ignores role of financial
                                                                                        instruments
 .    Property   taxes                      Ad valorem tax on use of capital          Differential rates across juris—
                                              services by industry                      dictions ignored
3.    Social Security taxes, Unemploy—      Ad valorem tax on use of labor            Benefit related nature of contri—
        ment Insurance and Workmen's          services by industry                      butions; arbitrary distinction
        Compensation                                                                    between public and private in-
                                                                                        surance programs
4.    Motor vehicles tax                    Ad valorem tax on use of motor            In practice, a yearly registra—
                                              vehicles by producers                     lion fee and not a purchase tax;
                                                                                       averaging over jurisdictions
5.    Retail sales taxes                    Ad valorem taxes on purchase of       Averaging of rates over states
                                              consumer goods

6.    Excise taxes                          Ad valorem taxes on output of         Taxes often expressed as charge
                                              producers goods                       per unit physical measure such
                                                                                    as volume
7.    Other indirect business taxes        Ad valorem tax on output of
        and non—tax pa\rments to                                                  Payments depend on output levels
                                             producer goods                         by industry to only limited ex—
        government                                                                  tent; averaging of rates over
                                                                                    states

8.    Personal income taxes (including     Linear function for each consumer      Detailed deductions and exemptions
        state and local)                     where tax on capital affects           not specifically considered
                                             industry allocation; thirty per—       in model
                                             cent of savings currently (ledtlCtlh!C
                                                    TABLE   3

                                 LEVEL AND DISPERSION OF TAX
                                                             RATES IN 1973



                                                                           Weighted Statistics
                                                                       Mean of
                                    Sectors on Which
 Type of Tax                                                           Marginal
                                     Tax Is Levied                                 Standard      Coefficient of
                                                         Weights       Tax Rates   Deviation
 Capital Taxes at Industry Level                                                                    variationb
                                    19 industries
                                                         Capital use    0.970        0.729
 Labor Taxes at                                                                                      0.752
                Industry Level     19 industries
                                                        Labor use       0.101        0.009           0.092
 Consumer Purchase Taxes
                                   15 goods
                                                        Total Con—      0.067        0.140           2.101
 Output Taxes                                             sumption
                                   19 industries
                                                        Output          0.008        0.035           4.612
Motor Vehicle Taxes
                                   Intermediate Use     Use of Motor    0.052        0.051
                                   of Motor Vehicles
                                                        Vehicles                                     0.992
                                   in 19 industries                                                               0
Personal Income Taxes'
                                   12 consumer
                                               groups   Income         0.239       0.101          0.424
apersonal income tax rates are
                               expressed as a proportion of
 expressed as proportions of net—of—tax                      gross income, whereas the other
                                        capital income by industry, labor                     rates are
bCoefficients of variation will not                                        income by industry, etc.
 means because of                   equal the quotients of the
                  rounding in the standard deviations           corresponding standard deviations and
                                                      and means.
                                     17



        Marginal income tax rates are high, on average. In addition, the

income tax rates differ substantially among consumers. In our model, each

of the 12 consumer groups faces a linear income tax schedule. The rates

rise from 0.01 for the poorest group to 0.41 for the richest.

        Consumer sales and excise tax rates average about 6.7 percent, and

the rates for most goods are reasonably low. However, there are three

notable exceptions. The tax rate on alcoholic beverages is 0.875, on
                                                                     -
tobacco,: 0.958, and on gasoline and other fuels, 0.295.

        The key distortions created by the income tax deal with factor supplies.

It is widely recognized that the income tax distorts labor supply decisions.

In addition, the supply of new capital through saving is affected by the

"double taxation" of saving. Double taxation i mitigated partially by tax

shelters (such as Individual Retirement Accounts). We model the U.S. tax system

of 1973 by assuming that 30 percent of saving is sheltered in this way.

        Another aspect of the effect of the income tax on factor supplies is

the fact that consumers with higher incomes face higher marginal tax rates.

Since saving is heavily concentrated in the top tail of the income distribution,

much of the saving in the economy occurs where the tax rates are highest.8

On the other hand, labor supply is much more widely diffused. Consequently,

the effective rates of tax on labor income are lower, on average, than those

facing capital income.

        In addition to factor supply decisions, the income tax also has

important features which distort choices among industries and commodities.

The most prominent of these is the preferential treatment of housing which

results from the absence of tax on the imputed income of owner—occupied

housing. This is compounded by preferential treatment for capital gains on
                                     18


houses. These features of the tax law combine to create substantial static

resource allocation and interteinporal distortions.

        In modeling the corporate tax, we follow In the tradition of Harberger

(1962, 1966) who treats it as a partial factor tax. More recently, this

treatment has been the subject of active debate. It has been argued that the

corporate tax acts as a tax on the return to equity, rather than on the total

return to capital invested in the corporation. Stiglitz (1973) has argued

further that if all marginal investments by firms are debt financed, the

corporate tax operates as a lump sum tax. However, so many features of corporate

financial behavior remain unexplained that we follow Harberger's procedure of

treating the corporate tax as an ad valorein tax on capital, with average and

marginal rates the same. Thus the corporate tax misallocates capital services

among industries in the economy, since tax rates differ by industry. In

addition, the tax affects saving decisions, since savers who acquire corporate

equity have to pay a higher tax rate on the return to their savings than they

would pay in the absence of the tax. Further distortions operate through the

treatment of depreciation in the corporate tax. On the other hand, depreciation

allowances can be taken at rates which are faster than the true depreciation

of assets. On the other hand, depreciation is calculated on a historical cost

basis. Capital tax rates also include the investment tax credit. All these

features combine to produce a pattern of tax rates by industry which is

significantly discriminatory.

        Similarly to the corporate tax, we treat the property tax as a

differential tax on capital by sector. This falls most heavily on residential

housing, but structures in other capital—using industries in the economy are

also liable for the tax. As with the corporate income tax, both static and

dynamic distortions occur.
                                       19


          Consumer sales taxes have a variety of effects.   Even if the sales
 tax system covers all commodities evenly, it still distorts labor supply

 decisions. Additional distortions come from the nontaxatjon of food and

 other exempted items. The specific excises on alcohol, tobacco, and gasoline

 are sharply discriminatory in our model, since we treat them (along with sales

 taxes) as ad valorein taxes. However, we recognize that this treatment could

 be challenged. The taxes on alcohol and tobacco could be defended as externality

 correcting, and the gasoline tax defended as a benefit—related fee for the use

 of the highway system.

         The last major component of the tax system consists of payroll taxes

 for Social Security, unemployment insurance taxes, and workmen's compensation

 taxes. We treat these as advalorem taxes on labor at the industry level,

 rather than as benefit—related charges, because the correspondence between

 taxes and benefits for any individual is very rough.

        In our discussion of the various types of taxes, we have repeatedly

distinguished intertemporal distortions (which affect saving decisions) from

intersectoral distortions (which affect choices among industries or consumer

goods). Many of the general equilibrium models which exist today can calculate

only a single equilibrium. Consequently, they are poorly equipped to analyze

the relative importance of intertemporal and intersectoral distortions. Our

model calculates a sequence of equilibria,
                                             covering an arbitrarily long period
of time. The equilibria are tied together by endogenous saving decisions and

exogenous growth of labor endowments. This allows us to assess intertemporal

distortions as well as intersectoral ones.

        Through their interaction, utility—maximizing consumers and profit—

maximizing producers are assumed to reach a single period competitive equilibrium
                                     20



where all profits are zero and supply equals demand for each good and

factor. Starting with data on endowments, tax rates, preferences, and

production parameters, we use Merrill's (1972) algorithm, a revised version

of Scarf's (1973) algorithm, to calculate prices that satisfy these conditions

at each point in time. The algorithm can accommodate any number of sectors

and agents. Since this algorithm is not based on differential calculus, the

model can handle a number of large distortions and evaluate the effects of

simultaneous changes in any of them without linearity assumptions and without

ignoring income effects. This allows us to appraise tax policy changes which

are of sufficient magnitude to cause interactive effects throughout the economy.

        We assume that there is no involuntary unemployment of factors. Markets

are perfectly competitive, with no externalities, quantity constraints, or

barriers to factor mobility.

        For the benchmark sequence of equilibria, we assume that the economy

was on a balanced growth path in 1973. The first equilibrium in the sequence

replicates the 1973 data. Subsequent equilibria are merely scaled—up versions

of the initial equilibrium. Prices remain constant, and all quantities grow

at the same rate (the rate of growth of the effective labor force). We then

alter tax parameters and calculate a revised sequence of equilibria. Since

we compute a complete set of prices and quantities under alternative tax

policies, we can estimate the changes in utility or income for each consumer

group, changes in national income, and all new factor allocations among industries.

        Clearly, we cannot calculate an infinite sequence of equilibria.

Instead, we calculate equilibria a certain number of years into the future and

then calculate a termination term. The welfare evaluation in the termination

term will be precisely correct if the economy is on a steady—state growth path,
                                             21


     as is the case in our base case
                                       squence of equilibria. In a revised case
     sequence, the tax change causes a transition toward a new steady—state

    growth path. In this case, the termination
                                                      term calculations will only be
    approximate, with the accuracy of the approximation
                                                              becoming better as the
    economy settles more closely toward the new
                                                      steady—state growth path. In
    our calculations of marginal excess
                                          burden, the changes in relative prices
    are small since the tax changes are small.
                                                      Therefore, a good approxjmatiojj
    could be made by beginning the termination term after 50 years or
                                                                      so. However,
    our calculations of average excess burden
                                                    involve huge changes in relative
    prices, so that the approach to the new
                                                  steady—state takes a very long time.
•
    In order to improve the
                              accuracy of the approximation in the termination term,
    we carry our equilibrium calculations 100
                                                   years into the future, by calculating
    21 equilibria spaced five years apart.
                                           22

   IV. Results   of Computations


   A. Calculations of Marginal Excess Burden

           The main results of
                                 our marginal excess burden calculations are
  shown in Tables 4 and 5.    All of these results
                                                     are based on sequences of
  myopic expectations equi1ibrj       In the case of small
                                                             policy changes which
  do not change relative
                           prices a great deal, the structure of expectations
  makes very little difference.
                                    The results presented elsewhere in this
                                                                            paper
  involve maintaining the same level of spending in the
                                                        base case and revised
  sequences, but revenue yield
                               equality is not appropriate when we are interested
 in the marginal welfare
                         cost of increasing the overall size of the governmentS
 Consequently, Tables 4 and 5
                              contain the only set of results in this paper
 which were obtained Without
                             requiring yield equality.
                                                        Otherwise, we would be
 unable to determine the
                         amount of revenue which would
                                                       be caused by a marginal
 change in tax rates.

         We want to compare the
                                   marginal deadweight loss with the net change
 in the amount of
                  resources which flow from consumers to the government and
 thus taxes which the
                      government pays to itself are netted out.
        Table 4 shows the
                            marginal excess burden from
                                                          raising all marginal
tax rates in the model
                         by one percent. As would be
                                                       expected, the marginal
excess burden is greater when
                                 economic activities are more elastic. Nevertheless,
the results are fairly robust over a reasonable
                                                  range of values for the key
consumer elasticities.

        Our figures for the marginal welfare cost are
                                                          quite substantial. They
indicate that the transfer of
                                 an additional dollar to the government auses
a deadweight loss of from 34 to 48 extra cents. This
                                                     means that additional
                                        23


                                      TABLE 4

            MARGINAL EXCESS BURDEN PER DOLLAR OF MARGINAL REVENUE
                         FOR THE ENTIRE TAX SYSTEMa

                                                    Marginal Excess
                                                   Burden per Dollar

A. Saving elasticity = 0.4,
    Labor supply elasticity = 0.15                         48

B. Saving elasticity     0.4,
    Labor supply elasticity =   0.0                        36


C. Saving elasticity = 0.0,
    Labor supply elasticity = 0.15                         45C

D. Saving elasticity =   0.0,
    Labor supply elasticity =   0.0                        34


aThese numbers and those in Table 6 are based on a marginal increase in all
 tax rates of one percent. We calculated sequences of 21 equilibria, spaced
 five years apart (so that the horizon is 100 years). Transfer payemnts to
 individuals were held constant.




                                      TABLE 5

            MARGINAl EXCESS BURDEN PER DOLLAR OF MARGINAL REVENUE
                        FOR MAJOR GROUPS OF TAX RATES
                  (saving elasticity = 0.4, labor supply
                             elasticity = 0.15)

                                                   Marginal Excess
                                                  Burden per Dollar

A. Capital Taxes at the Industry Level                       49
B. Labor Taxes at the Industry Level                        19C

C. All Consumer Sales Taxes                                 63
      1. Taxes on alcohol, tobacco, and gasoline only     $1.18
      2. Taxes on goods other than alcohol, tobacco,
            and gasoline                                    35C

D. Income Taxes                                             55C

E. Output Taxes
    • 1. Government enterprises, subsidy rate unchanged     4l
      2. All 19 rates changed                               34c
                                       24



public expenditures only ought to be undertaken if their marginal benefits

are at least 34 percent greater than the revenues raised. We should be

aware that the bucket marked "distortionary taxes," with which we carry

resources from the private sector to the public sector, is a leaky bucket

indeed.

          In Table5, we break down the results of Table 4 by calculating the

marginal excess burden for the major tax rate subgroups, using a labor

supply elasticity of 0.15 and a saving elasticity of 0.4. These results

are not surprising, in view of the data on the level and dispersion of tax

rates in Table 3. The high and widely varying tax rates on capital and

consumer sales, and the progressive personal income tax rates lead to the

greatest losses. This suggests that the figure for the marginal excess burden

for the entire tax system could be reduced somewhat by a general equalization

of rates.



B. Calculations of Total and Average Welfare
    Costs of Distortionary Taxes

          For most of the simulations reported in this section, we remove all

taxes, and replace them by lump sum levies in proportion to personal income

taxes and sales taxes paid. These are the only two parts of the tax system

f or which the legal incidence (although not the economic incidence) can be

attributed to consumers directly. By assigning the lump sums in this manner,

we make a crude attempt to abstract from income effects (which can be important)

and concentrate on the efficiency aspects of the tax system.

          In Table 6, we report the welfare gain from this tax change for the

same values of elasticity parameters which we used in Table 4. It seems to
                                     25



us that these welfare gains are very substantial, even for the case in

which both the uncompensated labor supply elasticity and the uncompensated

saving elasticity are zero. Even under these fairly inelastic assumptions,

the welfare gain from replacing the distortionary taxes exceeds one—eighth

of revenues.

        In Table 7, we analyze the sensitivity of these results to assumptions

about expectations. The number of years of foresight is as defined in Section

II. Clearly, the expectational assumptions do not alter the basic magnitude

of our results. Since the future is discounted at a rate of four percent,

price changes in the distant future have little effect on consumer decisions.

Also, since prices change more rapidly at first and then approach a new

steady—state growth path, the consumer with T years of foresight is alerted

to more than half of the price change to which the consumer with 2T years of

foresight is alerted. For a much fuller discussion of this type of result,

see Ballard and Goulder (1982).

        In the cas.e of the first simulation in Table 6, the present value

of the welfare gains is $3,111 billion in 1973 dollars. This is 9.14

percent of the total present value of population—corrected national income,

6.26 percent of the present value of expanded national income (including

the value of leisure), and 22.1 percent of revenues.

        Of all the changes in behavior which contribute to this welfare

improvement, the most notable are those dealing with saving and the capital

stock. Saving is 80 percent higher in the initial equilibrium than it was

in the initial period of the base sequence. In addition, saving continues

at high levels: saving after 100 years of the revise sequence outstrips the

corresponding figure for the base sequence by 70 percent. The continued high
                                                26



                                            TABLE 6

                 WELFARE GAINS FROM REPLACING EXISTING DISTORTIONARY TAXES
                      WITH LUMP SUM TAXES IN PROPORTION TO INCOME AND
                       SALES TAXES PAID, FOR DIFFERENT ELASTICITIES


                                                               Gain as
                       Labor             Welfare Gain        Percentage of
     Saving           Supply            (in billions of       Base Case
    Elasticity       Elasticity          1973 doLLars)        Revenues

       0.4             0.15               $3,110.7              22.1%
       0.4            0.0                  2,497.8              17.7
       0.0            0.15                 2,236.1              15.9
       0.0            0.0                  1,775.5              12.6




                                            TABLE 7

                WELFARE GAINS FROM REPLACING EXISTING DISTORTIONARY TAXES
                     WITH LUMP SUM TAXES, SAVING ELASTICITY = 0.4,
                      LABOR SUPPLY ELASTICITY = 0.15, FOR DIFFERENT
       .              AMOUNTS OF FORESIGHT ON THE PART OF CONSUMERS


       Number                      Welfare Gain                 Gain as
      of Years                    (in billions of             Percentage of
-   of Foresight                   1973 dollars)                Revenues

     Myopia                          $3,110.7                     22.1%
     10 years                         3,061.1                     21.7
     50 years                         3,039.1                     21;6
                                      27


 level of saving is the result of two offsetting forces.   First, as capital

 becomes more abundant, its relative price decreases. Since we have a

 positive saving elasticity, this causes less saving, ceteris paribus.

However, the increased capital stock makes the economy wealthier. Given

our functional form assumption for the saving decision, this leads to an

increase in saving, ceteris paribus. In the 100 years covered by this

sequence of equilibria, the capital/labor ratio increases by 31 percent.

        As we said, this simulation involves large movements in relative

factor prices. The path for the price of capital relative to the price

of labor is shown in Table 8, for the myopic simulation we have been

considering, and for the simulations with foresight. In the first equilibrium,

the price of capital relative to the price of labor rises from 1.0 in the

base case to 2.129 in the revise case, under all formulations of expectations.

(Recall that prices are defined as net of taxes.) The change in the first

period is the same for all formulations of expectations because the extra

saving does not augment the capital stock until after the first equilibrium

is complete. Capital deepening then causes the price to fall, steeply at

first and less steeply later on as the economy approaches its new steady—

state growth path. When consumers have foresight, they recognize that the

price of capital will fall, so that saving becomes less attractive. They

save slightly less, and the price of capital falls less steeply.

        From Table 8, it is clear that the economy has come fairly close to

its new steady—state growth path within 100 years. This time path of capital prices

implies that in the short run capital taxes are borne by capital, as suggested

by Harberger's (1962) incidence analysis of the corporate tax. In the longer

run, however, as Feldstein's (1974) work on variable factor supply indicates,

the burden of this tax is increasingly shifted to labor.
                                     28


                                  TABLE 8

        PATH FOR THE PRICE OF CAPITAL RELATIVE TO THE PRICE OF LABOR,
                WHEN DISTORTIONARY TAXES ARE REPLACED WITH
                              LUMP SUM TAXESa


                                       Relative Price of Capital
                               Myopic          10 Years         50 Years
Year                         Expectations    of Foresight     of Foresight

1973                            2.129            2.129            2;129
1978                            1.932            1.948            1.954
1983                            1.793            1.815            1.824
1988                            1.689            1.714            1.725
1993                            1.611            1.637            1.648
1998                 0
                                1.551            1.575            1.587
2003                            1.503            1.526            1.538
2008                            1.466            1.437            1.498
2013                            1.435            1.455            1.465
2018                            1.411            1.429            1.438
2023                            1.391            1,407            1.416
2028                            1.375            1.389            1.397
2033                            1.361            1.374            1.382
2038                            1.350            1.362            1.368
2043                            1.341            1.351            1.357
2048                            1.333            1.343            1.348
2053                            1.327            1.335            1.340
2058                            1.322            1.329            1.334
2063                            1.317            1.324            1.328
2068                            1.314            1.320            1.323
2073                            1.311            1.316            1.319


aLabor supply elasticity = 0.15; saving elasticity = 0.4. Relative price
 of capital was 1.0 in every period of base case sequence.
                                       29



        Because of the capital deepening, it is not surprising that a large

proportion of the welfare gains occurs in the distant future. Even when

we carry out our calculations 100 years, we still find that 16 percent of

the welfare gains occur in the termination term. This raises the obvious

question of how sensitive these gains would be to changes in the discount

rate. In Table 9, we see that the removal of all distortionary taxes leads

to substantial welfare gains, even when a six percent real discount rate is

used. We do not report dollar figures in Table 9, since the present values

of both the base case sequence and the revise case sequence are affected by

the discounting.


                                     TABLE 9

               WELFARE GAIN FROM REPLACING THE EXISTING TAX SYSTEM
                   WITH A LUMP SUM TAX: SENSITIVITY ANALYSIS
                       WITH RESPECT TO THE DISCOUNT RATEa

     Discount Rate (%)                 Welfare Gain as a Percentage of Revenue
           3                                            28.3%
           4                                            22.1
           5                                            18.0
           6                                            15.0


     aLabor supply elasticity =   0.15; saving elasticity   0.4.




        In the simulation in which all distortionary taxes are replaced by a

lump sum tax, labor supply increases in response to the removal of tax

distortions, but the increase is not nearly so large (relatively) as the

increase in saving. Of course, this flows directly from our assumptions about

factor supply elasticities. Labor supply in the revised sequence is higher

than in the base sequence by 18.5 percent in the first period and 15.7 percent
                                     30


in the final period. Consumption of goods rises instantaneously by eleven

percent. This is possible, despite the large increase in saving, because

of the increase in labor supply. In the final period of the revised sequence

(i.e., after 100 years), consumption is 33 percent higher than in the base

sequence. For most of the 15 consumer goods, the increase is near this 33

percent figure. However, we find large increases in the consumption of the

three consumer goods which were heavily taxed. Consumption of alcohol increases

by 133 percent, of tobacco by 141 percent, and of gasoline by 69 percent.

        Finally, let us look at some of the changes in the industrial composition

of output which are broughtabout by the tax changes. In every period of the

base case sequence, the lightly taxed agriculture and real estate industries

account for 5.7 percent and 8.2 percent of total output, respectively. In the

first period of the revised sequence, these figures drop to 4.8 percent and

6.5 percent, respectively. On the other hand, the heavily taxed metals and

machinery industry increases from 12.6 percent to 14.2 percent, and trade

grows from 11.5 percent to 11.9 percent of total output. Over time, the

decrease in the relative price of capital leads the output proportions part

of the way back to their original positions.

        In Table 10, we break down the results of Table 6 by calculating the

welfare gains associated with removing the major groups of distortionary taxes,

using a labor supply elasticity of 0.15 and a saving elasticity of 0.4. Thus,

Table 10 can be compared with Table 5, in the same way in which Table 6 could

be compared with Table 4.

        Table 10 indicates that capital taxes at the industry level and income

taxes are the most important causes of distortion on average. This is not

surprising in view of the fact that growth of the capitat stock is important
                                          31


                                       TABLE 10

                WELFARE GAINS FROi REPLACING DIFFERENT PORTIONS
                     OF THE TAX SYSTEM WITH LTJ[P SUM TAXES
                        (in billions of 1973 dollars,

                                                                      Gain as
                                                                   Percentage of
Taxes Removed                                     Welfare Gain     Revenue Raised

A. All Distortionary Taxes                          $3,110.7               22.1%

B. Capital Taxes at the Industry Level               1,310.7               35.4

C. Labor Taxes at the Industry Level                   444.7               14.5

D. All Consumer Sales Taxes                            423.4               20.7
      1. Taxes on alcohol, tobacco, and                310.8               32.1
          gasoline only
      2. Taxes on other goods                           94.1                8.7

E. Income Taxes                                     1,732.2                37.6

F. Output Taxes (18 industries only)                  156.5                19.1

C. Output Taxes (all 19 industries)b                  4435
H. Capital and Labor Taxes                          1,745.2                25.8

I. Labor and Income Taxes                           1,877.5                20.9

J. Capital and Sales Taxes                          l.74l.l                10. 1


aAssuming saving elasticity =   0.4;   labor supply elasticity =   0.15.
bee footnote 9 regarding expressing the gain as a percentage of revenue
 raised for this simulation.



for long term welfare improvements. Also, as seen in Table 3, these taxes

are the ones with the highest rates.

        It is interesting to compare Table 10 with Table 5, and see that

the relationship between average loss and marginal loss is somewhat uneven.

However, marginal losses are always higher than average losses. The central

tendency is for marginal rats to be about twice as great as average rates,

as we would expect from the simple analysis in Section II. Also in Table 10, we
                                     32


consider the second—best issue of how the welfare effects of different

taxes interact with each other. Rows H, I, and J of Table 10 show that,

more or less, 'additivity" is preserved. For example, the welfare gain

from removing capital taxes and labor taxes is nearly equal to the sum

of the gains from removing the two types of taxes in separate simulations.

        Because lump sum levies are so unlikely ever to be adopted in

practice, it is interesting to ask whether a broadly based tax system, with

relatively undifferentiated rates, can give similarly large gains. If we

replace the existing system of distortionary taxes with a proportional income

tax, we get welfare gains of $1,851.3 billion in 1973 dollars. This is 13.2

percent of revenues and 60 percent of the gain from removing all taxes and

replacing them with lump sum levies. The tax rate which is necessary to raise
                                            10
all of this revenue is around 42 percent.        Broadly speaking, this experiment

yields behavior which is similar to that under the lump sum replacement. The

capital/labor ratio increases by more than 36 percent, not only because of a

large increase in saving, but also because of a small decrease in labor supply.

        Another alternative for a broadly based tax is a progressive income

tax. To simulate such a plan, we keep the same progressive marginal rates

that we had in our base sequence, and scale each of them up by the same number

of percentage points until all of the required revenue is collected. This plan

makes the "equity—efficiency tradeoff" stand out in bold relief. There is still

a large welfare gain of $814.8 billion, but it is less than half as large as

the gain under a proportional income tax. The tax rates necessary to achieve

equal revenue yield range from around 18 percent for the lowest income consumer

to around 58 percent for the group with the highest incomes.
                                     33


        A third broadly based tax is a value—added tax (VAT). We    simulate
replacing the existing distortionary system with a VAT of the consumption

type.11 As with our other broadly—based alternative tax plans, the VAT

leads to substantial capital deepening. The relative price of capital rises

at first to 1.842, as a result of the lowering and equalization of capital

tax rates. The added incentives to save eventually lead to a 53 percent

increase in the capital/.labor ratio, as a result of which the relative price

of capital falls to about 1.04. The value—added tax rate necessary to replace

the existing system is in the range of 32 percent of gross sales.

        The welfare gain resulting from the move to a VAT is $2,878.0 billion

in 1973 dollars, or about 20.4 percent of revenues. This is more than 90

percent of the gain which we reported for the lump sum tax. ThLs may seem

surprisingly high. The reason for this is that the income effects from the

lump sum simulation and the simulations of broadly based alternatives are

substantially different. In our model, the upper income groups have the

highest propensities to save. Consequently, highly progressive lump sum

schemes like the one we have used here will lead to less saving than less

progressive schemes.12 We therefore ran another simulation, in which the

existing tax system is replaced by a set of lump sum taxes allocated according

to income in the base case.13 The welfare gain associated with this type of

lump sum replacement is $3,721.2 billion, or 26.4 percent of revenues. In

Table 11, we summarize the results from these two lump sum simulations and

from the simulations using broadly based distortionary taxes.

        In Section II, we suggested that not only the level but also the

dispersion of tax rates is important to the welfare cost of taxation. For

each major portion of the tax system, we would like to know how much welfare
                                       34



                                    TABLE 11

            WELFARE GAINS FROM REPLACING THE EXISTING TAX SYSTEM
                         WITH VARIOUS TYPES OF TAXES


                                       Welfare Gain           Gain as
    Type of                           (in billions of      Percentage of
Replacement Tax                        1973 dollars)         Revenues

Lump Sum tax in proportion to
  income and sales taxes paid           $3,110.7               22.1%

Lump Sum tax in proportion to
  income                                    3,721.2            26.4

Proportional Income tax                     1,851.3            13.2

Progressive Income tax                        814.8            5.8

Consumption—type Value—added tax            2,878.0            20.4




loss is due to high taxes, and how much is due to taxes which discriminate

among industries, goods, or consumer groups. In the case of taxes on capital

at the industry level, this amounts to an analysis of intertemporal distortions

versus interindustry distortions.

        We already have reported that replacing the taxes on capital at the

industry level leads to a welfare improvement of $1,311 billion. How much

of an improvement would we have if we equalized these rates at the average

level existing in the base case? Our estimate is approximately $448 billion,

or just over one—third of the total. While the distortions across sectors

are costly (they outweigh the costs of the distortions from all labor taxes

at the industry level), it is clearly the intertemporal distortion which has

the greatest effect. This contrasts with Harberger's (1964, p. 30) study,

from which he concludes:
                                     35


             .the U.S. economy very likely suffers greater costs from
        tax—induced misallocations of its given capital stock than from
        the influence of taxation on the overall size of that capital
        stock.


We believe that the reason for the difference is that the simple Harberger

framework could not be adapted easily to the study of the growth of the

economy over time.

        Intersectoral distortions are relatively more important for consumer

purchase taxes. Equalization of consumer purchase tax rates leads to a

welfare gain of $266 billion, or more than 62 percent of the gain from removing

sales taxes entirely. Just the opposite is true of the taxes on labor at the

industry level. Equalization of these rates produces a negligible effect.

These results are not surprising in light of the data in Table 3. That table

showed that the coefficient of variation of labor taxes is minuscule, while

capital tax rates are moderately variable and consumer purchase tax rates are

highly variable.

        Finally, we can ask what would happen if the rates were equalized

within every portion of the tax system (i.e., capital tax rates, income tax

rates, etc., are all set to their average values). In this case, we find

that the economy would enjoy a welfare gain of $1,295.8 billion, or more than

41 percent of the gain from replacing all distortionary taxes with lump sum

taxes in proportion to income and sales taxes paid. These results are

summarized in Table 12. The implication for tax policy is clear: large

welfare gains could accrue if we were to equalize tax rates.
                                      36


                                 TABLE 12

                  WELFARE GAINS FROM EQUALIZING TAX RATES
                       FOR VARIOUS GROUPS OF TAXES


                                                               Gain as
                                                            Percentage of
                                       Welfare Gain      Gain from Replacing
                                      (in billions of    this Group of Taxes
Type of Tax Equalized                  1973 dollars)     with Lump Sum Taxes

Capital Taxes at the Industry Level        $     447.7          34.2%

Consumer Sales Taxes                             266.3          62.9

Income Taxes                                     601.0          34.9

Output Taxes                                      30.1           6.8

All Groups of Taxesa                           1,295.8          41.7


a5 includes equalization of labor tax rates by industry, which are not
 reported separately because the gains from equalization are negligible.
                                     37


V. Conclusion

        Most of the earlier studies using this model have focused on

specific policy proposals, such as corporate tax integration or the

consumption tax. The present paper is designed to give more general

guidance to policy. The central message of this paper is that the welfare

losses caused by distortionary taxation can be very large. This is true

both on average and at the margin.

        The marginal welfare loss to consumers from raising an additional

dollar of revenue is in the range of 34 cents to 48 cents. This has very

important implications for cost—benefit analysis. Samuelson (1954) developed

the condition for the optimal provision of a pure public good, namely, that

the sum of the marginal rates of substitution should equal the marginal

rate of transformation. However, this condition will only hold if the public

expenditure can be covered by lump sum taxes. If a public project must be

financed by distortionary taxes which cause deadweight loss, this excess

burden must be taken into account when we decide whether to undertake the

project. Our calculations indicate that the deadweight loss is between

one—third and one—half of revenues. This large wedge could cause us to

approve many fewer projects than we would approve if we were to use the simple

Samuelson condition.

        The average deadweight loss per dollar of revenue is smaller than the

marginal deadweight loss, but it is still substantial. tJe estimate that the

gain from replacing the distortionary tax system with certain lump sum taxes

would be in the range of 13 cents to 22 cents per dollar. The gains would be

about 60 percent as great if the existing system were replaced with a

proportional income tax. Replacing the existing system with a consumption—type
                                     38


value—added tax would give even greater gains than those from switching

to a proportional income tax.

        The greatest causes of inefficiency are the heavy taxation of

capital at the industry level., and of personal incomes. Each of these leads

to substantial intertemporal distortion. The intertemporal distortions appear

to be more important than intersectoral distortions, although the latter are

quite large. We should note, however, that these results were achieved with

data from 1973, when capital taxes were higher than they are now. The tax

changes passed in 1981 amounted to a substantial reduction in marginal taxes

on corporate capital. These changes will move us in the right direction (see

Fullerton and Henderson [1981}). Nevertheless, we believe that there is still

a good deal of room for improvement in the efficiency of the tax code. For

one thing, we find that equalizing the tax rates across sectors, goods, or

consumers for the various parts of the tax system would lead to gains with a

present value of almost $1.3 trillion, or about nine percent of revenue.

        Our central conclusion is that considerations of economic efficiency

are very important to the evaluation of the tax system. These considerations

should be taken into account in two ways. First, we can design a tax system

which is more efficient. Secondly, regardless of what tax system we use, we

should consider its efficiency properties when we choose the level of public

expenditure.
                                      39



                                   Footnotes


1. We will report our results in 1973 dollars, because our model is
    specified with 1973 data.

2. The lump sum taxes in question were assigned in proportion to income
    and sales taxes paid by the 12 consumer groups in our model. Different
    methods of assigning the lump sums lead to different welfare gains.
    In some cases, these were substantially greater..

3. In both our marginal and average calculations, we find that consumer
    purchase taxes are highly distortionary. However, these results are
    determined mainly by the very high taxes on alcohol, tobacco, and
    gasoline. We urge caution in interpreting these results, for two reasons.
    First, the taxes on alcohol and tobacco may be viewed as correcting
    externalities, and the gasoline taxes may be viewed as benefit—related
    charges. Second, we model consumer purchases with a Cobb—Douglas utility
    function, which may overstate substantially the own—price elasticities
    of demand for these goods.

4. Auerbach, Kotlikoff, and Skinner (1982) and Hausman (1981) also find that
    progressive tax systems perform substantially less well than proportional
    systems, in terms of overall welfare.

5. The manuipulations which follow can also be found in Browning (1976).
    Both in this partial equilibrium analysis and in our later general
    equilibrium calculations, we implicitly ignore certain issues raised by
    Atkinson and Stern (1974). They analyze two cases under which the economy
    might want to provide more public goods in the presence of distortionary
    taxes than in the presence of lump sum taxes. The first is when there is
    complementarity between public goods and taxed private goods. In our
    model, we do not consider public production per Se. Secondly, Atkinson
    and Stern consider the case of taxed goods which are inferior. However,
    our utility functions restrict all goods to be normal.

6. Calculations based on equation (4) but which use tax rates as a proportion
    of gross expenditure may understate the welfare loss from distortionary
    taxation. This is one reason why Browning calculates marginal excess
    burden figures which are lower than ours.

7.   These are incomes as defined for the 1973 Consumer Expenditure Survey..

8. Our model exaggerates this effect, since we do not capture life cycle
    differences among households.

9. A complication is caused by the fact that one of the output tax rates
    is negative. We model the subsidies to government enterprises as a
    negative tax on the output of that industry. One procedure would be to
    multiply all rates by 1.01 except for the subsidy to government enterprises,
    which we would multiply by 0.99. This would be an acceptable procedure
                                     40


     for a simulation of marginal excess burden, but the results would
     not be comparable with a calculation of the welfare gain from
     setting all output tax rates to zero. To see this, consider the
     extreme case in which the net revenue from the subsidy and the various
     taxes is zero. Then, although the marginal excess burden might have
     a reasonable value, the welfare gain per dollar of revenue from removing
     the taxes and subsidy would be infinite. Thus, we report two results
     for output taxes. In one case, we alter all 19 rates. In the other
     case, we alter only the rates on outputs other than that of the government
     enterprises industry.

10. This contrasts with some popular discussions of the 'flat tax,t in which
     tax rates of around 20 percent are mentioned. The difference, of course,
     is that the simulations reported here are concerned with replacing all
     distortionary taxes, rather than only the Federal taxes.

11. We get the same results, regardless of whether we model an origin—based
     or destination—based VAT. For an explanation of this equivalence, see
     Goulder, Shoven, and Whalley (1982).

12. Because of this, and because we do not use an explicit life cycle model,
     we do not emphasize the distributional results of these simulations.

13. Allocation according to income has been used in some of the earlier
     papers using this model, e.g., Fullerton, et al., (1981),
                                      41


                                 References


Atkinson, A. B., and N. H. Stern.   lPigou, Taxation, and Public Goods.'1
        Review of Economic Studies 41, no. 125 (January 1974).
Auerbach, Alan J.; Laurence J. Kotlikoff; and Jonathan Skinner. "The
        Efficiency Gains from Dynamic Tax Reform." NBER Working Paper
        No. 819, December, 1981.

Ballard, Charles L., and Lawrence H. Goulder. "Expectations in Numerical
        General Equilibrium Models." Mirneo, Stanford University, 1982.

Ballard, Charles L.; Don Fullerton; John B. Shoven; and John Whalley.
        Evaluation of United States Tax Policies with a Numerical General
        Equilibrium Model. Amsterdam: North—Holland Publishing Company,
        forthcoming, 1983.

Borjas, George J., and James J. Heckman. "Labor Supply Estimates for
        Public Policy Evaluation." Proceedings of the Industrial Relations
        Research Association (1978): 320—31.

Browning, Edgar K. "The Marginal Cost of Public Funds." Journal of Political
        Economy 84 (April 1976): 283—98.

Denison, Edward F. "A Note on Private Saving." Review of Economic Statistics
        40 (August 1958): 261—67.

Feldstein, Martin. "Incidence of a Capital Tax in a Growing Economy with
        Variable Savings Rates.". Review of Economic Studies 41 (October
        1974).

Fullerton, Don, and Yolanda K. Henderson. "Long Run Effects of the Accelerated
        Cost Recovery System." Discussion Paper No. 20, Woodrow t'lilson School,
        Princeton University, December, 1981.

Fullerton, Don; Yolanda K. Henderson; and John B. Shoven. "A Comparison of
        Methodologies in Empirical General Equilibrium Models of Taxation."
        National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 911, June 1982.
        Also in H. Scarf and J. B. Shoven (eds.), Applied General Equilibrium
        Analysis. Cambridge University Press, forthcoming. 1983.

Fullerton, Don; A. Thomas King; John B. Shoven; and John Walley. "Corporate
        Tax Integration in the United States: A General Equilibrium Approach."
        American Economic Review 71 (September 1981): 677—91.

Fullerton, Don; John B. Shoven; and John Whalley. "General Equilibrium
        Analysis of U.S. Taxation Policy." In Office of Tax Analysis, U.S.
        Treasury Department, 1978 Compendium of Tax Research. Washington,
        D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office, 23—55.
                                     42

Goulder, Lawrence; John B. Shoven; and John Whalley. "Domestic Tax Policy
        and the Foreign Sector: The Importance of Alternative Foreign Policy
        Formulations to Results from a General Equilibrium Tax Analysis Model."
        In Martin S. Feistein (ed.), Simulation Methods in Tax Policy Analysis.
        Chicago: University of Chicago Press, forthcoming, 1982.

Harberger, Arnold C. "The Incidence of the Corporation Income Tax." Journal
        of Political Economy 70 (June 1962): 215—40.

__________   "Taxation, Resource Allocation, and Welfare." In
        National Bureau of Economic Research, The Role of Direct and
        Indirect Taxes in the Federal Revenue System. Princeton, N.J.:
        Princeton University Press, 1964. Pp. 25—70.

__________   "Efficiency Effects of Taxes on Income from Capital." In
        N. Krzyzaniak (ed.), Effects of Corporation Income Tax. Detroit,
        Mi.: Wayne State University Press, 1966.

Hausman, Jerry A. "Labor Supply." In Henry J. Aaron and Joseph A. Pechman
        (eds.), How Taxes Affect Economic Behavior. Washington, D.C.: The
        Brookings Institution, 1981.

Killingsworth, Mark R. Labor Supply. New York: Cambridge University Press,
        forthcoming, 1982.

Merrill, 0. H. "Applications and Extension of an Algorithm that Computes
        Fixed Points to Certain Upper Semi—Continuous Point—to—Set Mappings.'
        Unpublished Ph. D. dissertation, University of Michigan, 1972.

Samuelson, Paul A. "The Pure Theory of Public Expenditure." Review of Economics
        and Statistics 36 (November 1954): 387—89.

Scarf, Herbert E. (wtih collaboration of Terje Hansen). The Computation of
        EconomIc Equilibria. New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press, 1973

Shoven, John B., and John Whallev. "General Equilibrium with Taxes: A
        Computational Procedure and an Existence Proof." Review of Economic
        Studies 40 (1973): 475—90.

Starrett, David A. "Long Run Savings Elasticities in the Life Cycle Iodel."
        Factor Markets Workshop Research Paper No. 24, Stanford University, 1982.

Stiglitz, Joseph E. "Taxation, Corporate Financial Policy, and the Cost of
        Capital." Journal of Public Economics 2, no. 1 (1973): 1—34.

Summers, Lawrence H. "Capital Taxation and Accumulation in a Life Cycle
        Growth Model." Mierican Economic Review 71 (September 1981): 533—44.
