                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                           SHORT INTEREST AND STOCK RETURNS

                                             Paul Asquith
                                            Parag A. Pathak
                                             Jay R. Ritter

                                         Working Paper 10434
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w10434


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       April 2004




We would like to thank the NYSE, Amex, and Nasdaq for supplying us with short interest data, and to Lisa
Meulbroek for helpful contributions. This paper substantially revises and extends the 1995 working paper
“An Empirical Investigation of Short Interest” by Paul Asquith and Lisa Meulbroek. Comments from Burt
Porter and workshop participants at Barclays Global Investors and the University of North Carolina are
appreciated. In addition, we thank Vivek Bohra, Jeff Braun, Stefan Budac, Jason Hotra, Carl Huttenlocher,
Kevin Kadakia, and Matthew Zames for their research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of
the author(s) and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2004 by Paul Asquith, Parag A. Pathak, and Jay R. Ritter. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Short Interest and Stock Returns
Paul Asquith, Parag A. Pathak, and Jay R. Ritter
NBER Working Paper No. 10434
April 2004
JEL No. G12, G14
                                         ABSTRACT


Using a longer time period and both NYSE-Amex and Nasdaq stocks, this paper examines short

interest and stock returns in more detail than any previous study and finds that many documented

patterns are not robust. While equally weighted high short interest portfolios generally

underperform, value weighted portfolios do not. In addition, there is a negative correlation between

market returns and short interest over our whole period. Finally, inferences from short time periods,

such as 1988-1994 when the underperformance of high short interest stocks was exceptional or

1995-2002, when high short interest Nasdaq stocks did not underperform, are misleading.

Paul Asquith
Sloan School of Management
MIT, Room E52-325
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
pasquith@mit.edu

Parag A. Pathak
Department of Economics
Harvard University
ppathak@fas.harvard.edu

Jay R. Ritter
Warrington College of Business Administration
University of Florida
jay.ritter@cba.ufl.edu
                             Short Interest and Stock Returns
I.      Introduction
        It is now widely accepted that stocks with high short interest ratios underperform the
market. This is a very recent bit of conventional wisdom, based largely on the evidence in
Asquith and Meulbroek’s (1995) unpublished working paper for New York Stock Exchange
(NYSE) and American Stock Exchange (Amex) stocks, and Desai, Ramesh, Thiagarajan, and
Balachandran’s (2002) article for Nasdaq stocks. Both Asquith and Meulbroek and Desai et al
report negative and significant abnormal returns for firms with short interest ratios of 2.5% or
more, where the short interest ratio is defined as the ratio of short interest to shares outstanding.
Both papers also report large secular increases in short interest ratios, and skewed cross-sectional
distributions, with most stocks having short interest ratios of less than 0.5%, and very few firms
having a ratio exceeding 10%. Prior to these papers, the conventional wisdom was that large
short positions presaged positive future returns, caused by the flow demand from short sellers
covering their positions.1
        The rationale for why high short interest should presage negative abnormal returns relies
upon the fact that short selling stocks is costly or constrained relative to taking long positions.
There are many reasons for this, primarily regulatory constraints. If short selling is costly, the
“votes” of optimistic investors carry a greater weight than those of pessimistic investors in stock
valuation. Two predictions flow from these observations. First, firms with a high dispersion of
opinion will be overvalued, and thus have low subsequent returns, as first discussed by Miller
(1977). Second, since short sellers will concentrate their positions in the firms that are most
overvalued, firms with high short interest ratios will have low subsequent returns, as modeled by
Diamond and Verrecchia (1987).
        This paper shows that the new conventional wisdom regarding short interest ratios and
return predictability, as well as continual increases in short interest ratios over time, is premature
and incomplete. Using a longer time period for both NYSE-Amex and Nasdaq stocks and
examining short interest and stock returns in more detail than any previous study, we find that
the patterns are more ambiguous than the recent literature suggests. While the result that high

1
 This idea is named the “Cushion Theory” in Barron’s Dictionary of Finance and Investment Terms, 5th edition,
1998.


                                                       2
short interest stocks underperform is generally true for equally weighted portfolios, it does not
hold for value weighted portfolios. Specifically, for the period from 1976 to 2002, equally
weighted (EW) portfolios of NYSE-Amex and (beginning in July 1988) Nasdaq firms with high
short interest reliably underperform. These same portfolios over the same calendar time period,
however, do not reliably underperform on a value weighted (VW) basis. For example, firms in
the 99th percentile of short interest ratios have monthly abnormal returns of –53 basis points (t= -
2.44) on an EW basis, but only –5 basis points (t= -0.17) on a VW basis. This difference is not
because highly shorted stocks are all micro-caps, however. While highly shorted stocks have a
larger median equity value than the median of non-highly shorted stocks, they are
disproportionately small stocks, with both micro-cap stocks and large-cap stocks
underrepresented. This is true for the entire sample and for the subsamples of NYSE-Amex and
Nasdaq firms.
       In addition to the differences between EW and VW portfolios, over the period 1988-
2002, when data for all markets are available, there are differences between NYSE-Amex and
Nasdaq firms. The abnormal returns on NYSE-Amex stocks with high short interest are more
negative and more consistent across portfolios than for Nasdaq stocks.
       Consistent with other studies, we find that the higher the short interest ratio, the lower is
the subsequent performance. That is, firms with short interest ratios of 10% or more
underperform those of 5% or 2.5%. Likewise, firms that are in the 99th percentile of short interest
underperform firms in the 95th percentile. These are not fair comparisons, however, since these
portfolios are not distinct. The 2.5% portfolio includes stocks in the 5% and 10% portfolio.
Likewise the 95th percentile portfolio includes stocks in the 99th percentile portfolio. This
suggests that the magnitude and significance of abnormal returns for the less restrictive
portfolios are driven by stocks with the highest short interest.
       We examine this issue using truncated portfolios, i.e. 2.5-4.9%, 5-9.9%, and 95-98.9th
percentiles, and find that this is in fact the case. For the sample of NYSE-Amex-Nasdaq firms
over the period 1988-2002, the truncated portfolio returns are not as negative or significant as are
the corresponding untruncated portfolio returns. In general, the portfolios with reliably negative
abnormal returns are EW portfolios with high short interest ratios. These stocks comprise a small
percentage of all firms and market capitalization. In a typical year, there are 5,500 domestic
operating companies trading on the NYSE, Amex, and Nasdaq National Market System. Only 55



                                                  3
of them are in the 99th percentile, which is the portfolio with the worst performance. For the
other 5,445 firms, short interest ratios have only a modest ability to predict abnormal returns.
        Moreover, our results are not as significantly negative as those reported by Asquith and
Meulbroek (1995) and Desai et al (2002). Differences with Desai et al’s results are due to the
fact that during the period they analyze, July 1988-1994, stocks with high short interest do
exceptionally poorly, on both an EW and VW basis. In fact, returns to highly shorted stocks for
all markets in this subperiod are the most negative of any subperiod that we examine. In other
subperiods, in particular the 1995-2002 period, not covered by Asquith and Meulbroek or Desai
et al, EW Nasdaq portfolios and all VW portfolios of high short interest stocks do not reliably
underperform the market.
        Our differences with the Asquith and Meulbroek results are not only due to the time
period they examine. The differences are also attributable to different methodologies. First, they
do not measure returns using a four-factor model as we and Desai et al do. Second, in the most
often-cited early versions of the paper (later corrected), they calculate the abnormal return on
stock i as ln(1 + rit) - ln(1 + rmt), where rit and rmt are the firm return and market return in month t.
This empirical procedure produces biased abnormal returns, since expected log returns depend
upon both the mean and the variance of the simple returns. Since individual stock returns have a
higher variance than the market return, the expected market-adjusted log return is negative in
random samples, with the bias approximately equal to ½ the average unique variance. If the
average variance of idiosyncratic returns is (0.3)2 per year (30 percent squared), the bias is
almost 40 basis points per month.
        Taken together, this implies that the new conventional wisdom about the poor
performance of stocks with high short interest is based on Nasdaq stocks for an atypical six-and-
one-half year sample period, and on a biased methodology that does not consider the Fama-
French risk factors for NYSE-Amex stocks. It is also based only on EW portfolios.
        Our results also differ from the existing literature on other dimensions. Asquith and
Meulbroek and Desai et al report that there has been a continual increase in short interest ratios
over time. Lamont and Stein (2004) report that short interest ratios declined during part of the
period 1995-2002 and that there is a large negative correlation between stock returns and short
interest for the Nasdaq market. All three studies examine too short a time period to draw general
conclusions. We find that short interest did not continue to rise steadily in the period subsequent



                                                    4
to that examined in Asquith and Meulbroek and Desai et al. Short interest as a percentage of
market value declined for Nasdaq in 1999 and 2000. Short interest ratios on Nasdaq
subsequently rose after Nasdaq prices peaked, reaching their highest level in 2002. NYSE-Amex
short interest ratios fell in 1998 and also reached a new peak in 2002. Examining market returns
and short interest for our longer period and on all markets, we find a negative correlation that is
much smaller than that reported by Lamont and Stein.
         We also find that the negative performance of stocks with high short interest is less
persistent than Desai et al report. In most subperiods, there is a fairly rapid decay of negative
abnormal performance towards zero, once short interest ratios fall. Specifically, portfolios that
remove firms with high short interest as soon as the short interest ratio drops below a fixed
threshold have more negative abnormal returns than those that keep a firm in the portfolio for
some additional inclusion period, e.g. 12 months. Thus, to implement a strategy that is restricted
to firms with a high short interest ratio, portfolio turnover must be extensive, and this would
result in an implementation shortfall relative to returns that are estimated ignoring transaction
costs.
         Individual stocks have high short interest for a variety of reasons. Some stocks have high
short interest because some investors feel they are overvalued (valuation shorts). Other stocks
have high short interest because some investors feel that a convertible bond issued by the
company is undervalued (arbitrage shorts). When we categorize stocks in our high short interest
portfolios on the basis of whether they may be subject to convertible bond arbitrage, we find that
the arbitrage short sellers do not profit as much as value-based short sellers.
         The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section II reviews related literature,
while Section III describes the data and the research design. Section IV presents the main
empirical results, while Section V considers arbitrage versus valuation-based short selling.
Section VI outlines some implications of our results and concludes. The Appendix contains
institutional details on the procedures of short selling.


II.      Related Literature
         Short sales restrictions were originally passed to prevent downward pressure on stock
prices (Jones and Lamont (2002)) and short sellers remain reviled today by firm managers
(Lamont (2002)). Rubinstein (2004) surveys the theoretical models on short sales and their effect


                                                   5
on stock returns. This literature relies on both institutional restrictions on short sales and
heterogeneous beliefs among investors. The modern empirical literature showing that short sales
affect subsequent stock returns begins with Asquith and Meulbroek (1995) and Desai et al
(2002). Prior to these papers, empirical research did not identify a strong or consistent
relationship between short interest and subsequent returns (see Figlewski (1981), Brent, Morse
and Stice (1990), Figlewski and Webb (1993), and Woolridge and Dickinson (1994)). One
reason for this failure is that some of these previous studies did not select their sample firms
based upon the level of short interest. The relation between short interest and returns is difficult
to detect using a random sample since a large percentage of firms have little or no short interest
in any given month. In their study of the announcement effects of short interest, Senchek and
Starks (1992) do look at levels of short interest, but their sample size is limited.
       Contemporaneous research on short interest and stock returns includes Gopalan (2003)
and Boehme, Danielson, and Sorescu (2002). Gopalan examines the relation between short
interest ratios and subsequent returns for a sample of NYSE and Nasdaq stocks from 1992-2000.
He finds that stocks that are likely to be short sale constrained earn lower one month ahead
returns compared to unconstrained stocks. Boehme et al examine the relation between short
interest and abnormal returns in the period January 1988 through July 1999 for NYSE-listed
stocks and January 1993 through July 1999 for Nasdaq-listed stocks. They sort stocks into
portfolios based on market capitalization, short interest ratios, and the standard deviation of
residuals from a market model regression for the prior one hundred trading days. They report that
the underperformance of stocks with a high short interest ratio is concentrated among smaller
stocks with a higher residual standard deviation.
       Other work focuses on why stocks are shorted and explores the costs of short selling. For
example, Dechow, Hutton, Meulbroek and Sloan (2001) document that short sellers position
themselves in firms with low ratios of fundamentals (such as earnings and book values) to
market values and cover their positions as ratios mean-revert. Geczy, Musto, and Reed (2002),
D’Avolio (2002), and Jones and Lamont (2002) examine smaller proprietary databases of stocks
that are “on special,” where short sellers must pay a premium to borrow shares. They find that
these stocks are more likely to have high short interest ratios. Ofek, Richardson, and Whitelaw
(2003) find that stocks which are difficult to short are more likely to violate put-call parity.
While these last four papers have detailed data on rebate rates and study the costs of short selling



                                                   6
in depth, none of them examine short selling and stock returns for NYSE-Amex and Nasdaq
stocks for as long a time period as our paper does.

III.     Data and Research Design
A. Sample Construction
         We use a sample of NYSE and Amex firms from 1976-2002 and Nasdaq firms from July
1988-December 2002. The NYSE, Amex, and Nasdaq report the level of short interest in
individual stocks monthly. This information is typically collected from member firms on the
fifteenth calendar day of every month (if it is a business day) and released (after the close of
trading) to news services at least four (and usually more) business days later. Nasdaq has
traditionally released the information a few days later than the NYSE and Amex. This
information is from the settlement date and represents short positions established in transactions
that occurred three or five business days prior (the settlement period changed from 5 to 3 days in
June 1995). The short interest positions for some, but not all, listed firms are then reported in the
Wall Street Journal, Barron's, and the New York Times.2 In recent years, they are also listed on
Bloomberg. Reporting dates vary from month to month since exchanges have no required release
date. The data is sometimes published as early as the 19th, sometimes as late as the 1st of the next
month. The markets and the financial press report both the current and past month short interest
together. The short interest data are frequently revised the following month. These revisions
occur primarily because a member firm is tardy in reporting, and its short interest is not included
in the initial amount reported. Most revisions are quite small and where the revised numbers are
provided, we use the revised numbers.
         The short interest data in this paper are from five sources. The first two sources are the
NYSE and Amex, which began selling their monthly short interest data to the public in January
1991. The third source is Nasdaq, which began supplying data in electronic form on a monthly
basis in June 1988, although February and July 1990 are missing. Nasdaq monthly short interest
data for months starting in January 1994 is available on the Nasdaq website. The last two sources

2
   One problem with using newspapers as a source of data is that they limit their coverage of short interest positions
to firms with the largest number of shares sold short or firms with large changes in short interest. The cut-off criteria
also changes over time. For example, the August 2000 Wall Street Journal reports short sales for NYSE and Amex
firms with positions greater than 850,000 shares or whose short positions changed by more than 525,000 shares
since the last month. The Nasdaq numbers for August 2000 are 575,000 and 350,000 respectively. In August 1995,
the short sale cut-offs for NYSE-Amex firms are 300,000 and 50,000. In general, the reporting requirements have
increased, reflecting stock splits and the general increase in short sales.


                                                            7
are owned by Standard and Poor's and are roughly equivalent. Interactive Data Corporation
(IDS), a subsidiary of Standard and Poor's, publishes a Quarterly History Tape, which provides
12 months of short interest data for each firm. This is the primary source for our NYSE and
Amex data prior to 1991. Standard and Poor's Daily Stock Price Record, published quarterly,
lists 12 months of short interest data for each firm on the NYSE and Amex for the entire period.
This source was used repeatedly to check revisions in monthly short interest. All the sources we
use are more comprehensive in their coverage of short interest positions than the financial press.
For example, in December of 1990, Barron's reports short interest for 986 NYSE-Amex firms
whereas the Standard and Poor's sources report short interest for 1,335 firms.
         The difference between the Standard and Poor's data and the exchange data is that the
exchanges report a value for short interest for every firm, even if the firm has no or low short
interest. For instance, in December 1990, the Standard and Poor's sources report short interest
data for 1,335 NYSE and Amex firms. In January 1991, the NYSE and Amex provide December
1990 data for 1,854 firms, of which 1,766 firms have non-zero entries. The Standard and Poor's
sources therefore omit 431 firms that have a small amount of short interest. The data provided by
the exchanges reveals that the average short interest for these 431 firms in January 1991 is 3,825
shares, equivalent to 0.07% of shares outstanding. For stocks with no reported short interest in a
given month, we assume the short interest is zero for that month. This paper uses the Standard
and Poor's sources for the 1976-1990 data for the NYSE and Amex. Post-1990 come directly
from the exchanges. For all months for which we have Nasdaq data, Nasdaq is the source.
         Numerous cross-checks were performed to ensure data accuracy. Since the quarterly
Standard and Poor's sources each contain 12 months of data and the monthly exchange data each
contains two months, we compared overlapping months to search for data problems. We also
identified outliers based on deviations from moving averages and compared the observations to
data published in Barron’s and listed in Bloomberg. Since Barron’s lists two months of data in
each of its reports, we compared each data point to two separate issues of Barron's. In total, we
manually checked approximately 50,000 data points.3



3
  We do not believe that we have completely corrected this database; indeed it is our belief that it would be
impossible to do so. We do believe that we have eliminated the obvious errors in the data. Often the errors appear
straightforward, e.g. transposed digits, short sales incorrectly credited to another similarly named firm, etc.



                                                          8
         To assist in comparing short positions across time and firms, we adjust short interest in
two ways. First, the exchange reported short sales are not always adjusted for stock splits or
stock dividends that occur the same month, so we matched all firms with the CRSP tapes and
corrected for these events. Adjusting for stock splits is cumbersome because the effective date of
the stock split during a month may be before or after the short interest numbers are reported.
Second, as mentioned, we divide each firm's short interest by the number of shares outstanding.4
This adjustment is important when comparing firms because the number of shares that constitute
a significant short interest position differs from firm to firm depending on the shares outstanding.
All short interest numbers in this paper are reported as percentages of total shares outstanding.5
B. Descriptive Statistics
         Figure 1 plots the time series of short interest data (relative to shares outstanding) for
NYSE and Amex firms over the period 1976-2002, and Figure 2 plots the short interest ratios for
Nasdaq firms over the period June 1988-December 2002. Four short interest ratios are reported
in the figures: the mean, the median, and the 95th and 99th percentiles. The 95th and 99th
percentiles are the cutoffs for firms in the top 5 percent and top 1 percent of our sample, ranked
by short interest ratio. Two characteristics of the distributions stand out. First, the typical firm in
our sample has very little short interest. Even at its peak in 2002, the median firm in Figure 1 on
the NYSE-Amex and in Figure 2 on Nasdaq had only one percent of its outstanding shares
shorted. While most firms have little or no short interest, a very small number have substantial
short interest. An NYSE-Amex firm in the 99th percentile had at least 23% of its outstanding
shares shorted in 2002, and the corresponding firm on Nasdaq had 24% short.



4
  The two sources we use for shares outstanding are CRSP and Compustat. However, these data sources sometimes
differ in the number of shares outstanding they report. When the shares outstanding differ, CRSP tends to lag actual
shares outstanding when checked against SEC filings. Compustat often sums shares across all classes of common
stock. We use shares outstanding from CRSP if both sources are available because their errors are less severe in
calculating short interest. Since our errors from CRSP are typically too few shares outstanding, we may include
more firms in higher short interest portfolios than there actually are. Any such errors may weaken our results.
5
  While we measure short interest relative to shares outstanding, a more traditional measure, reported in the Wall
Street Journal each month, is short interest relative to daily trading volume, known as the days to cover ratio or days
short. Which measure is more appropriate partly depends on the question being addressed. If one views short interest
as indicative of future buying pressure as short sellers cover their positions, the days to cover ratio is arguably the
best measure. But if one views short interest as reflecting the information of informed investors, then the short
interest to shares outstanding ratio is arguably the best measure. In any event, these two measures are positively
correlated.



                                                          9
        Second, short interest increased dramatically from 1976 for NYSE-Amex firms, and from
1988 for Nasdaq firms. This is true for all four measures presented in Figures 1 and 2. Table 1
presents annual averages of short selling both as a percentage of the total shares in the market
and as a dollar amount of the total shares sold short. The increase in short sales over time is
contemporaneous with the growth of hedge funds, which are much more likely to have large
short positions than other types of investors. There is a decline after 1997 for NYSE-Amex firms
and after 1998 for Nasdaq firms in the percentage of the market sold short. The percentage short
on the Nasdaq exceeds that on the NYSE-Amex from 1992 onwards. After dipping in the late
1990s, short interest ratios resumed their upward trend in 2001-2002.
        The dip in the late 1990s corresponds to a period of rapidly rising stock prices. This
reduction in the mean short interest ratios as the bubble inflated suggests that “limits to
arbitrage” arguments are important (Shleifer and Vishny (1997)). In other words, contrary to the
logic of the efficient market hypothesis, the actions of presumably knowledgeable traders in the
aggregate did not dampen overreactions caused by other investors.6
        This point is also made by Lamont and Stein (2004) who examine the correlation
between aggregate short interest and market returns. Specifically, they compare monthly Nasdaq
short interest ratios and the prior 12-month market return for the period 1995-2002. They report a
sample correlation between these variables of –0.54. Lamont and Stein interpret this result as
inconsistent with short sellers moving the aggregate market towards more accurate valuation. In
Panel A of Table 2, we report the correlations for our longer period and for NYSE-Amex as well
as Nasdaq stocks. We find a dramatically lower correlation of –0.16 between the Nasdaq short
interest ratio and 12-month returns over the July 1988-2002 period, and a correlation of –0.13
between the NYSE-Amex short interest ratio and 12-month returns over the 1976-2002 period.
Attempting to duplicate Lamont and Stein’s result over their time period 1995-2002, we find a
negative correlation of –0.47 using Nasdaq data and –0.41 using NYSE-Amex data. Panel A also
reports the correlations between short interest and the prior six month and prior one month
market returns. These correlations are also negative, but the correlation between the prior month
market return and short interest is smaller than that between the twelve month market return and
short interest.


6
 Brunnermeier and Nagel (2003) report that hedge funds were on average long in technology and Internet stocks
during the late 1990s as the bubble inflated, although they started to switch to short positions near the peak.


                                                        10
       Because the upward trend in mean short interest ratios suggests that the series may be
nonstationary, in Panel B of Table 2 we report the correlation between the change in the
percentage of the market sold short and the lagged market return. While these correlations are
still negative (with one exception), they reverse the pattern in Panel A. The correlations between
market return and change in short interest is larger for one month prior returns than for twelve
month prior returns. These results are not surprising since an upward movement in the market
raises the costs of many short sellers as they must pay cost of carry and meet margin calls.
       To illustrate the types of firms with high short interest, Table 3 lists the names of the 54
firms within the 99th percentile portfolio in December 2002, along with several characteristics of
each firm. 51 of the 54 firms have a market capitalization of between $140 million and $1.5
billion. In other words, almost all of these are small cap stocks, but not micro-cap. Almost all of
these stocks were in the Russell 2000 index representing the firms with market caps ranking
them 1,001 to 3,000 among the roughly 5,000 domestic operating companies on the NYSE,
Amex, and Nasdaq. Furthermore, the industry representation is fairly broad—this portfolio of
firms does not subject the holder to excessive concentration in one industry. The combined
market cap of these 54 stocks was approximately $35 billion, only a little more than 10% of that
of General Electric or Microsoft. Table 3 also lists the prior 12-month buy and hold return for the
54 stocks with high short interest, and their market-to-book ratios. Inspection of the list shows
that most of the stocks have had negative returns in the prior year, although a few have had big
run-ups. As measured by market-to-book ratios, there is a combination of growth and value
stocks, with Nasdaq stocks tending to be growth stocks and NYSE-Amex stocks tending to be
value stocks.
C. Research Design
       To empirically investigate whether high short interest stocks underperform relative to the
market, we study the relation between short interest and subsequent returns. We form portfolios
of highly shorted firms and then calculate returns on these portfolios, reasoning that the strongest
relation between short interest and excess returns should exist for firms that have the largest
short positions.
       We use two approaches to select samples of firms with large short interest positions. The
first approach identifies firms based on their short interest relative to other firms. Specifically,
each month all firms are ranked according to short interest divided by shares outstanding. The



                                                  11
firms in the top percentile of short interest comprise the 99th percentile sample, and similarly, the
firms in the top five percent comprise the 95th percentile sample. Because the overall level of
short interest increased substantially during the 1976-2002 time period, firms entering the high
percentile samples during the early part of the time period are likely to have smaller short interest
positions than firms entering the sample during the later part of the time period. The second
approach to selecting firms with large short interest positions imposes absolute cutoff criteria.
Following Asquith and Meulbroek (1995) and Desai et al (2002), we construct three different
absolute short interest samples. These samples have short interest greater than or equal to 2.5%,
5%, or 10% of shares outstanding.
         Monthly portfolio returns are calculated from the monthly CRSP tapes, where all returns
are from holding long positions. Thus, a negative return is good for short sellers since the stocks
sold short decreased in price. This return does not include the higher costs of short selling. That
is, it does not include the costs to borrow, the risk of demand loans, and transaction costs
associated with heavy portfolio turnover.7
         Since short interest information is collected and released in the middle of calendar month
0, we form portfolios at the end of month 0 and report returns beginning in event month 1.8 The
return for the portfolio over inclusion period [1,T] is the one-month return for a portfolio of
highly shorted firms whose short interest data is released in month 0, where the firms stay in the
portfolio through month T. Alternatively stated, a stock is in the portfolio [1,T] if it qualified for
inclusion in one or more of the previous T months. Thus, the monthly portfolio return over
inclusion period [1,1] is the return for the calendar month after the firms’ short interest places
them into a highly shorted portfolio.9 All of the returns reported in this paper are monthly
portfolio returns.
          Firms often remain highly shorted for several consecutive months. Table 4 reports the
length of time that firms remain in a high short interest portfolio once they have entered it. Table

7
  D’Avolio (2002) reports that firms with high short interest ratios are more likely to be on special than other stocks.
For these stocks the short interest ratio is likely to be lower than it would be if the supply of shares available for
lending was not limited. See the Appendix for institutional procedures on short selling.
8
  The short interest data is from three to five business days before the fifteenth of the month. The release of the
information is one or two weeks later. Thus the return in month 0 includes the period prior to the reporting date, as
well as a period when the short interest data are not yet known to investors.
9
  The portfolio return for inclusion period [1,1] also contains some information from new short interest data released
that month. For example, the [1,1] return for August 1992 (where the portfolio is formed of firms identified by the
release of short interest data on July 27th) will include the market reaction to short interest data that was released on
August 21st for the NYSE-Amex and August 26th for Nasdaq.


                                                           12
4 shows that some stocks have high short interest for only one or a few months, but others have
high short interest for years. For example, about one third of the firms in a portfolio in a given
month are there for only one month, but about half are in for three consecutive months or more.
Approximately 11-19% of the firms, depending on the portfolio, are in the high short interest
portfolios for more than one year. This means that the portfolio for inclusion period [1,1] may
include stocks that are highly shorted for the first time, as well as stocks that are highly shorted
for many previous months. The last column in Table 4 shows that the median number of
consecutive months a firm is highly shorted is 2-3 months. Therefore, the longer the inclusion
period, the greater is the number of months a firm is included in the portfolio when it is no longer
highly shorted. Finally, Table 4 shows that approximately 70% of firms are highly shorted for
more than one consecutive month.


IV. Empirical Results
A. Portfolio Returns

         We report returns from July 1988 to December 2002 on the entire sample of NYSE-
Amex-Nasdaq firms, and after categorizing firms by whether they are traded on the NYSE-Amex
or Nasdaq, we also report returns on NYSE-Amex firms from February 1976 to December 2002.
In Panel A, we report portfolio returns for firms with short interest ratios of at least 2.5%, and in
Panel B, we report portfolio returns for firms whose short interest ratio places them in the 99th
percentile.10 Table 5 uses two different return measures (EW monthly average raw returns and
monthly average intercepts from a four-factor model) over three different inclusion periods
([1,1], [1,6], and [1,12]). For portfolios formed after January 2002 and June 2002, the monthly
returns on portfolios with inclusion periods of [1,12] and [1,6] are based on less than twelve and
six months, respectively.
         The abnormal returns are estimated from the four-factor regression model:

                        rpt - rft = a + b(rmt - rft) + sSMBt + hHMLt + mMOMt + ept



10
   We calculated returns for five different high short interest portfolios: 2.5%, 5%, 10%, 95th percentile, and 99th
percentile. The two reported portfolio results are representative. Returns from all five portfolios are reported below
in Table 6.



                                                          13
where rpt - rft is the excess return over the risk-free rate on a portfolio in time period t, rmt - rft is
the realization of the market risk premium in period t, SMBt is the return on a portfolio of Small
stocks Minus the return on a portfolio of Big stocks in period t, HMLt is the return on a portfolio
of High book-to-market (value) Minus Low book-to-market (growth) stocks in period t, and
MOMt is the return on a portfolio of prior winners minus the return on a portfolio of prior losers
(Fama and French (1993) and Carhart (1997)). The return interval over which winners and losers
are measured is the 11 months before month t-1 (i.e., for March 2002, winners and losers are
based on returns from March 2001 through January 2002). The monthly factor return realizations
are provided by Kenneth French. The intercept is our measure of monthly abnormal
performance.
        Table 5, Panel A shows that the monthly average raw returns for EW portfolios of stocks
with short interest ratios of at least 2.5% are positive for every inclusion period and for every
calendar period. These positive raw returns imply that a trading strategy of being naked short in
highly shorted firms is unprofitable. This alone does not indicate that highly shorted stocks are
not overvalued. The abnormal returns, measured using a four-factor model, are negative for the
majority of EW portfolios reported in columns 4-6. This shows that these firms, even though
they have a positive raw return, underperform.
        In Panel B of Table 5, we report results for the 99th percentile portfolio. The returns are
generally more negative than in Panel A. In Panel B, the monthly average raw returns for all
portfolios on the combined NYSE-Amex-Nasdaq stocks are negative for the period July 1988-
2002. The monthly abnormal returns are also negative for this period for both NYSE-Amex and
Nasdaq stocks separately. The monthly abnormal returns in columns 4 through 6 are negative as
well as for the NYSE-Amex stocks during the 1976-2002 period.
        In Table 5, for every reported calendar time period, the abnormal returns are more
negative for portfolio inclusion period [1,1] than [1,6] which in turn is more negative than [1,12].
The fact that the monthly four-factor intercept shows lower returns for inclusion period [1,1]
than either [1,6] or [1,12] suggests that high portfolio turnover may be required to capture the
low returns on stocks with high short interest ratios.
        In the rest of the paper, we will only report results from the four-factor model and we will
only report returns from two inclusion periods: [1,1] and [1,12]. The [1,12] inclusion period,
which we use in only one table, is representative of a longer inclusion period and its abnormal



                                                     14
performance per month is typically smaller than [1,1] and [1,6], but larger than the unreported
[1,24] inclusion period.11
B. Abnormal portfolio returns for inclusion period [1,1]
         In Table 6, we report the results of four-factor regressions for five portfolios composed of
all NYSE-Amex and Nasdaq firms with high short interest over the July 1988-2002 time period.
This is the 174 month period that includes both NYSE-Amex and Nasdaq stocks. The portfolio
inclusion period is [1,1]. In Panels A and B, we report equally weighted results, and in Panels C
and D, we report value weighted results.
         In Panel A, firms in the five portfolios have short interest ratios during the prior month of
at least 2.5%, 5.0%, 10.0%, or short interest ratios that place them in the 95th or 99th percentile of
all firms. Inspection of the EW results in Panel A shows that all five portfolios have statistically
significant negative intercepts, with the high short interest portfolios underperforming by
anywhere from -48 basis points to -125 basis points per month. On an annualized basis, this is
6% to 15% per year. The more heavily shorted are the firms in a portfolio, the more negative is
the performance: the portfolio where all firms have short interest ratios of at least 10% has more
underperformance than the 5.0% portfolio, which in turn does worse than the 2.5% portfolio.
Similarly, the 99th percentile portfolio has more extreme underperformance than the 95th
percentile portfolio.
         The abnormal returns on the portfolios in Table 6 Panel A are not independent because
some firms appear in more than one portfolio. For example, the 2.5% portfolio includes all
stocks with a short interest ratio of 2.5% or higher, including those with a short interest ratio of
5.0% or more. In principle, firms with short interest ratios between 2.5% and 4.9% could have
zero abnormal returns and yet the 2.5% portfolio, as measured, could significantly underperform.
To look at the marginal effects, we examine in Panel B three additional truncated portfolios:
portfolios containing firms with a short interest ratio greater than or equal to 2.5% but less than
5%, greater than or equal to 5% but less than 10%, and greater than or equal to the 95th percentile
but less than the 99th percentile. While the greater than 2.5% portfolio in Panel A has an intercept
of –48 basis points and a t-statistic of –2.79, the 2.5-4.9% portfolio in Panel B has an intercept of
only –28 basis points with a t-statistic of only –1.58. Similarly, the greater than 95th percentile


11
  We calculate returns for the inclusion periods [1,1], [1,3], [1,6], [1,12], and [1,24] and the results support the
general pattern described in Table 5.


                                                           15
portfolio intercept is –54 basis points (t=-2.67), while the 95-98.9th percentile intercept is only –
36 basis points (t=-1.74). In every EW case, the truncated high short interest portfolio is less
negative than the corresponding untruncated portfolio and is less significant. These results
demonstrate that the negative performance of some of the less restrictive untruncated portfolios
is driven by the underperformance of the firms in the more heavily shorted portfolios.
          In contrast to the statistically significant negative abnormal returns for the EW results
reported in Panel A, the VW results reported in Panel C and D show no reliable
underperformance. Indeed, several of the VW portfolios have positive intercepts. As in Panel A,
the more extreme portfolios (10% and 99th percentile) have lower intercepts than the less
extreme portfolios (2.5% and 95th percentile). Panel D of Table 6 reports coefficients for three
VW truncated portfolios. As with the EW results, the truncated portfolios have more positive
returns than the corresponding untruncated portfolios. The difference between the EW and VW
results suggests that large firms with high short interest do not reliably underperform.12
          Examination of the factor loadings (the slope coefficients) in Table 6 Panels A-D reveals
that firms with high short interest tend to have relatively high systematic risk, tend to positively
covary with small firms, tend to be tilted towards growth stocks when value weighted portfolios
are used, and tend to have negative momentum. Table 7 compares median size and market-to-
book ratios of highly shorted stocks to the rest of the market. We now substitute the truncated
portfolios, 2.5-4.9%, 5-9.9%, and 95-98.9th percentile for the untruncated portfolios greater than
2.5%, greater than 5%, and 95th percentile in the tables. This is so each of our three absolute
cutoff portfolios and two relative portfolios are distinct and there is no overlap of firms within
the absolute or relative rankings. The median market cap of highly shorted firms in Panel A is
noticeably higher than the median for other firms, reflecting the paucity of micro-cap stocks in
our portfolios. This is consistent with Table 3, which lists the stocks and their characteristics in
the 99th percentile sample for December 2002. Panel B shows that the median highly shorted
firm is a growth firm, as measured by its market-to-book ratio, consistent with Dechow et al
(2001).

12
   Boehme et al report four-factor regression intercepts for equally weighted portfolios of firms with high short
interest ratios. Their large firm portfolio has approximately 1,500 stocks in it during the portion of their sample
period, 1993-July 1999, in which Nasdaq stocks are included. The poor performance of mid-cap stocks offsets the
relatively good performance of large-cap stocks, and thus they fail to pick up the relatively high returns on large
stocks with high short interest ratios that our VW portfolios uncover.



                                                         16
        In Table 8, we examine whether the performance of firms with high short interest differs
between NYSE-Amex firms and Nasdaq firms during the July 1988-December 2002 period. Five
truncated samples are presented: 2.5-4.9%, 5-9.9%, 10%, 95-98.9th percentile and 99th percentile.
In constructing the NYSE-Amex portfolios and Nasdaq portfolios using the 95-98.9th and 99th
percentiles, we use population-specific short interest ratio cutoffs, whereas when we report
combined NYSE-Amex-Nasdaq results, as in Table 6, the same absolute cutoffs are used for all
stocks in a given month. For example, as shown in Figures 1 and 2, in December 2002 the 99th
percentile cutoff for NYSE-Amex firms is about 23%, but for Nasdaq firms, it is about 21%.
These are the cutoffs that we use in Table 8, but the Table 6 cutoff would be about 22%, applied
to all firms.
        In Panel A of Table 8, we report four-factor regression results for EW portfolios of
NYSE-Amex firms over the July 1988-December 2002 period. For all five portfolios, there is
statistically significant negative abnormal performance ranging from –41 basis points per month
to –146 basis points per month. As in Tables 5 and 6, this underperformance is more extreme, the
more heavily shorted the firms in the portfolio.
        In Panel B, we report the results of four-factor regressions for EW portfolios of Nasdaq
stocks with high short interest. In contrast to the NYSE-Amex results, the underperformance for
Nasdaq stocks is not always statistically significant at conventional levels. Only two of the five
intercepts are significant at the 10% level, although all of the point estimates are negative,
ranging from –14 to –127 basis points per month. The Nasdaq results also do not follow a
monotonic pattern, since the 5-9.9% truncated portfolio has a more negative intercept than the
10% portfolio.
        While the systematic risk in both panels is high and the momentum factors are both
negative, some of the factor loadings differ substantially between the Panel A NYSE-Amex
results and the Panel B Nasdaq results. Specifically, the EW Nasdaq portfolios are more sensitive
to small stock movements, and the NYSE-Amex portfolios move with value stocks, whereas the
Nasdaq portfolios move with growth stocks. The reliably positive coefficients on HML for
NYSE-Amex stocks are somewhat surprising, given that our Table 7 and Dechow et al (2001)
report that NYSE-Amex firms with high short interest tend to be growth firms.13

13
  The difference in conclusions about whether highly shorted NYSE-Amex firms tend to be growth firms (the
conclusion based on the medians) or value firms (the conclusion based on the slope coefficients) has to do with
differences in the weighting schemes. The Fama-French HML factor is constructed by giving equal weights to the


                                                       17
         In Panels C and D of Table 8, we report value weighted results for portfolios of NYSE-
Amex and Nasdaq firms, respectively. In contrast with the EW results in Panels A and B, none of
the VW portfolio intercepts have a t-statistic of –2.0 or less. In fact, half of the VW portfolio
intercepts are positive and half are negative.
         The point estimates in Table 8 Panel B for our truncated portfolios of EW Nasdaq stocks
during July 1988-December 2002 are less negative and significant than those reported for
untruncated portfolios by Desai et al (2002) for their sample period of July 1988-December
1994. To investigate whether the difference in results is sample period specific, we next partition
our sample by markets and time periods. In particular, we examine the six and one-half year
period June 1988-1994 for Nasdaq versus NYSE-Amex stocks since this allows us to compare
our results directly with Desai et al. We also report results for the twelve and a half year period
1976-June 1988 (for which we only have NYSE-Amex stocks) and the eight-year period 1995-
2002.
         Table 9 reports the EW and VW four factor model intercepts for the 2.5-4.9% truncated
and 99th percentile portfolios divided by market and subperiod and shows that calendar period
and markets do matter. To avoid overburdening the reader, we do not report the results on the 5-
9.9%, 10%, and 95-98.9th percentile portfolios in the table, but they generally follow the pattern
discussed above that the greater the short interest ratio, the more negative the result. For all three
panels of the table, if the 2.5-4.9% and 99th percentile portfolios are both significantly negative,
then the three unreported truncated portfolios also have significantly negative intercepts. There
are three non-overlapping subperiods (1976- June 1988, July 1988-1994, and 1995-2002) and
two combined periods (1976-2002 and July 1988-2002) presented in Table 9. The earliest
subperiod is only available for NYSE-Amex stocks. We will first discuss the EW and VW
subperiod results by panel and then the combined period results.
         The NYSE-Amex-Nasdaq results reported in Panel A show statistically significant
negative EW intercepts for the 2.5-4.9% and 99th percentile portfolios during the July 1988-1994
subperiod. The VW results for the same subperiod are significantly negative only for the 99th


returns on a value weighted portfolio of small value firms and a value weighted portfolio of large value firms, and
then subtracting the returns on two growth stock portfolios that are weighted in a similar manner. The effect of this
(which is done to minimize the correlation of the HML factor with the size factor) is to overweight the influence of
small growth stocks on Nasdaq. Consequently, since NYSE-Amex stocks are tilted towards value relative to Nasdaq
stocks, even growth stocks on the NYSE-Amex appear to have a value tilt with respect to the HML factor.



                                                         18
percentile and the 10% (not reported in the table) portfolios. For the 1995-2002 subperiod, the
only significant abnormal return, reported or not, is for the EW 99th percentile portfolio.
        Examining the NYSE-Amex results in Panel B for the 1976-June 1988 subperiod, none
of the EW or VW portfolio intercepts are negative and statistically significant. In the subperiod
July 1988-1994, the EW 99th percentile portfolio intercept is significantly negative, but the EW
2.5-4.9% portfolio intercept is not. This latter portfolio is the only one of the five calculated EW
portfolios not significantly negative during this subperiod. During this same subperiod, only the
VW 10% and 99th percentile portfolio intercepts are negative and statistically significant. For the
subperiod 1995-2002, the EW 2.5-4.9% and 99th percentile portfolios both have significantly
negative abnormal returns as reported in the table, although the VW results do not.
        Inspection of the Nasdaq results in Table 9 Panel C shows significantly negative EW
abnormal returns for the 2.5-4.9% and 99th percentile portfolios for the July 1988-1994
subperiod. For the VW results, only the 99th percentile portfolio intercept is negative and
statistically significant. During the 1995-2002 subperiod, the EW 99th percentile portfolio is the
only portfolio that has statistically significant negative returns.
        Examining next the combined periods, Panel B reports that both EW NYSE-Amex
portfolio intercepts are significantly negative for July 1988-2002 and 1976-2002. The 99th
percentile portfolio for 1988-2002 is the only VW portfolio significantly negative during the two
combined periods. For Nasdaq stocks in Panel C, during July 1988-2002 the EW and VW 99th
percentiles are the only portfolio intercepts that are negative and significant. For the entire
sample of NYSE-Amex-Nasdaq stocks in Panel A during 1988-2002, the 2.5-4.9% EW portfolio
intercept is the only one of the five EW portfolios that is not significant. During 1976-2002, all
EW portfolio intercepts are significantly negative. None of the VW portfolio intercepts in Panel
A are negative and significant for either combined period.
        These results show that during the subperiod July 1988-1994 both NYSE-Amex and
Nasdaq EW portfolios exhibited significantly negative abnormal returns for all but the least
restrictive NYSE-Amex portfolios. In addition, for this subperiod the most highly shorted VW
portfolios are also negative and significant for both NYSE-Amex and Nasdaq firms. This is by
far the most universally negative subperiod we examine and is of course the time period that
Desai et al (2002) investigate. Comparing our truncated EW 2.5-4.9% portfolio of Nasdaq stocks




                                                   19
to their untruncated EW 2.5% portfolio, our four factor model intercept of –89 basis points in
Panel C shows more underperformance than the –76 basis points that they report.14
         For the earliest subperiod 1976-June 1988 none of the EW or VW NYSE-Amex portfolio
intercepts are significantly negative. For the 1995-2002 subperiod, all the EW NYSE-Amex
portfolios intercepts are significantly negative, but none of the VW ones are. For the same
subperiod, only the EW 99th percentile Nasdaq portfolio intercept is significantly negative. Thus,
the earliest subperiod does not have reliably negative intercepts for NYSE-Amex portfolios and
the latter subperiod, except for the most highly shorted portfolio, is not negative for Nasdaq
firms. The middle subperiod has negative intercepts for both NYSE-Amex and Nasdaq. The
combined periods reflect these results, but the results for the middle period, July 1988-1994, are
so strong that the combined periods July 1988-2002 and 1976-2002 are negative and statistically
significant for most EW portfolio intercepts across all markets in Panel A of Table 9.
         Since the patterns in abnormal returns vary so much over time, we next compute
regressions estimated over rolling 48-month periods. Figures 3 and 4 plot the four-factor model
intercepts for the EW 99th percentile portfolios by market for rolling 48 month calendar time
periods with 5% two-tail confidence intervals. For example, the value –2.3%, plotted and labeled
May 1992, in Figure 3 represents the four-factor model intercept for the EW 99th percentile
NYSE-Amex portfolio estimated over the time period June 1988 to May 1992. Figures 3 and 4
reinforce and extend the results in Tables 8 and 9. The 48 month VW rolling regressions, not
shown here, have less negative and significant intercepts than the EW rolling regressions, as
expected from Tables 8 and 9. It should be noted that the rolling intercepts are not independent,
i.e. for each month, each 48 month portfolio contains 47 of the same observations as the portfolio
before and after it.
         In summary, Table 8 shows that EW high short interest portfolios underperform the
market for both combined markets and for NYSE-Amex and Nasdaq separately. However, Table
9 and Figures 3 and 4 show that this result does not hold for all calendar periods. Most

14
  In unreported results, our untruncated EW Nasdaq 2.5% portfolio has a negative abnormal return of –103 basis
points. Our stronger results may be due to extensive data cleaning which would reduce any errors in variables bias.
In addition, our empirical results consistently have larger standard errors than in Desai et al (2002), even when we
use untruncated portfolios and methodology that is identical to their Table 3 methodology. Our t-statistic implies a
monthly standard error of 31 basis points, whereas their t-statistic implies a monthly standard error of 23 basis
points. On pp. 2275 and 2277 they report the point estimates and t-statistics from additional robustness checks, with
implied standard errors of an implausibly low 3-6 basis points per month. The t-statistics on their robustness checks
are apparently overstated by a factor of almost ten.


                                                         20
importantly, the June 1988-1994 period is among the strongest period of underperformance,
particularly for the Nasdaq stocks that Desai et al (2002) analyze.
C. Abnormal portfolio returns for inclusion period [1,12]
        In Tables 6, 8, and 9 firms with high short interest enter a portfolio in the calendar month
immediately after they meet the inclusion criteria, and are removed from the portfolio in the
month after their short interest ratio falls below the portfolio’s threshold. We next calculate
returns for inclusion period [1,12] where firms stay in a portfolio until 11 months have elapsed
after their short interest ratio drops below the threshold (e.g., a 2.5% short interest ratio for the
2.5% portfolio). If, within 10 months after falling below the inclusion threshold, a stock’s short
interest ratio rises to qualify it for inclusion again, its time in the portfolio is extended. In other
words, for calendar month t, the firms in a high short interest portfolio are all firms whose short
interest ratio qualified it for inclusion in at least one month during the prior 12 months. If a firm
is delisted, it is no longer part of the portfolio. The purpose of using this longer portfolio
inclusion period is to see if abnormal performance persists. Unless there is an early delisting, all
stocks in the portfolio are retained in the portfolio for at least one year, as contrasted with the
one-month minimum in Tables 6, 8, and 9.
        The pattern of intercepts from the four-factor regressions using monthly returns for
inclusion period [1,12], although not reported here, are similar, but not as strong as in Table 9.
For example, for the period 1988-2002 across all markets, the EW 99th percentile portfolio
intercept for the [1,1] inclusion period is –1.25 (t=-4.42) while for the [1,12] inclusion period, it
is –0.77 (t=-2.84). This suggests that negative abnormal returns revert towards zero after a firm’s
short interest ratio drops. This is consistent with the old conventional wisdom that returns are
high when short sellers are covering their positions. These results are at odds with those reported
in Desai et al (2002), where there is no perceptible difference in abnormal returns whether a
stock is deleted from a portfolio as soon as a stock no longer qualifies for inclusion, or whether
12 months pass. Comparison of the [1,1] and [1,12] results find that the 1988-1994 subperiod has
the longest persistent of abnormal returns of any subperiod for both NYSE-Amex and Nasdaq
firms. Thus, it again appears that Desai et al (2002) July 1988-1994 Nasdaq findings do not
generalize. The rapid drop off in underperformance once short interest ratios fall has an
important implication: high portfolio turnover is required to profit from the underperformance.




                                                   21
V. Arbitrage vs. Valuation Shorts
        A stock can have a high short interest ratio for several reasons. Thus far we have assumed
that stocks have high short interest because investors considered them to be overvalued. We refer
to these as valuation shorts. But many short positions are established as part of an arbitrage
strategy, with convertible bond arbitrage and takeover arbitrage among the most common
motivations. In a typical convertible bond arbitrage, an investor views the conversion option on
the convertible to be underpriced, and buys the convertible while simultaneously shorting the
stock. The position is unwound when the convertible price rises so that the conversion option is
no longer underpriced, a process that might take many months. In a typical takeover arbitrage,
the investor shorts the acquiring firm and goes long in the takeover target if the takeover is a
stock-for-stock exchange. In cash-for-stock takeovers, risk arbitrageurs typically just take an
unhedged long position in the target. Because few takeovers drag on for long periods, takeover
arbitrage frequently involves positions held for at most a few months before being unwound.
        Of course, a firm might have a high short interest ratio because there is both valuation
shorting and arbitrage shorting taking place simultaneously. Unfortunately, we cannot identify
these situations precisely. To simplify things, we categorize firms that either have a convertible
bond outstanding or are making an acquisition as arbitrage shorts. As a crude measure we take
all firms with convertible bonds outstanding from Compustat balance sheet information and
consider them arbitrage shorts. Panel A of Table 10 shows that firms with convertible bonds
outstanding are much more likely to have high short interest ratios than random firms. Over the
1988-2002 period, 9.6% of all firms in a given month had a convertible bond outstanding. In the
99th percentile portfolio, 25.7% of firms had a convertible bond outstanding for an average
month. Thus, stocks with convertible bonds are roughly three times as likely to be in high short
interest portfolios as random stocks. This finding supports our assumption that this crude
measure may identify arbitrage shorting.
        Categorizing our sample as either arbitrage or valuation shorts and re-estimating the EW
four-factor portfolio model over the period 1988-2002 yields the results in Panels B, C, and D of
Table 10.15 The pattern of four-factor model intercepts for EW portfolios of stocks with high

15
 We also investigated arbitrage portfolios involving merger arbitrage from a proprietary database. The results,
which we are not allowed to report here, are qualitatively similar to those for our convertibles.


                                                         22
short interest (using the 2.5-4.9% and 99th percentile portfolios) shows that abnormal returns on
arbitrage shorts are less negative and less statistically significant than valuation shorts. Thus,
Table 10 suggests that the negative abnormal returns on our high short interest portfolios are
driven more by valuation shorts than by arbitrage shorts. Moreover, Panel A clearly shows, even
though our methodology does not allow us to identify when arbitrage shorting takes place, there
is more than one reason for shorting stocks.

VI. Conclusion and Implications
       In recent years the empirical literature on short selling shows that stocks with high short
interest ratios underperform and that short interest ratios have increased over time (Asquith and
Meulbroek (1995) and Desai et al (2002)). This literature also documents that short sellers target
firms selling at high multiples (Dechow et al (2001)), that the stocks with the worst subsequent
performance are those with both high short interest and large differences of opinion (Boehme et
al (2002)), and that there is a large negative correlation between market performance and short
interest (Lamont and Stein (2004)).
       The problem with this literature is that it is based on short time periods and/or incorrect
and incomplete analysis. In this paper, we show that while equally weighted portfolios of stocks
with high short interest ratios reliably underperformed over the 1976-2002 period, value
weighted portfolios did not. In addition, by using truncated (non-overlapping) portfolios, we
show that the highest short interest stocks drive some of the results of earlier work. Moreover,
we show that 2002 has the highest levels of short interest ever recorded. While there is a negative
correlation between short interest and trailing market performance for our whole period, it is
weak compared to the 1995-2002 period that Lamont and Stein examine. Furthermore, the
correlation between changes in short interest and trailing market performance, not reported
elsewhere, is large and significant for the one month prior market return.
       We find that the underperformance of high short interest firms is fairly brief, and only
rapid portfolio turnover allows us to realize this underperformance. We also examine whether
high short interest is based only on valuation concerns and find that convertible bond arbitrage is
a major reason for high short interest as well. Finally, we show that the performance of high
short interest NYSE-Amex stocks is more severe and consistent than for their Nasdaq




                                                  23
counterparts over the period July 1988-2002, and that small cap firms make up a large portion of
the firms that are highly shorted.
       Equally weighted portfolios of heavily shorted stocks underperform relative to a four-
factor model specification during the 1976-2002 and July 1988-2002 period. A portfolio strategy
of shorting these stocks should therefore yield positive abnormal returns over this period.
Whether short sellers in fact can profit from this strategy depends on implementation costs,
including some unique to short selling. First, short sellers must locate the stock to borrow, which
can sometimes be difficult. Second, even after locating the stock, they must stand ready to repay
the loan at any time. Hence, short sellers face the risk that their positions may be terminated at a
less than optimal time. Most importantly, as other studies show (D’Avolio (2002), Geczy, Musto,
and Reed (2002), and Jones and Lamont (2002)), many of the stocks with high short interest are
on special, which increases the cost of shorting, due to the rebate rate that must be paid. Thus,
active trading strategies are likely to be subject to an implementation shortfall relative to the
returns that we report.
       Whether or not short sellers can profit from a short selling strategy, the finding that
heavily shorted stocks underperform the market has other important investment implications. An
investor selecting stocks for a portfolio should avoid stocks with a high short interest ratio. If an
investor already owns a stock that develops sustained high short interest, the clear and strong
advice is to sell the stock immediately, unless adverse tax consequences are present. The number
of stocks in any month that must be avoided or sold is small, however. As shown in Table 6, the
abnormal return for the 99th percentile EW portfolio is a significantly negative 125 basis points
per month over the 1988-2002 period, and the abnormal return for the 95-98.9th percentile EW
portfolio is a marginally significant 36 basis points per month. Therefore, following the advice to
stay away from highly shorted stocks only requires investors to avoid a few percent of all stocks
in the market each month, although diligence is required to track the changing composition of
these stocks.
       Our findings also have implications on whether hedge funds produce positive abnormal
returns. A common assertion is that one way that hedge funds add value is because of their
ability to take short positions in overvalued equities, whereas most mutual funds are restricted to
long-only positions. Our results indicate that the only class of stocks that reliably produce
negative abnormal returns is that of small cap firms with extremely high short interest ratios. At



                                                  24
the end of 2002, however, firms in the 99th percentile had an aggregate market capitalization of
only $35 billion. If the largest firm among these is excluded, the total market cap drops to $30
billion. If the average short interest ratio for these stocks is 40%, only $12 billion in short
positions is available for these firms. Given that the hedge fund industry is estimated to have
about $600 billion under management (albeit not all in domestic equities), our findings suggest
that the average hedge fund is unlikely to be creating significant value from short selling stocks.




                                                  25
References
Asquith, Paul, and Lisa Meulbroek (1995) “An Empirical Investigation of Short Interest,”
       unpublished M.I.T. working paper.

Boehme, Rodney D., Bartley R. Danielsen, and Sorin M. Sorescu (2002) “Short-sale Constraints
     and Overvaluation,” unpublished Texas A&M working paper.

Brent, A., D. Morese, and E. K. Stice (1990) “Short Interest: Explanations and Test.” Journal of
       Financial and Quantitative Analysis 25, 273-289.

Brunnermeier, Markus, and Stefan Nagel (2003) “Hedge Funds and the Technology Bubble,”
      Journal of Finance, forthcoming.

Carhart, Mark (1997) “On Persistence in Mutual Fund Performance,” Journal of Finance 52, 57-
       82.

D’Avolio, Gene (2002) “The Market for Borrowing Stock” Journal of Financial Economics 66,
      271-306.

Dechow P., Hutton A., Meulbroek L. and R. Sloan (2001) “Short-sellers, Fundamental Analysis
      and Stock Returns,” Journal of Financial Economics 61, 77-106.

Desai, Hemang, K. Ramesh, S.R. Thiagarajan, and B. V. Balachandran, “An Investigation of the
       Informational Role of Short Interest in the Nasdaq Market,” Journal of Finance 57, 2263-
       2287.

Diamond D. and R. Verrecchia (1987) “Constraints on Short-Selling and Asset Price Adjustment
      to Private Information.” Journal of Financial Economics 18, 277-311.

Fama, E., and K. French (1993) “Common risk factors in the returns on stocks and bonds,”
      Journal of Financial Economics 33, 3-56.

Figlewski S. (1981) “The Information Effects of Restrictions on Short Sales: Some Empirical
       Evidence,” Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 16, 463-476.

Figlewski S. and G. Webb (1993) “Options, Short Sales, and Market Completeness,” Journal of
       Finance 48, 761-777.

Geczy, C. C., D. K. Musto, and A. V. Reed (2002) “Stocks are Special Too: An Analysis of the
       Equity Lending Market,” Journal of Financial Economics 66, 241-269.

Gopalan, Mohanaraman, 2003. “Short constraints, difference of opinion and stock returns,”
      unpublished Duke University working paper.

Jones, Charles M., and Owen Lamont (2002) “Short-sale Constraints and Stock Returns,”
       Journal of Financial Economics 66, 207-239.


                                               26
Lamont, Owen (2002) “Go Down Fighting: Short Sellers vs Firms” Unpublished University of
      Chicago working paper.

Lamont, Owen, and Jeremy C. Stein (2004) “Aggregate Short Interest and Market Valuations,”
      Forthcoming, American Economic Review.

Miller, Ed (1977) “Risk, Uncertainty, and Divergence of Opinion,” Journal of Finance 32, 1151-
        1168.

Ofek, Eli, Mathew Richardson, and Robert F. Whitelaw (2003) “Limited Arbitrage and Short
       Sales Restrictions: Evidence from the Options Markets,” Journal of Financial
       Economics, forthcoming.

Rubinstein, Mark (2004) “Great Moments in Financial Economics: III. Short-Sales and Stock
       Prices,” Journal of Investment Management 2.

Senchack, A.J., Jr., and Laura T. Starks (1993) “Short-Sale Restrictions and Market Reaction to
      Short-Interest Announcements” Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 28, 177-
      194.

Shleifer, A., and R. Vishny (1997) “The Limits to Arbitrage,” Journal of Finance 52, 35-55.

Woolridge, J.R., and A. Dickinson (1994) “Short Selling and Common Stock Prices.” Financial
      Analysis Journal, 20-28.




                                               27
Appendix.        Short Selling Procedures
        A short sale is a sale of borrowed stock, and is the most direct way for an investor to bet
that a stock price will decrease. Regulatory “prudent investor rules,” however, prohibit many
institutional investors, particularly banks, pension funds, and insurance companies, from short
selling. These rules primarily exist because the risk-return profile of a short position is very
different from that of a long position. The maximum loss on a long position is the amount
invested (if the security price goes to zero) while the maximum gain is unlimited. The maximum
gain on a short position is 100% of the proceeds (if the security price goes to zero), but the
potential loss is unlimited.
        Investors selling short also face more stringent restrictions than investors going long. To
execute a short sale, the seller must borrow the stock through a broker or an investor who owns
the stock. The broker secures the stock either from another investor’s margined account at the
brokerage house, or from a large institutional investor, like a pension fund or depository bank, or
from another broker-dealer.16 The Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) requires that all
short sales be marked as such, and also requires that short sales on the NYSE, Amex, and Nasdaq
be made only on a “plus tick” or a “zero plus tick”. That is, a short sale can only occur at a price
above the last sale price or at a price equal to the last sale price if the most recent price
movement was positive.
        The proceeds from a short sale are not available to the short seller, but instead are
escrowed as collateral for the owner of the borrowed shares. While large short sellers may
receive interest on the proceeds of the short sale, small short sellers usually receive no interest. If
the lenders of the stock are institutional investors, they receive the proceeds of the sale, but pay
interest to the broker on these proceeds. The lending broker collects the spread between the
interest rebate given to the short seller and the interest charged to stock lenders on the rebate.
These interest rates vary inversely with the difficulty in locating the borrowed shares. If the
shares are not hard to borrow, the Fed Funds rate minus one-quarter percent represents a typical
rebate to short sellers; Fed Funds minus one-eighth percent is a typical rate that lenders must
pay. For stocks in short supply, borrowers receive no rebate, and they often pay a premium;
likewise, lenders would not pay interest and may collect rent on the proceeds of difficult to


16
  Certain market makers are allowed to sell a stock short without borrowing shares. This exemption is currently the
subject of a proposed SEC rule that would eliminate it.


                                                        28
borrow stocks. When the source for the borrowed stocks is a retail margined account, not an
institutional investor, the owners of the stock may never know that they have lent out the stock,
and they do not receive the proceeds of the sale or any interest thereon.
        In addition to the proceeds which remain as collateral, Regulation T requires that a short
seller deposit 50 percent of the market value of the shorted sales as a margin requirement (the
Fed Reserve sets Regulation T and the percentage may vary over time). If the price of the shorted
stock rises, the short seller faces a margin call, and must deposit more funds. The short seller
may use the market value of their non-margined long positions or may deposit interest-bearing
treasury securities (and keep the interest) to meet margin requirements. While a short position is
open, the short seller faces the additional cost of reimbursing the owner of the security for any
dividends the stock may accrue. The tax treatment of short sales may also make them more
costly than long positions. Unlike profits from long sales, profits from short sales are subject to
short term capital gains, no matter how long the short position is held.
        One distinguishing feature of the market for borrowing and lending equities that affects
the risk of a short position is the term of the security’s loan. All loans are “demand loans”: the
owner of the borrowed shares may at any time decide to sell the security, so the borrower must
stand ready to replace the shares if required. If the short seller is not ready to close out their
position, they will seek to borrow the shares from another source. If all available margined
shares are already loaned out, and the short seller’s broker cannot locate the desired shares from
an institutional owner, the short seller must purchase the shares on the open market to cover the
loan (this is known as a “short squeeze”). Short sellers try to manage the risk of a short squeeze
by discovering the source of the borrowed shares. The broker will sometimes tell large borrowers
the source of the borrowed shares, which may yield some information regarding the probability
of a short squeeze. For instance, market index funds are less likely to sell their shares than retail
investors or actively managed funds.
        While borrowing stock to short is costly and risky, lending stock to short sellers can be
safe and profitable. The combination of keeping the cash proceeds of the sale, the 50% margin
requirement, and daily margin calls make the risk of lending stock very small. Any brokerage or
financial intermediary may lend stock to short sellers, but the largest participants in this market
are retail brokerage houses, brokerages that do large scale stock clearing operations for other
firms, and banks that serve as security depositories. All three have access to large inventories of



                                                   29
stock as a normal part of their business which they lend out to increase profitability. As short
selling increased in the nineties, some investment banks began to contact fiduciaries who held
large amounts of stock, i.e. pension funds, insurance companies, and university endowments to
contract with them so the investment bank has access to their stock portfolios for lending
purposes. The investment bank often pays a flat annual fee for access to any stock in the
portfolio. This agreement does not restrict the lender’s trading strategy in any way.
       The costs and risks of short sales outlined above suggest that the options market would
allow short sellers to establish similar positions with fewer costs and risks. Hedge fund managers
and other practitioners involved in short selling maintain that they can not effectively use the
options market. In interviews, they repeatedly claimed that the options market provides less
liquidity and is more expensive than the short sales market when trying to establish a large
position. Few investors, they assert, are willing to write large amounts of puts on an individual
stock without hedging themselves. An important part of the hedge when writing a put is to short
the stock. Attempts to buy puts on a hard-to-borrow stock therefore drive up the demand for
loans of the stock, and thereby increase the price of the option.




                                                 30
                                           Table 1

            Summary Statistics: Aggregate Annual Characteristics of Short-selling

The annual averages are equally weighted averages of the 12 months during the year, except for
Nasdaq in 1988 when the data starts in June (7 months) and in 1990 when data for the months of
February and July are missing (10 months).

                             NYSE-Amex ____                      ___    Nasdaq
                   % of Market    Amount Sold                    % of Market Amount Sold
                       Short          Short                         Short         Short
    Year                          (in $billions)                              (in $billions)

     1976               0.33                2.5
     1977               0.32                2.4
     1978               0.41                3.2
     1979               0.40                3.5
     1980               0.43                4.5
     1981               0.44                5.0
     1982               0.70                7.5
     1983               0.64                9.3
     1984               0.60                8.6
     1985               0.69               11.3
     1986               0.81               16.6
     1987               0.80               18.7
     1988               0.69               14.8                   0.30               1.0
     1989               0.72               18.2                   0.35               1.3
     1990               0.74               18.4                   0.54               1.7
     1991               0.71               20.9                   0.64               2.6
     1992               0.77               25.5                   1.45               7.6
     1993               0.87               32.4                   1.68              11.0
     1994               1.13               43.9                   1.92              14.3
     1995               1.31               60.2                   2.03              19.4
     1996               1.35               77.4                   2.23              28.7
     1997               1.56              114.8                   2.46              40.2
     1998               1.53              137.6                   2.73              56.5
     1999               1.28              131.4                   2.41              78.4
     2000               1.23              130.9                   2.30             114.0
     2001               1.52              153.7                   2.67              75.1
     2002               1.72              153.4                   2.97              63.9




                                             31
                                                      Table 2

Sample Correlations Between Aggregate Short Interest Ratios and Lagged Market Returns
Table 2 reports sample correlations of the percentage of the market sold short with the nominal return on the CRSP
value weighted NYSE-Amex-Nasdaq market index. The p-values, which assume independence, testing the
hypothesis that the correlation is 0 are reported in parentheses. Panel A presents the correlation with the percentage
of the market sold short, while Panel B presents the correlation with the change in the percent of the market sold
short.

                                 Panel A: Correlations with % market short

                              Time Period                      1-month lag      6-month lag         12-month lag
                                                                  return           return              return

     NYSE-Amex                1976-2002                           -0.05             -0.10                -0.13
                                                                 (0.38)            (0.08)                (0.02)
                              7/1988-2002                         -0.11             -0.19                -0.18
                                                                 (0.16)            (0.01)                (0.02)
                              1995-2002                           -0.21             -0.35                -0.41
                                                                 (0.04)            (0.01)                (0.00)

         Nasdaq               7/1988-2002                         -0.08             -0.21                -0.16
                                                                 (0.32)            (0.01)                (0.03)
                              7/1988-1994                         -0.06             -0.26                -0.19
                                                                 (0.64)            (0.03)                (0.10)
                              1995-2002                           -0.21             -0.44                -0.47
                                                                 (0.04)            (0.00)                (0.00)

                           Panel B: Correlations with change in % market short


     NYSE-Amex                1976-2002                           -0.30             -0.16                -0.11
                                                                 (0.00)            (0.00)                (0.05)
                              7/1988-2002                         -0.42             -0.23                -0.12
                                                                 (0.00)            (0.00)                (0.13)
                              1995-2002                           -0.37             -0.17                -0.14
                                                                 (0.00)            (0.09)                (0.17)

         Nasdaq               7/1988-2002                         -0.18             -0.09                -0.00
                                                                 (0.02)            (0.24)                (0.96)
                              7/1988-1994                         -0.27             -0.06                 0.17
                                                                 (0.02)            (0.64)                (0.14)
                              1995-2002                           -0.14             -0.11                -0.06
                                                                 (0.16)            (0.30)                (0.54)




                                                          32
                                                          Table 3
                                54 Firms in the 99th Percentile Portfolio in December 2002
Short interest ratio is short interest in November 2002 divided by shares outstanding. Market cap is as of June 30, 2002. Book
value of equity is for the end of the fiscal year ending during calendar 2002, or (for three companies that have not filed 2002
annual reports as of August 2003) the latest quarterly report during 2002. The 12-month prior return is for the 12 months ending in
November 2002. The short interest ratio cutoff for NYSE-Amex firms is independent of the cutoff for Nasdaq firms.
                                        Short                                         Prior
                                        Interest       Market Cap,       Market- 12-month
Company Name                           Ratio              $mm           to-book      Return          Industry
NYSE-Amex
CVD Equipment Corp                   99.3%            $653 mm            1.10    -42.37%           Semiconductor processor
UAL (United Airlines)                58.3%            $638 mm           -0.18    -85.48%           Airline
Prepaid Legal Services               54.7%            $401 mm           11.46     50.00%           Legal services
Federal Agricultural Mortgage        33.5%            $269 mm           -0.17    -30.86%           Consumer finance
Fleetwood Enterprises                33.3%            $304 mm            2.74    -34.34%           Recreational vehicle producer
Jo Ann Stores                        32.7%            $293 mm            1.01    258.38%           Retail fabric stores
Metris                               32.1%            $517 mm            0.82    -79.00%           Credit card issuer
BMC Industries MN                    30.2%            $260 mm            0.44    -34.74%           Electronics
SWS Group                            29.2%            $338 mm            1.33    -10.80%           Finance
Fleming Companies                    28.9%            $976 mm            1.45    -70.85%           Supermarket supplier
Northwestern Corp.                   28.7%            $464 mm           -1.02    -56.64%           Electricity and gas distribution
Nautilus Group                       28.5%            $1,077 mm          5.32    -43.37%           Exercise equipment
Sunrise Assisted Living              28.1%            $602 mm            1.29      1.93%           Retirement housing
Action Performance                   27.9%            $562 mm            2.45    -32.88%           Motorsports merchandise
Administaff                          26.6%            $280 mm            2.41    -76.70%           Temporary staffing
Univision Communications             26.2%            $5,025 mm          3.23     -9.74%           Spanish-language TV
American Italian Pasta               25.7%            $916 mm            3.08     -2.16%           Pasta producer and marketer
Chico Fas                            24.4%            $1,490 mm          6.21    112.68%           Women’s clothing retailer
Salton                               23.3%            $157 mm            0.64    -19.63%           Small appliance retailer
Duane Reade                          23.3%            $812 mm            2.46    -42.37%           Drug store chain
Footstar                             23.2%            $492 mm            1.74    -76.55%           Shoe retailer
Nasdaq
Biosite                              48.3%            $415 mm            3.85      72.74%          Diagnostic product developer
Cognizant Tech Solutions             46.1%            $452 mm            2.73     123.02%          IT outsourcing
Polymedica                           45.0%            $310 mm            1.58      24.96%          Medical products retailer
Eresearch Technology                 43.1%            $176 mm            4.34    120.05%           Cardiac clinical research
Cabot Microelectronics               39.6%            $1,045 mm          4.89    -12.99%           Polishing compound producer
Neoware Systems                      37.7%            $146 mm            4.01    676.54%           Thin client appliances/software
FPIC Insurance Group                 37.6%            $141 mm            0.85    -53.65%           Liability insurance provider
American Capital Strategies          33.0%            $1,058 mm          1.54    -17.53%           Buyout fund
Sirius Satellite Radio               31.6%            $289 mm            9.54    -87.78%           Satellite radio
Expedia                              31.1%            $1,337 mm          2.75    131.13%           Internet travel agency
New Century Financial                31.0%            $864 mm            2.24      67.51%          Subprime mortgages
Silicon Laboratories                 29.5%            $1,366 mm          8.77      13.70%          Integrated circuit designer
THQ                                  29.3%            $1,177 mm          2.88    -53.21%           Video games for PCs
J2 Global Comm                       28.9%            $178 mm            3.14    460.99%           Communications services
Zix Corp.                            28.7%            $97 mm            10.12    -42.52%           E-mail management/ protection
AAIPharma                            28.0%            $411 mm            4.13    -16.54%           Drug marketing
XM Satellite Radio Holdings          27.4%            $661 mm            1.12    -78.26%           Satellite radio
Hot Topic Inc.                       26.6%            $848 mm            5.27      27.67%          Clothing retailer for teenagers
Invision Technologies                25.8%            $403 mm            1.70      15.03%          Airline security systems
Shuffle Master                       25.8%            $330 mm            6.56        7.78%         Gambling industry supplier
Cell Therapeutics                    25.3%            $181 mm            4.17     -64.91%          Biotech (cancer)
Kroll Inc                            25.3%            $656 mm            1.44      30.03%          Risk consulting and security
SCP Pool Corp.                       25.3%            $751 mm            5.29      22.08%          Swimming pool wholesaler
Photon Dynamics                      25.0%            $514 mm            2.27      -9.92%          Flat panel display developer
Conceptus                            24.7%            $350 mm            4.95     -26.92%          Surgical birth control
Astropower                           24.1%            $427 mm            2.75     -64.25%          Solar cell manufacturer
Multimedia Games                     23.8%            $280 mm            4.27        4.50%         Gambling industry supplier
Webex Communications                 23.7%            $645 mm            7.32     -39.40%          Internet conferencing services
Take Two Interactive                 23.1%            $800 mm            2.25     114.71%          Video games for PCs
Scios Inc.                           22.6%            $1,427 mm         216.32      19.77%         Biotech (heart disease)
Trimeris Inc.                        22.5%            $833 mm            6.40      32.96%          Biotech (anti-virus)
Drexler Technology Corp.             21.5%            $223 mm            6.05       -1.57%         Optical data storage
Microstrategy                        21.1%            $24 mm            -0.69     -46.98%          Business software
                                             Table 4

                                     Descriptive Statistics

Table 4 reports the distribution of the length of time that a firm spends in the untruncated high
short interest portfolio once it enters. For example, for firms that first crossed the 2.5% short
interest ratio threshold, 32.1% of them fell back below 2.5% in the following month. A firm that
reenters the 2.5% portfolio after falling out is treated as a new observation.


         Percentage of firms categorized by persistence and median months in portfolio

                      Distribution of the length of time spent in a portfolio once entering
                                                                    13 or more         median
  Portfolio        1 month       2-3 months       4-12 months         months           months

    2.5%            32.1%            22.1%             26.7%          19.1%               3

    5.0%            30.9%            22.9%             28.6%          17.6%               3

   10.0%            32.9%            23.4%             29.5%          14.2%               3

   95%ile           34.1%            23.7%             26.7%          15.5%               3

   99%ile           35.6%            26.8%             26.5%          11.5%               2




                                                34
                                           Table 5
  EW Raw Returns and Four-factor Model Intercepts for Firms with Short Interest Ratio
    ≥ 2.5% or in the 99th Percentile, for 1, 6, and 12 Months after Portfolio Formation

Columns 1-3 report monthly arithmetic average percentage raw returns for firms with high short interest
in month 0 during periods of, respectively, 1 month, 6 months, and 12 months starting at the beginning of
the following calendar month. Each portfolio from a calendar month during a sample period is weighted
equally. Columns 4-6 report intercepts from four-factor regressions using monthly percentage returns, as
described in Table 6, where a firm is included in the portfolio for calendar month t if it qualified for
inclusion in the portfolio in at least one month during, respectively, month t-1, months t-6 to t-1, or
months t-12 to t-1. For Nasdaq firms, we include only stocks listed on the National Market System
(NMS). An intercept of 0.08 means 8 basis points per month.

                               Panel A: Short Interest Ratio ≥ 2.5%

                           Monthly average raw return, %         Monthly average 4-factor intercepts
                            [1,1]     [1,6]     [1,12]              [1,1]       [1,6]     [1,12]
                             (1)       (2)        (3)                (4)         (5)        (6)

 NYSE-Amex-Nasdaq
  July 1988 – 2002           0.08         0.24          0.35          -0.48       -0.31        -0.18

 NYSE-Amex
  1976 – June 1988           1.68         1.86          1.84          -0.11        0.13         0.15
  July 1988 – 2002           0.26         0.44          0.52          -0.65       -0.46        -0.37
  1976 – 2002                0.91         1.10          1.13          -0.51       -0.29        -0.24

 Nasdaq
  July 1988 – 2002           0.03         0.08          0.22          -0.42       -0.28        -0.11


                       Panel B: Short Interest Ratio in the 99th Percentile


 NYSE-Amex-Nasdaq
  July 1988 – 2002           -0.71       -0.44          -0.38         -1.25       -0.94        -0.77

 NYSE-Amex
  1976 – June 1988           2.12        2.17           2.12           0.29        0.41         0.37
  July 1988 – 2002           -0.82       -0.50          -0.42         -1.46       -1.35        -1.29
  1976 – 2002                0.54        0.74           0.75          -0.72       -0.64        -0.62

 Nasdaq
  July 1988 – 2002           -0.73       -0.43          -0.31         -1.27       -0.71        -0.51




                                                   35
                                                        Table 6

     Four Factor Model Parameters for EW and VW Portfolios of NYSE-Amex-Nasdaq
                Stocks with High Short Interest, July 1988-December 2002
In the time series regressions using monthly returns, the dependent variable is rpt - rft, the excess return over the risk-
free rate on a portfolio in time period t, rmt - rft is the realization of the market risk premium in period t, SMBt is the
return on a portfolio of Small stocks Minus the return on a portfolio of Big stocks in period t, HMLt is the return on
a portfolio of High book-to-market (value) Minus Low book-to-market (growth) stocks in period t, and MOMt is the
return on a portfolio of prior winners minus the return on a portfolio of prior losers. The monthly factor return
realizations are provided by Kenneth French. For July 1988-December 2002, 174 monthly returns are used in the
regressions. The 2.5% portfolio in month t is the portfolio composed of all Amex, NYSE, and Nasdaq National
Market System stocks with a short interest ratio of greater than 2.5% (short interest/shares outstanding) in month t-1.
The portfolio is updated monthly. The 5.0%, 10%, 95th percentile, and 99th percentile portfolios are defined
analogously. T-statistics are shown in parentheses. An intercept of –0.48 means –48 basis points per month.

                               rpt - rft = a + b(rmt - rft) + sSMBt + hHMLt + mMOMt + ept



                   Panel A: Untruncated EW NYSE-Amex-Nasdaq Firms July 1988 - December 2002


      Sample           Intercept           RMRF                  SMB             HML               MOM            R2adj


     ≥ 2.5%              -0.48               1.25              1.01              -0.07              -0.37          0.93
                        (-2.79)            (27.22)           (21.04)            (-1.12)           (-10.76)

     ≥ 5.0%              -0.69               1.30              1.14              -0.08              -0.42          0.92
                        (-3.53)            (25.18)           (21.00)            (-1.13)           (-10.82)

    ≥ 10.0%              -0.78               1.28              1.25              -0.24              -0.51          0.88
                        (-2.87)            (17.84)           (16.52)            (-2.50)            (-9.37)

   ≥ 95th %ile           -0.54               1.30              1.16              -0.13              -0.43          0.92
                        (-2.67)            (24.07)           (20.50)            (-1.82)           (-10.72)

   ≥ 99th %ile           -1.25               1.33              1.38              -0.08              -0.41          0.87
                        (-4.42)            (17.73)           (17.52)            (-0.84)            (-7.33)


                    Panel B: Truncated EW NYSE-Amex-Nasdaq Firms July 1988 - December 2002


      Sample           Intercept           RMRF                  SMB             HML               MOM            R2adj

    2.5-4.9%             -0.28               1.19              0.89              -0.07              -0.32          0.91
                        (-1.58)            (24.95)           (17.77)            (-1.14)            (-8.92)

    5.0-9.9%             -0.62               1.31              1.09              -0.01              -0.39          0.91
                        (-3.00)            (23.83)           (18.82)            (-0.10)            (-9.39)

 95-98.9th %ile          -0.36               1.29              1.00              -0.14              -0.44          0.91
                        (-1.74)            (23.11)           (18.86)            (-1.91)           (-10.48)




                                                            36
                                        Table 6 (continued)

                 Panel C: Untruncated VW NYSE-Amex-Nasdaq Firms, July 1988 - December 2002


   ≥ 2.5%             0.16            1.23           0.38           -0.29          -0.26     0.92
                     (1.02)         (28.57)         (8.51)         (-5.06)        (-7.89)

   ≥ 5.0%             -0.14           1.33           0.57           -0.37          -0.30     0.92
                     (-0.76)        (27.21)        (11.08)         (-5.81)        (-8.28)

  ≥ 10.0%             -0.27           1.36           0.86           -0.45          -0.31     0.83
                     (-0.86)        (16.33)         (9.89)         (-4.14)        (-4.97)

 ≥ 95th %ile          0.24            1.27           0.56           -0.46          -0.34     0.92
                     (1.24)         (25.25)        (10.65)         (-7.00)        (-8.98)

 ≥ 99th %ile          -0.38           1.42           1.18           -0.30          -0.17     0.81
                     (-1.09)        (15.26)        (12.09)         (-2.44)        (-2.48)


                 Panel D: Truncated VW NYSE-Amex-Nasdaq Firms, July 1988 - December 2002


  2.5-4.9%            0.31            1.18           0.29           -0.23          -0.22     0.88
                     (1.69)         (23.77)         (5.63)         (-3.60)        (-5.91)

  5.0-9.9%            -0.11           1.33           0.50           -0.31          -0.31     0.90
                     (-0.55)        (24.75)         (8.76)         (-4.43)        (-7.64)

95-98.9th %ile        0.32            1.25           0.48           -0.47          -0.36     0.91
                     (1.63)         (23.89)         (8.77)         (-6.83)        (-9.18)




                                                  37
                           Table 7: Characteristics of Highly Shorted Firms

Panel A reports the size (market capitalization) for firms in the respective short interest portfolios, and for firms
whose short interest ratio is lower than required for inclusion. For firms with a missing size value in year t, the year
t-1 size value is used. Size is calculated by taking the year end market price times the shares outstanding at year end.
Panel B reports the median market-to-book ratio of equity for firms in the respective short interest portfolios, and for
firms whose short interest ratio is lower than required for inclusion. For firms with a missing book value in year t,
the year t-1 book value is used. Book values are from Compustat. Nasdaq firms include only National Market
System (NMS) listings.


                                           Panel A: Median Size, $ millions

                   All firms, 1976-2002              NYSE-Amex, 1976-2002                Nasdaq, July 1988-2002
   Portfolio      Highly shorted Others              Highly shorted Others               Highly shorted Others

   2.5-4.9%              392             74                708             174                 237              43

   5.0-9.9%              334             76                475             184                 265              44

   ≥ 10.0%               303             78                350             188                 280              45

   95-98.9th             257             75                276             187                 196              44
     %ile

  ≥ 99 %ile
       th
                         207             79                202             191                 192              46


                                       Panel B: Median Market-to-book Ratios

                   All firms, 1976-2002              NYSE-Amex, 1976-2002                Nasdaq, July 1988-2002
   Portfolio      Highly shorted Others              Highly shorted Others               Highly shorted Others

   2.5-4.9%             2.34            1.48               1.77            1.31                3.14            1.69

   5.0-9.9%             2.45            1.49               1.83            1.32                3.26            1.71

   ≥ 10.0%              2.58            1.50               1.64            1.33                3.46            1.72

   95-98.9th            2.02            1.50               1.53            1.33                2.96            1.70
     %ile

  ≥ 99 %ile
       th
                        2.21            1.51               1.60            1.33                3.19            1.73




                                                          38
                                                         Table 8

   Four Factor Model Parameters for EW and VW Portfolios of NYSE-Amex Stocks and
          of Nasdaq Stocks with High Short Interest, July 1988-December 2002
In the time series regressions using monthly percentage returns, the dependent variable is rpt - rft, the excess return
over the risk-free rate on a portfolio in time period t, rmt - rft is the realization of the market risk premium in period t,
SMBt is the return on a portfolio of Small stocks Minus the return on a portfolio of Big stocks in period t, HMLt is
the return on a portfolio of High book-to-market (value) Minus Low book-to-market (growth) stocks in period t, and
MOMt is the return on a portfolio of prior winners minus the return on a portfolio of prior losers. For July 1988-
December 2002, 174 observations are used in the regressions. The 2.5% portfolio is the portfolio composed of all
Nasdaq stocks with a short interest ratio of greater than 2.5% (short interest/shares outstanding) in month t-1. The
portfolio is updated monthly. The 5.0% and 10.0% portfolios are defined analogously. The 95th percentile portfolio
is composed of all stocks that are in the top five percent of short interest ratios in month t-1. The 99th percentile
portfolio is defined analogously. An intercept of –0.41 means –41 basis points.

                                rpt - rft = a + b(rmt - rft) + sSMBt + hHMLt + mMOMt + ept


                              Panel A: EW NYSE-Amex Firms, July 1988 - December 2002


      Sample           Intercept           RMRF                   SMB             HML                MOM            R2adj

    2.5-4.9%             -0.41              1.20                0.62               0.67               -0.23          0.83
                        (-2.12)            (23.51)            (11.45)             (9.92)             (-5.91)

    5.0-9.9%             -0.77              1.31                0.88               0.67               -0.30          0.83
                        (-3.47)            (22.14)            (14.18)             (8.63)             (-6.63)

    ≥ 10.0%              -1.27              1.29                1.06               0.56               -0.44          0.76
                        (-4.11)            (15.66)            (12.21)             (5.15)             (-7.11)

  95-98.9th%ile          -0.86              1.36                0.96               0.75               -0.39          0.84
                        (-3.79)            (22.41)            (15.15)             (9.42)             (-8.54)

   ≥ 99th %ile           -1.46              1.32                1.13               0.45               -0.47          0.69
                        (-3.71)            (12.62)            (10.31)             (3.27)             (-5.98)



                                   Panel B: EW Nasdaq Firms, July 1988 - December 2002

    2.5-4.9%             -0.24              1.18                1.07               -0.56              -0.41          0.89
                        (-0.95)            (17.71)            (15.44)             (-6.49)            (-8.32)

    5.0-9.9%             -0.63              1.33                1.22               -0.35             -0.44           0.88
                        (-2.27)            (17.80)            (15.76)             (-3.57)            (-8.05

    ≥ 10.0%              -0.48              1.27                1.28               -0.67              -0.55          0.82
                        (-1.25)            (12.23)            (11.94)             (-4.98)            (-7.24)

 95-98.9th %ile          -0.14              1.26                1.17               -0.60              -0.45          0.91
                        (-0.55)            (18.79)            (16.78)             (-6.91)            (-9.03)

   ≥ 99th %ile           -1.27              1.30                1.35               -0.37              -0.43          0.82
                        (-3.49)            (13.38)            (13.38)             (-2.90)            (-6.04)



                                                             39
                                      Table 8 (continued)
                     Panel C: VW NYSE-Amex Firms, July 1988 - December 2002

   Sample        Intercept        RMRF               SMB          HML         MOM       R2adj

  2.5-4.9%         0.34             1.13              0.21         0.24        -0.18    0.86
                  (2.06)          (26.09)            (4.49)       (4.17)      (-5.54)

  5.0-9.9%         -0.32            1.27              0.29         0.32        -0.30    0.82
                  (-1.49)         (22.34)            (4.93)       (4.24)      (-7.07)

  ≥ 10.0%          -0.66            1.39              0.66         0.46        -0.28    0.61
                  (-1.61)         (12.83)            (5.79)       (3.24)      (-3.42)

95-98.9th %ile     -0.24            1.27              0.38         0.31        -0.39    0.79
                  (-0.95)         (19.12)            (5.43)       (3.51)      (-7.71)

 ≥ 99th %ile       -0.95            1.50              0.76         0.34        -0.28    0.56
                  (-1.85)         (10.94)            (5.25)       (1.90)      (-2.68)


                        Panel D: VW Nasdaq Firms, July 1988 - December 2002


  2.5-4.9%         0.17             1.26              0.59         -0.90       -0.26    0.84
                  (0.54)          (14.84)            (6.75)       (-8.15)     (-4.16)

 5.0%-9.9%         0.11             1.55              0.78         -0.80       -0.28    0.86
                  (0.33)          (17.45)            (8.47)       (-6.91)     (-4.27)

  ≥ 10.0%          0.08             1.30              0.97         -1.05       -0.37    0.80
                  (0.19)           11.33             (8.22)       (-7.09)     (-4.42)

95-98.9th %ile     0.95             1.38              0.64         -1.04       -0.33    0.91
                  (3.62)          (19.61)            (8.86)      (-11.44)     (-6.31)

 ≥ 99th %ile       -0.73            1.44              1.17         -0.79       -0.05    0.79
                  (-1.66)         (12.15)            (9.57)       (-5.13)     (-0.62)




                                                40
                                                    Table 9

                    Four Factor Model Parameters for EW and VW Portfolios
                        of Firms with High Short Interest, by Subperiod

Intercepts and their t-statistics from monthly time series regressions of rpt - rft, the percentage excess return
over the risk-free rate on a portfolio in time period t, regressed on rmt - rft is the realization of the market
risk premium in period t, SMBt is the return on a portfolio of Small stocks Minus the return on a portfolio
of Big stocks in period t, HMLt is the return on a portfolio of High book-to-market (value) Minus Low
book-to-market (growth) stocks in period t, and MOMt is the return on a portfolio of prior winners minus
the return on a portfolio of prior losers, are reported. For July 1988-December 1994, 78 monthly returns
are used in the regressions. For January 1995 to December 2002, 96 monthly returns are used. The 2.5%
portfolio in month t is the portfolio composed of all Nasdaq stocks in with a short interest ratio of greater
than 2.5% (short interest/shares outstanding) in month t-1. The portfolio is updated monthly. The 99th
percentile portfolio in month t is composed of all stocks that are in the top one percent of short interest
ratios in month t-1.

                            rpt - rft = a + b(rmt - rft) + sSMBt + hHMLt + mMOMt + ept

                                           Four-factor model intercepts
                               Equally Weighted                     Value Weighted
         Sample            2.5-4.9%       99th %ile           2.5-4.9%        99th %ile
                 Panel A: All Markets (NYSE-Amex only prior to July 1988)
     July 1988-1994         -0.62***       -1.36***             0.42*          -1.00***
                            (-2.46)        (-3.54)              (1.90)          (-2.45)
     1995-2002               -0.05         -1.18***              0.25             0.13
                            (-0.21)        (-2.92)              (0.91)          (0.24)
     July 1988-2002          -0.28         -1.25***             0.31*            -0.38
                            (-1.58)        (-4.42)              (1.69)          (-1.09)
     1976-2002              -0.28**        -0.53***             0.27*            -0.05
                            (-2.08)        (-2.44)              (1.76)          (-0.17)
                                          Panel B: NYSE-Amex
     1976-June 1988                -0.28             0.29                        0.17              0.44
                                  (-1.47)           (0.94)                      (0.67)            (0.94)
     July 1988-1994                -0.45           -1.62***                     0.55***           -1.45**
                                  (-1.53)          (-2.75)                      (2.41)            (-2.32)
     1995-2002                     -0.34*          -1.36***                      0.23              -0.64
                                  (-1.72)          (-2.67)                      (0.99)            (-0.90)
     July 1988-2002               -0.41**          -1.46***                     0.34**            -0.95*
                                  (-2.12)          (-3.71)                      (2.06)            (-1.85)
                                       ***
     1976-2002                    -0.45            -0.72***                      0.21              -0.42
                                  (-2.88)          (-2.68)                      (1.35)            (-1.18)
                                              Panel C: Nasdaq
                                        ***
     July 1988-1994               -0.89             -1.36***                     -0.26            -1.59***
                                  (-2.56)           (-3.03)                     (-0.61)            (-3.20)
     1995-2002                      0.20            -1.24**                       0.51              -0.06
                                   (0.63)           (-2.28)                      (1.16)            (-0.09)
     July 1988-2002                -0.24            -1.27***                      0.17             -0.73*
                                  (-0.95)           (-3.49)                      (0.54)            (-1.66)


                                                       41
                                                  Table 10

               Four Factor Model Parameters for EW Portfolios of Firms with
            High Short Interest, by Arbitrage Category, July 1988-December 2002

Arbitrage shorts are firms with high short interest that have a convertible bond outstanding. Valuation
shorts are all other firms with high short interest. Intercepts and their t-statistics from time series
regressions using monthly percentage returns of rpt - rft, the excess return over the risk-free rate on a
portfolio in time period t, regressed on rmt - rft is the realization of the market risk premium in period t,
SMBt is the return on a portfolio of Small stocks Minus the return on a portfolio of Big stocks in period t,
HMLt is the return on a portfolio of High book-to-market (value) Minus Low book-to-market (growth)
stocks in period t, and MOMt is the return on a portfolio of prior winners minus the return on a portfolio
of prior losers, are reported. For July 1988-December 2002, 174 monthly returns are used. The 2.5%
portfolio in month t is the portfolio composed of all Nasdaq stocks in with a short interest ratio of greater
than 2.5% (short interest/shares outstanding) in month t-1. The portfolio is updated monthly. The 99th
percentile portfolio in month t is composed of all stocks that are in the top one percent of short interest
ratios in month t-1. Panel A reports the average percentage of firms that are in convertible arbitrage
category.

                           rpt - rft = a + b(rmt - rft) + sSMBt + hHMLt + mMOMt + ept

      Panel A: Percentage of Firms with Convertibles Debt in Portfolios, July 1988-December 2002
            All Firms                            2.5-4.9%                               99th %ile

              9.6%                                17.6%                                  25.7%

                    Panel B: EW NYSE-Amex-Nasdaq firms, July 1988-December 2002
                     2.5-4.9%                                               99th Percentile
        Arbitrage                Valuation                        Arbitrage               Valuation
         Short                    Short                            Short                    Short

          -0.22                     -0.34                           -0.62                     -1.38
         (-1.09)                   (-1.57)                         (-1.76)                   (-4.05)

                        Panel C: EW NYSE-Amex firms, July 1988-December 2002

          -0.40                     -0.41                            -0.24                    -1.87
         (-1.77)                   (-1.77)                          (-0.40)                  (-3.82)


                          Panel D: EW Nasdaq firms, July 1988-December 2002

           0.08                     -0.32                           -1.06                     -1.26
          (0.22)                   (-1.14)                         (-1.89)                   (-3.01)




                                                      42
                                      NYSE-Amex Monthly Distribution of Short Interest 1976-2002

                    30%                                                                                              1800




                    25%                                                                                              1500




                    20%                                                                                              1200
   Short Interest




                                                                                                                                99th Percentile
                                                                                                                                95th Percentile
                    15%                                                                                              900        median
                                                                                                                                mean
                                                                                                                                S&P 500

                    10%                                                                                              600




                    5%                                                                                               300




                    0%                                                                                               0
                    Ja 6

                    Ja 7

                    Ja 8

                    Ja 9

                    Ja 0

                    Ja 1

                    Ja 2

                    Ja 3

                    Ja 4

                    Ja 5

                    Ja 6

                    Ja 7

                    Ja 8

                    Ja 9

                    Ja 0

                    Ja 1

                    Ja 2

                    Ja 3

                    Ja 4

                    Ja 5

                    Ja 6

                    Ja 7

                    Ja 8

                    Ja 9

                    Ja 0

                    Ja 1
                        02
                        7

                        7

                        7

                        7

                        8

                        8

                        8

                        8

                        8

                        8

                        8

                        8

                        8

                        8

                        9

                        9

                        9

                        9

                        9

                        9

                        9

                        9

                        9

                        9

                        0

                        0
                      n-

                      n-

                      n-

                      n-

                      n-

                      n-

                      n-

                      n-

                      n-

                      n-

                      n-

                      n-

                      n-

                      n-

                      n-

                      n-

                      n-

                      n-

                      n-

                      n-

                      n-

                      n-

                      n-

                      n-

                      n-

                      n-

                      n-
                    Ja




Figure 1 - The mean, median, 95th, and 99th percentiles of short interest ratios (scale on left axis) for NYSE and Amex stocks, and the
level of the S&P 500 (right axis), for January 1976 to December 2002. Short interest ratios are defined as short interest divided by
shares outstanding. If no short interest is reported for a stock in a given month, the ratio is assumed to be zero.



                                                                  43
                                                                                                 Nasdaq Monthly Distribution of Short Interest 6/1988-2002

                 30%                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  6000




                 25%                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  5000




                 20%                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  4000
Short Interest




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             99th Percentile
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             95th Percentile
                 15%                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  3000   mean
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             median
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             NASDAQ

                 10%                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  2000




                 5%                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1000




                 0%                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0
                                Dec-88



                                                  Dec-89



                                                                    Dec-90



                                                                                      Dec-91



                                                                                                        Dec-92



                                                                                                                          Dec-93



                                                                                                                                            Dec-94



                                                                                                                                                              Dec-95



                                                                                                                                                                                 Dec-96



                                                                                                                                                                                                   Dec-97



                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Dec-98



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Dec-99



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Dec-00



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Dec-01



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Dec-02
                       Jun-88



                                         Jun-89



                                                           Jun-90



                                                                             Jun-91



                                                                                               Jun-92



                                                                                                                 Jun-93



                                                                                                                                   Jun-94



                                                                                                                                                     Jun-95



                                                                                                                                                                       Jun-96



                                                                                                                                                                                          Jun-97



                                                                                                                                                                                                            Jun-98



                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Jun-99



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Jun-00



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Jun-01



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Jun-02
                 Figure 2-- The mean, median, 95th, and 99th percentiles of short interest ratios (left axis) of Nasdaq stocks, and the level of the Nasdaq
                 Composite (right axis), from June 1988 to December 2002. The jump in short interest ratios in January 1992 is due to an increase in the
                 number of firms for which Nasdaq reported positive short interest.



                                                                                                                                                                                44
                                              Short Interest in 99th Percentile (48-month rolling, NYSE-Amex Firms)

        0.04



        0.03



        0.02



        0.01
Alpha




            0
                9        0        1        2        3        4        5        6        7        8        9        0        1        2        3        4        5        6        7        8        9        0        1        2
            c-7      c-8      c-8      c-8      c-8      c-8      c-8      c-8      c-8      c-8      c-8      c-9      c-9      c-9      c-9      c-9      c-9      c-9      c-9      c-9      c-9      c-0      c-0      c-0
         De       De       De       De       De       De       De       De       De       De       De       De       De       De       De       De       De       De       De       De       De       De       De       De
        -0.01



        -0.02



        -0.03



        -0.04

                                                                                                                    Date




 Figure 3—Intercepts (and 5% and 95% confidence bands) from rolling 48-month four-factor regression with the market excess return,
 book-to-market, size, and momentum as the four factors. For month t, the regression is estimated over the 48 months from month t-48
 to t. The vertical axis measures the intercept in units of monthly returns, with an alpha of –0.01 corresponding to –1.0 percent per month.



                                                                                                                  45
                                                         Short Interest in 99th Percentile (48-month rolling, Nasdaq Firms)

        0.04



        0.03



        0.02



        0.01
Alpha




            0
                2        2        3        3        4        4        5        5        6        6        7        7        8        8        9        9        0        0        1        1        2        2
            y-9      v-9      y-9      v-9      y-9      v-9      y-9      v-9      y-9      v-9      y-9      v-9      y-9      v-9      y-9      v-9      y-0      v-0      y-0      v-0      y-0      v-0
         Ma       No       Ma       No       Ma       No       Ma       No       Ma       No       Ma       No       Ma       No       Ma       No       Ma       No       Ma       No       Ma       No
        -0.01



        -0.02



        -0.03



        -0.04

                                                                                                            Date




    Figure 4—Intercepts (and 5% and 95% confidence bands) from rolling 48-month four-factor regression with the market excess return,
    book-to-market, size, and momentum as the four factors. For month t, the regression is estimated over the 48 months from month t-48
    to t. The vertical axis measures the intercept in units of monthly returns, with an alpha of –0.01 corresponding to –1.0 percent per month.



                                                                                                              46
