                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         INFORMATION DIFFUSION EFFECTS IN
                 INDIVIDUAL INVESTORS’ COMMON STOCK PURCHASES:
                    COVET THY NEIGHBORS’ INVESTMENT CHOICES

                                            Zoran Ivković
                                           Scott Weisbenner

                                         Working Paper 10436
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w10436


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       April 2004




We extend our gratitude to an anonymous discount broker for providing the data on individual investors
positions, trades, and demographics. Special thanks go to Terry Odean for his help in obtaining and
understanding the data set. Both authors acknowledge the financial support from the College Research
Board at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign. We thank Jean Roth of the NBER for assistance
with the 1990 Census data. Finally, we thank seminar participants at the Univesity of Florida and the
University of Illinois for their comments and feedback. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2004 by Zoran Ivković and Scott Weisbenner. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.
Information Diffusion Effects in Individual Investors’ Common Stock Purchases: Covet Thy
Neighbors’ Investment Choices
Zoran Ivković and Scott Weisbenner
NBER Working Paper No. 10436
April 2004
JEL No. D83, G11

                                          ABSTRACT

Using data on stock purchases individual investors made through a discount broker from 1991 to

1996, we study information diffusion effects—the relation between household investment

choices and those made by their neighbors. A ten percentage point increase in neighbors’

purchases of stocks from an industry is associated with a two percentage point increase in the

household’s own purchases of stocks from that industry, with the effect considerably larger for

purchases of local stocks. The presence of information diffusion effects is robust to controls for

potential inside information effects and to household fixed effects. Upon controlling for

aggregate trading patterns, households’ and neighbors’ investment style preferences, and the

industry composition of local firms, we attribute approximately one-third to one-half of the

overall diffusion effect to word-of-mouth communication. Disentangling the overall diffusion

effect suggests that the significant relation between our measures of information diffusion and

subsequent industry-level returns appears to be driven by its word-of-mouth component.



Zoran Ivković                                               Scott Weisbenner
Department of Finance                                       Department of Finance
University of Illinois                                      University of Illinois
340 Wohlers Hall                                            340 Wohlers Hall
1206 South Sixth Street                                     1206 South Sixth Street
Champaign, IL 61820                                         Champaign, IL 61820
ivkovich@uiuc.edu                                           and NBER
                                                            weisbenn@uiuc.edu
Although individual investors hold approximately one-half of the stock market in the U.S.,
relatively little is known about what governs their investment decisions. Generally, individual
investors may choose to buy stocks for a variety of reasons1 and may consider a broad spectrum
of information sources. In this paper we study information diffusion effects among individual
investors—the relation between the investment choices made by an individual investor’s
neighborhood and the investor’s own investment choices. Information diffusion effects among
individual investors in the U.S. have received relatively little attention in the academic literature,
probably because of the lack of detailed data. If present, such effects undoubtedly can affect
individual investors’ asset allocation decisions. Moreover, trades based on information diffusion
might be sufficiently correlated and condensed in time to affect stock prices.
           In the domain of institutional investors, Hong, Kubik, and Stein (2003) study word-of-
mouth effects among mutual fund managers and find that “…a manager is more likely to hold (or
buy, or sell) a particular stock in any quarter if other managers in the same city are holding (or
buying, or selling) that same stock.” Similarly, individual investors may seek to reduce search
costs and circumvent their lack of expertise by relying on word-of-mouth communication with
those around them. Indeed, Hong, Kubik, and Stein (2004) present a model in which stock
market participation may be influenced by social interaction. Such social interaction can serve
as a mechanism for information exchange via “word-of-mouth” and/or “observational learning”
(Banerjee (1992), Ellison and Fudenberg (1993, 1995)).
           Duflo and Saez (2002, 2003) present evidence of peer effects in a related context—
retirement plans. They find that an employee’s participation in retirement plans and choices
within those plans are affected by participation decisions and choices made by other employees
in the same department.
           In the international arena, Feng and Seasholes (2004) present evidence of herding effects
among individual investors who hold individual brokerage accounts in the People’s Republic of
China. A unique feature of their data (investors have to place trades only in the brokerage house
in which they opened an account) enables Feng and Seasholes to disentangle word-of-mouth
effects from common reaction to releases of public information. They find that common reaction
to public information (trades placed across branches in the same region, local to the company),



1
    For a recent review see Barber, Odean, and Zhu (2003).


                                                                                                     1
rather than word-of-mouth effects (trades placed in the same branch), seems to be a primary
determinant of herding in this context.
       We study information diffusion effects among U.S. individual investors by using a
detailed data set of common-stock investments 35,673 U.S. households made through a large
discount brokerage in the period 1991 to 1996. We pay attention to the overall magnitude of the
effect, as well as to its heterogeneity across industries and across time. We also investigate
whether high levels of information diffusion have predictive power for future industry-level
returns. Moreover, we disentangle the diffusion among the influences of common preferences,
structure of the local industry, and word-of-mouth effects. We find that disentangling the overall
information diffusion effect suggests that the significant relation between diffusion and
subsequent industry-level returns appears to be driven by its word-of-mouth component.
       We find a strong information diffusion effect (“neighborhood effect”): a ten percentage
point increase in purchases of stocks from an industry made by a household’s neighbors is
associated with a two percentage point increase in the household’s own purchases of stocks from
that industry. We pay particular attention to the differentiation between information diffusion
effects related to local stocks (defined as companies headquartered within 50 miles from the
household) and the effects related to non-local stocks. While the key neighborhood effects—
similarity in preferences, the impact of the structure of the local industry, and word-of-mouth—
can prevail among the investments both local and non-local to the household, most of those
effects will likely be far more pronounced among local investments because, as demonstrated for
both professional money managers (Coval and Moskowitz, 2001) and individual investors
(Ivković and Weisbenner, 2004), the flow of value-relevant information regarding local
companies appears to be higher and of better quality than the comparable flow regarding remote,
non-local companies.
       Not surprisingly, we indeed find that information diffusion effects are considerably
stronger for local purchases than for non-local ones. For example, if the neighborhood’s
allocation of local purchases to a particular industry increases by ten percentage points, a
household tends to increase its own allocation of local purchases to the industry by a comparable
amount. This result adds another dimension to the already documented high degrees of
individual investors’ locality, both in the U.S. (Ivković and Weisbenner (2004), Zhu (2002)) and
abroad (Grinblatt and Keloharju (2001), Massa and Simonov (2003)): not only do investors tend



                                                                                                   2
disproportionately to invest locally, but there are also strong information diffusion effects in their
neighborhood.
       In an attempt to study the way information diffusion effects dissipate over time and
space, we show that there is a relation between a household’s own purchases and purchases made
by the household’s neighbors not only contemporaneously, but also with a lag of up to four
quarters. As for space, we find that information diffusion effects wane fairly quickly beyond the
distance of 50 miles; purchases by those residing 100 miles away have only one-tenth of the
impact that purchases by the immediate neighbors (residing within 50 miles) have.
       We further find that a household’s sensitivity to neighbors’ investment choices increases
with the population of the household’s community. Such diffusion in stock trading affects
individual investors’ asset allocation decisions. For example, although residents in larger
metropolitan areas have substantially more diverse investment opportunities and tend to invest
more in local stocks, we find that their local stock investments tend to remain just as
concentrated as residents of less populated communities that have a significantly smaller pool of
potential local investments. This tendency is consistent with the notion that residents in more
populous geographic areas might be exposed to word-of-mouth effects to a higher degree than
residents in less highly populated areas.
       Our inquiry extends beyond establishing the existence of industry-level information
diffusion effects, attributing them, and characterizing them; we also investigate whether the
extent of information diffusion effects has predictive power for future industry-level returns. We
find that, even after controlling for aggregate individual investors’ trading activity (i.e., the buy-
sell imbalance in that industry) and past industry-level performance, non-local information
diffusion is positively associated with future industry returns: an increase in information
diffusion equal to the interquartile range of the estimates of information diffusion across 322
industry-quarter observations is associated with a two to three percentage point increase in
industry returns over the following year. Moreover, we buttress these results by presenting an
explanation that relates the role of non-local diffusion with a gradual diffusion of value-relevant
information from local investors to non-local ones, accompanied with appropriate trading
patterns.
       Finally, to disentangle the contributions of correlated preferences and the structure of the
local economy to the observed correlation between individual investors stock purchases and



                                                                                                         3
those of their neighbors from “word-of-mouth” effects, we consider the households’ own
preferences (as revealed by the composition of their respective portfolios across industries at the
beginning of each quarterly investment period), preferences of the households’ respective
neighborhoods (as revealed by the composition of the neighborhoods’ aggregate portfolios), as
well as the composition of local firms and workers by industry. We find that one-third to one-
half of the overall neighborhood effect among both local and non-local investments cannot be
attributed to these sources. We regard the remaining portions of the neighborhood effect as a
conservative lower bound on the impact of word-of-mouth communication effects on household
trading decisions. Disentangling the overall information diffusion effect into word-of mouth
communication and other diffusion effects yields further insight as to how correlated trading
among individuals may influence stock prices. The significant relation between non-local
diffusion and subsequent industry-level returns appears to be driven by the word-of-mouth
component. This result is consistent with the hypothesis that word-of-mouth communication
creates a more dynamic exchange of information that may lead to a ripple effect of further
information dissemination, which in turn may eventually impact stock prices.
       The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section I describes the data and
summary statistics. We present our basic findings concerning information diffusion in Section II.
Section III analyzes the dissipation of diffusion effects across time and space and explores the
relation between diffusion effects and location. Section IV documents the heterogeneity of
information diffusion across industries and across time and relates future industry-level returns to
our estimates of information diffusion. We identify the contributions of correlated preferences,
the structure of the local economy, and word-of-mouth communication to overall diffusion in
individuals’ investment choices in Section V. Section VI concludes.


                             I. Data and Descriptive Statistics

A. Data

       We compile the data from several sources. The primary source is a large data set,
obtained from a large discount broker, of individual investors’ monthly positions and trades over
a six-year period from 1991 to 1996. The data set covers all the investments that 78,000
households made through the discount broker, including common stocks, mutual funds,
government and corporate bonds, foreign securities, and derivatives. Each household could have


                                                                                                   4
as few as one account and as many as 21 accounts (the median number of accounts is two). For a
detailed description of the data set see Barber and Odean (2000).
        In this paper we focus on the common stocks traded on the NYSE, AMEX, and Nasdaq
exchanges. Common stock investments constitute roughly three-quarters of the total value of
household investments through the brokerage house in the sample. We use the Center for
Research in Security Prices (CRSP) database to obtain information on stock prices and returns
and COMPUSTAT to obtain several firm characteristics, including company headquarters
location (identified by its state and county codes). We use the headquarters location as opposed
to the state of incorporation because firms often do not have the majority of their operations in
their state of incorporation.2
        The sample of households used in this study is a subset of the entire collection of
households for which we could ascertain their zip code and thus determine their location. We
obtained the latitude and longitude for each of the zip codes from the U.S. Census Bureau’s
Gazetteer Place and Zip Code Database. The corresponding company location comes from the
COMPUSTAT Annual Research Files, which contain the information regarding the company
headquarters’ county code. Finally, we identify the latitude and longitude for each county from
the U.S. Census Bureau’s Gazetteer Place and Zip Code Database as well. We use the standard
formula for computing the distance d(a,b) in statutory miles between two points a and b as
follows:


d(a,b) = arccos{cos(a1)cos(a2)cos(b1)cos(b2)+cos(a1)sin(a2)cos(b1)sin(b2)+sin(a1)sin(b1)} r,            (1)

where a1 and b1 (a2 and b2) are the latitudes (longitudes) of the two points (expressed in radians),
respectively, and r denotes the radius of the Earth (approximately 3,963 statutory miles).
        We exclude the stocks we could not match with CRSP and COMPUSTAT; they were
most likely listed on smaller exchanges. We also exclude stocks not headquartered in the
continental U.S. The resulting “market”—the universe of stocks we could obtain the necessary
characteristics and information about—is representative of the overall market. For example, at




2
 While we are aware that this is a somewhat imprecise measure, to our knowledge the data that detail the
geographic distribution of employees for each company during the sample period are not available. Moreover, most
value-relevant, strategically important information is likely concentrated at the company headquarters.


                                                                                                               5
the end of 1991 the “market” consists of 5,478 stocks that cover 89% of the overall market
capitalization at the time.
        In most of our empirical analyses, we relate the industry composition of a household’s
purchases during a quarter to the industry composition of all the purchases of the household’s
neighbors (households located within 50 miles) made during the quarter, plus appropriate
controls. We choose this distance because there is evidence that 50 miles captures most of one’s
social interactions, including those that are employment-based.3
        The sample size necessitates two adjustments. First, instead of fitting regressions based
on individual stocks we aggregate all the buys in each quarter by assigning firms to one of the
following 14 industry groups based on their SIC code: mining, oil and gas, construction, food,
basic materials, medical/biotechnology, manufacturing, transportation, telecommunications,
utilities, retail/wholesale trade, finance, technology, and services. Moreover, although 35,673
households purchased common stocks at some point during the sample period, in each quarter
we consider only the households that made some purchases during the quarter. In sum, there are
23 complete quarters in the sample period (1991:1 to 1996:3), 14 industries, and 7,000 to 9,000
households that made purchases in a quarter. This leads to a total of 2,678,004 observations,
where each observation has several control variables, as well as 322 industry-quarter dummy
variables (14 industries x 23 quarters).

B. Summary Statistics

       Table I summarizes quarterly household stock purchases at the industry level. Summary
statistics are reported for the entire sample period (bottom row of the table) as well as annually.
The first column presents the number of household, quarter, industry (h, t, i) combinations in a
given year for which household h made at least one purchase in quarter t in industry i. The
second column tallies the number of distinct households appearing in the sample in a given year.
The third column lists average dollar values of households’ quarterly purchases, where median
values are reported in parentheses directly underneath the mean values. The last two columns
break down the purchases according to their distances from the household (i.e., whether the firm
headquarters is located within 50 miles of the household) and their S&P 500 status. There are a


3
 For example, according to the 1990 Census, 88% of the population lives within 25 miles of work (98% live within
50 miles). Moreover, if two co-workers each live only 25 miles from work, they may live as many as 50 miles apart.


                                                                                                                 6
total of 191,286 “purchases”—household-quarter-industry (h, t, i) combinations for which there
was a purchase by household h in quarter t in industry i—with 16,000-20,000 households making
purchases each year, for a total of 35,673 distinct households throughout the sample period. The
distribution of the dollar values of quarterly purchases is skewed; while the mean quarterly
purchase was around $29,000, the median value was substantially smaller, around $8,000. The
fourth column shows individual investors’ disproportionate preference for local stocks (17.1% of
all purchases), a phenomenon studied in Ivković and Weisbenner (2004) and Zhu (2002).


                           II. Information Diffusion Effects: Basic Results

A. Basic Regression Specification

            At the outset, we classify individual stock purchases made by household h in quarter t
into industries i = 1, 2, … , 14 and compute the dollar-weighted share of a household’s buys in
each industry (fh,t,i).4 In various analyses, the aggregation into 14 industries is done across all
stock purchases, local purchases only, and non-local purchases only. Moreover, for each

household h and each quarter t we also compute F−50h, t , i , i = 1, 2, … , 14, that is, the proportion

of buys made by all neighboring households within 50 miles from household h (excluding
household h) in each of the 14 industries. For presentational convenience, throughout the paper
the household industry shares fh,t,i are expressed in percentage points (that is, they are multiplied
by 100), whereas neighboring household industry shares are not. Finally, we employ industry-
quarter effects to allow for market-wide variation in demand across industries and time by
defining 322 dummy variables Dt,i, t = 1, …, 23 (from quarter 1991:1 to 1996:3), and i = 1, 2, …
, 14. These controls ensure that our results are not driven by, for example, technology stocks
beating analysts’ expectations, which belong to the common information set that may affect
buying patterns of all investors, but rather reflect the differences in households’ propensity to
purchase technology stocks across different communities. In sum, the basic regression is:

                                                                  23 14
                                f h, t , i = β F−50h, t , i   +   ∑ ∑ γ t ,i Dt ,i + other covariates + ε h,t ,i   (2)
                                                                  t =1 i =1



4
    Note that, by construction, for every h and every t, Σi=1, …,14 fh,t,i = 100.


                                                                                                                    7
For the basic specification without other controls, the null hypothesis is that information
diffusion effects (“neighborhood effects”) do not exist, that is, that the coefficient β is zero. A
positive β would be suggestive of the presence of the information diffusion effect.
       We next address the correlation structure of the error term: observations are independent
neither within each household-quarter combination (industry shares necessarily need to add up to
one) nor across time (households’ preferences are unlikely to change at quarterly frequency). It
follows that the OLS regression estimation, although consistent, would produce biased standard
errors. Thus, we report the standard errors and resulting tests of statistical significance that stem
from employing a robust estimator that clusters observations at the household level for all
regressions.
       There are several reasons why individuals’ investment choices might be related to those
made by their neighbors. At the outset, we note that individual investors might be reacting to the
same publicly available information to which their neighbors are reacting. Such tendencies may
cause correlated trading. Indeed, Barber, Odean, and Zhu (2003) document that trading patterns
are correlated across individual investors and Barber and Odean (2002) find that individual
investors are inclined to buy stocks that attract attention. These correlated trading patterns are not
necessarily surprising in light of exposure to (the same) publicly available information, as well as
to the pronounced presence of the disposition effect (Odean, 1998), tax-motivated trading, and/or
other behavioral phenomena that might prevail among individual investors, yet need not be
driven by information diffusion effects. Our basic set of 322 industry-quarter dummy variables
seeks to control for these and other trading factors that do not vary across communities (e.g.,
when a stock price reaches an all-time high, it does so for all investors) and thereby to allow our
specifications to pick up information diffusion effects.
       Results of running the basic regression, without any controls other than the 322 industry-
quarter dummies, are summarized in Figure 1. It presents both the results for the pooled data
across all 23 quarters and quarter-by-quarter results (in which case each regression only has 14
dummy variables for the industry effects). The estimated coefficient β is highly statistically
significant in all twenty-four regressions. Overall, information diffusion effects appear to be
strong. For pooled observations, the estimate of 20.7% suggests that a 10% change in the
neighbors’ allocation of purchases in an industry is associated with a nearly 2.1% change in the
household’s own allocation of purchases in the industry. Quarterly regressions suggest that,



                                                                                                        8
although point estimates vary somewhat from quarter to quarter (from 13.6 to 28.3), information
diffusion effects are strong throughout the sample period.


B. Information Diffusion Effects for Local and Non-Local Purchases

         As discussed in the introduction, information diffusion that prevails among local and
non-local stocks may be different. Similarity in preferences, the structure of the local industry,
and word-of-mouth effects are likely stronger among local investments. This inquiry is also
motivated by studies of local bias among both institutional investors (Coval and Moskowitz
(1999)) and individual investors (Ivković and Weisbenner (2004) and Zhu (2002)). Those studies
find that both groups of investors are biased toward holding disproportionately more local stocks
in their portfolios. Moreover, Coval and Moskowitz (2001) and Ivković and Weisbenner (2004)
present evidence that local investments outperformed non-local ones among mutual fund
managers and individual investors, respectively.
         We present the results of testing this hypothesis by fitting the regression from Equation
(2) for various dependent variables in Table II. Panel A focuses on the entire universe of stocks,
whereas Panels B and C presents results only for S&P 500 and non-S&P 500 stocks,
respectively. Within each panel every row pertains to a different left hand side variable. The first
row pertains to the industry share breakdown fh,t,i computed across all buys and the next two
rows pertain to the industry composition breakdowns computed across local purchases5 only and
non-local purchases only, respectively.
         The coefficient β reported in Panel A for all buys is 20.7, an estimate already presented in
Figure 1. Separate consideration of local and non-local buys reported in the next two rows
reveals that the local information diffusion effect is an order of magnitude larger than the non-
local one (119.3 vs. 8.4). For example, if the neighborhood’s allocation of local purchases to a
particular industry increases by ten percentage points, a household tends to increase its own
allocation of local purchases to the industry by a comparable amount. This result adds another
dimension to the (already documented) high degrees of individual investors’ locality, both in the
U.S. (Ivković and Weisbenner (2004), Zhu (2002)) and abroad (Grinblatt and Keloharju (2001),



5
 In the regressions for local buys we discarded all the h,t,i observations for which there were no firms in industry i
within 50 miles from household h in quarter t because the household simply could not invest into industry i locally.


                                                                                                                         9
Massa and Simonov (2003)). The results presented herein suggest the possibility that strong
information diffusion effects could contribute to individual investors’ local bias.
       Panels B and C address the degree of informational asymmetry between well-known
stocks of established companies and relatively obscure stocks. We use a simple proxy—
membership in the S&P 500 index—to differentiate between the two. A comparison of Panels B
and C with Panel A suggests that the overall pattern of information diffusion coefficients is
preserved among both S&P 500 and non-S&P 500 stocks. The magnitudes of the coefficients in
the two panels suggests that both local and non-local information diffusion may be somewhat
more pronounced among S&P 500 stocks (Panel B) than among non-S&P 500 stocks.
       An issue of potential concern for local information diffusion is the possibility that the
effect may be driven by some form of inside trading: those who work for a company may be
trading in their own company stock and may be selectively releasing pertinent information to
their close friends and relatives. We regard this effect as somewhat distinct from the other
aspects of information diffusion because the information the investors would receive is likely
much more precise than the information available through word-of-mouth effects, exposure to
local news, influence of company’s presence through advertising efforts, company-sponsored
events, or social interaction with company employees.
       Unfortunately, the data set does not provide information about the investors’ current and
past employers. Consequently, it is impossible to identify whether (and to what extent)
households hold their employers’ stocks. Still, we can control for the own-company stock
explanation by focusing on the plausible, but rather conservative assumption that, if a
household’s local purchase is motivated by inside information, it is likely to be the household’s
largest local trade in that quarter. Pursuant to that assumption, we compute for each household h
in quarter t the industry composition of local purchases excluding the single largest stock
purchase made by household h in quarter t. In unreported analyses, we find that this specification
yields estimates of the local information diffusion effect that are even somewhat larger than the
estimates based on the full sample of local investments (152.5 versus 119.3) and conclude that
we do not find evidence that trading in own-company stock drives the estimated information
diffusion effects among local investments.
       Another issue of potential concern is that the estimates of local information diffusion may
be induced by the dominant presence of a company (or industry) in a household’s neighborhood.



                                                                                                   10
Taking a drastic example, suppose there is only one company (or multiple companies all
belonging to the same industry) local to the household. The opportunity set for local investments
is therefore very focused and the inability to invest locally into any other industry may bias the
results. To assess the impact of industry dominance in the local opportunity set we run
regressions for local purchases while removing certain observations. In unreported results, we
consider a subsample of purchases—household-quarter-industry (h,t,i) combinations for which
the weight of industry i in the portfolio of firms local to household h does not exceed the
threshold of 50%, that is, the observations not plagued by the domination of a single company
(or industry) in the community. The regression coefficient remains essentially the same; it
declines only very slightly, from 119.3 to 111.3, which suggests that the “one-company town”
issue does not drive local information diffusion.


 III. Dissipation of Information Diffusion Effects Across Time and Space and
                              the Role of Location

A. Lags in Information Diffusion Effects

        The analyses to this point focused on the contemporaneous relations between households’
purchases and purchases made by their neighbors (households within 50 miles from the
household). However, individuals may be influenced by their neighbors’ past stock trades as
well. Accordingly, we reflect this possibility by considering specifications that allow for lags of
up to four quarters. Unlike regressions reported to this point, in which market-wide demand for
stocks in particular industries over time was absorbed by industry-quarter dummy variables, we
now explicitly compute for each household h and quarter t the share of stock purchases across

industries for all households except household h in quarter t, F−All
                                                                 h,t ,i , i = 1, 2, … , 14, and run the

following regression:

                                                        4                                4
     f h,t ,i = β0 F−50
                      h,t ,i   + β0All   F−All
                                           h,t ,i   +   ∑   β − j F−50
                                                                     h, t − j , i   +   ∑ β−Allj F−Allh,t − j,i + εh,t ,i   (3)
                                                        j =1                            j =1


        Table III presents results of running four specifications with varying explanatory
variables: contemporaneous only in the first column, lagged by one quarter only in the second



                                                                                                                                  11
column, both contemporaneous and lagged by one quarter in the third column, and both
contemporaneous and lagged by up to four quarters in the fourth column. Column (1) replicates
the basic result from Table II with a slightly different way of controlling for market-wide
demand for stocks at the industry level; the estimate of the contemporaneous information
diffusion coefficient (22.1) is very close to the baseline estimate from Table II (20.7). Column
(2) allows only for independent variables lagged by one quarter; the point estimates are very
similar to those reported in column (1), suggesting that even a very conservative specification
that captures information diffusion by relating current household purchases to their neighbors’
past purchases at the industry level uncovers a strong effect. Allowing both contemporaneous
effects and effects with a one-quarter lag, as suggested by column (3), shows that both
contemporaneous and lagged purchasing decisions made by a household’s neighborhood are
related to the household’s current purchasing decisions. While the coefficient estimates are
somewhat attenuated relative to those reported in columns (1) and (2), both are still fairly large
(16.5 and 14.0, respectively). On the other hand, coefficients related to purchases made by all
households differ considerably: the current quarter’s coefficient is four times larger than the
lagged quarter’s (42.9 vs. 9.4). Finally, column (4) suggests that information diffusion effects
extend beyond a single lagged quarter: regression coefficients pertaining to lagged purchases
made by the households’ neighborhoods persist for all four lagged quarters and amount to a total
of 41.2. Thus, individual investors appear not to be influenced only by their neighbors’ most
recent purchases; rather, they are influenced by the neighbors’ purchases made across an
extended period of time—up to one year (four quarters).
       By contrast, in this specification only contemporaneous purchases made by all
households have a consistently strong effect (coefficient estimate of 40.4), reflecting perhaps the
impact of current national news. Lagged coefficients vary in sign and are much smaller in
magnitude and, moreover, an F-test rejects their joint significance at the one-percent level. It
appears that, although lagged market-wide news may have affected trading when it first became
available, it no longer impacts current trading.


B. Dissipation of Information Diffusion Effects with Distance from the Household

       One would expect information diffusion effects to dissipate as the distance from the
household increases. For example, households located more than 100 miles away from a


                                                                                                   12
household should have weaker effect on the household’s portfolio decision than households
located within 50 miles. To test this, we define regions surrounding the household at increasingly
larger distances as follows: 0-50 miles, 50-70.7 miles, 70.7-86.6 miles, 86.6-100 miles, … ,
141.4-150 miles. The prevailing criterion is that these regions should cover a geographic area of
the same size (502 π = 7,854 square miles). Accordingly, we run a regression similar to Equation

(2), except, instead of having one information diffusion regressor F−50
                                                                      h,t ,i , we now have nine

               50 − 71   71−87     87 −100             −112             −122             −132            −141
( F−50
     h,t ,i , Fh,t ,i , Fh,t ,i , Fh,t ,i  , Fh100
                                                ,t , i      , Fh112
                                                                 ,t , i      , Fh122
                                                                                  ,t , i      , Fh132
                                                                                                   ,t ,i      , and

        −150
Fh141
   ,t ,i     ). The results of this regression are presented graphically in Figure 2. Across all three

panels, that is, for all buys, local buys, and non-local buys, the pattern is the same: there is a
rapid and steady exponential decline of the information diffusion coefficients with distance from
the household.


C. Information Diffusion Effects and Local Population

         In this section we stratify households according to the size of the population that resides
within 50 miles from the household. We define four categories: 0-1 million residents, 1-2.5
million residents, 2.5-5 million residents, and more than 5 million residents (the latter includes
households in and around New York City, Los Angeles, and Chicago). Not surprisingly, the size
of the local population and the diversity of local companies are positively related. Specifically,
the Herfindahl index of the industry composition of firms local to the average household
decreases from around 0.5 to around 0.2 as the population increases from 0-1 million local
residents to more than 5 million local residents.6 Yet, although the average number (and dollar
amount) of quarterly purchases of local individual stocks increases from 1.4 ($13,000) to 1.7
($22,400), the Herfindahl index of households’ local purchases across industries remains
virtually unchanged—it drops only very slightly—as the size of the local population increases
(from 0.99 to 0.95 for populations of 0-1 million and more than 5 million local residents,
respectively). Thus, although residents in larger metropolitan areas have substantially more
diverse investment opportunities and tend to invest more into local stocks, they tend to remain
very focused in their industry allocation. This tendency is consistent with the notion that
6
 Firms are divided into 14 industry groups. Thus, a community with equal representation across all industries would
have a local firm Herfindahl index of 0.07.


                                                                                                                      13
residents in more populous geographic areas might be exposed to information diffusion effects to
a higher degree than residents in less highly populated areas are. To confirm this intuition we run
a simple modification of the basic regression from Equation (2) on subsamples selected by the
type of purchase (all buys, local buys, and non-local buys) wherein information diffusion effects
are interacted with dummies representing local population size (0-1 million, 1-2.5 million, 2.5-5
million, more than 5 million). The coefficient estimate presented in the table for a particular
population group represents the total information diffusion effect for that group (i.e., the sum of
the diffusion effect for the 0-1 million group and the interaction term for that particular
population group).
        Across all three panels of Table IV the results suggest that the information diffusion
effects increase with population size. Stronger information diffusion effects in larger
metropolitan areas may stem from the intensified flow of investment-relevant information
through increased availability of information sources (e.g., business-oriented magazines and
newspapers) and advertising efforts, both of which are subject to economies of scale and are
typically more substantial in larger metropolitan areas.


D. Information Diffusion Effects in Large U.S. Cities

        The preceding section shows that the information diffusion effects are stronger in larger
metropolitan areas. Still, it is entirely possible that relatively few U.S. cities could be driving this
effect. Generally, there could be considerable heterogeneity among information diffusion effects
in individual large cities. In the following analysis, we identify 25 large U.S. cities and collect
the rest of investors into the 26th “city” R (“Rest of Investors”). To explore information diffusion
effects among households in 25 major U.S. cities we run a regression wherein we relate the share
of purchases across industries for each household with those of the residents of the same city and
those of the residents of all other major cities and the rest of the investors (i.e., those that do not
reside in one of the 25 cities):

                                25                            26
                 f h, t , i =   ∑ αc Fc − h,t ,i I (h ∈ c) + ∑ βc Fc,t ,i I (h ∉ c) + ε h,t ,i ,      (4)
                                c =1                          c =1




                                                                                                      14
where the indicator function expression I (h ∈ c) means that household h resides in city c. Thus,
for a given city c, c = 1, ..., 25, (αc – βc) represents the effect of a change in industry allocation in
city c upon households in that city relative to households that live elsewhere. This approach
follows very closely the key specification from Hong, Kubik, and Stein (2003), with one
exception: in light of the nature of our data (there are many more individual investors in the
present data set than there are money managers in the sample used by Hong, Kubik, and Stein
(2003)), rather than considering individual stocks we focus on industry-level stock purchases.
This regression framework allows for a close comparison of information diffusion effects of
individual investors to those prevailing among mutual fund managers.
        Table V present results of fitting the regression from Equation (4). The first two columns
focus on all buys. While there is some variation in the information diffusion coefficients αc
(related to a household’s own city), they are all fairly large and are each much larger than the
corresponding information diffusion coefficients βc (related to other cities). For example, the
information diffusion coefficients of 40.4 and 8.4 for Los Angeles, respectively, mean that a 10
percentage point increase in the portfolio share of Los Angeles’ households allocated to, for
example, technology, will boost the technology share of a Los Angeles resident by 4%, but will
only boost the technology share of a household’s purchases in another city by 0.8%. In fact, the
weighted-average difference between the two information diffusion coefficients, that is, (αc –
βc), across the twenty-five cities is 35%. That is, a ten percentage-point change in industry
allocation in a particular city will tilt the purchases made in that industry by 3.5 percentage
points more for a household residing in that city than for a household residing elsewhere. The
next two pairs of columns replicate the same analysis for local purchases and non-local
purchases. Except for a difference in the magnitude of the effect—the information diffusion from
a household’s city is much larger for local purchases than for non-local purchases and the
difference between the own-city effect and the other-city effect is much larger for local
purchases than for non-local purchases (97.9 and 10.9, respectively)—the same conclusion
holds. Overall, we present evidence of a strong dominance of the own-city effect over the other-
city effect and our results are consistent with, and somewhat more pronounced than, those
pertaining to mutual fund managers (Hong, Kubik, and Stein (2003)). For example, while our
basic specification yields the estimate of 35%, the comparable specification in Hong, Kubik, and
Stein (Table 2, 2003) yields a coefficient of 22%.


                                                                                                      15
    IV. Heterogeneity of Information Diffusion Effects and Their Relation to
                         Future Industry-Level Returns

A. Heterogeneity of Information Diffusion Effects Across Industries

         In the following analyses, carried out separately for each industry on the subsamples of
all buys, local buys and non-local, we fit two specifications. The first specification employed for
each industry is very similar to the baseline specification, outlined in Equation (2), with only 23
quarter-dummies and without any additional controls. In the second specification we include 15
controls that capture household investment style7 to answer the question whether, after
controlling for a household’s preference to invest, for example, in high-momentum, small, low
book-to-market firms, the neighborhood’s allocation of purchases across industries still
influences the household’s own allocation. Put differently, a household’s propensity to buy
technology stocks could be driven by its neighborhood’s propensity to buy technology stocks
and/or by the household’s preference for firms that exhibit characteristics that are correlated with
characteristics of technology stocks; this analysis seeks to disentangle these two potentially
conflicting effects.
         The results are presented in Table VI. The first column shows the results of fitting the
first, baseline specification. It suggests that there are differences among the information diffusion
estimates obtained industry-by-industry, with the largest, statistically significant estimates for
technology stocks, followed by retail trade and services. With the exception of all buys of
construction stocks, coefficient estimates for both all buys and local buys are positive and
statistically significant. As for non-local buys, the information diffusion coefficient β in the
baseline specification is statistically significant for 10 out of the 14 industries. Moreover, the
information diffusion effects appear to be much stronger for local buys than for non-local buys,
for some industries even in excess of an order of magnitude. Although the 15 style dummies


7
  Each of the household’s individual stock purchases is characterized by the stock’s size, book-to-market, and past
year’s return. The three characteristics are sorted in each quarterly cross-section and divided into quintiles. Each
stock purchase is associated with 15 auxiliary variables. The first five auxiliary variables are set to one if the stock
belongs to the respective size quintile and to zero otherwise; the next five are defined analogously for stock’s book-
to-market ratio; the last five auxiliary variables are defined analogously for stock’s recent performance over the 11
months preceding the month of purchase. The fifteen controls are computed as weighted sums of the respective
fifteen auxiliary variables across all the purchases made by the household in the quarter and thus represent the share
of quarterly purchases in each size, book-to-market, and momentum quintile. This approach is also employed by
Hong, Kubik, and Stein (2003).


                                                                                                                     16
have significant explanatory power of their own, their inclusion in the specification seems to
have had virtually no effect on the information diffusion coefficient; most of the regression
coefficients are very similar to those reported in the respective columns for the baseline
specification.


B. Time-Variability of Industry-Level Information Diffusion Effects

        The industry-by-industry regressions reported in Table VI suggest some degree of
heterogeneity among industries with respect to the intensity of information diffusion effects.
Table VII provides summary statistics obtained by running industry-by-industry regressions
separately for each of the 23 quarters, for a total of 322 estimates. Results for all buys, local
buys, and non-local buys suggest that there is nontrivial time variation in the magnitude of the
information diffusion effect point estimates. Technology stocks feature the largest average of
point estimates for all buys and non-local buys and the second largest for local buys. In all three
cases, their interquartile range is fairly tight. Several other industries, such as
medical/biotechnology, retail trade, and services also had fairly large averages, whereas some
other industries are interesting because they featured low averages for all buys and non-local
buys, yet had high averages for local buys (e.g., oil and gas, construction, and food). The last row
of Table VII reports the summary statistics taken across all 322 estimates of the information
diffusion coefficient β. Roughly speaking, it suggests that the effect for all buys is an order of
magnitude smaller than it is for local buys (average coefficient estimates are 8.9 and 97.2,
respectively) and is more than twice as large as it is for non-local buys (average coefficient for
non-local buys is 3.7).


C. Do Diffusion Effects Predict Future Returns? The Portfolio Formation Approach

        In light of strong information diffusion effects, that is, evidence of correlated trading
behavior across industry-level purchases, we next explore whether our estimates of information
diffusion can predict industry-level returns. Intuitively, our inquiry may be interpreted as a
simple question as to whether industry-level diffusion effects among individual investors can
create sufficiently concentrated trades and thus “momentum” to impact future industry-level
returns?



                                                                                                     17
       In this section we implement a simple portfolio formation strategy wherein at the end of
each quarter t the fourteen industries are sorted according to their information diffusion estimates
IDˆ t ,i . The industries are then classified into three categories: top five, bottom five, and middle

four. This classification serves as the basis for forming a zero-cost portfolio. The returns to the
long (short) size of the portfolio are equally-weighted returns to the top (bottom) five industries.
These positions can be held during the next quarter only, in which case the portfolio is
completely redefined each quarter, or over a longer horizon of one year. In the latter case, the
overall portfolio consists of four sub-portfolios, all of which are equally weighted, and only one-
fourth of the portfolio is modified each quarter. Finally, in light of highest estimates of
information diffusion effects among technology stocks, we introduce a robustness check wherein
we remove technology stocks from the long side of the portfolio in all quarters in which it would
be classified among the top five industries (which occurs in most quarters). This entire procedure
is carried out for estimates of information diffusion among all buys, local buys, and non-local
buys. We control for risk using the four-factor model (i.e., the three Fama-French (1993) factors
and the fourth momentum factor) proposed by Carhart (1997).
       The results of analyzing the performance of these zero-cost portfolios are presented in
Table VIII. The table presents the loadings on the four factors and the risk-adjusted performance
(Alpha) for each of the nine portfolios. Moreover, the bottom row of the table presents raw
returns on each of the zero-cost portfolios. The bottom two rows suggest that the risk-adjusted
returns are positive for all portfolios, although Alpha is consistently statistically significant only
across the portfolio strategies based on non-local diffusion. Those analyses suggest that chasing
information diffusion effects concerning non-local industry-level purchases in the sample would
have resulted in abnormal portfolio performance of around seven percentage points per year
(under the assumption of quarterly rebalancing), both including and excluding the technology
industry. As suggested by the high p-value of the four-factor model regressions with the 3-month
holding period, there is no systematic difference in the two portfolios formed on non-local
diffusion (i.e., no difference in loadings on the four factors). The effect of non-local information
diffusion appears to weaken fairly quickly, as the estimate related to the 12-month holding
period (involving up to four equally-weighted overlapping sub-portfolios), aside from being only
marginally statistically significant, is reduced by one-half in comparison with the quarterly
rebalancing strategy.


                                                                                                         18
D. Alternative Perspective: The Industry-Level Panel Data Approach
        As a robustness check to the strong returns following high non-local information
diffusion, we relate industry-level returns prevailing over the next period not only to current
information diffusion effects, but also to industries’ current performance, individual investors’
demand for stocks at the industry level, as well industry and quarter effects. The regression at the
quarterly horizon is specified as follows:


                                                              23                14
                    NL ˆ NL
        Rq +1,i = β ID IDt ,i + β R Rq,i + β BSI BSI t ,i +   ∑      γ t Dt +   ∑ δi Di + εt ,i ,   (5)
                                                              t =1              i =1


where the first regressor is the quarterly industry-level non-local information diffusion estimate,
the second regressor represents lagged industry-level returns, the third regressor captures
industry-level demand, and the remaining regressors are controls for industry and quarter
effects. The industry-level demand is computed as the difference between buys and sells of stock
in the given industry divided by their sum: BSIt,i = ($Buyst,i – $Sellst,i)/ ($Buyst,i + $Sellst,i). This
approach follows Lakonishok, Shleifer, and Vishny (1992). The annual regression differs only in
regard to the horizon of future industry-level returns (i.e., the left-hand-side variable)—those
returns stretch across the next four quarters.
        Panel A of Table IX presents results for the regression involving quarterly industry-level
returns. Each of the three specifications introduces increasingly more controls, culminating in
column (3) that features the full set of control variables from Equation (5). Information diffusion
effects of non-local purchases are consistently (though marginally) statistically significant across
all of the specifications. The impact of non-local diffusion is economically significant: the point
estimate of 0.08 and the interquartile range of quarter-industry non-local information diffusion
effect from the last row of Table VII (–1.4 to 7.3) suggest that a change in the information
diffusion effect for an industry equal to the interquartile range (that is, around 8.7) is associated
with a 70 basis points increase in next quarter’s returns for the industry (which translates into
approximately 2.8% per year). Similarly, results from column (3) in Panel B suggest a 2.0%
increase in annual industry level returns (8.7 * 0.23), although the evidence is only marginally
statistically significant. In sum, controlling for the pattern of buying/selling activity, non-local
information diffusion effects have predictive power for future industry-level returns.


                                                                                                          19
E. Toward Understanding the Predictive Power of Non-Local Industry-Level Information
Diffusion Effects

        The analyses presented in Tables VIII and IX offer compelling evidence that industry-
level non-local information diffusion can predict industry-level returns, where the magnitude of
the effect is estimated to lie in the range from two to seven percentage points per year. In this
section we offer an insight into a plausible mechanism that might generate such a pattern.
        Empirical evidence is mounting that individual investors are able to exploit informational
asymmetries embedded in stocks local to them (Ivković and Weisbenner (2004)).8 Consistent
with such evidence, we show that individual investors’ purchases of local stocks outperform their
purchases of non-local stocks (Panel A in Table X). This finding suggests that a certain fraction
of “good” value-relevant information is generated locally.
        Second, local information diffusion effects are statistically significantly related to both
contemporaneous and future (by up to three quarters) non-local diffusion effects, but not to
lagged non-local diffusion effects. Specifically, the correlation between local “word-of-mouth”
effects and contemporaneous non-local “word-of-mouth” effects is 0.11 and is statistically
significant; the correlation between local effects and future non-local effects remains strong and
statistically significant for the next three quarters (the correlations are 0.17, 0.12, and 0.10,
respectively). Put differently, an intense flow of investment information started locally continues
non-locally for quite a while and non-locals may be enticed to buy those stocks about which they
(eventually) receive some information.
        Panel B of Table X provides evidence that, consistent with the disposition effect
documented in Odean (1998), investors tend to sell local stocks too soon—local purchases
continue to outperform non-local purchases following their sale (the differential in terms of both
raw returns and risk-adjusted returns is positive, yet it lacks statistically significance for risk-
adjusted returns). Non-locals, on the other hand, being net buyers of stocks previously (and
perhaps concurrently) sold by locals, may still reap some benefits from the original “good”
value-relevant information generated locally.




8
  Similarly, Coval and Moskowitz (2001) show that professional managers’ local investments outperform their non-
local investments.


                                                                                                              20
                    V. Disentangling Information Diffusion Effects

       The results presented in Section II suggest that the stock purchases made by households
are strongly related to those made by their neighbors, consistent with word-of-mouth effects
playing a strong role in household investment decisions. However, such a correlation in trading
activity could also reflect an underlying similarity in preferences and/or the industry-composition
of local firms. In regard to U.S. investors, studies have found correlated trading patterns both for
institutional investors (Hong, Kubik, and Stein (2003)) and individual investors (Barber, Odean,
and Zhu (2003)), but have not explored why such correlated trading patterns obtain. To our
knowledge, the only study that addresses this issue focuses on individual investors in the
People’s Republic of China (Feng and Seasholes (2004)) and finds that correlated trading is
related to the flow of local information, but is not related to word-of-mouth effects that could
result from executing trades in the same branch office.
       Unlike Feng and Seasholes (2004), we do not have what is essentially a natural
experiment—the investors in our sample can place trades by phone, over the Internet, or in
person, rather than being required to place trades in the specific brokerage house in which they
opened an account. Instead, we devise an alternative strategy to disentangle the sources of the
observed correlation between a household’s stock purchases and those of its neighbors. In
particular, we consider three key contributions to the overall information diffusion effect,
namely, word-of-mouth communication, correlated preferences (which may incorporate common
reaction to news events), and the structure of the local economy.
       We use the composition of the neighborhoods’ aggregate portfolio to reveal the
neighborhoods’ preferences and the accumulation of their reactions to past news. Analogously,
we use the composition of a household’s own portfolio position to reveal its own preferences and
accumulated reactions to past news. We further use the degree of conformity of the household
portfolio composition to the portfolio composition of the neighborhood to identify households
with preferences and reactions similar to their neighbors’, as well as those whose preferences and
reactions are very different from their neighbors’.
       Upon controlling for the composition of households’ neighborhood portfolios and
households’ own portfolio compositions, as well as the structure of the local economy, we view



                                                                                                   21
the correlation between the household’s stock purchases and those of its neighbors that survives
such rigid controls as a conservative lower bound on the magnitude of the word-of-mouth effect.
Strikingly, our estimates of the contribution of word-of-mouth communication are very similar
across households that conformed to their neighbors very closely and those that held very
disparate portfolios. This finding is reassuring because it suggests that the strategy we employed
to control for the effect of common preferences and the cumulative common reactions to news
did not lead to materially different estimates of the word-of-mouth effect across the two sets of
households.
       It is important to differentiate among these competing sources of the overall information
diffusion effect because they likely have different levels of influence on the market. For
example, word-of-mouth effects may create a more dynamic exchange of information that may
lead to a ripple effect of further information dissemination, which in turn may have an impact on
stock prices.


A. The Role of Correlated Preferences

       A potential source of correlated purchases among households in a geographic area is that
these households may have similar preferences. Individual investors might be influenced by their
neighbors’ investment choices because they wish to conform and keep pace with their neighbors’
wealth and investment habits (Bernheim (1994), Campbell and Cochrane (1999), and Shore and
White (2003)). Moreover, to the extent that individuals choose their place of residence according
to their preferences, and those tend to be correlated among the residents of the same geographic
area, it is possible that similar tastes might govern investment decisions even without explicit
communication with their neighbors. Finally, it is plausible that individual investors’ own
preferences are correlated over time; individuals might have an inclination to conform to some of
their previous investment choices (to the extent of favoring stocks from the same industry as they
previously did).
       To explore the effect of correlated preferences, we define two variables for each (h, t)
observation. First, we define the industry composition of stock positions of neighboring
households (excluding household h itself) at the end of quarter t-1. Second, we define the
industry composition of stock positions of the household itself at the end of quarter t-1. The
inclusion of these two position-related variables in the specification explicitly accounts for any


                                                                                                     22
underlying correlation in trading activity attributable to a similarity in preferences within a
community that manifests itself in a similarity of stock purchases within the community or a
similarity in an individual’s own stock preferences over time. This approach requires merging
purchases in quarter t with positions at the end of quarter t-1. While there is substantial overlap
between household identifiers for trades and positions in the database, the matching is imperfect
and it allowed us to retain around two-thirds of the original observations used in previous
analyses.


B. The Structure of the Local Economy

        Companies routinely seek to generate a certain presence in the local community. One
immediate effect of such endeavors is investors’ enhanced familiarity with local companies,
generated through social interaction with employees and company efforts such as local
advertising and sponsoring local events. Investors’ propensity to invest in the companies
(industries) they are familiar with, and perhaps even informed about, undoubtedly constitutes one
important facet of information diffusion. Moreover, the local presence of a company may
enhance the probability of circulation of very precise, inside information, an issue we addressed
to a certain extent in Section II.
        To capture the impact of the structure of the local economy, we define variables that
capture the distribution of the local economy and local labor force across industries. Specifically,
for each (h, t, i) observation we define two variables: the fraction of market value of companies
local to household h in quarter t in industry i and the fraction of the labor force local to
household h in quarter t employed in industry i.9
        Including these two variables should pick up both the effects that stem from familiarity
with local companies and the potential direct company-stock effect. For example, if there are
many employees working for construction companies in the area, a household’s propensity to
invest in construction firms could stem from word-of-mouth effects—social interaction between
these employees and other households—and/or these employees investing in their own company
stock (company-stock effects).

9
 We obtain the number of employees from COMPUSTAT. For the purpose of this analysis we assume that all the
company’s employees are employed in the same county in which the company headquarters are located. We are
aware that this is a somewhat imprecise measure, but, to our knowledge, more precise panel data regarding the
geographic distribution of the employees for each company are not available.


                                                                                                            23
         Figure 3 presents average compositions of quarterly buys, firms local to the household,
and corporate workers local to the household over the entire sample period. The figure shows
that the purchases made by the individual investors in the sample were tilted toward technology
and medical/biotechnology industries: around one-third of all purchases were in technology
stocks and a further one-sixth in medical/biotechnology stocks. Moreover, the figure suggests
that there may be a relatively high correlation between the composition of individuals’ purchases
and the local economy, that is, market values and corporate workers in the individuals’
neighborhoods (within 50 miles).
         Industry compositions of households’ total buys are more correlated with their neighbors’
buys (0.34) than they are with either market values of local firms (0.15) or employees of local
firms (0.16). There is a striking contrast in the effect that local firms have on households’ local
buys versus households’ non-local buys. Specifically, the correlation between the industry
composition of local firm value (employees) and the industry composition of local buys is 0.41
(0.40), while the comparable correlation for non-local buys is 0.10 (0.11). The higher
correlations related to local buys could partially reflect company-stock issues, namely, the
propensity to invest in a firm for which household members work (or have worked). On the other
hand, the correlations related to non-local buys likely do not reflect this concern; instead, they
likely reflect the fact that households’ familiarity with local investment opportunities influences
households’ remote investments as well.


C. The Results

         The results of relating the industry composition of a household’s investments to the
neighborhood’s preferences, own preferences, and the structure of the local economy are
presented in Table XI. Panel A has three sections, containing estimates for all buys, local buys,
and non-local buys, respectively. Within each section, we first show the baseline result, which
corresponds very closely with the corresponding baseline result in Table II, Panel A.10 The
following row in each section shows the results with the two additional independent variables
that seek to capture preferences for industry allocation. Both variables are statistically
significant, which suggests that households’ purchases across industries are related to the

10
  The small discrepancies between the point estimates (e.g., 19.9 in Table XI vs. 20.7 in Table II for all buys) can
be attributed to the differing numbers of observations.


                                                                                                                   24
common preferences that prevail in their neighborhoods, as well as their own revealed
preferences (as described by their current common-stock positions). For example, the point
estimates suggest that households that enter the quarter with a stock portfolio fully concentrated
in a particular industry allocate 31-48 percentage points more of their quarterly purchases to that
same industry. The point estimate of β, interpreted as the information diffusion effect unrelated
to such preferences or the word-of-mouth component, is equal to one-half of the magnitude of
the estimated effect of the overall information diffusion (Table II, Panel A) for all buys and non-
local buys, and to one-third for local buys.
       The third row in each section of Panel A includes the variables that capture the structure
of the local economy. Both local-economy variables are positively related to the allocation of
household purchases across industries and are statistically significant, although they tend to
attenuate the estimate of β to a much lesser degree than do the two variables related to
preferences. Although the effect of the structure of the local economy is present for all the
subsamples, the impact is by far the strongest for local buys. Specifically, a 10 percentage point
change in the presence of a certain industry (as measured by firm values) is associated with a 4.7
percentage point change in the allocation of a local household’s local purchases across industries.
The impact of the industry-level structure of the local labor force is also noticeable (1.4
percentage point change), though it is not as strong.
       The fourth row in each section features the results of relating the industry composition of
a household’s investments to both preferences (the neighborhood’s and own) and the structure of
the local economy. Estimates of the effects of all the four variables are positive and statistically
significant. Most importantly, the point estimate of β, interpreted as the information diffusion
effect unrelated to either preferences or the structure of the local economy, approximately equals
one-half of the magnitude of the estimated effect of the overall information diffusion for all buys
and non-local buys, and one-third for local buys. Figure 4 illustrates the estimates of the overall
information diffusion effect for all buys (as presented in Figure 1), plotted using gray bars, and
the word-of-mouth component for all buys, plotted using black bars. The estimates for the full
sample period are plotted using full bars, whereas quarterly estimates are plotted using dotted
bars. For the full sample, word-of-mouth communication accounts for nearly one-half of the
overall information diffusion effect. This is a very robust estimate because inspection of period-




                                                                                                     25
by-period estimates suggests that word-of-mouth communication accounts for 40% to 50% of the
overall information diffusion effect in most quarters.
       The final analysis reported in Panel A of Table XI seeks to capture differences among
households along unobservable characteristics by running the baseline regression from Equation
(2) with the inclusion of household-level fixed effects. This is a very rigorous test, as it presents
a higher standard than the baseline specification: it relates the change in a household’s allocation
of purchases to an industry from its time-series average allocation of purchases to the industry
with the change in its neighborhood’s allocation of purchases to the industry from the
neighborhood’s time series average allocation of purchases to the industry. For example, an
investor who likes technology stocks may happen to live in an area where others independently
also happen to invest in technology stocks. Such a non-causal correlation would lead toward the
detection of diffusion effects in a cross-sectional regression even if investors acted
independently. By contrast, to identify diffusion effects in a panel regression requires that, in
response to a change in community technology stock investment, the household should change
its allocation to technology stocks in the same direction. Results in the last row of each section in
Panel A are compelling; they suggest that information diffusion effects remain strong in the
household fixed-effects framework, especially for local buys (3.6 for all buys; 17.7 for the
subsample of local buys; 2.4 for the subsample of non-local buys), though the magnitudes are
substantially reduced compared to the cross-sectional analyses.
       The extent to which households’ portfolios conform to those of their neighbors can serve
as a proxy for identifying households whose purchasing decisions are driven to varying degrees
by the desire to adhere (inadvertently or not) to the preferences and common news prevailing in
their neighborhood. For example, if the household shared the investment preferences with its
neighborhood and responded to news similarly to its neighborhood, over time its portfolio
composition would be very similar to that of its community.
       We sort households into two types according to the extent to which their household
portfolio allocations at the industry level conform to those of their neighbors; the metric we use
is the average absolute deviation in industry portfolio shares between a household and its
neighborhood. Results in Panels B and C of Table XI suggest that, while initially there are
substantial differences in information diffusion effects (i.e., coefficients associated with the
composition of buys of neighboring households) across the two groups, once the variables that



                                                                                                    26
capture preferences and the structure of the local economy are included, the estimated coefficient
β (i.e., the relation between a household’s purchases and its neighbors’ purchases) becomes fairly
similar across the two types of investors. Specifically, the β for local (non-local) buys across the
two groups of investors are 46.2 and 29.4 (3.9 and 2.9), respectively, and are no longer
significantly different at the 1% level. This suggests that the two positions-related variables
indeed are successful in capturing the effect of common preferences because, once they are
included in the specification, the remaining information diffusion effect, which we attribute to
word-of-mouth communication, is very comparable across investors that have stock portfolios
very similar to their neighbors and those with portfolios that are quite different.
           Finally, we revisit the analysis that relates industry-level returns prevailing over the next
period to current information diffusion effects and a number of controls such as industries’
current performance, individual investors’ demand for stocks at the industry level, as well
industry and quarter effects. As discussed earlier, it may be important to differentiate among the
word-of-mouth effect and other sources of correlated purchases because they likely have
different levels of influence on the market. Toward that goal, we augment the specification from
Equation (5) by including two components of non-local diffusion—the word-of-mouth
component and other information diffusion (expressed as the difference between the overall
information diffusion effect and the estimate of word-of-mouth communication):11 The
regression at the quarterly horizon is specified as follows:

                                                                             23          14
                NL
     Rq +1,i = βWOM WOˆ M tNL    NL ˆ NL
                           ,i + βOD ODt ,i + β R Rq,i + β BSI BSI t ,i +    ∑ γ t Dt + ∑ δi Di + εt ,i ,       (6)
                                                                            t =1         i =1


where the first two regressors are the quarterly industry-level non-local information diffusion
estimates of word-of-mouth effects (“WOM”) and other information diffusion effects (“OD”),
and the remaining regressors are the same as in Equation (5). Once again, the annual regression
differs only in regard to the horizon of future industry-level returns (i.e., the left-hand-side
variable)—those returns stretch across the next four quarters.
           Panel A of Table XII presents results for the regression involving quarterly industry-level
returns, while Panel B presents the one-year return regression results. Disentangling the overall

11
  The word-of-mouth component is defined as the diffusion effect that remains after controlling for preferences and
the structure of the local economy.


                                                                                                                27
information diffusion effect into word-of mouth communication and other diffusion effects
yields further insight as to how correlated trading among individuals may influence stock prices.
The significant relation between non-local diffusion and subsequent industry-level returns
appears to be driven by the word-of-mouth component. Across all specifications and all return
horizons, word-of-mouth communication is predictive of higher future industry-level returns,
while there is no significant relation between the other diffusion effects and returns. This result is
consistent with the hypothesis that word-of-mouth communication creates a more dynamic
exchange of information that may lead to a ripple effect of further information dissemination,
which in turn may eventually impact stock prices.


                                         VI. Conclusion

       Using a detailed set of common-stock investments that nearly 36,000 households made in
the period from 1991 to 1996, we focus on the relation between the investment choices made by
an individual investor’s neighborhood (households located within 50 miles from the investor)
and the investor’s own investment choices. We find strong evidence of information diffusion:
baseline estimates suggest that a ten percentage-point increase in purchases of stocks from an
industry made by a household’s neighbors is associated with a two percentage point increase in
the household’s own purchases of stocks from that industry, with the effect larger for local stock
purchases.
       The findings are robust to controls for inside information effects, domination of a single
company (industry) in the neighborhood, and household fixed effects. In sum, there is strong
evidence that individuals’ purchasing decisions are related to those made by their neighbors. The
strength of the information diffusion effect is compelling; for example, investors in more
populous areas, where, on average, there are many more local investment choices, still are very
concentrated in their purchases. To the extent that their investment choices are related to their
neighbors’, the information diffusion effect is likely at least partially responsible for individual
investors’ lack of diversification.
       We further find that there is considerable heterogeneity among information diffusion
effects across industries and across time and relate these patterns in individual investors’ trading
(i.e., quarters with high information diffusion) to future returns. We find that, even after
controlling for aggregate individual investors’ demand (as captured by the buy-sell imbalance)


                                                                                                       28
and past industry-level performance, information diffusion among non-local investors predicts
future industry-level returns: an increase in non-local information diffusion equal to the
interquartile range of the estimates of information diffusion across 322 industry-quarter
observations is associated with a two to three percentage point increase in industry returns over
the following year.
       These findings are consistent with the hypothesis that there is a pronounced intertemporal
dynamic of the flow of investment-relevant information between local and non-local investors,
wherein the value-relevant information generated locally is disseminated over time to non-local
investors. It appears that it requires a coordinated action of non-local investors (relative to any
location, non-local investors clearly constitute the vast majority of all investors), who act upon
the information disseminated to them by local investors, to move the asset prices during the next
quarter or year. We propose and present evidence consistent with a mechanism that could
generate the predictability of industry-level returns from non-local information diffusion.




                                                                                                      29
References

Banerjee, A., 1992, A simple model of herd behavior, Quarterly Journal of Economics 107, 797-
       817.

Barber, Brad, and Terrance Odean, 2000, Trading is hazardous to your wealth: The common
       stock investment performance of individual investors, Journal of Finance 55, 773-806.

Barber, Brad, and Terrance Odean, 2002, All that glitters: The effect of attention on the buying
       behavior of individual and institutional investors. Working paper, UC Davis and UC
       Berkeley.

Barber, Brad, Terrance Odean, and Zhu, Ning, 2003, Systematic noise. Working paper, UC
       Davis and UC Berkeley.

Bernheim, B. Douglas, 1994, A Theory of Conformity, Journal of Political Economy 102, 841-
      77.

Campbell, John Y.and John H. Cochrane, 1999, By Force of Habit: A Consumption-Based
     Explanation of Aggregate Stock Market Behavior, Journal of Political Economy 107,
     205-51.

Carhart, Mark M., 1997, On persistence in mutual fund performance, Journal of Finance 52, 57-
       82.

Coval, Joshua D., and Tobias J. Moskowitz, 1999, Home bias at home: Local equity preference
       in domestic portfolios, Journal of Finance 54, 1-39.

Coval, Joshua D., and Tobias J. Moskowitz, 2001, The geography of investment: Informed
       trading and asset prices, Journal of Political Economy 109(4), 811-841.

Duflo, Esther, and Emmanuel Saez, 2002, Participation and investment decisions in a retirement
       plan: the influence of colleagues’ choices, Journal of Public Economics 85, 121-148.

Duflo, Esther, and Emmanuel Saez, 2003, The role of information and social interactions in
       retirement plan decisions: Evidence from a randomized experiment, The Quarterly
       Journal of Public Economics 118(3), 815-842.

Ellison, G., and D. Fudenberg, 1993, Rules of thumb for social learning, Journal of Political
        Economy CI, 93-126.



                                                                                                30
Ellison, G., and D. Fudenberg, 1995, Word of mouth communication and social learning,
        Quarterly Journal of Economics 110, 93-125.

Fama, Eugene, and Kenneth French, 1993, Common risk factors in the return on bonds and
   stocks, Journal of Financial Economics 33, 3-53.

Feng, Fei, and Mark Seasholes, 2004, Herding and location, Journal of Finance, forthcoming.

Grinblatt, Mark and Matti Keloharju, 2001, How distance, language, and culture influence
       stockholdings and trades, Journal of Finance 56(3), 1053-1073.

Hong, Harrison, Jeffrey D. Kubik, and Jeremy C. Stein, 2003, Thy neighbor’s portfolio: Word-
      of-mouth effects in the holdings and trades of money managers, Working paper,
      Princeton University, Syracuse University, and Harvard.

Hong, Harrison, Jeffrey D. Kubik, and Jeremy C. Stein, 2004, Social interaction and stock-
      market participation, Journal of Finance, forthcoming.

Ivković, Zoran, and Scott Weisbenner, 2004, Local does as local is: Information content of the
       geography of individual investors’ common stock investments, Journal of Finance,
       forthcoming.

Lakonishok, Josef, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert W. Vishny, 1992, The impact of institutional
      trading on stock prices, Journal of Financial Economics 32(1), 23-43.

Massa, Massimo, and Andrei Simonov, 2003, Hedging, stock market participation and portfolio
       choice, Working paper, INSEAD.

Odean, Terrance, 1998. Are investors reluctant to realize their losses? Journal of Finance 53,
       1775-1179.

Shore, Stephen H., and Joshua White, External Habit Formation and the Home Bias Puzzle,
       Working Paper, 2003.

U.S. Census Bureau: Gazetteer Place and Zip Code Database.

Zhu, Ning, 2002, The local bias of individual investors, Working paper, Yale School of
       Management.




                                                                                                 31
           Table I: Quarterly Purchases of Stock by Households 1/1991 – 9/1996
Table I summarizes quarterly household stock purchases at the industry level. Summary statistics
are reported for the entire sample period (bottom row of the table) as well as annually. The first
column presents the number of household, quarter, industry (h, t, i) combinations in a given year
for which household h made at least one purchase in quarter t in industry i. The second column
tallies the number of distinct households appearing in the sample in a given year. The third
column lists average dollar values of households’ quarterly purchases, where median values are
reported in parentheses directly underneath the mean values. The last two columns break down
the purchases according to their distance from the household (i.e., whether the firm headquarters
is located within 50 miles of the household) and their S&P 500 status.

                                                Mean Quarterly
                 # Purchases   # Distinct HHs   purchase (in $)    % Local       % S&P 500
                                                  [Median]
                                                   23,242
   1991            36,250         20,366                             16.4           47.9
                                                   [7,113]
                                                   23,576
   1992            36,270         20,300                             17.0           48.7
                                                   [7,500]
                                                   25,150
   1993            34,377         18,894                             16.4           46.5
                                                   [7,500]
                                                   25,418
   1994            28,726         16,307                             17.4           43.3
                                                   [7,388]
                                                   38,540
   1995            30,299         16,134                             17.8           43.5
                                                   [9,313]

                                                   42,277
   1996            25,364         15,483                             17.5           43.5
                                                   [9,725]
   (Q1-Q3)
                                                   28,922
   TOTAL           191,286        35,673                             17.1           45.8
                                                   [7,949]




                                                                                               32
           Table II: Information Diffusion and Stock Purchases, Local/Non-Local and
             S&P 500/Non-S&P 500 Breakdown, Pooled Regression 1/1991 – 9/1996
The table presents the results of fitting the regression from Equation (2) for various dependent
variables as follows:
                                                 23 14
                     f h,t ,i = β F−50h,t ,i +   ∑ ∑ γ t ,i Dt ,i + other covariates + ε h,t ,i .
                                                 t =1 i =1
Panel A focuses on the entire universe of stocks, whereas Panels B and C presents results only
for S&P 500 and non-S&P 500 stocks, respectively. Within each panel, every row pertains to a
different left hand side variable. The first row pertains to the industry share breakdown fh,t,i
computed across all buys and the next two rows pertain to the industry composition breakdowns
computed across local purchases only and non-local purchases only, respectively. In the
regressions for local buys we discarded all the h,t,i observations for which there were no firms in
industry i within 50 miles from household h in quarter t because the household simply could not
invest into industry i locally.
                                        Composition of Buys of
Sample                                 Households within 50 Miles                     R2            # Observations
                                            Panel A: All Stocks

All Buys                                                      20.7 ***
                                                                                    0.142                2,678,004
                                                             (0.3)
Local Buys                                               119.3 ***
                                                                                    0.232                  568,247
(within 50 miles)                                         (1.2)
Non-Local Buys                                                 8.4 ***
                                                                                    0.129                2,337,314
(outside 50 miles)                                           (0.3)
                                           Panel B: S&P 500 Stocks

All Buys                                                      21.1 ***
                                                                                    0.151                1,490,342
                                                             (0.5)
Local Buys                                               156.1 ***
                                                                                    0.287                  235,657
(within 50 miles)                                         (1.9)
Non-Local Buys                                                 9.0 ***
                                                                                    0.138                1,327,438
(outside 50 miles)                                           (0.5)
                                       Panel C: Non-S&P 500 Stocks

All Buys                                                      19.7 ***
                                                                                    0.136                1,752,198
                                                             (0.4)
Local Buys                                               104.2 ***
                                                                                    0.226                  377,244
(within 50 miles)                                         (1.4)
Non-Local Buys                                                 6.9 ***
                                                                                    0.122                1,479,142
(outside 50 miles)                                           (0.4)
*** ** *
  , , denote significance at the 1 percent, 5 percent, and 10 percent levels, respectively.


                                                                                                                33
                                 Table III: Lags in Information Diffusion
This table presents results of fitting four regression specifications that allow for lags of
information diffusion effects of up to four quarters. For the purposes of these analyses, we
explicitly compute for each household h and quarter t the share of stock purchases across
industries for all households except household h in quarter t, F−All
                                                                 h,t ,i , i = 1, 2, … , 14, and run the
following regression (Equation (3)):
                                                        4                              4
             f h,t ,i = β0 F−50         All All
                              h,t ,i + β0 F− h,t ,i +   ∑   β − j F−50
                                                                     h, t − j , i +   ∑ β−Allj F−Allh,t − j,i + εh,t ,i
                                                        j =1                          j =1
The four columns present results of running specifications with varying explanatory variables:
contemporaneous only in (1), lagged by one quarter only in (2), both contemporaneous and
lagged by one quarter in (3), and both contemporaneous and lagged by up to four quarters in (4).
                                                   (1)                      (2)                     (3)                     (4)
                                                         ***                                              ***
Purchases of Households                           22.1                                             16.5                    11.7 ***
within 50 miles (contemporaneous)                (0.3)                                            (0.4)                   (0.4)
Purchases of Households                                                  21.1 ***                  14.0 ***                 8.3 ***
within 50 miles (1 quarter lag)                                         (0.4)                     (0.4)                   (0.4)
Purchases of Households                                                                                                     6.2 ***
within 50 miles (2 quarter lag)                                                                                           (0.4)
Purchases of Households                                                                                                     6.8 ***
within 50 miles (3 quarter lag)                                                                                           (0.4)
Purchases of Households                                                                                                     8.2 ***
within 50 miles (4 quarter lag)                                                                                           (0.4)

Purchases of all Households                       59.5 ***                                         42.9 ***                40.4 ***
(contemporaneous)                                (0.4)                                            (1.4)                   (1.6)
Purchases of all Households                                              61.5 ***                   9.4 ***           -10.1 ***
(1 quarter lag)                                                         (0.4)                     (1.4)               (1.9)
Purchases of all Households                                                                                                 8.5 ***
(2 quarter lag)                                                                                                           (1.8)
Purchases of all Households                                                                                                -2.6
(3 quarter lag)                                                                                                           (1.8)
Purchases of all Households                                                                                                 8.4 ***
(4 quarter lag)                                                                                                           (1.5)

R2                                               0.136                    0.139                   0.142                   0.152
Number of observations                         2,678,004              2,570,848                2,570,848            2,170,504
*** ** *
     , , denote significance at the 1 percent, 5 percent, and 10 percent levels, respectively.


                                                                                                                                      34
                          Table IV: Information Diffusion and Population
This table presents results of stratifying households according to the size of the population that
resides within 50 miles from the household into four categories and assessing information
diffusion effects in neighborhoods of various size by running the following regression (a variant
of Equation (2)):
                                                           23 14
f h,t ,i = (β F−50h,t ,i ) * Population Interactions + (   ∑ ∑ γ t,i Dt,i ) * Population Interactions + ε h,t,i .
                                                           t =1 i =1
The four categories are: 0-1 million, 1-2.5 million, 2.5-5 million, and more than 5 million
residents (the latter includes households in and around New York City, Los Angeles, and
Chicago). Regressions are estimated on subsamples selected by the type of purchase and
presented in three panels accordingly (All Buys, Local Buys, and Non-Local Buys). The
coefficient estimate presented in the table for a particular population group represents the overall
information diffusion effect for that group (i.e., the sum of the diffusion effect for the 0-1 million
group and the interaction term for that particular population group).
                                               Composition of
 Population (in 000s)                         HH Buys ≤ 50 miles                    R2             # obs.
                                             Panel A: All Buys
       0 – 1,000                                      5.2 ***
                                                    (0.4)                          0.147             2,678,004

       1,000 – 2,500                                 10.7 ***
                                                    (0.8)
       2,500 – 5,000                                 27.2 ***
                                                    (1.0)
       5,000+                                        53.5 ***
       (NY, LA, Chicago)                            (0.9)
                                            Panel B: Local Buys
       0 – 1,000                                      64.2 ***
                                                     (4.9)                         0.245               568,247

       1,000 – 2,500                                  59.0 ***
                                                     (3.0)
       2,500 – 5,000                                102.7 ***
                                                     (2.3)
       5,000+                                       139.5 ***
       (NY, LA, Chicago)                             (1.6)
                                         Panel C: Non-Local Buys
       0 – 1,000                                      4.5 ***
                                                    (0.4)                          0.129             2,337,314

       1,000 – 2,500                                  6.5 ***
                                                    (0.8)
       2,500 – 5,000                                  9.3 ***
                                                    (1.1)
       5,000+                                        13.1 ***
       (NY, LA, Chicago)                            (1.0)
*** ** *
  , , denote significance at the 1 percent, 5 percent, and 10 percent levels, respectively.

                                                                                                              35
              Table V: Information Diffusion and Stock Purchases by Location
This table reports results of exploring information diffusion effects among households in 25
major U.S. cities. We identify 25 large U.S. cities and collect the rest of investors into the 26th
“city” R (“Rest of Investors”) and run a regression wherein we relate the share of purchases
across industries for each household with those of the residents of the same city and those of the
residents of all other major cities and the rest of the investors (i.e., those that do not reside in one
of the 25 cities):
                                    25                                   26
                     f h, t , i =   ∑      α c Fc − h,t ,i I (h ∈ c) +   ∑ βc Fc,t ,i I (h ∉ c) + ε h,t ,i .
                                    c =1                                 c =1
The indicator function expression I (h ∈ c) means that household h resides in city c. For a given
city c, c = 1, ..., 25, (αc – βc) represents the effect of a change in industry allocation in city c
upon households in that city relative to households that live elsewhere. The first two columns
focus on all buys. The weighted-average difference between the two information diffusion
coefficients, that is, (αc – βc), is reported in the second to last row of the table. The next two pairs
of columns replicate the same analysis for local purchases and non-local purchases.




                                                                                                               36
           Table V: Information Diffusion and Stock Purchases by Location (continued)

                              All Buys                  Local Buys                  Non-Local Buys
                         Own City Other              Own City   Other              Own City   Other
 New York                 32.7 ***     3.0 **          83.9 ***
                                                                 -0.1                14.4 ***
                                                                                               4.1 ***
 Los Angeles               40.4 ***      8.4 ***       89.3 ***       12.3 ***       23.4 ***        8.7 ***
 Chicago                   36.0 ***      5.0 ***      100.6 ***        3.2           15.5 ***        6.7 ***
 Houston                   29.4 ***      3.0 ***       88.1 ***       -7.1 ***       13.6 ***        7.0 ***
 Philadelphia              31.2 ***      4.3 ***       93.5 ***        5.8 ***       10.9 ***        4.8 ***
 Phoenix                   28.5 ***     -2.6 ***       76.3 ***       -8.5 ***       12.5 ***        0.5
                                  ***          ***            ***                            ***
 San Diego                 37.1          4.5          105.5            1.8           15.3            4.8 ***
 Dallas                    32.2 ***      1.5 **        82.7 ***        3.5 ***       15.6 ***        1.3
                                  ***                         ***            *
 San Antonio               13.2         -0.1           24.8           -0.9            2.2            0.3
 Detroit                   26.7 ***     -1.2 **        73.8 ***       -8.4 ***       11.2 ***        2.3 ***
 San Jose                  58.1 ***      1.0          119.7 ***        6.4 ***       19.4 ***        -3.0 ***
 Indianapolis              30.0 ***      3.5 ***       80.5 ***        3.3 ***       10.9 ***        3.2 ***
 San Francisco             32.1 ***     -6.3 ***      101.5 ***     -13.6 ***         5.0 ***        -3.8 **
 Jacksonville              12.9 ***      1.0 ***       65.6 ***        2.2 ***        -2.0           0.3
                                  ***          ***            ***            ***             ***
 Columbus                  26.3          3.2           77.5            2.4           10.0            3.4 ***
 Baltimore                 26.9 ***     -0.5           66.3 ***        1.3           11.0 ***        0.1
                                  ***          ***            ***            ***             ***
 Milwaukee                 31.7          3.4           79.2            5.0           12.7            2.6 ***
 Boston                    25.7 ***     -0.6 *         82.8 ***       -1.8 ***        7.7 ***        0.2
 Denver                    31.9 ***      2.7 ***       95.9 ***        1.2           13.0 ***        4.5 ***
 Kansas City               30.1 ***      5.1 ***      109.3 ***       11.1 ***        5.4 ***        3.8 ***
 Atlanta                   34.5 ***      0.6           90.2 ***        2.2 **        14.0 ***        -0.1
                                  ***          ***            ***            *               ***
 Minneapolis               33.8          6.8           72.2            2.8           22.1            8.2 ***
 Miami                     25.9 ***      3.7 ***       82.9 ***        3.7 ***        7.3 ***        4.1 ***
 Tampa                     14.9 ***     -2.2 ***       53.2 ***       -1.4            -0.9           -1.8 **
 Rest of Investors                      13.5 ***                    -26.2 ***                      20.1 ***
 Average Diff.                 35.0 ***                    97.9 ***                       10.9 ***
 (Own –Other)                 (0.7)                       (1.4)                          (0.8)
 R2                             0.183                      0.313                          0.139
 # observations               1,204,434                   403,536                       984,074
*** ** *
  , , denote significance at the 1 percent, 5 percent, and 10 percent levels, respectively.




                                                                                                            37
               Table VI: Information Diffusion and Stock Purchases by Industry
The table presents regression results based on specifications similar to Equation 2, carried out
separately for each industry. Two specifications are fitted for each industry. The first
specification employed for each industry is very similar to the baseline specification, outlined in
Equation (2), with only 23 quarter-dummies and without any additional controls. In the second
specification we include 15 style controls that capture household investment style as follows:
                                                 23
                           f h,t = β F−50
                                        h, t +   ∑ γ t Dt + style controls + ε h,t .
                                                 t =1
The 15 style controls account for a household’s preference to invest in stocks with certain
characteristics (for example, in high-momentum, small, low book-to-market firms). Regressions
are fitted for samples of all buys, local buys, and non-local buys. For each of the three samples,
the first column shows the results of fitting the first, baseline specification, and the second
column shows the results of fitting the second specification that includes 15 style controls.

                         All Buys                            Local Buys                  Non-Local Buys
    Industry       Baseline      Style                  Baseline       Style           Baseline     Style
                               Dummies                                Dummies                      Dummies
Mining               4.3 ***         4.3 ***              18.7 ***       20.2 ***        3.2 *       3.3 **

Oil & Gas            1.6 **          1.6 **               92.0 ***       88.3 ***        0.7         0.7

Construction         0.8             1.0                  78.2 ***       79.3 ***       -0.4        -0.1

Food                 3.6 ***         3.3 ***              63.1 ***       57.1 ***        0.1         0.0

Basic Materials      5.9 ***         5.7 ***              63.2 ***       62.4 ***        2.5 **      2.4 **

Medical/Biotech     10.4 ***       11.3 ***               84.3 ***       90.4 ***        4.3 ***     4.5 ***

Manufacturing        6.7 ***         5.9 ***              57.3 ***       54.0 ***        1.6 *       1.3

Transportation       6.1 ***         6.3 ***              80.5 ***       88.1 ***        2.8 ***     2.7 ***

Telecom              3.7 ***         3.1 ***              44.2 ***       44.8 ***        0.8         0.4

Utilities            7.5 ***         6.4 ***              88.8 ***       87.7 ***        5.0 ***     3.9 ***

Retail Trade        20.1 ***       19.5 ***              117.4 ***     117.4 ***        11.7 ***    11.4 ***

Financial            7.8 ***         5.7 ***              83.2 ***       62.9 ***        2.8 ***     2.2 **

Technology          36.7 ***       35.3 ***              140.7 ***     136.4 ***        14.6 ***    14.0 ***

Services            13.0 ***       10.6 ***              135.2 ***     132.5 ***         5.4 ***     4.2 ***
*** ** *
  , , denote significance at the 1 percent, 5 percent, and 10 percent levels, respectively.


                                                                                                           38
       Table VII: Dispersion in Quarterly Information Diffusion by Industry (1/1991 – 9/1996)
The table presents summary statistics of regression estimates β in specifications similar to Equation 2,
carried out for each quarter t and each industry i as follows:

                                                  f h = β F−50h + ε h .
Thus, summary statistics obtained by running industry-by-industry regressions separately for each of the
23 quarters, for a total of 322 estimates. Regressions are fitted for all buys, local buys, and non-local
buys, with the means, medians, and the interquartile ranges of the information diffusion coefficients
reported for each industry (the first fourteen rows of the table). Finally, the last row of the table presents
summary statistics across all industries, that is, across all 322 estimates of the information diffusion
coefficient β.
                           All Buys                           Local Buys                     Non-Local Buys
Industry
                  Mean Median 25th – 75th%          Mean Median            25th – 75th%   Mean Median    25th – 75th%

Mining               3.6     0.7 -2.0 – 6.6           30.1     24.1       -12.8 – 61.9      2.5   -0.9    -2.6 – 5.3

Oil & Gas            3.1     0.2 -1.6 – 5.3         133.5 121.6 40.7 – 212.9                1.5   -0.7    -2.9 – 4.5

Construction         0.6     0.3 -2.0 – 4.2         125.0      54.0 -26.2 – 148.3          -1.5   -1.8    -4.5 – 0.2

Food                 3.2     2.9      0.5 – 4.8       90.6     63.5 34.1 – 124.9            0.0    0.4    -2.1 – 2.8

Basic Materials      5.2     3.7 1.2 – 10.2           84.6     62.2 31.4 – 124.9            1.8    0.2    -2.0 – 6.4

Medical/Biotech    10.0     10.0 5.6 – 13.4           73.8     67.3 37.7 – 106.5            4.7    3.5     0.3 – 7.8

Manufacturing        7.5     6.6 5.4 – 12.1           73.1     56.7 37.8 – 105.9            2.2    1.9    -0.3 – 6.4

Transportation       5.8     3.9 0.3 – 13.0           98.0     63.4 22.1 – 155.1            2.4    1.8    -2.3 – 6.7

Telecom              3.6     2.1 -0.8 – 9.0           50.2     44.9         9.4 – 74.6      1.4   -0.7    -3.9 – 6.0

Utilities            7.1     6.0 1.1 – 13.3           90.9     72.8 19.4 – 109.9            4.6    3.8    -0.0 – 7.8

Retail Trade       16.5     12.6 11.4 – 23.1        113.1 114.1 83.7 – 131.7                8.5    6.6     4.0 – 9.8

Financial            7.9     7.4 4.1 – 11.7           92.9 105.1 58.3 – 129.4               3.0    3.0     0.1 – 4.8

Technology         36.6     36.2 33.5 – 40.8        143.7 140.6 128.3 – 152.5              14.6   14.9 11.1 – 19.1

Services           13.9     13.5 7.1 – 19.6         161.7 179.2 101.7 – 228.5               6.0    6.0 -0.9 – 10.5

All Industries       8.9     6.1 1.0 – 13.1          97.2      83.9       35.3 – 137.1     3.7     2.6    -1.4 – 7.3


                                                                                                              39
     Table VIII: Regression of Monthly Portfolio Returns 4/91 – 9/97 (in percentages), High vs. Low Diffusion Industries
This table presents results of regressing zero-cost portfolio returns formed on the basis of estimates of industry-level quarterly
information diffusion effects on four factors (Carhart (1997)). Each time series of monthly portfolio returns is based on equally-
weighted monthly industry returns. At the end of each quarter, industry-level information diffusion coefficients β are sorted by
magnitude. The industries featuring the five highest coefficients (in some specifications, this group would exclude technology stocks
if they ranked among the highest, a very common occurrence) are grouped into the “High Diffusion” portfolio, whereas the industries
featuring the five lowest coefficients are grouped into the “Low Diffusion” portfolio. Portfolios are rebalanced either every three
months or every twelve months (with partial changes to the portfolio every three months). The table reports regression results for
zero-cost portfolios formed on the basis of the high- and low-diffusion portfolios.
                                  High Minus Low                      High Minus Low                        High Minus Low
                                     Diffusion                        Local Diffusion                      Non-Local Diffusion
                                      3-month                             3-month                               3-month
                        3-month                 12-month     3-month                12-month      3-month                    12-month
                                      (no tech)                           (no tech)                             (no tech)
                           0.14 *        0.09     0.16 ***     0.05         0.04       0.09 **      0.11           0.07        0.13 ***
   Market
                         (0.08)        (0.07)   (0.05)       (0.06)       (0.06)     (0.04)       (0.08)         (0.08)      (0.05)
                           0.37 **       0.19     0.30 ***     0.15 **      0.02       0.07         0.19           0.09        0.26 **
   Small minus Big
                         (0.15)        (0.14)   (0.09)       (0.06)       (0.07)     (0.05)       (0.18)         (0.18)      (0.11)
                           0.08          0.12    -0.06        -0.11        -0.09      -0.12         0.08           0.13        0.01
   High minus Low
                         (0.16)        (0.15)   (0.11)       (0.08)       (0.07)     (0.07)       (0.15)         (0.15)      (0.11)
                          -0.09         -0.05    -0.07        -0.26 *** -0.25 *** -0.21 ***        -0.12          -0.04       -0.02
   Up minus Down
                         (0.10)        (0.10)   (0.06)       (0.08)     (0.09)    (0.07)          (0.11)         (0.11)      (0.05)
        p-value of
        regression       0.099 *        0.647   0.000 ***     0.003 ***   0.049 **   0.000 ***    0.665          0.907        0.001 ***

                           0.26          0.27     0.18         0.19         0.07       0.31 ***     0.45 ***       0.44 **     0.23 *
   Alpha
                         (0.22)        (0.21)   (0.16)       (0.17)       (0.17)     (0.12)       (0.17)         (0.20)      (0.13)
                           0.36          0.36 * 0.29          -0.05        -0.18       0.17         0.48 **        0.53 **     0.39 **
   Raw Return
                         (0.25)        (0.22) (0.20)         (0.19)       (0.21)     (0.19)       (0.23)         (0.27)      (0.19)
   *** ** *
      , , denote significance at the 1 percent, 5 percent, and 10 percent levels, respectively.


                                                                                                                                   40
                           Table IX: Information Diffusion and Future Stock Returns Across Industries
This table presents panel regression results of relating industry-level returns prevailing over the next period to current information
diffusion effects, industries’ current performance, individual investors’ demand for stocks at the industry level, as well industry and
quarter effects. The regression at the quarterly horizon (Panel A) is specified as follows (Equation (5)):
                                                                                         23         14
                                               NL ˆ NL
                                   Rq +1,i = β ID IDt ,i + β R Rq,i + β BSI BSI t ,i +   ∑ γt Dt + ∑ δi Di + εt ,i .
                                                                                         t =1       i =1
The first regressor is the quarterly industry-level non-local information diffusion estimate, the second regressor is the lagged industry-
level return, the third regressor is the industry-level demand, and the remaining regressors are controls for industry and quarter effects.
The industry-level demand is computed as the difference between buys and sells of stock in the given industry divided by their sum:
BSIt,i = ($Buyst,i – $Sellst,i)/ ($Buyst,i + $Sellst,i). The annual regression (Panel B) differs only in regard to the horizon of future
industry-level returns (i.e., the left-hand-side variable)—those returns stretch across the next four quarters. Each of the three
specifications introduces increasingly more controls, culminating in columns (3) and (6) that feature the full set of control variables
from Equation (5).
                                                           Panel A:                                                       Panel B:
                                                      Dependent Variable =                                          Dependent Variable =
                                                Industry Return Over Quartert+1                            Industry Return Over Quarterst+1 to t+4
                                                          (in percent)                                                  (in percent)
                                              (1)              (2)            (3)                            (4)            (5)            (6)
NON-LOCAL BUY Diffusiont                       0.08 *           0.08 **        0.08 **                       0.20 *         0.22 *         0.23 *
                                             (0.04)           (0.04)         (0.04)                        (0.12)         (0.12)         (0.12)
                                                                                                                                 **
Returnt                                                         0.07           0.08                                         0.30           0.23
                                                              (0.07)         (0.07)                                       (0.15)         (0.16)
Buy-Sell Imbalancet                                                            0.01                                                       -0.11
                                                                             (0.03)                                                      (0.08)
Industry effects included?                    Yes                 Yes                Yes                    Yes            Yes             Yes
Quarter effects included?                     Yes                 Yes                Yes                    Yes            Yes             Yes
R2                                           0.569               0.570              0.570                  0.495          0.503           0.508
# of observations                             322                 322                322                    322            322             322
     *** ** *
       , , denote significance at the 1 percent, 5 percent, and 10 percent levels, respectively.



                                                                                                                                              41
      Table X: Regression of Monthly Portfolio Returns 2/91 – 12/96 (in percentages),
                           Local vs. Non-Local Buys and Sales
This table presents raw returns and risk-adjusted returns (using the four-factor model proposed
by Carhart (1997)) of portfolio strategies based on the purchases and sales of local and non-local
stocks that the individual investors made during the sample period. In Panel A, returns to the
“Local” portfolio are constructed by value-weighting each month all the purchases of stocks
local to the respective investors (i.e., headquartered within 50 miles from their residences) by the
size of the purchase. Analogously, returns to the “Non-Local” portfolio are constructed by value-
weighting each month all the purchases of stocks that are not local to the respective investors by
the size of the purchase. Finally, the portfolio “Difference” is the zero-cost portfolio that is long
the “Local” portfolio and short the “Non-Local” portfolio. Portfolios are rebalanced either every
three months (left side of the panel) or every twelve months (right side of the panel) with partial
changes to the portfolio every three months. The structure of Panel B is analogous to the
structure of Panel A, except for the fact that the transactions that Panel B focuses on are stock
sales.


                                                  Panel A: Buys
                  Held in Portfolio for Three Months           Held in Portfolio for One Year
                   Local       Non-Local     Difference       Local       Non-Local     Difference

Raw Return          1.60 ***      1.17 **       0.44 ***       1.61 ***      1.31 ***       0.30 ***
                  (0.57)        (0.53)        (0.11)         (0.54)        (0.48)         (0.11)

Alpha               0.03         –0.29          0.32 **        0.10         –0.08           0.18
                  (0.32)        (0.27)        (0.13)         (0.28)        (0.22)         (0.12)

                                                  Panel B: Sales
                  Held in Portfolio for Three Months           Held in Portfolio for One Year
                   Local       Non-Local     Difference       Local       Non-Local     Difference

Raw Return          1.57 ***      1.27 ***      0.30 ***       1.68 ***      1.42 ***       0.26 **
                  (0.54)        (0.50)        (0.11)         (0.52)        (0.46)         (0.12)

Alpha              –0.09         –0.29          0.20           0.05         –0.06           0.11
                  (0.33)        (0.26)        (0.16)         (0.31)        (0.20)         (0.15)
*** ** *
  , , denote significance at the 1 percent, 5 percent, and 10 percent levels, respectively.




                                                                                                   42
      Table XI: Information Diffusion, Correlated Preferences for Industry Allocation,
                                and Structure of Local Economy
This table presents results of assessing the contribution of word-of-mouth effects to the overall
information diffusion effect. Toward that goal, we regress households’ industry-level purchases
on neighbors’ purchases, variables capturing correlated preferences for industry allocation,
variables capturing the structure of the local economy, and 322 industry-time dummy variables
(Equation (2)). Two variables for each (h, t) observation define correlated preferences. First, we
define the industry composition of stock positions of neighboring households (excluding
household h itself) at the end of quarter t-1. Second, we define the industry composition of stock
positions of the household itself at the end of quarter t-1. To capture the impact of the structure
of the local economy, for each (h, t, i) observation we define two variables: the fraction of
market value of companies local to household h in quarter t in industry i and the fraction of the
labor force local to household h in quarter t employed in industry i. In this framework, estimates
of β are conservative lower bounds on the contribution of word-of-mouth effects to the overall
information diffusion effect. Panel A has three sections, containing estimates for all buys, local
buys, and non-local buys, respectively. Within each section, we first show the baseline result.
The following row in each section shows the results with the two additional independent
variables that seek to capture preferences for industry allocation. The third row in each section of
Panel A includes the variables that capture the structure of the local economy. The fourth row in
each section features the results of relating the industry composition of a household’s
investments to both preferences (the neighborhood’s and own) and the structure of the local
economy. The final analysis, reported in the fifth row in each section, seeks to capture
differences among households along unobservable characteristics by running the baseline
regression from Equation (2) with the inclusion of household-level fixed effects. Panels B and C
show results of replicating the key analyses from Panel A on two subsamples of households.
Specifically, we sort households into two types according to the extent to which their household
portfolio allocations at the industry level conform to those of their neighbors; the metric we use
is the average absolute deviation in industry portfolio shares between a household and its
neighborhood.




                                                                                                 43
          Table XI: Information Diffusion, Correlated Preferences for Industry Allocation,
                          and Structure of Local Economy (Continued)
                                             Composition of...
Buys                 Buys of HHs Positions of HHs Positions of Firms   Workers                 R2     # obs.
                      ≤ 50 miles   ≤ 50 miles      this HH ≤ 50 miles ≤ 50 miles
                                         Panel A: All Households
                               ***
All                       19.9                                                               0.134 1,786,666
                         (0.4)
                               ***                ***           ***
All                        9.8             16.5          32.5                                0.204 1,786,666
                         (0.4)            (0.5)         (0.2)
                               ***                                            ***         ***
All                       17.4                                          4.8           4.0     0.135 1,786,666
                         (0.4)                                        (0.3)         (0.3)
                               ***                ***           ***         ***           ***
All                        9.0             14.5          32.4           1.9           2.7     0.204 1,786,666
                         (0.4)            (0.6)         (0.2)         (0.3)         (0.3)
                               ***
All                        3.6                                                                0.323 1,786,666
(HH Fixed Effects)       (0.5)
                               ***
Local                   128.9                                                                0.249    265,509
                         (1.7)
                               ***                ***           ***
Local                     43.6             58.8          47.5                                0.417    265,509
                         (1.7)            (2.3)         (0.5)
                               ***                                            ***         ***
Local                     85.1                                         46.9          14.2     0.276   265,509
                         (1.8)                                        (1.4)         (1.3)
                               ***                ***           ***         ***           ***
Local                     36.8             40.1          46.2          18.1           5.6     0.421   265,509
                         (1.7)            (2.4)         (0.5)         (1.2)         (1.1)
                               ***
Local                     17.7                                                                0.577   265,509
(HH Fixed Effects)       (2.5)
                               ***
Non-Local                  7.4                                                               0.121 1,510,390
                         (0.4)
                               ***                ***           ***
Non-Local                  3.7              7.2          31.2                                0.186 1,510,390
                         (0.4)            (0.6)         (0.2)
                               ***                                            ***         ***
                           7.0                                          0.7           1.0     0.121 1,510,390
Non-Local                (0.4)                                        (0.3)         (0.3)
                               ***                ***           ***                       ***
                           3.6              7.0          31.2          -0.1           0.8     0.186 1,510,390
Non-Local                (0.4)            (0.6)         (0.2)         (0.3)         (0.3)
                               ***
Non-Local                  2.4                                                                0.305 1,510,390
(HH Fixed Effects)       (0.5)
*** ** *
      , , denote significance at the 1 percent, 5 percent, and 10 percent levels, respectively.




                                                                                                         44
       Table XI: Information Diffusion, Correlated Preferences for Industry Allocation,
                           and Structure of Local Economy (Continued)
                                          Composition of...
Buys             Buys of HHs Positions of HHs Positions of Firms Workers               R2   # obs.
                  ≤ 50 miles      ≤ 50 miles       this HH ≤ 50 miles ≤ 50 miles
    Panel B: Similar HH Portfolios (Average Absolute Deviation in Industry Positions from HHs
                                     within 50 miles is in Bottom Quartile)
                           ***
All                   30.0                                                           0.205 446,670
                     (0.8)
All                   10.3 ***         17.5 ***     35.9 ***                         0.245 446,670
                     (0.8)            (1.3)        (0.5)
All                    9.5 ***         15.5 ***     35.7 ***      2.1 ***    2.0 *** 0.245 446,670
                     (0.8)            (1.3)        (0.5)        (0.6)      (0.6)
Local               148.6 ***                                                        0.543   66,390
                     (4.2)
Local+                53.7 ***         66.8 ***     40.1 ***                         0.586   66,390
                     (4.8)            (6.4)        (1.7)
Local+                46.2 ***         53.3 ***     39.2 ***      1.6       16.6 *** 0.587   66,390
                     (4.8)            (6.9)        (1.7)        (3.3)      (2.8)
Non-Local             14.9 ***                                                       0.173 377,608
                     (0.8)
Non-Local+             3.9 ***          9.2 ***     33.6 ***                         0.207 377,608
                     (0.8)            (1.3)        (0.5)
Non-Local+             3.9 ***          9.1 ***     33.6 ***      0.3        0.0     0.207 377,608
                     (0.8)            (1.3)        (0.5)        (0.6)      (0.6)
    Panel C: Disparate HH Portfolios (Average Absolute Deviation in Industry Positions from HHs
                                       within 50 miles is in Top Quartile)
                           ***
All                    4.5                                                           0.067 446,670
                     (0.7)
All                    6.4 ***          7.2 ***     27.8 ***                         0.143 446,670
                     (0.7)            (0.9)        (0.3)
All                    5.7 ***          5.7 ***     27.8 ***      2.2 ***    2.0 *** 0.143 446,670
                     (0.7)            (0.9)        (0.3)        (0.5)      (0.5)
Local                 60.6 ***                                                       0.064   66,390
                     (3.2)
Local+                40.6 ***         52.4 ***     45.7 ***                         0.265   66,390
                     (3.1)            (4.1)        (0.7)
Local+                29.4 ***         29.1 ***     43.9 ***     30.0 ***    3.4     0.275   66,390
                     (3.0)            (4.0)        (0.8)        (2.2)      (2.3)
Non-Local              0.1                                                           0.063 377,608
                     (0.7)
Non-Local+             3.1 ***          2.3 ***     27.1 ***                         0.135 377,608
                     (0.7)            (0.9)        (0.3)
Non-Local+             2.9 ***          2.0 **      27.1 ***      0.1        0.8     0.135 377,608
                     (0.7)            (0.9)        (0.3)        (0.5)      (0.6)
*** ** *
   , , denote significance at the 1 percent, 5 percent, and 10 percent levels, respectively.
  +
    denotes that the difference in coefficients across the similar and disparate samples is not
  significant at the one percent level.



                                                                                                  45
Table XII: Relation Between Word-of-Mouth Effects and Other Diffusion Effects and Future Stock Returns Across Industries
This table presents panel regression results of relating industry-level returns prevailing over the next period to current information
diffusion effects, industries’ current performance, individual investors’ demand for stocks at the industry level, as well industry and
quarter effects. The regression at the quarterly horizon (Panel A) is specified as follows (Equation (6)):
                                                                                                23           14
                                     NL
                          Rq +1,i = βWOM WOˆ M tNL    NL ˆ NL
                                                ,i + βOD ODt ,i + β R Rq,i + β BSI BSI t ,i +   ∑ γ t Dt + ∑ δi Di + εt ,i .
                                                                                                t =1        i =1
The first regressor is the quarterly industry-level non-local information diffusion estimate attributed to word-of-mouth effects
(“WOM”), the second regressor is the quarterly industry-level non-local information diffusion estimate attributed to other information
diffusion effects (“OD”), while the remaining regressors are analogous to those from Table IX. The annual regression (Panel B)
differs only in regard to the horizon of future industry-level returns (i.e., the left-hand-side variable)—those returns stretch across the
next four quarters.
                                                           Panel A:                                                    Panel B:
                                                      Dependent Variable =                                       Dependent Variable =
                                                Industry Return Over Quartert+1                         Industry Return Over Quarterst+1 to t+4
                                                          (in percent)                                               (in percent)
                                               (1)              (2)           (3)                         (4)            (5)            (6)
                                                    *                **
NON-LOCAL BUY Word-of-Moutht                  0.077            0.083         0.083 **                    0.208 *
                                                                                                                       0.231 **
                                                                                                                                       0.233 *
                                            (0.041)          (0.041)       (0.041)                     (0.118)       (0.118)         (0.122)
NON-LOCAL BUY Other Diffusiont                0.050            0.060         0.059                       0.041         0.080           0.092
                                            (0.066)          (0.066)       (0.066)                     (0.169)       (0.164)         (0.167)
Returnt                                                        0.072         0.078                                     0.298 **        0.226
                                                             (0.067)       (0.069)                                   (0.147)         (0.157)
Buy-Sell Imbalancet                                                          0.010                                                    -0.111
                                                                           (0.026)                                                   (0.085)
Industry effects included?                     Yes              Yes              Yes                     Yes             Yes            Yes
Quarter effects included?                      Yes              Yes              Yes                     Yes             Yes            Yes
R2                                            0.568            0.569            0.568                   0.495           0.503          0.507
# of observations                              322              322              322                     322             322            322
*** ** *
     , , denote significance at the 1 percent, 5 percent, and 10 percent levels, respectively.


                                                                                                                                               46
 (%)
30



25



20



15



10



 5



 0
                   1991: 1
                             1991: 2

                                       1991: 3
                                                 1991: 4

                                                           1992: 1
                                                                     1992: 2

                                                                                1992: 3
                                                                                          1992: 4

                                                                                                    1993: 1
                                                                                                              1993: 2

                                                                                                                        1993: 3
                                                                                                                                  1993: 4

                                                                                                                                            1994: 1
                                                                                                                                                      1994: 2

                                                                                                                                                                1994: 3
                                                                                                                                                                          1994: 4

                                                                                                                                                                                    1995: 1

                                                                                                                                                                                              1995: 2
                                                                                                                                                                                                        1995: 3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1995: 4

                                                                                                                                                                                                                            1996: 1

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1996: 2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                1996: 3
     Full Sample




 Figure 1:      Information Diffusion and Common Stock Purchases, Regression of
 Composition of Household Stock Purchases Upon Composition of Local Stock Purchases
 (in percent). The β denoted with a black bar is based on the specification over the full sample
 period from Equation 2:
                                                                                                                           23 14
                                                                               f h,t ,i = β F−50
                                                                                               h, t , i +                ∑ ∑ γ t ,i Dt ,i + ε h,t ,i .
                                                                                                                          t =1 i =1
 The βs denoted with gray bars are based on a variant of the specification from Equation 2,
 carried out for each quarter t:
                                                                                                                                  14
                                                                                          f h,i = β F−50h,i +                     ∑ γ i Di + ε h,i .
                                                                                                                                  i =1
 For the full sample, the estimate of 20.7% suggests that a 10 percentage point change in the
 neighbors’ allocation of purchases in an industry is associated with a nearly 2.1 percentage point
 change in the household’s own allocation of purchases in the industry.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   47
                      (%)
                                                    Panel A: All Buys
                 20

                 18

                 16

                 14

                 12

                 10

                  8

                  6

                  4

                  2

                  0
                            0-50   50-71   71-87     87-100   100-112 112-122 122-132 132-141 141-150    radius [miles]
                      (%)                          Panel B: Local Buys
                120


                100


                80


                60


                40


                20


                  0
                            0-50   50-71   71-87     87-100   100-112 112-122 122-132 132-141 141-150    radius [miles]
                       (%)                  Panel C: Non-Local Buys
                  8

                  7

                  6

                  5

                  4

                  3

                  2

                  1

                  0
                            0-50   50-71   71-87     87-100    100-112 112-122 122-132 132-141 141-150   radius [miles]
Figure 2: Dissipation of Information Diffusion. The figure illustrates dissipation of
information diffusion effects with distance from the household. Regions surrounding the
household at increasingly larger distances have the same geographic area (502 π = 7,854 square
miles). The regression specification is similar to Equation (2), except, instead of having one
information diffusion regressor, the specification now has nine–one for each geographic area.


                                                                                                                      48
         (%)
45
                                             Total Buys
40                                           Local Buys
                                             Local Firms
35
                                             Local Workers
30

25

20

15

10

 5

 0




                                                gy
                                                ch
                                                 ls




                                                  l
                                                  g
     g

                       as




                                               od




                                                  n




                                                 es
                                                 m




                                                  e
                                                es
                        n




                                               ia
                                              ad
                                             rin
   in




                                             tio
                      io




                                              ia




                                            co
                    G




                                             ic
                                             iti
                                             te




                                            lo
                                           nc
                                           Fo
 in




                   ct




                                          er




                                          Tr




                                         rv
                                          ta
                                         tu
                                         io




                                         til
                                         le




                                       no
                 &




                                       na
               tru
M




                                       at




                                      or
                                     ac




                                     Se
                                     /B




                                    Te


                                      U


                                      il




                                    ch
      il




                                    Fi
                                    M




                                   sp
            ns




                                   ta
                                  uf
                                  al
     O




                                Te
                               Re
                               an
         Co




                                ic


                                ic

                               an
                               s

                             ed




                             Tr
                             M
                            Ba

                            M




Figure 3: Average Industry Composition of Quarterly Purchases, Firms Local to the
Household (within 50 miles), and Corporate Workers Local to the Household, Pooled Over
the Entire Sample Period 1/1991 – 9/1996.




                                                                                   49
(%)
28
26
24
22
20
18
16
14
12
10
 8
 6
 4
 2
 0
      Full Sample
                    1991: 1
                              1991: 2
                                        1991: 3
                                                  1991: 4
                                                            1992: 1
                                                                      1992: 2
                                                                                1992: 3
                                                                                          1992: 4
                                                                                                    1993: 1
                                                                                                              1993: 2
                                                                                                                        1993: 3
                                                                                                                                  1993: 4
                                                                                                                                            1994: 1
                                                                                                                                                      1994: 2
                                                                                                                                                                1994: 3
                                                                                                                                                                          1994: 4
                                                                                                                                                                                    1995: 1
                                                                                                                                                                                              1995: 2
                                                                                                                                                                                                        1995: 3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1995: 4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            1996: 1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1996: 2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                1996: 3
 Figure 4: Word-of-Mouth Effects and Overall Information Diffusion Effects, All Buys. The
 βs denoted with gray bars replicate the bars from Figure 1: they reflect the overall information
 dissemination effects. The βs denoted with black bars reflect conservative estimates of the word-
 of-mouth effect: they come from regressions analogous to those fitted to produce Figure 1 with
 added controls for common preferences and the structure of the local economy. Full bars pertain
 to the full sample (pooled observations from 1991:1 to 1996:3), whereas the dotted bars pertain
 to estimates that come from quarterly regressions. For the full sample, the overall diffusion effect
 estimate of 20.7% suggests that a 10 percentage point change in the neighbors’ allocation of
 purchases in an industry is associated with a nearly 2.1 percentage point change in the
 household’s own allocation of purchases in the industry.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                50
