                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




          CHILD MENTAL HEALTH AND HUMAN CAPITAL ACCUMULATION:
                            THE CASE OF ADHD

                                               Janet Currie
                                               Mark Stabile

                                          Working Paper 10435
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w10435


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       April 2004




The authors are grateful to the Social Science and Humanities Research Council of Canada for financial
support. We thank members of the CIAR new investigators network, Bonnie Zima, and seminar participants
at Princeton’s Center for Health and Well-being for helpful comments, and Catherine Deri and Graciana
Rucci for excellent research assistance. Janet Currie also thanks Princeton’s Center for Health and Well-Being
for support. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

©2004 by Janet Currie and Mark Stabile. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
Child Mental Health and Human Capital Accumulation: The Case of ADHD
Janet Currie and Mark Stabile
NBER Working Paper No. 10435
April 2004, Revised February 2006
JEL No. I2, I1
                                      ABSTRACT


       We examine U.S. and Canadian children with symptoms of Attention Deficit Hyperactivity

Disorder (ADHD), the most common child mental health problem. ADHD increases the probability

of delinquency and grade repetition, reduces future reading and mathematics scores, and increases

the probability of special education. The estimated effects are remarkably similar in the two

countries, and are robust to many specification changes.Moreover, even moderate symptoms have

large negative effects relative to the effects of poor physical health.

       The probability of treatment increases with income in the U.S., but not in Canada. However,

in models of outcomes, interactions between income and ADHD scores are statistically insignificant

in the U.S. (except for delinquency), while in Canada these interactions indicate that higher income

is protective. The U.S. results are consistent with a growing psychological literature which suggests

that conventional treatments for ADHD improve behavior, but have inconsistent effects on cognitive

performance.

Janet Currie
Department of Economics
UCLA
405 Hilgard Avenue
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1477
and NBER
currie@simba.sscnet.ucla.edu

Mark Stabile
Department of Economics
University of Toronto
150 St. George Street
Toronto, Canada M5S 3G7
and NBER
mark.stabile@utoronto.ca
           The prevalence and importance of child mental health problems have been increasingly

recognized in recent years. For example, the 1999 U.S. Surgeon General’s Report (U.S. DHHS,

1999) states that approximately one in five children and adolescents in the U.S. exhibit the signs

or symptoms of mental or behavioral disorders.1 Child mental health problems, while important

in their own right, also often lead directly to adult mental health problems, which are a major

cause of lost work time and health care costs.2 But mental health problems may also reduce

adult earnings and employment indirectly by inhibiting the child’s accumulation of human

capital.

           While the economics literature recognizes that physical health problems can impede

children’s human capital accumulation (c.f. Grossman and Kaestner, 1997), the link between

mental health problems and human capital accumulation has received little attention. Yet the

incidence of most physical health problems among children is small, while the incidence of

mental health problems is large, suggesting that these problems are likely to have a more

important impact on average educational attainments (Currie, 2005).

           This paper examines the experience of North American children with symptoms of

Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD), the most common chronic mental health

problem among young children. It is difficult to find definitive estimates of the prevalence of

ADHD. Most studies are based on diagnosed cases and there is considerable controversy about

whether ADHD is over (or under) diagnosed, and even about whether it is actually an “illness”.

Two studies based on screeners for ADHD found in large national studies found that 4 to 5

           1
           Similarly, Offord et al. (1987) report that in the Canadian province of Ontario, 18% of children have
moderate to severe emotional or behavioral problems.
         2
           For example, Ettner, Frank and Kessler (1997) show that psychiatric disorders reduce employment and
earnings among both men and women. Currie and Madrian (1999) conclude that the labor market consequences of


                                                        2
percent of American children met the diagnostic criteria for ADHD or had clinically significant

symptoms (Jensen et al., 1999; Cuffe et al., 2003). Clearly, ADHD affects large numbers of

children.

        The few longitudinal studies that examine the effects of ADHD on child outcomes

indicate that ADHD is associated with significantly worse outcomes. But it is possible that

poorer outcomes reflect other problems suffered by children with ADHD. For example, in the

U.S., estimated prevalence rates are almost twice as high in families with income less than

$20,000 compared to families of higher income (Cuffe et al. 2003).3 Poor children with ADHD

may also receive less effective treatment than other children, and thus be at “double jeopardy”

for ill effects.

        We investigate these issues using data from the Canadian National Longitudinal Survey

of Children and Youth, and the American National Longitudinal Survey of Youth.                       Our work

offers a number of new contributions. First, it is problematic to focus only on diagnosed cases.4

Instead, we focus on a set of questions administered to all children in two large nationally

representative longitudinal data sets. These questions are similar to the types of screening

questions outlined by American Psychiatric Association for diagnosis of ADHD. Second, we

address the possibility of omitted variables bias by estimating sibling-fixed effects models.

Third, we examine a range of outcomes and compare the effects of ADHD to the effects of

physical health conditions. We also examine the effects of ADHD symptoms in samples of


mental health problems are large relative to the consequences of physical health problems, since the former are more
likely than the latter to afflict those of working age
          3
            Other studies that find a relationship between income and ADHD prevalence include: Korenman, Miller
and Sjaastad (1995), McLeod and Shanahan (1993) Dooley et al., (1998), Dooley and Stewart (2003), Phipps and
Curtis (2003), and Lipman et al. (1994). Dooley et al. (1998) argue that lone parenthood has an independent effect
on incidence.



                                                    3
children without any other diagnosed learning disabilities. Fourth, we ask how the effects of

ADHD and the probability of treatment for ADHD are mediated by income.

        We show that ADHD symptoms increase the probability of future grade repetition and

special education and reduce future reading and mathematics test scores. The effects are large

relative to those of physical health problems such as chronic conditions: A score at the 90th

percentile of the distribution of a hyperactivity score based on symptoms increases the

probability of grade repetition by 6 percent in Canada, and by 7 percent in the U.S., while having

been diagnosed with a chronic condition such as asthma does not have any significant effect.

        Surprisingly, income has little effect on the probability of treatment, and the test scores of

higher income children are as much affected by symptoms of ADHD as those of lower income

children, though higher income children are less likely to repeat grades. We find negative

effects even among children whose relatively low levels of symptoms make it unlikely that they

would ever be diagnosed or treated for ADHD. This finding suggests that if better ways could be

found to teach the relatively small number of children diagnosed with ADHD, many other

children with lower levels of symptoms might benefit.



II. Background and Previous Literature

        ADHD is the most common chronic mental health problem among young children, and

the disorder is diagnosed in more than half of all child mental health referrals (Mannuzza and

Klein, 2000). It is characterized by an inability to pay attention (inattention) and/or

hyperactivity. The main diagnostic criteria for ADHD are laid out in the Diagnostic and


        4
           For example, the incidence of diagnoses of ADHD in the U.S. may have changed in response to changes
in the Social Security Insurance program over the 1990s which made it more or less difficult for children diagnosed
with conditions such as ADHD to receive benefits.
                                                         4
Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fourth Edition (American Psychiatric Association,

1994). These symptoms are laid out in Appendix Table 1. To be diagnosed with ADHD, a

child must have six or more symptoms; have had symptoms by age 7; and be suffering

impairment in two or more settings from the symptoms (usually home and school).

       ADHD can affect children’s schooling attainment through several channels. First,

children whose behavior is considered disruptive or inappropriate are likely to have trouble in

school. Second, people with ADHD process and organize information differently than others.

They characteristically have great difficulty paying attention for long periods or completing

assigned tasks. On the other hand, they are often able to make creative leaps. Research on

teaching methods for ADHD children is limited, but does suggest that changes in the way that

information is presented (e.g. more use of color, elimination of distracting details) can help such

children learn (Fiore, Becker, and Nero, 1993), and that classroom management techniques can

reduce disruptive behavior (State and Quiroz, 1997).

       Mannuzza and Klein (2000) review three studies of the long-term outcomes of children

with ADHD from the literature in medicine and psychology. In one study, children diagnosed

with ADHD were matched to controls from the same school who had never exhibited any

behavior problems and had never failed a grade; in a second study, controls were recruited at the

9-year follow up from non-psychiatric patients in the same medical center who had never had

behavior problems; and in a third study, ADHD children sampled from a range of San Francisco

schools were compared to non-ADHD children from the same group of schools.

       These comparisons consistently show that the ADHD children had worse outcomes in

adolescence and young adulthood than control children. For example, they had completed less

schooling and were more likely to have continuing mental health problems. However, by

                                             5
excluding children with any behavior problems from the control groups, the studies might

overstate the effects of ADHD. Also, the studies do not address the possibility that the negative

outcomes might be caused by other factors related to a diagnosis of ADHD, such as poverty, the

presence of other learning disabilities, or the fact that many people diagnosed with ADHD end

up in special education.5

         There is also a literature in sociology and economics, looking at longer term

consequences of a broader set of behavior problems in larger samples than are typically used in

psychology. For example, Farmer (1993, 1995) uses data from the British National Child

Development Survey (the NCDS) which follows the cohort of all British children born in a

single week in March 1958, to examine the consequences of childhood “externalizing”

behavioral problems on men’s outcomes at age 23. She finds that children who fell into the top

decile of an aggregate behavior problems score at ages 7, 11, or 16 had lower educational

attainment, earnings and probabilities of employment at age 23.6 Gregg and Machin (1998) also

use the NCDS data and find that behavioral problems at age 7 are related to poorer educational

attainment at age 16, which in turn is associated with poor labor market outcomes at ages 23 and

33. A similar study of a cohort of all New Zealand children born between 1971 and 1973 in

Dunedin found that those with behavior problems at age 7 to 9 were more likely to be

unemployed at age 15 to 21 (Caspi et al., 1998).7


         5
          These studies do not address the question of whether outcomes were better for ADHD children who were
treated—in fact, there appears to be virtually no research examining the longer-term effects of treatment on
achievement (Wigal et al., 1999).
         6
           Her regressions control for parent’s aspirations for the child, the type of school attended, the ability group
of the child, and whether they are in special education. Hence, her analysis attempts to measure the effects of
externalizing behavior over and above its effects on these determinants of educational attainment.
         7
          Other psychological studies have examined the longer term impact of different types of behavior, such as
aggression (see Richard Tremblay’s many studies of a cohort of Montreal school boys). However, a survey of this
                                                            6
         Our work differs from the previous work using these cohort data sets in several respects.

First, we estimate sibling fixed-effects models to control for omitted variables bias. Fixed effects

methods offer a powerful way to control for unobserved or imperfectly measured characteristics

of households that might be associated with both with a higher probability of ADHD and with

outcomes. Second, these previous papers focus on a wide set of behavior problems that are

measured using the sum of the responses to a variety of questions about children’s behavior, and

do not attempt to focus on any specific syndrome.8 Some of the behavior problems included in

previous studies might be caused by poor performance at school, rather than vice versa. In

contrast, we will show that the ADHD symptoms we focus on have negative effects even when

they are measured before school age. Third, the NCDS has no data on family income during

childhood, so it is not possible to examine the relationships between mental health problems,

treatment, income, and outcomes. Fourth, we investigate outcomes in a much more recent

cohort of children than previous studies.



3. Data

         We use data from the Canadian National Longitudinal Survey of Children and Youth

(NLSCY) and from the American NLSY. The NLSCY is a national longitudinal data set which

surveyed 22,831 children ages 0 to 11 and their families beginning in 1994. Follow up surveys

were conducted in 1996 and 1998. We restrict our sample to those children between the ages of

4 and 11 in 1994, since only parents of children in this age range completed the ADHD screener.


literature is beyond the scope of this paper.
         8
          A limited amount of work has examined the consequences of specific mental health problems in
adolescents. Mullahy and Sindelar (1989) examine the impact of adolescent alcoholism on earnings and
employment, and conclude that the onset of alcoholism before age 18 reduces earnings and employment through its

                                                   7
This restriction yields 8,332 children. Finally, for our main analyses we keep only those

children whose teachers were also given the ADHD screener in 1994, which yields a sample of

just under 4,000 children. Sample sizes are reduced by this criterion because children must be

enrolled in school to have a teacher report, and some schools did not return completed

questionnaires. We focus on the teacher responses to the screener as we felt that they would be

less correlated with other unobserved characteristics of the family than the parent responses. It

may be the case, however, that teacher responses are influenced by school related outcome

measures. We have re-estimated all our models including all children who meet the other sample

inclusion criteria, and using parental responses to the ADHD screener. The results are extremely

similar to those reported below. For analyses that use Canadian math and reading test scores we

have a smaller sample of approximately 2,200. 9 We use the NLSCY data to ask how the

hyperactivity score in 1994 affects treatment in 1994 and outcomes in 1998.

         The NLSY began in 1979 with a survey of approximately 6,000 young men and 6,000

young women between the ages of 14 and 21. These young people have been followed up every

year up to the present. In 1986, the NLSY began assessing the children of the female NLSY

respondents at two year intervals. Given the differences in the design of the two studies, and the

large amounts of missing data in the NLSY, we use the NLSY data to see how the average


effect on schooling attainment. Cuellar, Markowitz, and Libby (2003) show that adolescents in the Colorado state
foster care program who received treatment for their mental health problems were less likely to engage in crime.
         9
           Of the 9,542 children eligible to receive the tests, 86 percent of parents consented to have the school
board administer the tests and 97 percent of school boards consented to conduct the tests. However, due to
administrative problems, only 65 percent of the administered tests were returned to Statistics Canada in 1998.
Therefore, of the original 9,542 children eligible to take the test, we have test scores for only 5,153 children (this
number represents all children in the sample, including those outside the age range we investigate). The response
rate for 1996 was significantly higher (closer to 75 percent). Using the 1996 test scores rather than the 1998 test
scores yields results that are qualitatively similar to those reported below. Statistics Canada has conducted an
analysis of the non-response, and finds that there is very little difference between responders and non-responders
along observable dimensions (such as gender, type of school, whether the children had ever repeated a grade, or the

                                                          8
hyperactivity score measured over the 1990 to 1994 period affects the average outcomes of

children in the 1998 and 2000 waves. This procedure yields a maximum sample of 5,348

children. We restrict the age range of the NLSY children to be greater than 4 and less than 12

years of age in 1994 to make the Canadian and U.S. samples more comparable.10

        The NLSCY offers a number of advantages over the NLSY for our analysis. First, the

NLSCY began with a nationally representative sample of children in 1994. In contrast, the

mothers of the NLSY children represented a nationally representative cohort of 14 to 21 year old

women in 1978. Since women of lower socioeconomic status tend to have children at younger

ages, the NLSY sample of children is disadvantaged relative to a nationally representative cross

section of children, although this is a less of a problem after we have deleted the oldest children.

Second, the NLSCY has better measures of physical health than the NLSY, as discussed further

below. Third, the NLSCY has both parent and teacher reports of ADHD, a feature that we

exploit in our analysis. An advantage of the NLSY is that we can identify children who have

been diagnosed with ADHD which allows us to compare estimates based on diagnosed cases to

those based on the screener. However, as we will show below, the estimates are remarkably

similar in the U.S. and Canada despite differences in sampling and design, which lends strength

to our conclusions regarding the importance of ADHD. We have also re-estimated all of our

models using sample weights, and this did not affect our results.




importance that the parent respondent attaches to education).
          10
             Focusing on 4-11 year olds also improves our ability to compare across outcome measures in the NLSY.
The reason is that test scores are available only for children aged 5 to 14, while measures of delinquency are
available for much older children. Estimating our models for the full available sample for each outcome measure in
the NLSY yielded estimates qualitatively similar to those discussed below. The main exception is that the
interaction between income and hyperactivity scores is positive in OLS using the full U.S. sample. In other words,
in the sample of older NLSY children, there IS a positive relationship between income and probability of treatment
conditional on hyperactivity scores.
                                                    9
        The measurement of ADHD is key for our analysis. The measures available in our

surveys, as in most surveys, are questions that are asked to parents and/or teachers about

symptoms of ADHD. We do not have information whether the symptoms are causing

impairments, but given the way that ADHD is diagnosed, it is obvious that children who are

having problems in school are more likely to be judged to be “impaired” by their symptoms in

the school setting than those who are not. Hence, whatever the underlying symptoms, there is

likely to be a spurious relationship between schooling achievement and diagnosed ADHD. As

we will show below using U.S. data, diagnosis generally implies placement in special education.

Given this relationship, as well as concerns about the extent to which ADHD is either over or

under-diagnosed, we focus on the extent to which children exhibit symptoms, rather than on

whether or not children have been diagnosed with ADHD.11

        ADHD is always diagnosed through the use of questions similar to those included in both

surveys. In the NLSCY data, the teachers and parents of all children aged 4 through 11 in 1994

were asked a series of 8 questions (we list the questions in the data appendix). The responses to

these questions were added together to determine a hyperactivity score for the child. Since the

hyperactivity score is generated from a set of questions asked of all respondents, our measure

captures a set of ADHD symptoms and is not dependent on whether the child has been diagnosed

with ADHD. This avoids criticisms of mental health measures based on the set of children who

seek treatment for their illness (Frank and Gertler, 1991).

        The NLSY Behavior Problems Index is asked to parents of children 4 to 14. There are 26

questions asked to all children, and 2 questions asked only to children who have been to school.



        11
        Most of the literature focuses on children who have been diagnosed with ADHD. However, Merrell and
Tymms (2001) show that symptomatic children who have not been diagnosed suffer from similar problems.
                                                    10
Five of the questions can be used to create a hyperactivity subscale. This score is standardized

by the child’s sex and age. We convert this standardized score to one that has the same range as

the score in the Canadian data. More information about how these scores are computed in both

samples is available in the data appendix.

       In the NLSY, parents were also asked whether their children had any conditions that

limited their normal activities. If they answered in the affirmative, parents were asked to identify

the limitation. We code children as having been diagnosed with ADHD if the parent identifies

any of the following conditions: “Minimal brain dysfunction, minimal cerebral dysfunction,

attention deficit disorder”, or “Hyperkineses, hyperactivity”. Minimal brain dysfunction is a

term that was used to describe ADHD when the leading theory was that the disorder was caused

by brain damage in infancy. The same suite of questions was used to identify children who had

been diagnosed with a “learning disability”. In the Canadian NLSCY we use a question on

whether the child has been diagnosed with a learning disability that is asked in the series of

questions on chronic conditions. Below, we examine the effects of ADHD symptoms in a

sample of children that excludes those with diagnosed learning disabilities, in an effort to isolate

the effects of ADHD itself.

       We focus on a set of outcomes that are intended to capture the child’s human capital

accumulation, broadly defined. These include: Grade repetition, mathematics scores, reading

scores, and special education. Since ADHD is often thought of as a primarily behavioural

affliction, we also look at delinquency, which may be more closely related to the child’s

behaviour problems. Further details about the construction of these variables are available in the

data appendix, but some general discussion is warranted here.



                                             11
       Grade repetition is an important outcome, in that it is predictive of eventual schooling

attainment. Since whether or not someone has ever repeated a grade is a cumulative measure,

we ask whether the child repeated a grade between 1994 (when hyperactivity is measured) and

1998 (2000 in the NLSY). Mathematics and reading scores are two more immediate measures of

schooling achievement. The NLSY assesses children using the Peabody Individual Achievement

Tests (PIATs) for mathematics and reading recognition. These tests are administered in the

home. In the NLSCY, mathematics and reading tests were administered in schools to children in

grades two through ten and are based on the Canadian Achievement Tests.

       The special education variable in the NLSY, corresponds to a parental report that the

child was in a special education class in 2000. In the NLSCY, the teacher is asked whether the

child received special education because of a physical, emotional, and behavioural or other

problem that limited their ability to do school work. We count only students who received

special education because of a mental health condition. Although this might appear to be a more

restrictive protocol than in the U.S., the prevalence of positive responses is actually higher in

Canada than in the U.S. Special education is an important variable to consider, because special

education children tend to lag behind their peers throughout their schooling and are more likely

to drop out.

       The measure of delinquency that we construct using NLSY data corresponds closely to

that used by the U.S. Department of Justice (DIJ) for this age group. The DIJ definition includes

illegal drug use or sales, “destroyed property”, “stolen something worth more than $50”,

“committed assault”, and whether they have ever been arrested (Puzzanchera, 2000). The

NLSCY measure is slightly broader in that it also includes questions about whether children have



                                                 12
been questioned by police, or have run away from home. Questions about drug use and

delinquency are answered by the child in both surveys.

        While the Canadian survey has very good physical health information, the health

information in the NLSY is limited, and difficult to use. For example, in the NLSY, questions

about chronic conditions are asked only about children who have an activity limitation, and the

“poor health” question is not asked in all waves of the survey. Hence, we limit our comparison

of ADHD with physical health problems to the Canadian data. In the NLSCY, the respondent is

asked to rate the health of the child on a scale of 1 to 5, with 1 being poor and 5 being excellent.

We define poor health as the bottom three measures on this scale12. Information is also collected

on chronic conditions (these include allergies, asthma, heart disease, bronchitis, epilepsy,

cerebral palsy, kidney troubles, and a category for other chronic conditions) for all children.13

We excluded learning disabilities, and psychological disabilities from this list of chronic

conditions in order to focus on physical health problems.

        We use total permanent household income as our measure of income. This variable is

constructed by taking the mean income for all available waves.14 We average income over all

waves for two reasons. First, child outcomes are likely to be more strongly affected by

permanent than by transitory income. Second, the impact of random measurement error in the




12
  In this case “poor health” combines poor, average, and good health. We choose to include responses of good
health in our “poor health” measure as only small fraction of parents rate their child’s health in the bottom three
categories a the 5 point scale.
          13
             It is possible that a parent might classify a child with mental health problems but no physical health
problems as in poor health. However, the correlation between the teacher-reported hyperactivity score and the poor
health measure was only .09, suggesting that in general parents do not consider ADHD when answering questions
about health status.
        14
             In the NLSY, we use all income measures from 1990 onwards.
                                                    13
OLS estimates also will be attenuated by averaging.15 While it would be preferable to have past

income (prior to 1994) included in this calculation as well, the first year of the NLSCY is 1994.

        Means of all of our measures are shown for all children with non-missing hyperactivity

scores are shown in columns 1 and 4 of Table 1. Columns 2 and 5 show means for the sample of

children with siblings, who will be the focus in our fixed effects models. In the NLSY, all

siblings in sampled households are interviewed, whereas in the NLSCY, one randomly chosen

sibling is interviewed. Columns 3 and 6 show the number of siblings with a within-family

difference in the variable in question, since these are the children who will identify the effects of

hyperactivity in our models.

        This table suggests that the sibling sample is quite similar to the “full” sample of

children, and that there are sufficient numbers of siblings with differences in outcomes to pursue

a fixed effects strategy for most of our outcomes. The mean difference in hyperactivity scores,

where there is a difference, is 3.96 in Canada and 3.07 in the U.S, which is roughly a one

standard deviation difference. Table 1 also shows that the mean difference in hyperactivity

scores between boys and girls is relatively small (slightly larger in Canada than the US), while

there is a much greater gender difference in the probability of being above the 90th percentile of

the score distribution.

        The U.S. sample also has information about diagnosed cases of ADHD. Table 1

indicates that only about 2.6% of children had such a diagnosis in 1994. This is about the same

fraction that has been diagnosed with “learning disabilities” and there is significant overlap in the


        15
            In cases where the household income is not reported, the NLSCY imputes it. We include a dummy
variable for the imputation of household income in all of our analyses. We also re-estimated all our analyses
omitting individuals for whom income had been imputed in order to be sure that there was nothing peculiar about
the income imputation process. Our analyses are robust to these checks.

                                                       14
two samples: Of the 96 children with diagnosed ADHD, 40 have other learning disabilities. We

can also examine the screener score measure for children diagnosed with ADHD. In this group,

only 35% have a score higher than the 90th percentile of the ADHD score distribution. These

comparisons highlight difficulties with using ADHD diagnosis as a measure. On the one hand, it

appears that ADHD is under-diagnosed in this population, since 2.6% is much less than the 4-5%

estimated prevalence. On the other hand, many of the children diagnosed with ADHD appear to

have few behavioural symptoms (even when they are not being treated), suggesting that they

have perhaps been erroneously diagnosed, or that there is potentially measurement error in the

reporting of symptoms in the survey.

         The table highlights similarities and differences between the U.S. and Canadian samples.

The U.S. children are slightly older and born to somewhat younger mothers on average, as one

would expect. They are also more likely to have mothers who are depressed or have an activity

limitation. All of these differences as well as differences in other observable variables in the

two data sets are controlled for in our Ordinary Least Squares (OLS) models, and many of them

will be absorbed by family fixed effects in the fixed effects models. The U.S. children are much

more likely to be delinquent, and twice as likely to repeat grades. However, they are slightly less

likely to be in special education.16

         Both the NLSY and the NLSCY have information about drug and psychiatric treatment

for mental health conditions, as shown in Table 1. In 1994, only 1.4 percent of the Canadian

children reported drug treatment compared to 3.3 percent of the American children. The NLSCY



         16
           In the U.S., the scores are standardized using national norms for children of the same sex and age. Such
norms are not available for these Canadian tests. However, we control for the child’s sex and age in our regressions.
The Canadian math and reading scores are out of 15 and 20 respectively. For ease of comparison with the U.S.

                                                    15
asks specifically about Ritalin, tranquillizers and nerve pills, whereas the NLSY asks a more

general question about medications used to control activity levels or behavior.17 The Canadian

children were also less likely to have seen a psychiatrist, resulting in overall treatment rates of

4.7 percent compared to 9.6 percent for the American children.

        These differences in mean rates of treatment are surprising in view of differences in the

insurance regimes in the two countries: In Canada, psychiatric treatment is covered under public

health insurance, and all of the provinces have drug plans for low-income families. In the U.S.,

many private insurance plans severely restrict the coverage of mental health treatment, and

Medicaid (the public system of health insurance for low income children) offers only limited

coverage of psychiatric treatment. The low treatment rates in Canada may reflect greater stigma

attached to mental illness, less faith in the efficacy of treatment, or both.

        A comparison of the distribution of NLSCY teacher reports, NLSCY parent reports, and

NLSY parent reports of hyperactivity is shown in Table 1b. The first two columns suggest that

the teacher and parent reports do contain independent information–in Canada parents are much

more likely to report low levels of symptoms than teachers and the correlation between the two

scores is only .46. Half of the children receive scores of two or less from teachers, while the

median parent score is 4.




results, we have multiplied the Canadian math and reading scores by 6.67 and by 5 in the means tables. We
multiply coefficients and standard errors by the same factors in all the subsequent tables as well.
        17
           In comparison, the Centre for Addiction and Mental Health in Ontario, which conducts a student drug use
survey in 2001, found 4.2 percent of seventh and eighth graders in Ontario reported using Ritalin within the past 12
months (Adlaf and Paglia, 2001). However, in the NLSCY reported use of Ritalin has increased significantly since
1994. For example, among 10 year olds the incidence of Ritalin use increased from 2.5 to 4.1%, while among 11
year olds, it increased from 1.3 to 3.9% between 1994 and 1998.


                                                        16
         The U.S. distribution indicates lower fractions of children with very low scores, and

higher numbers of children with high scores since the median score is 6. The 90th percentile

score is also somewhat higher in the U.S. distribution. Scores exceeding 8 have been shown in

previous research to be associated (though imperfectly) with diagnosed ADHD (Baillargeon et

al, 1999). In our Canadian data, a cutoff of 9 yields prevalence rates of about 14 percent which

corresponds with Willms (2002) finding that approximately 14 percent of children in the NLSCY

are hyperactive.18 But since 14 percent is much higher than the 4-5 percent estimated prevalence

of ADHD in the U.S., we have chosen to compromise and focus on the 90th percentile score for

both the U.S. and Canada.

         Table 1c shows that there are large mean differences in outcomes between children above

and below the 90th percentile of the hyperactivity score. In the US, high scores double the risk

of grade repetition and special education, and are associated with a half of a standard deviation

reduction in reading and mathematics scores. The difference in the probability of delinquency is

more modest, which is perhaps surprising given that ADHD is thought of as a primarily

behavioral disorder. In Canada, the differences in outcomes between children with high and low

scores are perhaps even starker than in the US, with a rate of grade repetition that is more than

three times higher, and a rate of special education that is more than 5 times higher.

         An important question is whether we expect the effect of hyperactivity symptoms to be

roughly linear, or whether scores above some threshold have much more deleterious effects?

People often think about illness in terms of thresholds—only people with blood pressure above a

set cut off are diagnosed with high blood pressure, and only people whose insulin function is


         18
            In a survey of students in three Ontario school districts, Sgro et al. (2000) use a cutoff of 9 or higher as a
“diagnosis” of ADHD and find rates around 5 percent. Since response rates to the survey instrument used in Sgro et
al, were less than 29 percent, it is likely that the NLSCY numbers are more accurate.
                                                      17
subject to a certain degree of impairment are diagnosed with diabetes. However, in both of these

examples, recent research has shown that persons with readings below the relevant thresholds for

diagnosis still suffer from negative effects. This could also be the case with ADHD symptoms.

       Figure 1 shows non-parametric Lowess plots of outcomes against hyperactivity scores for

the U.S. and Canada. There are two striking things about these pictures. First, they are

remarkably similar for the U.S. and Canada despite differences in samples, educational systems,

variable definitions and so on. Second, all of the outcomes except delinquency change

approximately linearly with hyperactivity scores. This observation suggests that even children

with scores low enough that they would never be diagnosed with ADHD, may nevertheless

suffer ill effects of behaviours associated with the syndrome. Hence we look at the effect of

linear ADHD scores as well as the 90th percentile.

       The negative effects of ADHD on delinquency top out at around the 90th percentile of

both the U.S. and Canadian distributions. We have estimated models with splines at the 90th

percentile in order to take account of the effect of this non-linearity, but did not find that our

results were materially affected, so these results are not reported below.




4. Methods

       We begin by estimating OLS models of the relationship between hyperactivity scores in

1994 and outcomes in 1998, controlling for a wide range of other potentially confounding

variables, including permanent income; maternal health status, education and family structure (in

1994); child age (single year of age dummies), whether the child is first born, and sex.

       These models have the following form:

                                                  18
(1)outcome98 = α + βADHD94 + λX 94 + ε
            i             i       i   i

where outcome98 is one of the outcomes described above, ADHD94 is the child’s hyperactivity

score (either the continuous score or a cut-off for a score above the 90th percentile) and X is the

vector of covariates described above. If high hyperactivity scores are positively correlated with

other factors that have a negative effect on child outcomes, then these estimates will overstate the

true effect of hyperactivity.

          We next attempt to control for unobserved heterogeneity by estimating family fixed

effects models:

(2)outcome98 = α + βADHD94 + λZ 94 + µ f + ε
            if            if      if        if

          In these models, the Z vector is similar to X but omits factors common to both siblings,

and the f subscript indexes families. A comparison of (1) and (2) will indicate whether OLS

estimates are driven by omitted variables at the family level. Evidently, there may be individual-

level factors that are important and which will not be captured by family fixed effects. However,

it is impractical to estimate models with child fixed effects because ADHD is a symptom that

typically emerges before the child’s 7th birthday. Thus, changes in ADHD scores over time for

the same child are likely to reflect measurement error, rather than true changes in mental health

status.    One of the most important individual-level factors is likely to be whether the child has

other learning disabilities. We deal with this problem by re-estimating models excluding

children with other diagnosed learning disabilities below.

          If a high hyperactivity score for one sibling has negative effects on the achievement of

other siblings in the household, then the difference between the two siblings will provide an

under-estimate of the effects of hyperactivity. Estimates of (2) may also be biased downwards

by random measurement error in the hyperactivity scores. Measurement error is a potentially
                                         19
important problem in this and all of the past studies relying on parental reports of children’s

mental health disorders (c.f. Offord et al., 1988; Garrett, 1996; Glied et al, 1997).

       One way to judge the importance of measurement error is to compare the OLS and fixed

effects estimates. If we believe that part of the true effect of ADHD is persistent between

siblings, then the within family variation may be more “noisy” than the between family variation.

In this case we might expect increased attenuation bias in the fixed effects estimates. However,

as we show below, these estimates are very similar suggesting that in practice, measurement

error (or potential spillover effects, as noted above) may not be such an important problem. In

the Canadian data, we also adopt a second approach to measurement error which uses the fact

that this survey independently asks identical questions about the mental health of the child of

both teachers and parents. Specifically, we estimate models using parent reports as instruments

for teacher reports in order to correct for measurement error. The identifying assumptions are

first, that conditional on the teacher report and on the family fixed effect included in the model,

the parent report has no independent effect on the child’s test scores and other outcomes.

Second, while we assume that the “signals” in the parent and teacher reports are correlated, the

instrumental variables estimates are only consistent if the errors in the parent and teacher reports

are uncorrelated.

       Given that the questions are asked independently and that they concern very specific

observed behaviors, we believe this second assumption is reasonable. For example, suppose

that the teacher and the parent had discussed the fact that the child might have ADHD. There is

no reason why this would cause correlated errors in the responses to a set of questions about

specific behaviors that are not linked to ADHD in any way in the questionnaire.



                                                 20
        A third potential problem is that a small number of children in our samples are being

treated for ADHD. Treatment for ADHD generally consists of drug treatment (with stimulants

such as methylphenidate or amphetamine), psychiatric counseling for parents and children aimed

at behavioral modification, or both. Drug therapy is effective in improving behavior for

approximately 70 to 80 percent of children. However, Swanson et al. (1991) indicate that there

is little evidence that drug treatment consistently improves cognitive performance on academic

tasks in a laboratory setting.19

        To the extent that treatment is effective in altering behavior, children who are being

treated will have lower ADHD scores than they otherwise would have, since the questions used

in the screener focus on behavior. But if treatment has no consistent impact on cognitive

outcomes such as test scores (as Swanson’s research suggests) then failing to account for

treatment will bias our estimates.       For example, if all ADHD children were treated, it might

appear that even low ADHD scores were associated with significantly poorer outcomes, and our

results would be biased upwards.

        It would be extremely interesting to be able to conduct our own analysis of the impact of

treatment on outcomes. However, the very small number of children who are treated (especially

in Canada) and the endogenous nature of treatment decisions (along with the lack of plausible

instruments for treatment) make this difficult. Instead, we take two alternative approaches to the

problem of treated children. First, we simply exclude the treated children. If treatment were

applied randomly to the population of children, then these estimates would provide an unbiased

        19
            They point to two reasons for mixed results of drug therapy. First, drug doses that are too high may
impair cognitive functioning. For simple tasks, the performance of ADHD children improves linearly with dose,
while for tasks that require mental effort, performance improves at low doses and then declines. Thus, they
conclude that the doses administered to control behavior may be higher than optimal for improving academic
performance. Second, there are children whose performance on cognitive tests does not improve with drug therapy

                                                  21
estimate of the effects of untreated ADHD scores on outcomes. Second, we impute the 90th

percentile score to all of the treated children. This is equivalent to assuming that only children

with high scores are treated. As we will show, neither alternative has much impact on our

estimates, given the small numbers of children being treated.

         We also examine gender differences in the effects of ADHD. As Table 1 shows, on

average, boys score only slightly higher on the ADHD index than girls, but are much more likely

to be above the 90th percentile of the distribution. We ask whether similar levels of ADHD

scores affect boys and girls similarly by interacting the dummy variable for “male” with the

hyperactivity score in models of the form (2).

         Finally, we turn to an investigation of the extent to which the effects of ADHD are

mediated by income. The OLS models we estimate have the following form:

(3) outcome98 i = α + β (income) i + φincomei * ADHD94 i + χADHD94 i + λX94 i + εi

where now income has been broken out of the X vector, and interacted with the hyperactivity

score.    A positive coefficient on the interaction term (in the case of a positive outcome) would

suggest that the negative effects of ADHD were mitigated in high income children. If it were the

case that high income children with ADHD were more likely to be treated than other children,

and had either better or worse outcomes than lower income children, then models of this type

would provide some evidence (albeit indirect) about the efficacy of treatment. Hence, we also

estimate models of treatment probabilities that take the form (3). However, we show below that

neither outcomes nor treatment probabilities vary much with income (in contrast to the strong

relationship between income and treatment (or quality of treatment) that holds for most physical



at all, and may even be impaired. Some studies suggest that up to 40 percent of children treated with stimulant
drugs do not have any favorable cognitive response.
                                                        22
illnesses). While these results are interesting in and of themselves, they make it difficult to infer

anything about the effectiveness of treatment from our estimates.



5. Results

       Table 2 presents our baseline OLS estimates of the effects of hyperactivity on child

outcomes in the U.S. and Canada. Table 2 indicates that children with higher hyperactivity

scores have outcomes that are worse in all of the measured dimensions. The estimated effects of

a one unit change in the hyperactivity score are generally somewhat lower for the U.S. than for

Canada, though for reading scores, they are somewhat larger.

       One way to think about the size of these effects is to compare them with the effect of

income, which has consistently significant effects, and generally has larger effects in the U.S.

than in Canada. For example, in Canada, each $100,000 worth of permanent income is

associated with a 3.8 percentage point decrease in the probability that a child repeats a grade

between 1994 and 1998. But a Canadian child with a score of only 5 out of 16 on the

hyperactivity index would be 3.5 percentage points more likely to have repeated a grade. Thus,

in Canada, the effect of hyperactivity is large relative to the effect of income. The same

comparison in the U.S. data suggests that each $100,000 increase in permanent income would

decrease the probability of grade repetition by 5.3 percentage points, compared to a 2 percentage

point increase in the probability for a child with a hyperactivity score of 5 relative to a child with

a hyperactivity score of zero.

       Having a mother with at least a high school education is also consistently related to

positive outcomes, especially in the U.S., with the effect being generally similar to that of

$100,000 worth of income. Other variables with consistently significant effects are the indicator

                                              23
for Hispanic ethnicity, which has negative effects (in the NLSY data only; Race and ethnicity are

not available in the NLSCY), and having two parents in 1994, which has positive effects in the

NLSY data, though in Canada it is only statistically significant in the model of delinquency.

Males are more likely to be delinquent, more likely to repeat grades, and (in the U.S.) more

likely to be in special education, consistent with other studies.

         The robustness of these effects is investigated further in Table 3. The first panel of Table

3 repeats the OLS estimates of the effects of hyperactivity and income from Table 2. The second

panel presents fixed effects estimates. Except for delinquency, these within-family estimates are

very similar to those in Panel 1, indicating that the OLS results for academic outcomes are not

driven by unobserved heterogeneity between families (though OLS estimates for delinquency

may be). The similarity between the OLS and fixed effects estimates suggests that measurement

error is not driving the estimates, as discussed above.20

         Panel 3 of Table 3 focuses on the children with the highest ADHD symptom scores by

using a dummy variable for scores above the 90th percentile rather than the continuous

hyperactivity score as the independent variable of interest. Having a high hyperactivity score

has no effect on delinquency in models with fixed effects, but does affect all of the other

outcomes. The coefficient estimates are consistent with roughly linear effects on grade repetition

and special education, while the estimated effects on test scores are substantial but somewhat

smaller than one would project on the basis of the linear models.




20
   Random measurement error would be expected to reduce the size of the fixed effects estimates relative to the
OLS estimates. Correlated errors (for example, if the mother tended to consistently exaggerate reports of a
particular behavior for both children) would lead to much larger fixed effects estimates. If, on the other hand,
parents exaggerate differences between siblings, the fixed effects estimates could theoretically be smaller than the
OLS estimates.
                                                          24
       If high ADHD scores are correlated with having learning disabilities, or other conditions

that may impair outcomes, then we may be attributing part of the effect of other disabilities to

our ADHD measure, thereby overestimating the true effect of ADHD on outcomes. In the U.S.,

8% of children with an ADHD score above the 90th percentile are also diagnosed with a learning

disability, and in Canada, the comparable figure is 10%. We address this potential problem by

estimating the effects of ADHD in a sample that excludes children with diagnosed learning

disabilities. Panel 4 of Table 3 shows that excluding these children has little impact on our

estimates.

       We have also estimated models excluding children in special education from our

samples. The rationale for this experiment is that since children with ADHD are more likely to

end up in special education, the estimated effects of ADHD might be contaminated by the effects

of being in this track. However, our estimates (not shown) were very similar to those shown in

Panel 2.

       Panel 5 of Table 3 shows estimates for the sample of children who were age 4 to 7 in

1994. As discussed above, in order for a diagnosis of ADHD to take place, symptoms must

have appeared before age 7. Among older children behavior problems that mimic ADHD might

appear in response to school-related difficulties. This restriction dramatically reduces our

sample sizes, particularly for the Canadian test scores. However, the U.S. estimates are very

similar to those reported in Panel 2, and the Canadian estimates of the effects of ADHD

symptoms on grade repetition and special education are also similar for grade repetition and

special education (we lose statistical significance in the Canadian test score models, but this may

be because of the large reduction in sample size for these outcomes).



                                            25
        Panel 6 of Table 3 shows that if teacher-reported scores are instrumented with parent

reports in the Canadian data, the fixed effects-IV estimates are similar to the OLS estimates for

grade repetition and math scores and much higher than the fixed effects (or OLS) estimates for

special education (F-statistics for our first-stage are reported in the notes to the table).   We take

the estimates for special education with a grain of salt, as it may be the case that parent reports

about the child’s behavior do have an independent effect on the probability that the child is

placed in special education after the teacher’s report is accounted for. We believe that this is less

likely to be the case with test scores.

        Panel 7 uses the measure of diagnosed ADHD rather than the screener measure.

Comparing these estimates with those in Panels 2 and 3 suggests that focusing on diagnosed

cases greatly exaggerates the extent to which ADHD symptoms per se lead to special education.

On the other hand, the extent to which ADHD symptoms are related to grade repetition is under-

stated if we use only diagnosed cases.     These two phenomena may be related if children are less

likely to be retained in grade once they have been placed in special education, and if diagnosis

with ADHD is often an entrée into special education.

        It is interesting that judging by the point estimates, both being diagnosed, and having a

score above the 90th percentile have very similar negative effects on reading scores, although

only the estimates using the score measure are statistically significant because of large standard

errors in the models using diagnosed cases. Again, this result suggests that there may be a good

deal of measurement error in diagnosed cases. For math scores, being diagnosed has a larger

negative effect than scoring highly on the screener, but both are imprecisely estimated.

        Table 4 shows models that either exclude treated children, or impute a high hyperactivity

score to these children. For the most part, these alternative ways of handling the treated children

                                                  26
produce estimates that are very similar to those shown in Table 3. The main exception is that the

hyperactivity score does not have a significant effect on the probability of special education in

the U.S. in these models. This result suggests once again that it is the treated children in the

U.S. who end up in special education, and that untreated children with the same ADHD scores as

the treated children are not more likely to end up in special education.

        Table 5 asks whether effects differ for boys and girls. When we consider the linear score

measure, it appears that girls suffer as much as boys from the symptoms of ADHD—none of the

interaction terms are statistically significant (though most of the ADHD main effects are also

insignificant). But when we use the dummy for the 90th percentile of the hyperactivity

distribution, interesting gender differences emerge. In particular, in both Canada and the U.S.,

only hyperactive boys appear to be at risk for being placed in special education. And in the U.S.,

the negative effects of high hyperactivity scores on reading and math scores is confined to boys.

        Table 6 offers an alternative way to think about the magnitude of these effects. In it, we

compare the estimated effect of hyperactivity to the effects of physical health problems, using

the Canadian data. Table 6 shows that in fixed effects models, neither having been diagnosed

with a chronic health problem such as asthma (the most common chronic physical condition

among children) as of 1994, nor a maternal report that a child is in poor health in 1994 is

predictive of poorer outcomes as of 1998.21 These results suggest that on average ADHD has a

greater impact on academic achievement than serious physical health problems.



        21
              In OLS models, chronic conditions in 1994 have no effect on future outcomes but a maternal report that
a child is in poor health is predictive of poorer outcomes in 1998. We cannot be certain that mothers answer this
question with only their child’s physical health in mind, but the correlation between being in poor health and the
hyperactivity score is very small (0.09). In OLS models, a moderate hyperactivity score generally has worse effects
than being in poor health. For example, among Canadian children, being in poor health in 1994 is associated with a
reduction of .43 in 1998 mathematics scores, while a score of 5 out of 16 on the hyperactivity index is associated
with reduction of 1.3 (on a mean score of 8.1).
                                                    27
       Table 7 reports estimates of equation (3), which include interactions between

hyperactivity scores and income. Panel 1 shows that in OLS models using the NLSY, the

interactions are of the expected sign (that is, higher income appears to mitigate the effects of

hyperactivity) but none of them are statistically significant. In contrast, in Canada all of the

interactions are significant in the OLS models, except in the model of delinquency. Panel 2

shows, however, that once we control for heterogeneity between families, only the interaction

term that remains statistically significant is for grade repetition in Canada.

       Given that we are using permanent income, the interaction terms in these fixed effects

models are identified by the fact that ADHD scores vary within families. What the interaction

term tells us is whether the difference between the high and low ADHD score children within a

family is bigger in a low income household than in a high income household. That is, if the high

income household is able to do a better job assisting the high ADHD score child than the low

income household, then the interaction will be significant.

       Panel 3 of Table 7 indicates that the interaction of income and having a hyperactivity

score above the 90th percentile is associated with a higher probability of grade repetition in both

the U.S. and Canada, and the point estimates in the two countries are quite similar (although the

U.S. coefficient is significant only at the 90 percent level of confidence). However, the other

interaction terms remain statistically insignificant. In summary then, within families with

children with differing levels of hyperactivity, being in a higher income family offers little

protection against the negative effects of ADHD on test scores, although the high ADHD child in

the high income family is less likely repeat grades than a similar child in a low income family.




                                                 28
       Table 8 investigates the relationship between hyperactivity scores, income, and treatment.

OLS estimates indicate that income has no effect on the probability of treatment in either the

U.S. or Canada. This is a surprising result, particularly in the U.S. where richer children

generally have better access to medical care. The main effects of income are insignificant as

well, except that in the U.S., children from wealthier families are more likely to see a

psychiatrist. In the U.S., maternal education also increases the probability of treatment as does

having a mother who is depressed or has an activity limitation. Children of younger mothers and

Hispanic children are much less likely to be treated, as are children in two parent families.

       The second panel of Table 8 presents fixed-effects estimates. In order to interpret our

fixed effects models it may be useful to consider an example. Consider two families, one with

high income and the other with low income. Each family has two children, one with a high

ADHD score, and one with a low ADHD score. The question posed by the interactive models is:

Is the child with the high score more likely to be treated in a high income family? The answer is

no -- in these models, the only interaction that is statistically significant suggests that conditional

on their hyperactivity score, richer Canadian children are actually less likely to see a psychiatrist

than other children.

       It is useful to think about the estimation biases that the effects of treatment of ADHD

might create. Suppose for example, that high income children really were more likely to be

treated, and that treatment lowered their hyperactivity scores. Then we would see high income

children with relatively low scores being treated, suggesting that conditional on their score, high

income children were even more likely than low income children to be treated. This argument

suggests that if anything the estimates in Table 8 over-estimate the true interaction between



                                              29
income and ADHD scores, suggesting that there really is a very weak effect of ADHD scores on

the probability of being treated.



6. Discussion and Conclusions

       Children with symptoms of hyperactivity suffer large negative consequences in terms of

their achievement test scores and schooling attainment. Hyperactivity is a more important

determinant of reduced human capital accumulation than physical health problems. These

results are qualitatively similar in the U.S. and Canada and are robust to many changes in

specification.

       We also find that a given level of symptoms has similar effects on the test scores of rich

and poor children although richer children are less likely to be retained in grade, which may be a

significant advantage. Boys and girls with moderate levels of symptoms also suffer equally in

terms of academic outcomes, though boys with high hyperactivity scores do worse than girls,

especially in the U.S..

       A silver lining is that there is no evidence that poor children suffer from “double

jeopardy”. Even if we assume that treatment is effective, there is surprisingly little relationship

between income and treatment probabilities in these data. The lack of a strong relationship

between income and drug treatment for ADHD contrasts sharply with a large literature showing

that richer children are more likely to be treated for physical health problems, conditional on the

need for such treatment.

       It is interesting to speculate on why rich parents appear to be relatively less likely to seek

treatment for ADHD than for other ailments. One reason may be that a diagnosis of ADHD is

strongly related to placement in special education, and wealthier parents may wish to avoid this

                                                 30
outcome. At the same time, drug treatment for ADHD has become more commonly available to

low income children through Medicaid and schools may face strong incentives to have low-

achieving children diagnosed and treated for ADHD so that they can be placed in special

education (Cullen, 2003).

       Finally, we find that even children whose relatively low level of symptoms make them

unlikely candidates for diagnosis will suffer significant ill effects. The severity of the problems

associated with ADHD and the pervasiveness of its symptoms suggest that efforts to find better

ways to teach the relatively small number of children diagnosed with ADHD could have a large

payoff in terms of improving the academic outcomes of many children with milder symptoms.




                                            31
References

Adlaf, E., Paglia, A., “Drug Use Among Ontario Students 1977-2001,” Centre for Addiction and
Mental Health Research Document Series, No. 10, 2001.

American Academy of Pediatrics. “Diagnosis and Evaluation of the Child with Attention-
Deficity/Hyperactivity Disorder, Practice Guidline,” Pediatrics, 105 #5, May 2000, 1158-1170.

American Psychiatric Association. Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 4th
Ed. 1994.

Baillargeon, R., Tremblay, R., Willms, J.D., “The Prevalence of Physical Aggression in
Canadian Children: A Multi-Group Latent Class Analysis of Data from the First Collection
Cycle (1994-1995) of the NLSCY,” Human Resources Development Canada, Applied Research
Branch, December 1999.

Cuffe, Steven, Charity Moore, and Robert McKeown. “ADHD Symptoms in the National Health
Inverview Survey: Prevalence, Correlates, and the Use of Services and Medication,” poster
presented at the 50th Anniversary Meeting of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent
Psychiatry, Miami Beach FL, October 15, 2003.

Caspi, Avshalom, Bradley Wright, Terrie Moffitt, and Phil Silva. “Early Failure in the Labor
Market: Childhood and Adolescent Predictors of Unemployment in the Transition to
Adulthood,” American Sociological Review, 63, 1998, 424-451.

Cuellar, Alison, Sara Markowitz, Anne Libby. “The Relationships Between Mental Health and
Substance Abuse Treatment and Juvenile Crime,” NBER Working Paper #9952, Sept. 2003.

Currie, Janet. “Health Disparities and Gaps in School Readiness” in The Future of Children:
School Readiness: Closing Racial and Ethnic Gaps, Volume 15, Number 1 - Spring 2005, 117-
138.

Currie, Janet and Brigitte Madrian. "Health, Health Insurance and the Labor Market", The
Handbook of Labor Economics, volume 3c, David Card and Orley Ashenfelter (eds.)
(Amsterdam: North Holland), 1999, 3309-3407.

Dooley, Martin, and Stewart, J. “Family Income, Parenting Styles and Child Behavioural-
Emotional Outcomes,” mimeo, McMaster University, 2003.

Dooley, Martin, Curtis, Lori, Lipman, Ellen, and Feeny, David, “Child Psychiatric Disorders,
Poor School Performance and Social Problems: The Roles of Family Structure and Low-
Income,” in Labour Markets, Social Institutions, and the Future of Canada’s Children, ed. M.
Corak, 1998, Statistics Canada: Ottawa, Canada.



                                               32
Ettner, S., Frank, R., Kessler, R., “The Impact of Psychiatric Disorders on Labour Market
Outcomes,” Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 1997, 51(1), pp.64-81.

Farmer, Elizabeth. “Externalizing Behavior in the Life Course: The Transition from School to
Work,” Journal of Emotional and Behavioral Disorders, 1, 1993, 179-188.

Farmer, Elizabeth. “Extremity of Externalizing Behavior and Young Adult Outcomes,” Journal
of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 36, 1995, 617-632.

Fiore, Thomas, Elizabeth Becker, and Rebecca Nero. “Educational Interventions for Students
with Attention Deficit Disorder,” Exceptional Children, 60 #2, 1993, 163-173.

Frank, R., Gertler, P., “An Assessment of Measurement Error Bias for Estimating the Effect of
Mental Distress on Income,” The Journal of Human Resources, 1991, 26(1), pp.154-164.

Garrett, A.B., Essays in the Economics of Child Mental Health, Columbia University Ph.D.
Thesis, 1996.

Glied, S., Garrett. A.B., Hoven, C., Rubio-Stipec, M., Regier, D., Moore, R., Goodman, Sh., Wu,
P., and Bird, H., “Child Outpatient Mental Health Service Use: Why Doesn’t Insurance Matter?”
The Journal of Mental Health Policy and Economics, 1198, 1, pp.173-187.

Glied, S., Hoven, C., Garrett, A.B., Moore, R., Leaf,. P, Bird, H., Goodman, S., Regier, D.,
Alegria, M., “Measuring Child Mental Health Status for Services Research,” Journal of Child
and Family Studies,, 1997, 6(2), pp.177-190.

Gregg, Paul and Steven Machin. “Child Development and Success or Failure in the Youth
Labour Market,” Center for Economic Performance, London School of Economics Discussion
Paper 0397, July 1998.

Grossman, Michael and Robert Kaestner, "Effects of Education on Health" in J.R. Behrman and
N. Stacey, eds., The Social Benefits of Education. University of Michigan Press, Ann Arbor MI,
1997, pp. 69-123.

Jensen, Peter S., Lori Kettle. “Are Stimulants Over-Prescribed? Treatment of ADHD in Four
U.S. Communities,” Journal of the American Academy of Child & Adolescent Psychiatry, July
99, Vol. 38 #7, 797-805.

Korenman, Sanders, Jane Miller, and J.E. Sjaastad. “Long-term Poverty and Child Development
in the United States: Results from the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth,” Children and
Youth Services Review, 17 #1&2, 1995, 127-151.

Lipman, Ellen D.R. Offord and M.H. Boyle. “Economic Disadvantage and Child Psycho-social
Morbidity,” Canadian Medical Association Journal, 151, 1994, 431-37.


                                           33
Mannuzza, Salvatore and Rachel Klein. “Long-Term Prognosis in Attention-
Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder,” Child and Adolescent Psychiatric Clinics of North America, v9
#3, July 2000, 711-726.

McLeod, J.D. and M.J. Shanahan. Poverty, Parenting and Children’s Mental Health,” American
Sociological Review, 58 #3, 1993, 351-366.

Merrell, C. And P.B. Tymms. “Inattention, Hyperactivity and Impulsiveness: Their Impact on
Academic Achievement and Progress,” British Journal of Educational Psychology, 72, 2001, 43-
56.

Mullahy, John and Jody Sindelar. “Life-Cycle Effects of Alcoholism on Education, Earnings,
and Occupation,” Inquiry, 26, 1989, 272-282.

National Institutes of Mental Health. “Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder,” (Bethesda
MD:NIMH) publication #96-3572, 1996.

Offord, D., M. Boyle, P. Szatmari, N.I. Rae-Grant, P.S. Links, D.T. Cadman, J.A. Byles, J.W.
Crawford, H.M. Blum, C. Byrne, H. Thomas, and C.A. Woodward. “Ontario Child Health Study:
II. Six-month Prevalence of Disorder and Rates of Service Utilization,” Archives of General
Psychiatry, 1987, 44: 832-36.

Offord, D., M. Boyle, Y. Racine. “Ontario Child Health Study: Correlates of Disorder,” Journal
of the American Academy of Child Adolescence and Psychiatry, 1989, 28, pp.856-860.

Phipps, Shelley and Lori Curtis. “Poverty and Child Well-Being in Canada and the United
States: Does it Matter How We Measure Poverty?” Final Report Applied Research Branch,
Strategic Policy, Human Resources Development Canada (Ottawa: HRDC) SP-556-01-03E,
September 2000.

Puzzanchera, Charles. “Self-Reported Delinquency by 12-Year-Olds, 1997,” Office of Juvenile
Justice and Delinquency Prevention, U.S. Department of Justice, Fact Sheet #3, February 2000.

Romano, Elisa, Raymond Baillargeon and Richard Tremblay. “Prevalence of Hyperactivity-
Impulsivity and Inattention Among Canadian Children: Findings from the First Data Collection
Cycle (1994-1995) of the National Longitudinal Survey of Children and Youth,”
(Ottawa, Canada: Applied Research Branch Strategic Policy, Human Resources Development
Canada) Final Report SP-561-01-03E, June 2002.

Sgro, M., Roberts, W., Grossman, S., Barozzino, T., “School Board Survey of Attention
Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder: Prevalence of Diagnosis and Stimulant Medication Therapy,”
Paediatrics and Child Health, 2000, 5(1), pp.19-23.




                                               34
Swanson, James, Dennis Cantwell, Marc Lerner, Keith McBurnett, and Greg Hanna. “Effects of
Stimulant Medication on Learning in Children with ADHD,” Journal of Learning Disabilities,
24 #4, April 1991, 219-230.

Stage, Scott and David Quiroz. “A Meta-Analysis of Interventions to Decrease Disruptive
Classroom Behavior in Public Education Settings,” School Psychology Review, 1997, 26 #3,
333-368.

U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. Mental Health: A Report to the Surgeon
General (Rockville: U.S. Dept. of Health and Human Services) 1999.

Wigal, Tim, James Swanson, Roland Regino, Marc Lerner, Ihab Soliman, Ken Steinhoff, Suresh
Gurbani, and Sharon Wigal. “Stimulant Medications for the Treatment of ADHD: Efficacy and
Limitations,” Mental Retardation and Developmental Disabilities Research Reviews, 5, 1999,
215-224.

Williams, R., Horn, S., Daley, S., Nader, P., “Evaluation of Access to Care and Medical and
Behavioral Outcomes in a School-Based Intervention Program for Attention-Deficit
Hyperactivity Disorder,” Journal of School Health, 1993, 63(7), pp.294-297.

Willms, J.D., editor, Vunerable Children, University of Alberta Press: Edmonton, Alberta, 2002.




                                           35
Data Appendix

Appendix Table 1: Symptoms of Inattention and Hyperactivity (Source: AAP, 2000).

Inattention:
A) Often fails to give close attention to details or makes careless mistakes in schoolwork, work,
or other activities.
B) Often has difficulty sustaining attention in tasks or play activities.
C) Often does not seem to listen when spoken to directly.
D) Often does not follow through on instructions and fails to finish schoolwork, chores, or duties
in the workplace (not due to oppositional behavior or failure to understand instructions).
E) Often has difficulty organizing tasks and activities.
F) Often avoids, dislikes, or is reluctant to engage in tasks that require sustained mental effort
(such as schoolwork or homework).
G) Often loses things necessary for tasks or activities (e.g. toys, school assignments, pencils,
books, or tools.
H) Is often easily distracted by extraneous stimuli.
I) Is often forgetful in daily activities.

Hyperactivity:
A) Often fidgets with hands or feet or squirms in seat.
B) Often leaves seat in classroom or in other situations in which remaining seated is expected.
C) Often runs about or climbs excessively in situations in which it is inappropriate.
D) Often has difficulty playing or engaging in leisure activities quietly.
E) Is often “on the go” or often acts as if “driven by a motor”.
F) Often talks excessively.
G) Often blurts out answers before questions have been completed.
H) Often has difficulty awaiting turn.
I) Often interrupts or intrudes on others (e.g. butts into conversations or games).

To be diagnosed a child must have: six or more symptoms of inattention, or six or more
symptoms of hyperactivity have persisted for at least six months to a degree that is maladaptive
and inconsistent with developmental level; some symptoms present before seven years of age;
impairment from the symptom is present in two or more settings (such as home and school).

2. Variable Definitions in the NLSCY

Respondent: In the NLSCY the respondent is the “person most knowledgeable about the child”
which is usually, but not always the mother (it is the mother 92% of the time). Because of this
potential complication, we determine the education level of the mother using information about
the PMK and the spouse of the PMK in all three survey years. We measure mother’s education
as follows: when the child’s mother is also the PMK or the child’s mother is the spouse of the
PMK we use this information to calculate the mother’s education. When no biological mother is
present in the family in any of the three survey years we use the next closest female parent figure
as the basis for calculating the mother’s education. We then include dummy variables for the

                                                36
female parent figure being other than the biological mother, and/or for the PMK being other than
the biological mother in all our analyses.

Parent Reported Hyperactivity - Inattention Score variables (variables ABECS06, BBECS06
and CBECS06 in cycles 1, 2 and 3 respectively) are derived using the PMK’s responses to the
following questions:

How often would you say that -- can't sit still, is restless or hyperactive?
How often would you say that – is distractible, has trouble sticking to an activity?
How often would you say that – fidgets?
How often would you say that – can’t concentrate, can’t pay attention for long?
How often would you say that – is impulsive, acts without thinking?
How often would you say that – has difficulty awaiting turn in games or groups?
How often would you say that – cannot settle to anything for more than a few moments?
How often would you say that – is inattentive?

The possible responses to these questions were: Never/Not True, Sometimes/Somewhat True or
Often/Very True. The total score varies from 1-16 where a high score represents the presence of
hyperactive or inattentive behaviour.

The Teacher Hyperactivity - Inattention Score variables (variables AETCS28B, BETCS28B
and CETCS28B in cycles 1, 2 and 3 respectively) are derived using the respondent’s teacher’s
responses to the same questions.

The Delinquency Variable is derived using the responses to the following questions.

I physically attack people. (cfbcq1aa)
I vandalize. (cfbcq1dd)
I steal outside my home. (cfbcq1pp)

The possible responses to these questions were Never or not true, Sometimes or somewhat true
or Often of very true.

In the past 12 months, about how many times were you questioned by the police about anything
that they thought you did? (cfbcbq2e)

In the past 12 months, about how many times have you run away from home? (cfbcbq2f)

The possible responses to these questions were Never, Once or Twice, Three or Four times or
Five times or more.

Ages 10-11: Have you ever tried drugs or sniffed glue or solvents? (cdrcq10)The possible
responses to this question are yes or no.



                                           37
Ages 12-15: Have you ever tried marijuana and cannabis products (also known as joint, pot,
grass, hash)? (cdrcc10a)

Have you ever tried glue or solvents (such as paint thinner, gasoline etc)? (cdrcb10b)
Ages 14-15: Have you ever tried Hallucinogens (like LSD, acid, magic mushrooms, “mesc” or
PCP, “Angel dust” etc)? (cdrcb10c)

Ages 12-13: Have you ever tried other drugs (heroin, speed, PCP, crack/cocaine, LSD, acid
ecstasy etc)? (cdrcc10f)

The possible responses to these questions are yes, no or I don’t know what that drug is.

The variable delinquency takes on the value 1 if any of the above questions indicate delinquent
behavior, takes on the value 0 only if the answers to all these questions is no or ‘I don’t know
what that drug is’, and is a missing value if any of the questions were not answered.

The above questions were asked only to children 10-15 in 1998, and hence the sample available
to study delinquency is somewhat smaller than that available to study test scores. For younger
children, there are a similar set of delinquency questions that are asked to the adult respondent.
However, for a two year age range in which we have both self reports and adult reports (ages 10
and 11) we found that there were considerable differences in the reporting of delinquent behavior
between parent and child. Given that the child’s answers to these questions were recorded in
writing confidentially22 and the adult answers were recorded orally, we decided to use child self-
reports as the more accurate reflection of true delinquency.23

Special Education:

The special education variable is derived from a subset of respondents (the teacher in this case)
who answer yes to the following question:

Does this student receive special education because a physical, emotional, behavioral, or some
other problem limits the kind or amount of school work he/she can do? (cetcq21)

Respondents who answer yes are then asked a series of questions about why the student receives
special education. We categorize the student as receiving special education for a mental health
problem if they answered yes to any of the following reasons:

a) A learning disability.
b) An emotional or behavioral problem.


         22
           Children are asked to respond to a written questionnaire for these questions and then to return the
answers in a sealed envelope, much like the sampling procedures used in the NLSY.
         23
          For the delinquency analysis we restrict the sample to those children who do not have missing
information for any of the questions used.
                                                         38
c) A mental disability or limitation.
d) Home environment.

Reading and Mathematics Tests
The math test was a shortened version of the Canadian Achievement Test Center’s Mathematical
Operations test, second edition. It measures the student’s ability to do addition, subtraction,
multiplication and division on whole numbers, decimals, fractions, negatives, and exponents.
Problem solving using percentages and the order of operations was also measured. A separate
version of the test was constructed for each grade level (except for 9 and 10 which received the
same test). The 1998 test included 20 questions at each level (except for level 9-10 which had 15
questions) plus 5 questions selected from the test of the next higher level. The reading
comprehension test is also from the Canadian Achievement Test, second edition. Each test
consists of questions about two passages, which are designed to test the student’s ability to recall
information, identify the main idea, and analyze the passage. In order to avoid problems with
test “ceilings”, children were given a short assessment at home before they took the school tests.
Children who scored perfectly on the home test, were given the test of the next highest grade
level.

Child Treatment

Children are classified as taking drugs for mental health treatment if the PMK answers yes to one
of the following questions:

Does he/she take the following prescribed medication on a regular basis: Ritalin? (ahlcq51b)
Does he/she take the following prescribed medication on a regular basis: Tranquilizers or nerve
pills? (ahlcq51c)

Children are classified as visiting a doctor for mental health treatment based on the following
question:
In the past year, how many times have you seen or talked on the telephone about child's physical
or mental health with: A psychiatrist or psychologist? (ahlcq48g)

PMK Activity Limitations

The PMK is asked if he/she are restricted in their daily activities. (variable ARSSD01).

The PMK Depression Score variable (variables ADPPS01, BDPPS01 and CDPPS01 in cycles
1, 2 and 3 respectively) is derived using the responses to the following questions.

        How often have you felt this way during the past week: I did not feel like eating, my
appetite was poor?
        How often have you felt this way during the past week: I felt like I could not shake off
the blues even with help from family or friends?
        How often have you felt this way during the past week: I had trouble keeping my mind
on what I was doing?

                                            39
          How often have you felt this way during the past week: I felt depressed.
          How often have you felt this way during the past week: I felt that everything I did was an
effort?
          How often have you felt this way during the past week: I felt hopeful about the future.
          How often have you felt this way during the past week: My sleep was restless.
          How often have you felt this way during the past week: I was happy.
          How often have you felt this way during the past week: I felt lonely.
          How often have you felt this way during the past week: I enjoyed life.
          How often have you felt this way during the past week: I had crying spells.
          How often have you felt this way during the past week: I felt that people disliked me.

The possible responses to these questions were Rarely or none of the time (less than 1 day),
Some or a little of the time (1-2 days), Occasionally or a moderate amount of the time (3-4 days)
or Most or all of the time (5-7 days). The total score varies between 0 – 36, where a high score
represents the presence of symptoms of depression.

We used the chose a cutoff such that 10 percent of the mothers in the survey were classified as
depressed.


3. Variables in the NLSY: (Note: Question numbers are from the 2000 survey).

Hyperactivity: The Behavior Problems Index is asked to parents of children 4-14. There are 26
questions asked to all children, and 2 questions asked only to children who have been to school.
For each question, parents reply that the statement is often true, sometimes, true, or not true. To
convert into an index, they take not true to be zero and often true or sometimes true to be a one,
and then sum up the answers to the questions (so the maximum score is either 26 or 28). In
addition to hyperactivity, there are also subscales for: antisocial, anxious, depressed, headstrong,
hyperactive, dependent, peer conflict, and withdrawal.

The hyperactivity subscore has 5 questions:

1. He/she has difficulty concentrating, cannot pay attention for long
2. He/she is easily confused, seems to be in a fog
3. He/she is impulsive, acts without thinking
4. He/she has a lot of difficulty getting his/her mind off certain thoughts
  (has obsessions)
5. He/she is restless or overly active, cannot sit still.

This score is standardized by the child’s sex and age. We convert this standardized score to one
that has the same range as the score in the Canadian data.

Delinquency

Children 10-14 were consistently asked the following questions as part of the child self-

                                                  40
administered questionnaire (Question 40 on the 2000 questionnaire):

In the last year, about how many times have you:

Hurt someone badly enough to need bandages or a doctor?
Taken something from a store without paying for it?
Damaged school property on purpose?

We recode the answers as zero if the answer is never, and 1 otherwise.

These questionnaires also ask whether the respondent has ever used marijuana, cocaine, LSDs,
uppers, downers, amphetamines, or sniffed or huffed substances to get high. We code a one if
the respondent answers yes to any of these questions.

Special Education

BKGN-29C Has he/she participated in special education or a program for handicapped children
in the past year? (yes/no).

This question was only asked in 2000. Previous surveys ask about remedial education in
various subjects, but we do not use these questions.

Test Scores

Peabody Individual Achievement Tests (PIATs) were administered to children with PPVT ages
of 5 to 14.

Child Treatment

HLTH-17 During the past 12 months has (child) seen a psychiatrist, psychologist, or counselor
about any behavioral emotional, or mental problem?

HLTH-20 Does (child) regularly take any medicines or prescription drugs to help control his/her
activity level or behavior?

Maternal Activity Limitations

Question Q11-5A is coded as 1 if the mother has any health problem that limits her ability to
work, and zero otherwise.

Maternal Depression:

The mother was asked the following questions (Q11-H40CESD1B-1G in the 2000
questionnaire):


                                           41
During the past week...
       I had trouble keeping my mind on what I was doing.
       I felt depressed.
       I felt that everything I did was an effort.
       My sleep was restless.
       I felt sad.
       I could not get going.

Possible responses were: Rarely/None of the time/1 Day; Some/A little of the time/1-2
Days/Occasionally/Moderate Amount of the Time/3-4 Days/Most/All of the Time/5-7 Days.
These responses were given values 0, 1, 2, or 3.

To create a depression score, we summed the responses for each question, and chose a cutoff so
that 10% of the mothers were depressed.




                                              42
Table 1: Means of Key Variables in Sample with Reading and Math Scores
                                   Canada     Canada Sib # Canada Sibs                       U.S.         U.S. Sib       U.S. # Sibs
                                     All        Sample     in HH w diff.                     All          Sample        in HH w diff.
Hyperactivity Score 1994            3.890        3.699         1300                           .              .                .
 reported by teacher               [4.065]      [3.931]
Hyperactivity Score                 4.508        4.291         1332                          5.930          5.786           2363
 reported by parent                [3.487]      [3.414]                                     [3.797]        [3.809]
Gender Difference Mean Scores       2.216        2.039                                       1.248          1.269
Probability score>90th ptile-male  15.800       13.023                                      12.300         12.237
Prob. score>90th ptile-female       5.390        4.967                                       7.508          7.253
Diagnosed ADHD                         .            .                                        0.026          0.026           120

Child Outcomes
Delinquent Behaviour 1998                  0.307           0.282              248            0.502          0.492            135
Grade Repetition 1998                      0.037           0.036               88            0.075          0.072            238
Mathematics score 1998                    54.027          54.947              608           51.622         49.946           1338
(/15 in Canada, /100 in US)               [23.14]         [22.81]                          [26.912]       [26.726]
Reading score 1998                        55.650          55.405              612           56.185         53.981           1332
(/20 in Canada, /100 in US)                [18.2]         [18.13]                          [28.806]       [28.943]
Special Education 1998/2000                0.104           0.095              32             0.071          0.078            63

Alternative Health Indicators
Poor Health 1994                           0.135           0.134                                .              .
Chronic Condition Indicator 1994           0.328           0.323                                .              .
Learning Disabilities                      0.026           0.019                             0.026          0.028

Treatment
Drug Treatment 1994                        0.014           0.010              30             0.033          0.032           155
Psychiatrist 1994                          0.036           0.033              72             0.081          0.085           280
 (or Psychologist in NLSCY)
Any Treatment 1994                         0.047           0.039              92             0.096          0.099           359

Selected Covariates
Child Age 1994                             7.890           7.890                             8.271           8.172
                                                                                           [2.300]         [2.259]
Male Child                                 0.500            0.503                            0.513           0.513
First Born Child                           0.460            0.353                            0.387           0.296
Permanent Income                          54566            56608                            41483           42185
                                         [33338]          [32092]                          [25867]         [26154]
Mother High School or More                 0.558            0.570                            0.751           0.754
Family Size 1994                           4.310            4.530                            4.313           4.670
                                         [1.063]          [0.930]                          [1.212]         [1.164]
Mother Teen at Child Birth                 0.045            0.026                            0.046           0.047
Mother’s Age at Birth                     27.220           27.140                           24.689          24.692
                                         [4.709]          [4.382]                          [3.092]         [3.103]
Mother depressed                           0.158            0.154                            0.234           0.236
 or activity limitation
Number of Observations                     3925            1540                              3969           2406

Notes: Canadian data from the 1994-95, 1996-97 and 1998-99 cycles of the NLSCY. Standard deviations in brackets.
U.S. data is means for 1990-1994 and for 1998 and 2000, see text. Sample includes those with non-missing test scores.
Table 1b: Hyperactivity Score Distribution

                                         Canada              Canada              U.S.
                                      Teacher Report      Parent Report      Parent Report
               Score                   % with score       % with score       % with score
                 0                         29.2               10.4               10.53
                 1                         12.2               11.9                5.85
                 2                          9.2               11.5                5.95
                 3                           7                10.3                4.23
                 4                          6.5                9.5               13.83
                 5                          5.6                9.3                6.32
                 6                          6.4                8.6               10.71
                 7                          5.3                7.5                 9.3
                 8                          5.4                6.9                5.85
                 9                          2.7                4.8               11.21
                10                          1.9                3.1                3.78
                11                           2                  2                 4.76
                12                          1.4                1.4                3.05
                13                          1.6                1.1                1.74
                14                          1.1                0.9                1.08
                15                          1.2                0.7                0.98
                16                          1.1                0.3                0.83

Note: Median score is underlined. 90th percentile score indicated in bold.

Table 1c: Means of Outcomes for Children Above and Below the 90th Percentile of Hyperactivity Score

                                      Canada: Above      Canada: Below       U.S.: Above     U.S.: Below
Grade repetition                          0.116              0.027              0.118           0.071
Delinquent                                0.427              0.293              0.602           0.493
Mathematics Score                         43.82              55.16              43.09           52.56
Reading Score                             46.80              56.15              43.26           57.60
Special Education                         0.380              0.070              0.143           0.063

Drug Treatment 1994                        0.070              0.007             0.103           0.025
Psychiatric Treatment 1994                 0.096              0.029             0.174           0.070
Any Treatment 1994                         0.147              0.035             0.199           0.084

Note: The median teacher-reported score is used for Canada.
Table 2: Effects of Hyperactivity on Future Outcomes

                                   [1]          [2]           [3]        [4]            [5]           [6]          [7]            [8]          [9]       [10]
                                Canada         U.S.       Canada        U.S.         Canada          U.S.       Canada           U.S.      Canada        U.S.
                                Delinq.      Delinq.     Grade Rep. Grade Rep.        Math          Math        Reading        Reading    Special Ed. Special Ed.
Hyperactivity Score 1994         0.015        0.013         0.007      0.004          -1.373        -0.868       -0.850         -1.176       0.023      0.008
                                [6.00]**     [2.98]**     [6.99]**   [2.49]**       [10.85]**      [6.57]**     [8.18]**       [8.14]**    [8.79]**    [3.85]**
Average Income                   0.008        -0.086       -0.038     -0.053          7.117         15.382       5.220          13.977      -0.031      -0.024
 (in 100,000)                    [0.33]       [1.21]      [4.28]**   [2.77]**        [4.72]**      [6.87]**     [4.69]**       [5.51]**      [1.44]     [0.73]
Adult Respondent                 -0.040                    -0.009                     0.514                      0.830                       0.078
 Immigrant                       [1.23]                     [0.94]                    [0.28]                     [0.56]                     [2.00]*
Black                                         -0.017                   0.007                        -8.787                      -2.835                  -0.023
                                               [0.46]                  [0.50]                      [6.13]**                     [1.76]*                 [1.13]
Hispanic                                        0.03                   0.027                       -12.485                      -9.391                  0.004
                                               [0.83]                [2.05]**                      [8.58]**                    [5.69]**                 [0.16]
Male                             0.099         0.029        0.005      0.016           1.721         4.539       -0.210         -0.444       0.023      0.034
                                [5.34]**       [1.03]       [0.79]    [1.70]*         [1.78]*      [4.65]**      [0.27]          [0.41]      [1.43]    [2.46]**
First Born Child                 -0.032       -0.062       -0.003     -0.003           3.095         2.221        5.185          5.375      -0.003      -0.015
                                 [1.55]       [1.97]*       [0.49]     [0.29]        [2.89]**       [1.94]*     [6.06]**       [4.42]**      [0.19]     [0.85]
Log Family Size 1994             0.059        -0.076        0.007         0            0.694        -8.366        2.160         -9.785       0.014      0.035
                                 [1.23]        [1.35]       [0.41]     [0.02]          [0.27]      [3.61]**      [1.10]        [3.63]**      [0.34]     [0.90]
Two Parent Family 1994           -0.111       -0.063        0.000     -0.021           0.133         2.128       -0.210          1.773      -0.048      -0.027
                                [3.31]**      [1.94]*       [0.04]    [1.83]*          [0.08]       [1.74]*      [0.27]          [1.25]      [1.45]     [1.45]
Mother’s Age at Birth            -0.001       -0.019        0.000     -0.001           0.260         0.543        0.405          0.477      -0.001      0.002
                                 [0.61]      [2.55]**       [0.12]     [0.60]        [2.16]**      [2.21]**     [4.17]**        [1.76]*      [0.49]     [0.78]
Teen Mother                      0.035        -0.113       -0.007      0.007          -5.376         2.062       -4.820          6.905       0.065      0.000
                                 [0.70]      [1.99]**       [0.40]     [0.22]        [2.26]**        [0.43]     [2.68]**         [0.95]      [1.27]       [.]
Mother High School plus          -0.021       -0.044       -0.015     -0.085           2.321         8.487        3.180         11.635      -0.017      -0.005
                                 [1.08]        [1.25]     [2.25]**   [5.31]**        [2.21]**      [6.19]**     [3.84]**       [7.23]**      [1.02]     [0.22]
PMK depressed or                 0.034        -0.018        0.004      0.002          -0.674        -2.499       -0.700         -0.491       0.024      0.025
 activity limit in 1994          [1.29]        [0.55]       [0.41]     [0.14]          [0.49]       [1.87]*      [0.67]          [0.33]      [0.97]     [1.19]
Age 4 (in 1994)                                   0        -0.036      0.059           6.450        -2.306        1.145         -2.062       0.000      0.006
                                                 [.]      [3.11]**   [2.46]**        [2.42]**        [0.58]      [0.49]          [0.50]      [0.00]     [0.16]
Age 5                            -0.730           0         0.005      0.014           5.176        -0.533       -1.550         -4.554       0.032      0.005
                               [16.02]**         [.]        [0.37]     [0.63]        [2.92]**        [0.13]      [1.12]          [1.10]      [0.58]     [0.12]
Age 6                            -0.216           0        -0.010     -0.029           5.423        -0.621       -2.985         -3.063       0.009      -0.017
                                [6.88]**         [.]        [0.83]    [1.66]*        [3.13]**        [0.16]     [2.22]**         [0.75]      [0.16]     [0.46]
Age 7                            -0.244           0        -0.017     -0.024           5.396        -1.412       -4.985         -4.855       0.022      0.009
                                [7.95]**         [.]        [1.43]     [1.38]        [3.02]**        [0.36]     [3.44]**         [1.17]      [0.40]     [0.23]
Age 8                            -0.224       -0.187       -0.019     -0.002          -5.523        -3.178       -4.455         -3.991      -0.013      0.068
                                [7.22]**     [3.75]**      [1.69]*     [0.10]        [3.33]**        [0.80]     [3.27]**         [0.95]      [0.22]     [1.64]
Age 9                            -0.127       -0.134       -0.004      0.015          -3.682        -3.866       -7.045         -3.917       0.077      0.000
                                [3.92]**     [3.71]**       [0.32]     [0.84]        [2.11]**        [0.95]     [5.20]**         [0.93]      [1.26]       [.]
Age 10                           -0.016       -0.104       -0.024      0.023          -6.410        -1.725       -3.730         -2.429       0.079      0.000
                                 [0.46]      [3.00]**     [2.23]**     [1.18]        [3.70]**        [0.40]     [2.80]**         [0.55]      [1.03]       [.]
Constant                         0.359         1.165        0.040      0.163          46.276        45.458       44.025         54.236       0.063      -0.080
                                [3.54]**     [6.01]**       [1.15]   [2.34]**        [8.06]**      [5.38]**     [9.91]**       [5.88]**      [0.62]     [0.75]
Observations                      2516          1303         3925       3240            2209          2501        2209            2501        1357       1401
R-squared                        0.090          0.06        0.040       0.06           0.150          0.23        0.120            0.2        0.14       0.05



Notes: Canadian data are from the 1994-95, 1996-97 and 1998-99 cycles of the NLSCY. Robust t-statistics are in brackets. A *
is significant at the 90% level. A ** indicates significants at 95%. Standard errors clustered at the household level.
 In the U.S. data, the "1994" variables are means over the period 1988-1994, while the 1998 values are
means for 1998 and 2000. Regressions for Canada also included indicators for whether the PMK was female, and
for whether income was imputed.
Table 3: Robustness of Effects of Hyperactivity on Future Outcomes
                                   [1]        [2]          [3]        [4]                   [5]          [6]          [7]         [8]         [9]        [10]
                                Canada       U.S.       Canada       U.S.                Canada         U.S.       Canada        U.S.      Canada        U.S.
1. OLS from Table 2             Delinq.    Delinq. Grade Rep. Grade Rep.                  Math         Math        Reading     Reading    Special Ed. Special Ed.
Hyperactivity Score 1994         0.015       0.013        0.007      0.004                -1.373       -0.868       -0.849      -1.176      0.023       0.008
                                [6.00]**   [2.98]**     [6.99]**    [2.49]*             [10.85]**     [6.57]**     [8.18]**    [8.14]**    [8.79]**    [3.85]**
Average Income (100,000)         0.008      -0.086       -0.038     -0.053                7.117        15.382        5.221      13.977      -0.031      -0.024
                                 [0.33]     [1.21]      [4.28]**   [2.77]**              [4.72]**     [6.87]**     [4.69]**    [5.51]**     [1.44]      [0.73]
Observations                      2516       1303         3925       3240                  2209         2501         2209        2501        1357        1401
R-squared                        0.090       0.06         0.040      0.06                 0.150         0.23         0.120        0.2       0.140       0.050

2. Fixed Effects
Hyperactivity Score 1994           0.008       -0.015        0.005          0.005         -1.179       -0.996         -0.66     -0.834      0.021        0.009
                                   [1.08]      [1.04]       [2.46]**       [1.85]*       [3.94]**     [4.00]**      [2.70]**   [3.14]**    [2.95]**     [1.74]*
Observations                        2514        1304          3923          3241           2208         2501          2208       2501        1357        1401
R-squared                            0.9         0.9          0.85          0.76           0.91         0.86           0.9       0.86        0.95         0.84

3. FE - Dummy Variable for Hyperactivity Above 90th Percentile
Hperactivity Score 1994      -0.087       0.118       0.064                 0.07          -9.468       -3.989        -5.930     -5.778      0.381       0.121
 Above 90th percentile        [1.02]      [0.86]     [2.89]**             [2.68]**       [2.59]**      [1.46]       [2.01]**   [1.98]**    [4.92]**    [2.00]**
Observations                   2514        1304        3923                 3241           2208         2501          2208       2501        1357        1401
R-squared                       0.9         0.9        0.85                 0.76            0.9         0.86           0.9       0.86        0.96        0.84

4. FE - Dropping Children with Diagnosed Learning Disabilities
Hperactivity Score 1994        0.006      -0.017      0.003                 0.004         -1.294       -0.954        -0.675     -0.762      0.018       0.006
                               [0.86]     [1.16]     [1.69]*               [1.80]*       [4.21]**     [3.79]**      [2.69]**   [2.85]**    [2.65]**     [1.36]
Observations                    2447       1257       3819                  3152           2160         2456          2160       2456        1327        1202
R-squared                        0.9       0.91        0.85                 0.79           0.91        0.859           0.9       0.86        0.95        0.84

5. FE - Including Children ages 4-7 in 1994 only
Hperactivity Score 1994                                       0.008        0.004          0.527        -0.826        -0.695      -1.03      0.022       0.007
                                                             [1.85]*      [2.43]**        [0.79]      [5.25]**       [1.42]    [5.97]**    [2.31]**    [3.63]**
Observations                                                  1734          1469           998          1491          998        1490        1002       12.02
R-squared                                                     0.94         0.083           0.96        0.248          0.97      0.205        0.98       0.032

6. FE, Instrumenting Teacher Report with Parent Report of Hyperactivity Score
Hyperactivity Score 1994       0.012                  0.010                    -1.456                                -0.370                 0.083
                               [0.71]                [2.13]**                 [1.99]**                               [0.62]                [3.09]**
Observations                    2506                   3907                     2197                                  2197                   1352
R-squared                      0.001                   0.02                     0.08                                  0.08                   0.05

7. FE, Using Diagnosed ADHD Cases
Child Diagnosed w ADHD                          0.395                      -0.053                      -9.161                   -5.195                   0.64
                                                [1.62]                     [1.20]                      [1.65]*                  [0.87]                 [3.49]**
Observations                                     1304                       3240                        2500                     2500                    1401
R-squared                                         0.9                       0.76                        0.86                     0.86                    0.85

Notes: Robust t-statistics in brackets. A * indicates significance at the 90% level. A ** indicates significance at 95%.
Standard errors clustered at the household level.
To compare effects on reading and math scores, multiply the Canadian coefficients by 5 and 6.67 respectively.
The first stage F-statistic for test that the parent score is 0 in our IV models is 154 (t-statistic of 12).
Table 4: Alternative Ways of Handling Treated Children

                               [1]           [2]            [3]           [4]             [5]         [6]        [7]        [8]          [
                            Canada          U.S.          Canada          U.S.          Canada       U.S.      Canada      U.S.       Can
                             Delinq.       Delinq.       Grade Rep.    Grade Rep.        Math        Math      Reading    Reading    Speci
1. FE - Excluding Children Treated in 1994
Hyperactivity Score, 1994     0.007        -0.023           0.004         0.003          -1.242      -0.770     -0.639     -0.694       0.
                             [0.91]        [1.38]         [2.00]**        [1.29]        [3.93]**    [2.77]**   [2.45]**   [2.37]**    [3.5
Observations                  2382          1108            3735           2900           2096        2290       2096       2289        12
R-squared                      0.9          0.91            0.85           0.79           0.91        0.87        0.9       0.87        0

2. FE - Assigning Treated Children the 90th Percentile Score
Hyperactivity Score, 1994     0.008          -0.017         0.004         0.004          -1.389      -0.968     -0.792     -0.847       0.
                              [1.23]         [1.23]       [2.31]**        [1.62]        [4.69]**    [3.99]**   [3.25]**   [3.27]**    [3.3
Observations                   2515           1304           3923          3241           2208        2501       2208       2501        13
R-squared                       0.9           0.901          0.85         0.762           0.91        0.858       0.9       0.858       0

3. FE - Excluding Children Treated in 1994 - Hyperactivity above 90th Percentile
Hyperactivity Score, 1994    -0.111          -0.044         0.065         0.063          -9.675     -4.520     -5.081      -6.390       0.
                             [1.21]          [0.28]       [2.84]**      [2.11]**        [2.54]**    [1.43]     [1.63]     [1.93]*     [5.1
Observations                  2382            1108          3735          2900            2096       2290       2096        2289        12
R-squared                      0.9            0.91          0.85          0.79            0.91       0.87        0.9        0.87        0

4. FE - Assigning Treated Children the 90th Percentile Score - Hyperactivty above 90th Percentile
Hyperactivity Score, 1994     -0.047         -0.046         0.059          0.962         -12.099    -3.020      -7.514     -7.930       0.
                               [.61]         [0.29]       [2.95]**       [2.09]**       [3.63]**    [1.02]     [2.77]**   [2.52]**    [5.6
Observations                   2515           1304          3923           3241           2208       2501        2208       2501        13
R-squared                       0.9            0.9           0.85          0.763           0.91      0.983        0.9       0.858       0

Notes: See table 3
Table 5: Differences Between Boys and Girls

                                        [1]        [2]      [3]        [4]      [5]         [6]        [7]       [8]       [9]        [10]
                                     Canada       U.S.   Canada      U.S.    Canada        U.S.      Canada     U.S.    Canada        U.S.
                                     Delinq.    Delinq. Grade Rep.Grade Rep. Math          Math      Reading   Reading Special Ed. Special Ed.
1. FE - Interaction of Hyperactivity Score with Male
Hyperactivity Score, 1994             0.008      -0.006   0.003      0.004    -0.962       -0.990    -0.585     -0.689     0.007     0.005
                                      [0.68]     [0.38]   [1.02]    [1.43]   [2.20]**     [3.48]**   [1.64]    [2.25]**    [0.61]    [0.97]
Male*Hyper Score                      0.000      -0.006   0.003     -0.001    -0.352        0.184    -0.122     -0.303     0.020     0.004
                                      [0.01]     [0.60]   [0.83]    [0.64]    [0.68]       [0.90]    [0.29]     [1.38]     [1.54]    [0.89]
Observations                           2514       1304     3923      3241      2207         2501      2207       2501       1356      1401
R-squared                              0.90       0.90     0.85       0.76     0.91          0.86     0.90       0.86       0.95      0.84


2. FE - Interaction of 90th percentile of Hyperactivity Score with Male
Hyperactivity Score, 1994              -0.064     0.226        0.097     0.097   -9.996     2.970    -8.268    -0.940      0.177     0.002
                                       [0.39]     [1.13]     [2.48]** [2.45]**   [1.57]    [0.72]    [1.61]     [0.21]     [1.32]    [0.02]
Male*Hyper Score                       -0.029    -0.126       -0.046    -0.040    0.745    -9.570     3.305    -9.200      0.287     0.215
                                       [0.16]      [.57]      [1.03]    [0.88]   [0.10]   [2.03]**   [0.56]    [1.82]*    [1.86]*   [1.98]**
Observations                            2514       1304        3923      3241     2207      2501      2207       2501       1356      1401
R-squared                               0.90       0.90         0.85      0.75     0.91      0.86      0.90      0.85       0.96      0.84


Notes: See table 3
Table 6: Comparing Effects of Hyperactivity, Poor Health, & Chronic Conditions, Canada

Fixed Effects Regressions
Panel 1                      Delinq.     Grade Rep.       Math          Reading          Special Ed.
Hyperactivity Score 1994      0.008        0.005          -1.179         -0.660            0.021
                             [1.08]       [2.46]**       [3.94]**       [2.70]**          [2.95]**
Observations                  2514          3923           2208           2208              1357
R-squared                      0.9          0.85           0.91            0.9              0.95

Panel 2
Chronic Condition 1994        0.024         0.006         1.916           1.728            0.042
                              [0.47]        [0.45]        [0.80]          [0.90]           [0.76]
# Observations                 2514          3923          2208            2208             1357
R-squared                       0.9          0.85          0.91             0.9             0.95

Panel 3
Poor Health in 1994           0.084         0.021         0.175           0.956            -0.035
                              [1.15]       [0.037]        [0.05]          [0.35]           [0.44]
# Observations                 2511         3920           2206            2206             1356
R-squared                       0.9          0.85          0.91             0.9             0.95



Notes: See table 3
Table 7: Interactions of Income With Hyperactivity
                               [1]        [2]          [3]                     [4]              [5]             [6]            [7]       [8]         [9]         [10]
                           Canada        U.S.       Canada                    U.S.           Canada           U.S.         Canada       U.S.      Canada        U.S.
1. OLS - Income             Delinq.    Delinq.     Grade Rep.              Grade Rep.         Math           Math          Reading    Reading    Special Ed. Special Ed.
Interaction                  0.000      -0.004       -0.011                  -0.003           0.752           0.069          0.616      0.614      -0.016      -0.003
                            [0.01]      [0.23]      [4.16]**                 [0.49]          [2.30]**        [0.15]        [2.47]**    [1.25]     [2.72]**     [0.34]
Hyperactivity 1994           0.015      0.014        0.012                   0.005            -1.758         -0.896         -1.164     -1.428      0.031        0.009
                           [3.37]**    [1.83]*      [6.23]**                 [1.52]          [8.26]**       [3.98]**       [6.79]**   [5.58]**    [7.23]**    [2.16]**
Average Income               0.008      -0.066       -0.006                  -0.038           5.086          15.039          3.556     10.909      0.013       -0.011
 [100,000]                  [0.33]      [0.62]       [0.80]                  [1.45]          [3.38]**       [5.16]**       [2.79]**   [3.20]**     [0.78]      [0.31]
Observations                 2516        1303         3925                    3240             2209           2501           2209       2501        1357        1401
R-squared                     0.09       0.06         0.04                    0.06             0.15            0.23           0.13       0.2        0.15         0.05

2. Fixed Effects
Interaction                   0.024           -0.033          -0.013          0.001           0.195           0.107         -0.625      0.581      -0.004      -0.021
                              [1.02]          [0.44]         [2.58]**         [0.06]          [0.28]         [0.12]         [1.11]     [0.60]      [0.33]       [1.14]
Hyperactivity 1994            -0.006          -0.002          0.012           0.004           -1.295         -1.041         -0.289     -1.083      0.024        0.018
                              [0.40]          [0.08]         [3.51]**         [0.93]         [2.56]**       [2.26]**        [0.70]    [2.20]**    [2.19]**     [1.88]*
Observations                   2514            1304            3923            3241            2208           2501           2208       2501        1357         1401
R-squared                       0.9             0.9            0.85            0.76            0.91            0.86           0.9        0.86       0.95         0.85

3. Fixed Effects - Indicator for Hyperactivity Score >=90th percentile
Interaction                   0.369        -0.045        -0.215         -0.267                0.455          -16.888        -9.856     -6.455      -0.139      -0.128
                             [1.19]        [0.05]       [3.15]**       [1.79]*                [0.05]          [1.10]        [1.33]     [0.40]      [1.02]      [0.41]
Hperactivity Score 1994      -0.285        0.132         0.178          0.155                 -9.732          1.824         -0.220     -3.556      0.466        0.17
 Above 90th percentile       [1.52]        [0.43]       [4.21]**      [2.86]**                [1.51]          [0.31]        [0.04]     [0.56]     [4.11]**     [1.28]
Observations                  2514          1304          3923           3241                  2208            2501          2208       2501        1357        1401
R-squared                      0.9           0.9          0.85           0.76                  0.91            0.86           0.9       0.86        0.96        0.85



Notes: See Table 3.
The first stage F-statistic for test that the parent score and its interaction with income are jointly 0 in our IV models is 79 .
Table 8: Effects of Hyperactivity in 1994 and Income on Treatment in 1994
                           [1]         [2]        [3]        [4]       [5]       [6]       [7]         [8]       [9]       [10]       [11]       [12]
                       Canada      Canada     Canada     Canada    Canada    Canada       U.S.       U.S.       U.S.       U.S.       U.S.       U.S.
1. OLS                   Drug        Drug      Psych.    Psych.      Any       Any        Drug       Drug      Psych.     Psych.      Any        Any
Hyper Score 1994         0.005       0.005      0.005      0.006     0.009     0.009     0.007       0.008     0.013      0.009      0.014      0.011
                       [5.85]** [3.89]** [5.35]** [3.49]** [7.44]**          [4.73]**   [7.02]**   [3.12]**   [8.78]**   [3.36]**   [9.53]**   [3.90]**
Interaction hyper                   -0.001                -0.002              -0.002                    0                 0.009                 0.008
 & income                           [0.39]                [0.70]              [0.58]                [0.03]                [1.48]                [1.32]
Average Income          -0.005      -0.003     -0.007     -0.002    -0.009    -0.004    -0.004      -0.003     0.045      0.003       0.03      -0.009
 [100,000]              [1.26]      [0.61]     [0.81]     [0.16]    [1.01]    [0.39]    [0.29]      [0.16]    [2.15]**    [0.11]     [1.35]     [0.31]
# Observations           3925        3925       3920       3920      3920      3920      3749        3749       3745       3745       3745       3745
R-squared                 0.04        0.04       0.03       0.03      0.05      0.05     0.04         0.04      0.09       0.09       0.09       0.09

2. Fixed Effects
Hyper Score 1994       0.002      0.001      0.005       0.010     0.006       0.01      0.009       0.011     0.015      0.013      0.018      0.013
                      [2.00]**    [0.67]    [2.77]**   [3.16]**   [3.31]**   [2.94]**   [5.46]**   [3.44]**   [6.95]**   [3.11]**   [7.11]**   [2.77]**
Interaction hyper                 0.001                 -0.009                -0.007                -0.004                0.006                 0.012
 & income                         [0.49]               [1.97]**               [1.36]                [0.60]                [0.75]                [1.25]
# Observations         3923        3923      3918        3918      3918        3918      3749        3749      3745        3745      3745        3745
R-squared              0.87        0.87      0.87         0.87     0.87        0.87      0.72         0.72     0.789      0.789      0.77        0.77


Notes: See Table 3.
Comparing US and Canadian Outcomes by Hyperactivity Score
                                        Delinquency - U.S.                                                Delinqency -CAN                                               Grade Rep - U.S.                                                Grade Rep -CAN




                                                                                            .5
                                                                                                                                                     .2    .3




                                                                                 .3 .4
                                                                                                                                                .1




                                                                           .2




 Prob. of Delinquency
                                                                          Prob. of Delinquency
                                                                                                                                         0
                                                                                                                                                                                                           0 .05 .1 .15 .2




 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7
                                                                                                                                                                                                         Prob.of Grade Repetition




                                                                                                                                       Prob. of Grade Repetition
                                      0        5        10         15                              0        5       10        15                                     0        5       10        15                              0       5        10        15
                                    Parent reported hyperactivity score                         teacher reported hyperactivity score                               Parent reported hyperactivity score                       teacher reported hyperactivity score
                                     bandwidth = .8                                                   bandwidth = .8                                                bandwidth = .8                                                  bandwidth = .8



                                         Math Score - U.S.                                                Math Score -CAN                                            Reading Score - U.S.                                            Reading Score -C AN




                                                                           7     8     9
                                                                                                                                                                                                          9 10 11 12




                                                                          Math Score
                                                                                                                                                                                                         Reading Score




  PIAT Mathematics
                                                                                       6
                                                                                                                                        Mean Reading Score
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     8




 35 40 45 50 55 60
                                                                                                                                       30 40 50 60 70
                                      0        5       10        15                                0        5       10        15                                     0        5       10        15                              0       5        10        15
                                    Parent reported hyperactivity score                         teacher reported hyperactivity score                               Parent reported hyperactivity score                       teacher reported hyperactivity score
                                     bandwidth = .8                                                   bandwidth = .8                                                bandwidth = .8                                                  bandwidth = .8



                                         Special Ed - U.S.                                                Special Ed -CAN




                                                                                   .2    .4    .6




      0 .05 .1 .15 .2 .25
                                                                            0
                                                                          Prob.of Special Education
                                      0        5       10        15                                0        5       10        15




 Probability of Special Education
                                    Parent reported hyperactivity score                         teacher reported hyperactivity score
                                     bandwidth = .8                                                   bandwidth = .8
