                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                INVESTOR SENTIMENT AND
                          THE CROSS-SECTION OF STOCK RETURNS

                                             Malcolm Baker
                                             Jeffrey Wurgler

                                          Working Paper 10449
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w10449


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       April 2004




We thank Ned Elton, Xavier Gabaix, Owen Lamont, Martin Lettau, Anthony Lynch, Sheridan Titman, and
Jeremy Stein for helpful comments, as well as participants of seminars at Baruch College, Chicago
Quantitative Alliance, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, Harvard University, Indiana University,
NBER, Norwegian School of Economics and Business, Norwegian School of Management, University of
Amsterdam, University of British Columbia, University of Illinois, University of Texas, and University of
Wisconsin. We gratefully acknowledge financial support from the Q Group (Baker and Wurgler) and the
Division of Research of the Harvard Business School (Baker). The views expressed herein are those of the
author(s) and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2004 by Malcolm Baker and Jeffrey Wurgler. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
Investor Sentiment and the Cross-Section of Stock Returns
Malcolm Baker and Jeffrey Wurgler
NBER Working Paper No. 10449
April 2004
JEL No. G12
                                         ABSTRACT

We examine how investor sentiment affects the cross-section of stock returns. Theory predicts that

a broad wave of sentiment will disproportionately affect stocks whose valuations are highly

subjective and are difficult to arbitrage. We test this prediction by studying how the cross-section

of subsequent stock returns varies with proxies for beginning-of-period investor sentiment. When

sentiment is low, subsequent returns are relatively high on smaller stocks, high volatility stocks,

unprofitable stocks, non-dividend-paying stocks, extreme-growth stocks, and distressed stocks,

consistent with an initial underpricing of these stocks. When sentiment is high, on the other hand,

these patterns attenuate or fully reverse. The results are consistent with predictions and appear

unlikely to reflect an alternative explanation based on compensation for systematic risk.

Malcolm Baker
Harvard Business School
Morgan Hall 361
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
mbaker@hbs.edu

Jeffrey Wurgler
Stern School of Business, Suite 9-190
New York University
44 West 4th Street
New York, NY 10012
and NBER
jwurgler@stern.nyu.edu
I.         Introduction

           Classical finance theory gives no role to investor sentiment. Investors are rational and

diversify to optimize the statistical properties of their portfolios. Competition among them leads

to an equilibrium in which prices equal the rationally discounted value of expected cash flows,

and in which the cross-section of expected returns depends on the cross-section of systematic

risks.1 Even if some investors are irrational, classical theory argues, their demands will be offset

by arbitrageurs and similar conclusions for prices will obtain.

           In this paper, we present evidence that investor sentiment actually has strong effects on

the cross-section of stock prices. We start with simple theoretical predictions. Given that a

mispricing is the result of an uninformed demand shock in the presence of a binding arbitrage

constraint, a broad-based wave of sentiment is predicted to have cross-sectional effects, as

opposed to raise or lower all prices equally, when either sentiment-based demands very across

stocks or arbitrage constraints vary across stocks. In practice, these two channels lead to quite

similar predictions, because stocks that are likely to be most sensitive to speculative demand –

those with highly subjective valuations – also tend to be the riskiest and costliest to arbitrage.

Concretely, then, theory suggests two separate channels through which the stocks of newer,

smaller, highly volatile firms, firms in distress or with extreme growth potential, firms without

dividends, and firms with like characteristics, would be expected to be relatively more affected

by investor sentiment.

           To investigate this prediction empirically, and to get a more tangible sense of the

intrinsically elusive concept of investor sentiment, we begin with a brief summary of rises and

falls in U.S. market sentiment from 1961 through the recent Internet bubble. This summary is


1
    See Gomes, Kogan, and Zhang (2003) for a recent model in this tradition.



                                                            1
based on anecdotal accounts and thus is only suggestive, but it appears broadly consistent with

our theoretical predictions, and suggests more formal empirical tests are warranted.

        Our main empirical approach is as follows. Because cross-sectional patterns of sentiment-

driven mispricing would be difficult to identify directly, we look for the hypothesized patterns in

subsequent stock returns that appear when one conditions on proxies for beginning-of-period

investor sentiment. The idea is that conditional cross-sectional patterns in subsequent returns

may represent the initial patterns of mispricing correcting themselves over time. For example,

relatively low future returns on young firms when sentiment was measured to be high suggests

that young firms were overvalued ex ante. As usual, there is a joint hypothesis problem with this

approach. We must also consider the possibility that any such predictability patterns are

compensation for systematic risks.

        The first step is to gather proxies for investor sentiment to use as time series conditioning

variables. We use a number of proxies suggested by recent work, and we also construct a novel

composite index based on their first principal component. To further reduce the likelihood that

these proxies are connected to systematic risks, we orthogonalize each of them to a wide range of

macroeconomic conditions. The resulting sentiment proxies are highly correlated and visibly line

up with anecdotal accounts of past bubbles.

        We then examine whether the cross-section of stock returns varies with beginning-of-

period sentiment in the predicted manner. We use monthly stock returns between 1963 and 2001.

Our first method is to sort firm-month observations according to the level of sentiment, first, and

then the decile rank of a given firm characteristic, second. We find that when sentiment is low

(below sample median), small stocks earn particularly high subsequent returns, but when

sentiment is high (above median), there is no size effect at all. Conditional patterns are even




                                                     2
sharper when sorting on other characteristics. When sentiment is low subsequent returns are

higher on young stocks than older stocks, high-return volatility than low-return volatility stocks,

unprofitable stocks than profitable ones, and nonpayers than dividend payers. When sentiment is

high, these patterns completely reverse. In other words, several characteristics that were not

known to have (and do not have) any unconditional predictive power actually reveal sign-flip

patterns, in the predicted directions, when one conditions on sentiment.

        The sorts also suggest that sentiment affects extreme growth and distressed firms in

similar ways. When stocks are sorted into deciles by sales growth, book-to-market, or external

financing activity, growth and distress firms tend to lie at opposing extremes, with more stable

firms in middle deciles. We find that when sentiment is low, the subsequent returns on stocks at

both extremes are especially high relative to their unconditional average, while stocks in middle

deciles are less affected by sentiment. This U-shaped pattern in the conditional difference of

subsequent returns also appears consistent with theoretical predictions, because both extreme-

growth and distressed firms are likely to have relatively subjective valuations and to be relatively

hard to arbitrage. Again, note that this pattern, like the monotonic conditional patterns described

above, are averaged away in unconditional studies.

        We confirm the statistical significance of these patterns with two regression approaches,

and then turn to the alternative explanation that they reflect compensation for systematic risks.

As a start, our sentiment proxies are orthogonal to contemporaneous macroeconomic conditions.

In addition, other aspects of the results cast doubt on this explanation. Note that it requires either

time variation in rational, market-wide risk premia or time variation in the cross-sectional pattern

of risk, i.e., beta loadings. We test the second possibility directly and find no link between the

patterns in predictability and patterns in betas with market returns or consumption growth. If risk




                                                      3
is not changing over time, then the first possibility requires not just time-variation in risk premia

but changes in sign – meaning that in half of our sample period (when sentiment proxies are

low), old, less volatile, profitable, dividend-paying firms require a risk premium over young,

highly volatile, unprofitable, nonpayers. Such a pattern is at best counterintuitive. Finally, we

uncover some conditional patterns in returns around firms’ earnings announcements, which

suggest that a component of the results can be attributed to expectational errors. For these

reasons, compensation for systematic risk is not a promising explanation.

        The evidence presented here challenges the classical view of the cross-section of stock

prices and carries significant implications, some of which we mention in the conclusion. Here we

note that the paper builds on several current themes in asset pricing. The results complement

earlier work that suggests that sentiment helps to explain the time series of returns (Kothari and

Shanken (1997), Neal and Wheatley (1998), Shiller (1981, 2000), and Baker and Wurgler

(2000)). Recent work including Campbell and Cochrane (2000), Wachter (2000), Lettau and

Ludvigson (2001), and Menzly, Santos, and Veronesi (2002) examines the effects of conditional

systematic risks; we condition on sentiment. Daniel and Titman (1997) test a characteristics-

based model for the cross-section of expected returns; we extend their specification and provide

it with a specific, conditional motivation. Shleifer (2000) surveys early work on sentiment and

limited arbitrage, two key theoretical ingredients here. Barberis and Shleifer (2003), Barberis,

Shleifer, and Wurgler (2003), and Peng and Xiong (2002) discuss models of category-level

trading, and Fama and French (1993) document strong comovement of stocks of similar sizes

and book-to-market ratios; sentiment-driven demand shocks for categories of stocks with similar

characteristics are central to our results. Finally, we unify and extend previously-documented




                                                       4
relationships among sentiment, IPOs, and small stock returns (Lee, Shleifer, and Thaler (1991),

Swaminathan (1996), and Neal and Wheatley (1998)).

        Section II derives predictions. Section III provides a qualitative history of recent

speculative episodes. Section IV describes the empirical hypotheses and the data, and the main

empirical tests are contained in Section V. Section VI concludes.



II.     Theoretical effects of sentiment on the cross-section

        A mispricing is the result of an uninformed demand shock and a limit on arbitrage. This

observation suggests that there are two distinct channels through which investor sentiment, as

defined more precisely below, might affect the cross-section of stock prices. In the first channel,

sentimental demand shocks vary in the cross-section, while limits on arbitrage are held constant.

In the second, the difficulty of arbitrage varies across stocks but sentiment is generic. We discuss

the two channels in turn.

A.      Cross-sectional variation in sentiment

        One possible definition of investor sentiment is the propensity to speculate. Under this

definition, sentiment drives the relative demand for speculative investments, and so causes cross-

sectional effects even if arbitrage forces are the same across stocks.

        What makes certain stocks more vulnerable to broad shifts in the propensity to speculate?

Perhaps the main factor is the subjectivity of their valuations. For instance, consider a canonical

young, unprofitable, extreme-growth potential stock. The lack of an earnings history combined

with the presence of apparently unlimited growth opportunities allows unsophisticated investors

to defend, with equal plausibility, a wide spectrum of valuations, from much too low to much too

high, as suits their sentiment. In a bubble period, when the propensity to speculate is apparently




                                                     5
high, this profile of characteristics also allows investment bankers or, worse, swindlers, to further

argue for the high end of valuations. By contrast, the value of a firm with a long earnings history

and stable dividends is much less subjective, and so its stock is likely to be less affected by

fluctuations in the propensity to speculate.2

         This channel suggests how variation in the propensity to speculate may generally affect

the cross-section, but not how sentimental investors actually choose stocks. We suggest that they

simply demand stocks that have the bundle of salient characteristics that is compatible with their

sentiment.3 That is, those with a low propensity to speculate may demand profitable, dividend-

paying stocks not because profitability and dividends are correlated with some unobservable firm

property that defines safety, but precisely because the salient characteristics “profitability” and

“dividends” are used to infer safety.4 Likewise, the salient characteristics “no earnings,” “young

age,” and “no dividends” may mark the stock as speculative. This investment process seems

potentially more realistic than that of Markowitz (1959), in which investors view individual

securities in terms of their statistical properties.

B.       Cross-sectional variation in arbitrage




2
  The favorite-longshot bias in racetrack betting is a nice application of the idea that investors with a high propensity
to speculate (racetrack bettors) will overprice the most speculative bets (longshots have the most negative expected
returns; see Hausch and Ziemba (1995)).
3
  The idea that investors view securities as a vector of salient characteristics borrows from Lancaster (1966, 1971),
who views consumer demand theory from the perspective that the utility of a consumer good (e.g, oranges) derives
from more primitive characteristics (fiber and vitamin C).
4
  The implications of categorization for finance have recently been explored by Baker and Wurgler (2003), Barberis
and Shleifer (2003), Barberis, Shleifer, and Wurgler (2003), Greenwood and Sosner (2003), and Peng and Xiong
(2002). Note that if investors infer category membership from salient characteristics (some psychologists propose
that category membership is determined by the presence of defining or characteristic features, e.g. Smith, Shoben,
and Rips (1974)), then sentiment-driven demand will be directly connected to characteristics even if sentimental
investors undertake an intervening process of categorization and trade entirely at the category level. It is also
empirically convenient to boil key investment categories down into vectors of stable and measurable characteristics:
one can use the same empirical framework to study such episodes as the late-1960’s growth stocks bubble and the
Internet bubble.



                                                           6
        Investor sentiment might also be reasonably defined as optimism or pessimism about

stocks in general. Indiscriminate waves of sentiment still affect the cross-section, however, if

arbitrage forces are relatively weaker in a subset of stocks.

        This channel is better understood than the cross-sectional variation in sentiment channel.

A body of theoretical and empirical research shows that arbitrage tends to be particularly risky

and costly for young, small, unprofitable extreme-growth or distressed stocks. Their high

idiosyncratic risk makes relative-value arbitrage especially risky (Wurgler and Zhuravskaya

(2002)). They tend to be more costly to trade (Amihud and Mendelsohn (1986)) and particularly

expensive, sometimes impossible, to sell short (D’Avolio (2002), Geczy, Musto, and Reed

(2002), Jones and Lamont (2002), Duffie, Garleanu, and Pedersen (2003), Lamont and Thaler

(2003), and Mitchell, Pulvino, and Stafford (2002)). Further, their lower liquidity also exposes

would-be arbitrageurs to predatory attacks (Brunnermeier and Pedersen (2003)).

        Note that, in practice, it is generally the case that the same stocks that are the hardest to

arbitrage are also most vulnerable to sentiment. While for expositional purposes we outline

these two channels separately, they are likely to have overlapping effects. And while this makes

the channels themselves difficult to distinguish empirically, it makes it easier to derive robust

empirical predictions for the cross-sectional effects of sentiment, broadly defined. Indeed, the

two channels may even amplify each other. For example, the fact that investors can convince

themselves of an especially wide range of valuations in certain regions of the cross-section is a

noise-trader risk that further deters short-horizon arbitrageurs (De Long, Shleifer, Summers, and

Waldmann (1990) and Shleifer and Vishny (1997)).5


5
 We do not incorporate the equilibrium prediction of DeLong et al., namely that securities with more exposure to
sentiment have higher unconditional expected returns. Elton, Gruber, and Busse (1998) argue that expected returns
are not higher on stocks that have higher sensitivities to the closed-end fund discount, a proxy for investor
sentiment.



                                                         7
III.    An anecdotal history of investor sentiment, 1961-2002

        In this section we offer a brief summary of U.S. stock market bubbles between 1961 to

2002, matching the period of our own data. The reader eager to see results may skip this section,

but it will prove useful for three reasons. First, despite great interest in the effects of investor

sentiment, the literature does not appear to contain even the most basic qualitative description of

recent speculative episodes. Second, a knowledge of the rough timing of these episodes will

allow us to make a preliminary judgment about the accuracy of the quantitative proxies for

sentiment we develop later. Third, the discussion sheds some initial, albeit anecdotal light on the

plausibility of our theoretical predictions.

        Our brief history of sentiment is distilled from several secondary sources. Kindleberger

(2001) draws general lessons from bubbles and crashes over the past few hundred years, while

Brown (1991), Dreman (1979), Graham (1973), Malkiel (1990, 1999), Shiller (2000), and Siegel

(1998) focus more specifically on recent U.S. stock market episodes. We take each of these

accounts with a grain of salt, and emphasize only those themes that appear repeatedly.

        We start in 1961, a year in which Graham (1973), Malkiel (1990) and Brown (1991) note

a high demand for small, young, growth stocks. Dreman (1979, p. 70) confirms their accounts.

Malkiel writes of a “new-issue mania” that was concentrated on new “tronics” firms. “… The

tronics boom came back to earth in 1962. The tailspin started early in the year and exploded in a

horrendous selling wave … Growth stocks took the brunt of the decline, falling much further

than the general market” (p. 54 - 57).

        The next bubble develops in 1967 and 1968. Brown writes that “scores of franchisers,

computer firms, and mobile home manufactures seemed to promise overnight wealth. … [while]




                                                        8
quality was pretty much forgotten” (p. 90). Malkiel and Dreman also note this pattern – a focus

on firms with strong earnings growth or potential, and an avoidance of “the major industrial

giants, ‘buggywhip companies,’ as they were sometimes contemptuously called” (Dreman 1979,

p. 74-75). Another characteristic apparently out of favor was dividends. According to the New

York Times, “during the speculative market of the late 1960’s many brokers told customers that it

didn’t matter whether a company paid a dividend – just so long as its stock kept going up”

(9/13/1976). But “after 1968, as it became clear that capital losses were possible, investors came

to value dividends” (10/7/1999). In summarizing the performance of stocks from the end of 1968

through August 1971, Graham (1973) writes: “[our] comparative results undoubtedly reflect the

tendency of smaller issues of inferior quality to be relatively overvalued in bull markets, and not

only to suffer more serious declines than the stronger issues in the ensuing price collapse, but

also to delay their full recovery – in many cases indefinitely” (p. 212).

        Anecdotal accounts invariably describe the early 1970’s as a bear market, with sentiment

at a low level. However, a set of established, large, stable, consistently profitable stocks known

as the “nifty fifty” enjoyed notably high valuations. Brown, Malkiel, and Siegel (1998) each

highlight this episode. Siegel writes, “All of these stocks had proven growth records, continual

increases in dividends … and high market capitalization” (p. 106). Note that this speculative

episode is a mirror image of those described above (and below). They center on small, young,

unprofitable growth stocks in periods of high sentiment, while the nifty fifty episode appears to

be a bubble in a set of firms with an opposite set of characteristics (old, large, and continuous

earnings and dividend growth) and happens in a period of low sentiment.

        The late 1970’s through mid-1980’s are described as a period of generally high sentiment

that saw a series of speculative episodes. Dreman describes a bubble in gambling issues in 1977




                                                      9
and 78. Ritter (1984) studies the hot issue market of 1980, finding greater initial returns on IPOs

of natural resource start-ups than on larger, mature, profitable offerings. Of 1983, Malkiel (p. 74-

75) writes that “the high-technology new-issue boom of the first half of 1983 was an almost

perfect replica of the 1960’s episodes … The bubble appears to have burst early in the second

half of 1983 … the carnage in the small company and new-issue markets was truly catastrophic.”

Brown confirms this account. Of the mid-1980’s, Malkiel writes that “What electronics was to

the 1960’s, biotechnology became to the 1980’s. … new issues of biotech companies were

eagerly gobbled up. … having positive sales and earnings was actually considered a drawback”

(p. 77-79). But by 1987 and 1988, “market sentiment had changed from an acceptance of an

exciting story … to a desire to stay closer to earth with low-multiple stocks that actually pay

dividends” (p. 79).

        The late-1990’s bubble in technology stocks will be familiar to the reader. By all

accounts, sentiment was broadly high before the bubble began to burst in 2000. Cochrane (2002)

and Ofek and Richardson (2002) offer detailed perspectives on the bubble. Malkiel draws

parallels to episodes in the 1960’s, 1970’s, and 1980’s, and Shiller (2000) compares the Internet

bubble to the late 1920’s. As in earlier speculative episodes that occurred in high sentiment

periods, demand for dividend payers seems to have been low (New York Times, 1/6/1998).

Ljungqvist and Wilhelm (2003) find that 80% of 1999 and 2000 IPOs had negative earnings per

share and that the median age of 1999 IPOs was 4 years. This contrasts with an average age of

over 9 years just prior to the emergence of the bubble, and of over 12 years by 2001 and 2002

(Ritter, 2003).

        These anecdotal accounts suggest that there may indeed be regular patterns in the effect

of sentiment on the cross-section. One pattern seems to be that canonical extreme-growth stocks




                                                    10
are especially prone to bubbles, and subsequent crashes, consistent with the observation that they

are relatively appealing to speculators and optimists and at the same time are hard to arbitrage.

The “nifty fifty” bubble is an exception to this pattern. However, anecdotal accounts suggest that

this bubble occurs in a period of broadly low sentiment, so it might still be consistent with our

main cross-sectional prediction that an increase in sentiment will increase the relative price of

stocks that are most subjective to value and hardest to arbitrage. We turn to more formal tests of

this prediction.



IV.     Empirical approach and data

A.      Empirical approach

        Theory and historical anecdote both suggest that sentiment may cause systematic patterns

of mispricing. Because mispricing is hard to identify directly, however, we will look for

systematic patterns of correction of mispricings in the form of conditional patterns in cross-

sectional return predictability. For example, a pattern in which returns on young and unprofitable

firms are low when beginning-of-period sentiment is estimated to be high may represent the

correction of a bubble in growth stocks.

        Specifically, we organize our empirical work around the following model:

         Et −1 [Rit ] = a + b1 ' x it−1 + b 2 ' Tt −1 x it−1                                             (1)

where i indexes firms or securities, t is time, x is a vector of firm or security characteristics, and

T is a time series conditioning variable that proxies for investor sentiment. The null hypothesis is

that b2 is zero or, more precisely, that any nonzero effect is due to rational compensation for

bearing systematic risk. The alternative is that b2 is nonzero and reflects the correction of




                                                               11
mispricings. We refer to Eq. (1) as a “conditional characteristics model,” as it adds conditional

effects to the characteristics model of Daniel and Titman (1997).

        We use Eq. (1) as an organizing framework to test for conditional characteristics effects,

not as a structural model. We will sort stocks by x and T and tabulate the subsequent returns in

each bin, and we will run predictive regressions. Either way, the strategy is to see whether the

manner in which characteristics spread future returns depends on the sentiment proxies used as

conditioning variables. This will help us to answer the first-order question of whether sentiment,

broadly defined, has cross-sectional effects. We will also address the question of whether any

conditional characteristics effects reflect mispricing or compensation for systematic risk. We will

leave interesting but subtler questions, such as the extent to which rejections of the null are due

to cross-sectional variation in sentiment or constraints on arbitrage, to future research.

B.      Characteristics and returns

        The firm-level data is from the merged CRSP-Compustat database. The sample includes

all common stock (share codes 10 and 11) of nonfinancial firms (excluding SIC code 6) between

1962 through 2001. Following Fama and French (1992), we match accounting data for fiscal

year-ends in calendar year t-1 to (monthly) returns from July t through June t+1, and we also

tend to use their variable definitions.

        Table 1 shows summary statistics. Panel A summarizes returns variables. Following

common practice, momentum MOM is defined as the cumulative raw return for the eleven-

month period between 12 and two months prior to the observation return. (Note we will examine

momentum as a control or robustness variable, not as a firm characteristic in itself.)

        The remaining panels summarize the firm and security characteristics that we consider.

The previous sections’ discussions point us directly to several variables. To that list, we add a




                                                     12
few more characteristics that, by introspection, seem likely to be salient to investors. Overall, we

group characteristics roughly, as pertaining most directly to firm size and age, profitability,

dividends, growth opportunities, and distress.

        Panel B summarizes size and age characteristics. Market equity ME from June of year t,

measured as price times shares outstanding from CRSP, is matched to monthly returns from July

of year t through June of year t+1. Age is the number of years since the firm’s first appearance on

CRSP, measured to the nearest month. 6 Sigma is the standard deviation of monthly returns over

the twelve months ending in June of year t. If there are at least nine returns to estimate it, Sigma

is then matched to monthly returns from July of year t through June of year t+1.

        Panel C summarizes profitability characteristics. The return on equity E+/BE is positive

for profitable firms and zero for unprofitable firms. Earnings (E) is income before extraordinary

items (Item 18) plus income statement deferred taxes (Item 50) minus preferred dividends (Item

19), if earnings are positive; book equity (BE) is shareholders equity (Item 60) plus balance sheet

deferred taxes (Item 35). E>0 is a dummy variable for profitable firms.

        Panel D summarizes dividend characteristics. Dividends to equity D/BE is dividends per

share at the ex date (Item 26) times Compustat shares outstanding (Item 25) divided by book

equity. D>0 is a dummy for positive dividends per share by the ex date. The recent decline in the

percentage of firms that pay dividends noted by Fama and French (2001) is apparent. As they

point out, this is partly attributable to the increasing proportion of unprofitable firms.

        Panel E summarizes characteristics that serve as indictors of growth opportunities,

distress, or both. The elements of book-to-market equity BE/ME are defined above. External

finance activity EF/A is defined as the change in assets (Item 6) minus the change in retained
6
  Barry and Brown (1984) use the more accurate term “period of listing.” A large number of firms appear on CRSP
for the first time in December 1972, when coverage of NASDAQ begins. Excluding these firms from our analyses
of age does not change any of our inferences.



                                                        13
earnings (Item 36) divided by assets. Sales growth (GS) is the change in net sales (Item 12)

divided by prior-year net sales. We measure and report sales growth GS/10 as the decile of the

firm’s sales growth in the prior year relative to NYSE firms’ decile breakpoints.

        It is important to bear in mind that the variables in Panel E capture multiple effects. For

instance, book-to-market wears three distinct hats: extremely high values are likely to indicate

distress; extremely low values are likely to indicate high growth opportunities; and, as a scaled-

price variable, book-to-market also serves as a generic valuation indicator, varying with any

source of mispricing or rational expected returns. The sales growth and external finance variables

wear at least two hats: extremely low values (which are negative) are likely to indicate distress;

extremely high values are likely to indicate high growth opportunities. Also, to the extent that

market timing motives are important to external finance, that variable also serves as a generic

misvaluation indicator.

        In Panels C, D, and E, the accounting data for fiscal years ending in calendar year t-1 are

matched to monthly returns from July of year t through June of year t+1. To reduce the influence

of outliers and data errors, all of the explanatory variables are Winsorized each year at their 0.5

and 99.5 percentiles.

C.      Investor sentiment

        Prior work suggests a number of proxies for sentiment to use as time-series conditioning

variables. Of course, there is no such thing as a perfect measure of sentiment, and each of the

available proxies has disadvantages. But to determine the extent to which our results are robust,

we consider six separate proxies – the average closed-end fund discount, NYSE share turnover,

the number and average first-day returns on IPOs, the equity share in new issues, and the




                                                    14
dividend premium – as well as a composite index based on their first principal component. The

sentiment proxies are measured annually from 1962 through 2001.

        To isolate the sentiment component of the proxies from business cycle components, we

orthogonalize each proxy with respect to several macroeconomic variables. Specifically, we

regress each of the raw proxies on growth in the industrial production index (Federal Reserve

Statistical Release G.17), growth in consumer durables, nondurables, and services (all from BEA

National Income Accounts Table 2.10), and a dummy variable for NBER recessions. We take the

residuals from these regressions as a cleaner proxy that is independent of major business cycle

effects. All of our results are based on these cleaned proxies.

        Table 2 summarizes the raw proxies in Panel A and the cleaned versions in Panel B.

Figure 1 plots both versions. The closed-end fund discount CEFD is the average difference

between the NAV of closed-end stock fund shares and their market prices. Prior work suggests

that the discount is inversely related to sentiment. Zweig (1973) uses the discount to forecast

reversion in Dow Jones stocks, and Lee, Shleifer, and Thaler (1991) argue that sentiment

explains several features of the discount. We take the value-weighted average discount on

closed-end stock funds for 1962 through 1993 from Neal and Wheatley (1998), for 1994 through

1998 from CDA/Wiesenberger, and for 1999 through 2001 from turn-of-the-year issues of the

Wall Street Journal.

        NYSE share turnover is based on the ratio of reported share volume to average shares

listed from the NYSE Fact Book. Baker and Stein (2002) suggest that turnover, and more

generally liquidity, can serve as a sentiment index. In a market with short-sales constraints,

irrational investors participate and thus add liquidity only when they are optimistic, and hence

high liquidity tends to coincide with overvaluation. Consistent with this interpretation, Jones




                                                     15
(2001) finds that high turnover forecasts low market returns. Turnover displays an exponential

positive trend over our period, however, and the May 1975 elimination of fixed commissions

have a visible effect. As a partial solution, the raw turnover ratio TURN is detrended by the five-

year moving average (specifically, the log of the ratio is detrended by its moving average). This

helps the variable to identify sharp changes in turnover, but it will clearly still pick up the sharp

changes caused by market structure.

         The IPO market is often viewed as sensitive to sentiment, and high first-day returns on

IPOs may also be a measure of investor enthusiasm. Likewise, the low idiosyncratic returns on

IPOs are often interpreted in terms of market timing (Stigler (1964), Ritter (1991)). We take the

number of IPOs NIPO and the average first-day returns RIPO in a given year from Jay Ritter’s

website, which updates the sample in Ibbotson, Sindelar, and Ritter (1994). Of course, there are

many non-sentiment reasons for why IPO volume and so-called underpricing vary over time, but

they do not have direct implications for cross-sectional return predictability.

         The share of equity issues in total equity and debt issues is another measure of financing

activity that may capture an aspect of sentiment. Baker and Wurgler (2000) find that when the

equity share is in its bottom (top) historical quartile, the next year’s equal-weighted market

return averages 27% (-8%), and argue that part of this predictability reflects market timing by

firms made possible by sentiment-driven mispricing. The equity share is defined as gross equity

issuance divided by gross equity plus gross long-term debt issuance using data from the Federal

Reserve Bulletin.7




7
  While they both reflect equity issues, the number of IPOs and the equity share have important differences. The
equity share includes seasoned offerings, is known to predict market returns, and scales by total external finance to
isolate the composition of finance from the level. On the other hand, the IPO variables may better reflect demand for
certain IPO-like regions of the cross-section that theory and history suggest are most sensitive to sentiment.



                                                          16
        The dividend premium PD-ND is the log difference of the average market-to-book ratios of

payers and nonpayers. Baker and Wurgler (2002) motivate the dividend premium as a proxy for

relative investor demand for dividend payers. Because Fama and French (2001) find that payers

are larger, more profitable, and have weaker growth opportunities, the dividend premium may

also pick up the relative investor demand for this correlated bundle of characteristics.

        Intuitively, to detect the hypothesized cross-sectional patterns in predictability, we want

to condition on turning points in investor sentiment. But the sentiment proxies themselves have

certain lead-lag relationships, raising the possibility that different variables may reflect the same

sentiment factor at different times. For instance, Ibbotson and Jaffe (1975), Lowry and Schwert

(2002), and Benveniste, Wilhelm, Ljungqvist, and Yu (2003) find that IPO volume lags the first-

day returns on IPOs. One interpretation of this fact is that sentiment is in part behind the high

first-day returns, and this attracts additional IPO volume with a lag. More generally, proxies that

involve firm supply responses (S and NIPO) are likely to lag proxies that are based on investor

demand or investor behavior (RIPO, PD-ND, TURN, and CEFD).

        We also form a novel composite index SENTIMENT in order to capture the common

factor in the six proxies, and to help us identify their best relative timing. The procedure is as

follows. We start by estimating the first principal component of the six proxies and their lags.

This gives us a first-stage index with twelve loadings, one for each of the current and lagged

proxies. We then compute the correlation between the first-stage index and the current and

lagged values of each of the proxies. Finally, we construct SENTIMENT as the first principal

component of the correlation matrix of six variables – each proxy’s lead or lag, whichever has

the higher correlation with the first-stage index.

        This procedure leads to a final, more parsimonious index:




                                                      17
        SENTIMENTt = − 0.358CEFDt + 0.402TURN t−1 + 0.414 NIPOt

                              + 0. 464 RIPOt−1 + 0.371S t − 0.431Pt D−1− ND                         (2)

where for Eq. (2) each of the six components was first cleaned of macroeconomic conditions and

standardized. The first principal component explains 53% of the (standardized) sample variance,

and only the first eigenvalue is above 1.00, so we conclude that one factor captures the common

variation. The correlation between the twelve-term first-stage index and the SENTIMENT index

is 0.96, suggesting that little information is lost in dropping six terms.

        Certain aspects of this index are intuitively appealing. First, each individual sentiment

proxy enters with the expected sign. Second, all but one of the proxies enter with the expected

timing – with the exception of CEFD, price and investor behavior variables lead firm supply

variables. We will make use of this pattern in the subsequent analysis, i.e. we will condition on

the first predetermined value of CEFD, NIPO, S, and SENTIMENT, and the lag of that value for

TURN, RIPO, and PD-ND. Third, the index irons out some extreme observations. The dividend

premium and the first-day IPO returns reached unprecedented levels in 1999, so for these proxies

to work as individual predictors in the full sample, these levels must be matched exactly to

extreme future returns.

        Figure 1 shows that the sentiment proxies line up well with anecdotal accounts of

sentiment. Most proxies point to low sentiment in the first few years of the sample, which follow

the 1961 crash in growth stocks – the closed-end fund discount and dividend premium are high,

while turnover and equity issuance-related variables are low. Each variable identifies a spike in

sentiment in 1968 and 1969, again matching anecdotal accounts. Sentiment then tails off until,

by the mid-1970’s, it is low by most measures (recall that for turnover this is confounded by the

deregulation). The late 1970’s through mid-1980’s sees generally rising sentiment, and according



                                                       18
to the composite index, sentiment has not dropped below a medium level since 1980. At the end

of 1999, near the peak of the Internet bubble, sentiment is again high by most proxies.

        This correspondence with anecdotal accounts is encouraging. It confirms, to the extent

possible, that the proxies capture the intended variation. Also notable is that cleaning the proxies

of macro conditions has little effect on their time-series properties. Indeed, Table 2 suggests that

the cleaned proxies are equally if not more correlated with each other than are the raw proxies,

suggesting that investor sentiment can be distinguished from macroeconomic conditions. Again,

we consider only the cleaned proxies in our subsequent empirical work, in order to isolate the

effect of sentiment from macroeconomic conditions.



V.      Empirical tests

A.      Sorts

        Table 3 looks for conditional characteristics effects in a simple, nonparametric way. We

place each monthly return observation into a bin according to the decile rank that a characteristic

takes at the beginning of that month, and then according to the level of a sentiment proxy from

the end of the previous calendar year. We compute the average monthly return for that bin and

look for patterns. We report sorts on CEFD in Table 3a and SENTIMENT in Table 3b. As

discussed above, we condition returns from calendar year t on the December of year t-1 values of

CEFD and SENTIMENT. Also, to keep the meaning of the deciles relatively constant over time,

we define them based on NYSE firms. The tradeoff is that there is not a uniform distribution of

firms across bins in a given month.

        For brevity, we omit sorts on the five other sentiment proxies. They give similar results,

available upon request, and they are broken out separately in all subsequent tables because they




                                                    19
fit more compactly. But it is worth showing results for the index component CEFD alongside the

overall index, however, because CEFD is perhaps our cleanest “general” indicator of investor

sentiment – it is not mechanically connected to sentiment for any one segment of the cross-

section. In contrast, the volume of IPOs and the dividend premium could in principle be driven

by a concentrated demand for firms with IPO characteristics or dividends, respectively. By

comparing the results for CEFD to the results for other sentiment proxies, or the composite

index, we can more clearly document a general sentiment effect.

        The first rows of Table 3 show the effect of size conditional on sentiment. They reveal

that the cross-sectional size effect of Banz (1981) exists in low-sentiment conditions only, i.e.

when CEFD is positive or SENTIMENT is negative (a final reminder that here, and in all

subsequent tables, the sentiment proxies are net of macroeconomic effects). Specifically, Table

3b shows that when SENTIMENT is negative, returns average 2.33 percent per month for the

bottom ME decile and 0.91 for the top decile. A similar pattern is apparent when conditioning on

CEFD; a link between the size effect and closed-end fund discounts was previously noted by

Swaminathan (1996). This pattern helps make sense of some long-known results. Namely, the

size effect was known to be largely a January effect (Keim (1983), Blume and Stambaugh

(1983)), and the January effect, in turn, was known to be stronger after a period of low returns

(Reinganum (1983)), which is when sentiment is likely to be low.

        As an aside, note that the average returns across the first two rows of Table 3 show that

subsequent returns tend to be higher across the board when sentiment is low. This is consistent

with prior results that the equity share and turnover, for example, forecast market returns. More

generally, it supports our premise that sentiment has broad effects, and so the existence of richer

patterns within the cross-section should not be entirely surprising.




                                                    20
        The conditional cross-sectional effect of Age is especially striking. It seems that investors

tend to demand young stocks when SENTIMENT is positive and old stocks when sentiment is

negative. This is suggested by the conditional difference in returns between decile 10 and decile

1 stocks. When SENTIMENT is pessimistic, top-decile Age firms return 0.47 percent less than

bottom-decile Age firms, but return 0.72 percent more when SENTIMENT is optimistic. This is

intriguing because Age shows no unconditional effect at all.8 The strong conditional effects

simply average out across high and low sentiment periods.

        The next rows indicate that the cross-sectional effect of return volatility is conditional on

sentiment in the hypothesized manner. In particular, high Sigma stocks appear to be out of favor

when SENTIMENT is low – they earn returns of 2.25 percent per month. However, just as with

Age, the cross-sectional effect of Sigma fully reverses in low sentiment conditions.

        The next rows examine profitability and dividends. For investors, perhaps the simplest

and most salient comparison is between profitable and unprofitable (E<0) firms and payers and

nonpayers (D=0). These contrasts are summarized in the extreme right columns, where we

average returns across profitable firms and compare them to unprofitable firms, and do the same

for dividends. These characteristics again display conditional sign-flip patterns. Table 3b shows

that when SENTIMENT is positive, monthly returns are 0.32 percent higher on profitable than

unprofitable firms and 0.45 percent higher on payers than nonpayers. When it is negative,

however, returns are 0.85 percent per month lower on profitable firms and 0.77 percent lower on

payers. Importantly, the left column shows that these patterns are driven mostly by conditional

variation in the returns of unprofitable and nonpaying firms. As discussed above, because these




8
 This conclusion is in seeming contrast to Barry and Brown (1984)’s evidence of an unconditional negative period-
of-listing effect, but their sample excludes stocks listed for fewer than 61months.



                                                        21
firms tend to be more subjective to value and harder to arbitrage, theory predicts that they will be

more sensitive to swings in sentiment.

        The remaining variables – book-to-market, external finance, and sales growth – also

display intriguing patterns. Most simply, running across rows, one can see that each of them has

some unconditional explanatory power. Expected returns are generally higher for high BE/ME

stocks, low EF/A stocks, and low GS decile stocks. The EF/A result is reminiscent of Loughran

and Ritter (1995) and Spiess and Affleck-Graves (1995, 1999), while the GS result is suggested

in Lakonishok, Shleifer, and Vishny (1994).

        A closer look also reveals a conditional pattern in these variables. Specifically, each sort

displays a U-shaped pattern in the conditional difference in average returns. Consider the GS

variable in Table 3b. When SENTIMENT is high, there is (roughly speaking) an inverted U-

shaped pattern across GS deciles, which is summarized in the 5-1 and 10-5 decile contrasts.

When sentiment changes sign, however, this flips to become (roughly speaking) an upward U.

As a result, the difference across sentiment regimes is a pronounced inverted U.

        Similar U-shaped patterns appear in the conditional differences across EF/A and BE/ME

deciles. But one must be somewhat careful in interpreting these patterns. As noted above, EF/A

and BE/ME may identify extreme growth opportunities and distress but also may serve as generic

valuation indicators. Thus viewed in isolation, the conditional patterns in these variables could

be taken as reflecting the conditional demand for categories of stocks other than extreme growth

and distressed stocks. On the other hand, casual intuition, as well as the fact that the EF/A and

BE/ME patterns match the pattern that appears in the conceptually straightforward GS variable,

suggests that at least a large portion of the EF/A and BE/ME patterns can be attributed to the

conditional pricing of growth and distress.




                                                    22
         Overall, the U-shaped conditional difference pattern suggests that investors demand both

high growth and distressed firms when they are optimistic, or their speculative propensity is

high, and avoid these extremes when they are pessimistic, or their propensity to speculate is low.

That sentiment has special implications for distressed firms is not emphasized in anecdotal

histories of market bubbles and crashes, but is consistent with theoretical predictions, because

both rapidly-growing firms and those teetering on the brink are difficult to value and, among

other deterrents to arbitrage, have high idiosyncratic risk. Such stocks are therefore predicted to

be more sensitive to sentiment than the “stable” firms in the middle deciles of sorts on GS, EF/A,

and BE/ME.

B.       Predictive regressions for individual stocks

         We turn to cross-sectional predictive regressions. We run monthly cross-sectional

predictive regressions and then study how the coefficients change with investor sentiment.

Compared to the sorts, this approach allows us to conduct formal inference, to determine which

characteristics have conditional predictive ability that is distinct from well-known unconditional

effects, and to present results for each of our sentiment proxies in a compact fashion.

         As a baseline, we estimate the unconditional predictive ability of each characteristic.

Each month, we run a cross-sectional univariate predictive regression:

            Rit = a + bt X it −1 + ε it ,                                                                            (3)

where X is a given characteristic. For earnings and dividends characteristics, we simply consider

the profitability and payer dummies, because the sorts suggest that these capture the main

effects.9


9
  In a similar spirit, Gruber (1966) documents changes in the cross-sectional determinants of stock prices between
1951 and 1963. He proposes that they are connected to changes in investor time horizon, i.e., shifts in the term
structure of discount rates.



                                                         23
            Figure 2 reports the time series of the coefficients from these rolling regressions, and

Panel A of Table 4 reports the average monthly coefficient and t-statistics based on the standard

deviation of the coefficients, as in Fama and MacBeth (1973). They confirm prior results that

size, book-to-market, external finance, and sales growth have unconditional predictive power.

            Panel B runs multivariate cross-sectional regressions to distinguish novel unconditional

effects from the well-known effects of size, book-to-market, and momentum:

            Rit = a + bt X it −1 + s t log (ME )it −1 + ht log ( BE ME )it−1 + mt MOM it−1 + ε it ,                              (4)

where X denotes the characteristic of interest. (There is no X when we consider size and book-to-

market themselves.) Age is modestly significant, sales growth loses some of its unconditional

effect, and external finance retains a strong independent effect.

            The key question is whether and how these coefficients change with investor sentiment.

Are the fluctuations in Figure 2 connected to, or anticipated by, those in Figure 1? In Table 5, we

address this question by regressing the monthly regression coefficients on sentiment proxies. The

first several columns regress coefficients obtained from (3) on each of the proxies, while the last

column regresses coefficients obtained from (4) on the composite index:10

            bˆt = c + dSENTIMENTt−1 + ε t .                                                                                      (5)

The sentiment proxies are all standardized. Standard errors are bootstrapped to correct for the

bias induced if the autocorrelated sentiment proxies have innovations that are correlated with

innovations in the coefficients, as in Stambaugh (1999).

            The results basically confirm the sorts. As sentiment increases (lower CEFDt-1 or PD-NDt-2

or higher TURN t-2 , NIPO t-1 , RIPO t-2 , S t-1 , or SENTIMENT t-1 ), expected returns tend to decrease

on small firms, young firms, firms with volatile returns, unprofitable firms, and non-dividend-

10
     Intuitively, in terms of Eq. (1), this procedure is regressing estimates of (b 1 + b 2 Tt-1 ) on sentiment proxies Tt-1 .



                                                                 24
paying firms. In all cases the results are in the expected direction, and those using IPO volume as

the sentiment proxy are particularly strong. While these effects clearly overlap to some extent,

the last column shows that the connection between the cross-sectional effect of these variables

and SENTIMENT can often be distinguished from arbitrarily time-varying effects of size, book-

to-market, and momentum.

        We give an example to illustrate the magnitude of the effects. In the second-to-last

columns of Table 5, the 0.1 coefficient of SENTIMENT on ME means that a two-SD increase in

the sentiment index raises the size coefficient by 0.2 percentage points per month. Table 4 shows

that such a change would bring the conditional size effect from negative to zero, and this is in

turn consistent with the Table 3b result that there is no size effect in high sentiment periods.

        Like the sorts, the regressions show that the cross-sectional effects of book-to-market,

external finance, and sales growth do not have a strong monotonic relationship with sentiment.

To capture their U-shaped conditional effects, we re-run (3) and (4) for these characteristics but

limit the regression sample to observations that fall within the top or bottom seven deciles of

these variables.11 The idea is to look at one side of the U at a time. For instance, the GS (1-7) row

examines how the cross-sectional effect of sales growth varies with sentiment among firms in the

lower range of sales growth, where a marginal increase predominantly reflects a move away

from distress, not a move toward extreme growth. The GS (4-10) row examines the cross-

sectional effect of sales growth in a range where the main effect of a marginal increase is an

move toward extreme growth, not a move away from distress. Effectively, we view GS (1-7) and

GS (4-10) as separate characteristics with different meanings.




11
  The decision of how many deciles to cut out is obviously somewhat arbitrary. The choice of three follows Fama
and French (1993), who identify the top three BE/ME deciles with value and the bottom three with growth.



                                                       25
         Figure 2 plots the cross-sectional coefficients from these regressions. The plots show

clearly that these characteristics have different cross-sectional effects in the bottom and top of

their ranges. The last several rows of Table 5 indicate that this method successfully captures the

U-shaped conditional effects in book-to-market, external finance, and sales growth. As we found

in the sorts, future returns on stocks with characteristics of either extreme growth or distress are

negatively related to sentiment proxies. Some calculations will confirm that the size of the

effects implied here are similar to those suggested in the sorts.

C.       Predictive regressions for long-short portfolios

         A third way to look for conditional characteristics effects is to use sentiment to forecast

portfolios that are long on stocks with high values of a characteristic and short on stocks with

low values. We have just seen that the average payer, for example, earns higher returns than the

average nonpayer when sentiment is high, so sentiment must forecast a long-short portfolio

formed on dividend payment. But it is useful to examine explicitly whether sentiment affects

portfolios like SMB and HML, for example, because they are often used to proxy for systematic

risks. In addition, the portfolio method is less parametric than the regressions for individual

stocks. To the extent that it delivers similar results, then, it indicates that the results are not

driven by changes in the cross-sectional distribution of firm characteristics.

         The first several columns of Table 6 use individual sentiment proxies to predict long-

short portfolios:12

          R Xit = High, t − RX it = Low, t = c + dSENTIMENTt−1 + ε it .                                                  (6)

The dependent variable is the monthly return on a long-short portfolio, such as SMB, and the

monthly returns from January through December of t are regressed on the lagged sentiment

12
  In terms of Eq. (1), this regresses (b 1 ∆X + b 2 Tt-1 ∆X) on sentiment proxies Tt-1 , where ∆X is the difference between
“high” and “low” levels of a characteristic.



                                                             26
proxies. The last column again attempts to separates novel comovement effects from well-known

effects using a multivariate prediction:

            R Xit = High, t − RX it = Low, t = c + dSENTIMENTt−1 + βRMKTt + sSMB t
                                                                                     .               (7)
           + hHMLt + mUMDt + ε it

Obviously, we must exclude SMB and HML from the right side when those are the portfolios

being forecast. RMRF is the excess return of the value-weighted market over the risk-free rate.

UMD is the return on high-momentum stocks, where momentum is measured over the period

from 12 months prior through 2 months prior, minus the return on low-momentum stocks. As

described in Fama and French (1993), SMB is the return on portfolios of small and big ME stocks

that is separate from returns on HML, and HML is constructed to isolate the difference between

high- and low-BE/ME portfolios.13

           For profitability and dividend payment, the coefficients estimated from the portfolio

approach are identical to those estimated from the individual stock approach by construction.

The other results are similar (the sign for predicting SMB is expected to be the opposite of the

earlier ME sign). SMB is significantly related to sentiment in some specifications, while there is

again an U-shaped conditional effect in HML and especially in the long-short portfolios formed

on external finance and sales growth. We separate extreme growth opportunities effects from

distress effects by constructing High, Medium, and Low portfolios based on the top three, middle

four, and bottom three NYSE decile breakpoints, respectively. Using sentiment to forecast the

High-Medium portfolio for sales growth, for example, is then analogous to using it to predict the

cross-sectional effect of GS (4-10).

D.         Systematic risk



13
     These portfolios are taken from Ken French’s website and are described there.



                                                           27
        At face value, the conditional characteristics effects seem unlikely to be compensation for

systematic risk. Among other considerations, the sentiment proxies have been orthogonalized to

macroeconomic conditions; the patterns match theoretical predictions about where the effects of

sentiment should be most pronounced; and the patterns line up with anecdotal accounts of

bubbles and crashes. Intuitively, the systematic risk explanation requires that older, profitable,

dividend-paying firms are (when sentiment is high, i.e. in half of the sample) actually require

higher returns than younger, unprofitable, nonpaying firms, and are recognized as such by the

marginal investor. While this seems counterintuitive, we can consider, and largely rule out, this

alternative explanation more rigorously.

        Systematic risk explanations come in two basic flavors. One is that the systematic risks

(beta loadings) of stocks with certain characteristics vary with the sentiment proxies, despite our

effort to isolate them from macro conditions. Table 7 investigates this directly. It asks whether

sentiment coincides with time-variation in market betas in a way that could at least qualitatively

reconcile the earlier results with a conditional CAPM. Specifically, we predict returns on the

characteristics portfolios:

          R Xit = High, t − RX it = Low, t = c + dSENTIMENTt−1 + β (e + fSENTIMENTt −1 )RMRF t + ε it .   (8)

The time-varying betas story predicts that the composite coefficient βf, reported in Table 7, is of

the same sign as the estimates of d in Table 6. However, it turns out that when the coefficient βf

is statistically significant, it is the wrong sign in a majority of cases. We find similar results when

we replace RMRF by aggregate consumption growth. A table is available upon request.

        The second systematic risk story keeps stocks’ betas fixed, but allows the risk premium

to vary with sentiment, which means that the difference in required returns between the high- and

low-beta stocks varies in proportion. However, this story runs into trouble with the simple fact



                                                       28
that the predicted effect of several characteristics does not just vary in magnitude over time, but

in direction. This discussion, and the results of the next exercise, leads us to conclude that the

results do not reflect compensation for classical systematic risks.

E.      Predictive regressions for earnings announcement returns

        Our last test is whether there are conditional characteristics effects in the returns around

earnings announcements. La Porta, Lakonishok, Shleifer, and Vishny (1997) find that low book-

to-market stocks have lower average returns at earnings announcements than high book-to-

market stocks, suggesting systematic errors in earnings expectations. Likewise, if errors in

earnings expectations account for some of our results, we might expect that the average earnings

announcement return on small, young, volatile, unprofitable, nonpaying, extreme growth and/or

distress stocks would tend to be inversely related to sentiment.

        This methodology, while appealing, has only limited power to detect how expectational

errors affect our results. The essence of our results appears to be the correlated correction of

mispricing, but a firm’s announcement event return picks up the expectational corrections that

occur only to it alone and within its own announcement window. Malkiel (1999) illustrates the

problem: “The music slowed drastically for the conglomerates on January 19, 1968. On that day,

the granddaddy of the conglomerates, Litton Industries, announced that earnings for the second

quarter of that year would be substantially less than forecast. … the announcement was greeted

with disbelief and shock. In the selling wave that followed, conglomerate stocks declined by

roughly 40 percent …” (p. 67). So, while a study of announcement event returns will capture the

corrective effect of Litton Industries’ announcement on its own stock, it will pick up none of its

broader effects, which are important to our main results. Nevertheless, an analysis of earnings




                                                     29
announcements may provide a lower bound on the effect that sentiment-driven expectational

errors have on our results.

        We gather quarterly earnings announcement dates from the merged CRSP-Compustat

file. These dates are available beginning in January 1971. The quarterly earnings announcement

sample represents approximately 75% of the firm-quarters (firm-months) analyzed in the main

tables, so coverage is fairly complete. For each firm-quarter observation, we compute the

cumulative abnormal return over the value-weighted market index over trading days [-1, +1]

around the report date. We then construct a quarterly series of average announcement effects for

each characteristic decile, and attempt to predict it with the composite sentiment index:

         CARX it = Decile, t = c + dSENTIMENTt −1 + ε it .                                               (9)

Table 8 reports the coefficient estimates for each characteristic decile.

        The patterns in Table 8 need to be compared to those in Table 3b. In Table 8, 12 of the 82

coefficients are significant at the 5% level. In Table 3b, on the other hand, 10 of the 82 estimated

effects are very large in the sense that sentiment is associated with an conditional difference in

monthly returns of over 1.50 percentage points. The intersection of these tables’ “strong results”

is six cells, and the signs agree in all cases. In addition, four of the five cells that are strong in

Table 3b but not significant in Table 8 have matching signs; in the opposite direction, five of the

six significant results in Table 8 that are not associated with very large effects in Table 3b are at

least of the same sign. One anomaly is the significantly negative coefficient on the oldest firms,

but perhaps at least one anomaly is to be expected by chance in so many implicit comparisons.

        Overall, this exercise suggests that some portion of the conditional characteristics effects

probably reflects the correction of conditional errors in earnings expectations. But as noted




                                                        30
above, this test is not very powerful, and thus provides only a lower bound on the contribution of

expectational errors.



VI.     Conclusion

        In classical finance theory, “investor sentiment” plays no role on the cross-section of

stock prices, returns, or expected returns. This paper takes issue with the classical view. It

marshals theoretical considerations, historical accounts of speculative episodes, and most

importantly a set of novel empirical findings, in support of the view that investor sentiment,

broadly defined, has significant cross-sectional effects.

        To summarize, the main empirical finding is that the cross-section of future stock returns

is conditional upon beginning-of-period proxies for investor sentiment. The patterns are rich, but

straightforward to interpret and consistent with simple theoretical predictions. Specifically, when

sentiment appears to be high, stocks that are likely to be relatively attractive to optimists and

speculators and at the same time unattractive candidates for arbitrage – young stocks, small

stocks, unprofitable stocks, non-dividend paying stocks, high-volatility stocks, extreme-growth

stocks, and distressed stocks – experience low future returns relative to other stocks. Conditional

on low sentiment, on the other hand, these cross-sectional patterns attenuate or reverse. Several

aspects of the results cast doubt on the hypothesis that they reflect rational compensation for

systematic risk. Rather, they match simple theoretical predictions and line up well with historical

accounts of bubbles and crashes.

        The conclusion that sentiment has broad cross-sectional effects obviously carries with it a

number of significant implications for financial economics. Here we highlight one application of

our results, involving dividend policy. An old question is whether dividend payers endure higher




                                                     31
costs of equity when there is a gap between income and capital gains rates, as in Brennan (1970),

or whether dividends are irrelevant. Black and Scholes (1974), Miller and Scholes (1982), and

Christie and Huang (1984), among others, find that the cross-sectional effect of the dividend

yield on (pre-tax) returns is not reliably positive and actually quite unstable over time. This is

often interpreted as rejecting the tax hypothesis in favor of the classical irrelevance view. Our

results, however, suggest that both views may be incorrect. While the cross-sectional effect of

dividends is indeed unstable, its sign is predictable by sentiment. So viewed as a whole, the facts

seem better explained by the idea dividends are relevant to current valuations but with a time-

varying sign that depends on relative investor demand for payers and nonpayers, as in the

catering theory of dividends of Baker and Wurgler (2002).

        The results suggest several avenues for future work. In corporate finance, a better

understanding of sentiment may shed light on time-series patterns in security issuance and the

supply of firm characteristics that seem to be conditionally relevant to share price. For asset

pricing, the results indicate that descriptively accurate models of expected returns need to better

incorporate investor sentiment. The best way to do this is unclear; the conditional characteristics

specification studied here offers a starting point. More generally, we have said little about how

and why investor sentiment forms, arguing only that it is a very real force with effects in the

cross-section of stock prices. An open question is whether there are necessary macroeconomic

preconditions for investor sentiment to bloom.




                                                      32
References

Amihud, Yakov, and Haim Mendelson, 1986, Asset pricing and the bid-ask spread, Journal of
        Financial Economics, 17, 223-49.
Baker, Malcolm, and Jeremy Stein, 2002, Market liquidity as a sentiment indicator, NBER
        Working Paper Series, No. 8816.
Baker, Malcolm, and Jeffrey Wurgler, 2000, The equity share in new issues and aggregate stock
        returns, Journal of Finance 55, 2219-57.
Baker, Malcolm, and Jeffrey Wurgler, 2002, A catering theory of dividends, Journal of Finance,
        forthcoming.
Banz, Rolf, 1981, The relationship between return and market value of common stocks, Journal
        of Financial Economics 9, 3-18.
Barberis, Nicholas, and Andrei Shleifer, 2003, Style investing, Journal of Financial Economics
        68, 161-199.
Barberis, Nicholas, Andrei Shleifer, and Jeffrey Wurgler, 2003, Comovement, Journal of
        Financial Economics, forthcoming.
Barry, Christopher B., and Stephen J. Brown, 1984, Differential information and the small firm
        effect, Journal of Financial Economics 13, 283-294.
Benveniste, Lawrence M., Alexander P. Ljungqvist, William J. Wilhelm, Jr., and Xiaoyun Yu,
        2003, Evidence of information spillovers in the production of investment banking
        services, Journal of Finance 58, 577-608.
Black, Fischer, and Myron S. Scholes, 1974, The effects of dividend yield and dividend policy
        on common stock prices and returns, Journal of Financial Economics 1, 1-22.
Blume, Marshall, and Robert Stambaugh, 1983, Biases in computed returns: An application to
        the size effect, Journal of Financial Economics 12, 387-404.
Brennan, Michael J., 1970, Taxes, market valuation and corporate financial policy, National Tax
        Journal 23, 417-427.
Brown, John Dennis, 1991, 101 Years on Wall Street, Prentice Hall.
Brunnermeier, Markus, and Lasse Pedersen, 2003, Predatory trading, Princeton working paper.
Campbell, John Y., and John H. Cochrane, 2000, Explaining the poor performance of
        consumption-based asset pricing models, Journal of Finance 55, 2863-2878.
Christie, William, and Roger Huang, 1994, The changing functional relation between stock
        returns and dividend yields, Journal of Empirical Finance 1, 161-191.
Cochrane, John H., 2002, Stocks as money: Convenience yield and the tech-stock bubble, NBER
        Working Paper Series, No. 8987.
D’Avolio, Gene, 2002, The market for borrowing stock, Journal of Financial Economics 66,
        271-306.
Daniel, Kent, and Sheridan Titman, 1997, Evidence on the characteristics of cross-sectional
        variation in stock returns, Journal of Finance 46, 1739-1764.
De Long, J. Bradford, Andrei Shleifer, Lawrence H. Summers, and Robert Waldmann, 1990,
        Noise trader risk in financial markets, Journal of Political Economy 98, 703-738.
Dreman, David, 1979, Contrarian Investment Strategy, Dreman Contrarian Group.
Duffie, Darrell, Nicolae Garleanu, and Lasse H. Pedersen, 2002, Securities lending, shorting, and
        pricing, Journal of Financial Economics 66, 307-339.
Elton, Edwin J., Martin J. Gruber, and Jeffrey A. Busse, 1998, Do investors care about
        sentiment?, Journal of Business 71, 477-500.



                                                 33
Fama, Eugene F., and James MacBeth, 1973, Risk, return, and equilibrium: Empirical tests,
        Journal of Political Economy 81, 607-636.
Fama, Eugene F., and Kenneth R. French, 1992, The cross-section of expected stock returns,
        Journal of Finance 47, 427-465.
Fama, Eugene F., and Kenneth R. French, 1993, Common risk factors in the returns on stocks
        and bonds, Journal of Financial Economics 33, 3-56.
Fama, Eugene F., and Kenneth R. French, 2001, Disappearing dividends: Changing firm
        characteristics or lower propensity to pay?, Journal of Financial Economics 60, 3-44.
Geczy, Christopher C., David K. Musto, and Adam V. Reed, 2002, Stocks are special too: An
        analysis of the equity lending market, Journal of Financial Economics 66, 241-269.
Gomes, Joao, Leonid Kogan, and Lu Zhang, 2003, Equilibrium cross section of returns, Journal
        of Political Economy 111, 693-732.
Graham, Benjamin, 1973, The Intelligent Investor, 4th ed., Harper & Row.
Greenwood, Robin, and Nathan Sosner, 2002, Trade and the comovement of stock returns:
        Evidence from Japan, Harvard University working paper.
Gruber, Martin J., 1966, The Determinants of Common Stock Prices, Ph.D. dissertation,
        Columbia University.
Hausch, Donald, and William Ziemba, 1995, Efficiency of sports and lottery betting markets, In:
        Handbooks in Operations Research and Management Science, vol. 9, Elsevier.
Ibbotson, Roger, and Jeffrey F. Jaffe, 1975, ‘Hot issue’ markets, Journal of Finance 30, 1027-42.
Ibbotson, Roger, Jody Sindelar, and Jay Ritter, 1994, The market's problems with the pricing of
        initial public offerings, Journal of Applied Corporate Finance 7, 66-74.
Jones, Charles, 2001, A century of stock market liquidity and trading costs, Columbia University
        working paper.
Jones, Charles, and Owen Lamont, 2002, Short sale constraints and stock returns, Journal of
        Financial Economics 66, 207-239.
Keim, Donald, 1983, Size-related anomalies and stock return seasonality: Further empirical
        evidence, Journal of Financial Economics 12, 13-32.
Kothari, S.P., and Jay Shanken, 1997, Book-to-market, dividend yield, and expected market
        returns: A time-series analysis, Journal of Financial Economics 44, 169-203.
Kindleberger, Charles, 2001, Manias, Panics, and Crashes, Wiley.
La Porta, Rafael, Josef Lakonishok, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert W. Vishny, 1997, Good news
        for value stocks: Further evidence on market efficiency, Journal of Finance 52, 859-74.
Lakonishok, Josef, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert W. Vishny, 1994, Contrarian investment,
        extrapolation, and risk, Journal of Finance 49, 1541-1578.
Lamont, Owen A., and Richard H. Thaler, 2003, Can the market add and subtract? Mispricing
        and tech stock carve-outs, Journal of Political Economy 111, 227-268.
Lee, Charles, Andrei Shleifer, and Richard H. Thaler, Investor sentiment and the closed-end fund
        puzzle, Journal of Finance 46, 75-109.
Lettau, Martin, and Sydney Ludvigson, 2001, Resurrecting the (C)CAPM: A cross-sectional test
        when risk premia are time-varying, Journal of Political Economy 109, 1238-87.
Ljunqvist, Alexander and William Wilhelm, 2003, IPO pricing in the dot-com bubble, Journal of
        Finance 58, 723-752.
Loughran, Tim and Jay Ritter, 1995, The new issues puzzle, Journal of Finance 50, 23-51.
Lowry, Michelle and G. William Schwert, 2002, IPO market cycles: Bubbles or sequential
        learning?, Journal of Finance 57, 1171 - 1200.



                                                34
Malkiel, Burton, 1990, A Random Walk Down Wall Street, W.W. Norton.
Malkiel, Burton, 1999, A Random Walk Down Wall Street, W.W. Norton.
Markowitz, Harry, 1959, Portfolio Selection: Efficient Diversification of Investments, John
         Wiley, New York.
Menzly, Lior, Tano Santos, and Pietro Veronesi, 2002, The time series of the cross section of
         asset prices, University of Chicago working paper.
Miller, Merton H., and Myron S. Scholes, 1982, Dividends and taxes: Some empirical evidence,
         Journal of Political Economy 90, 1118-1141.
Mitchell, Mark L., Pulvino, Todd, and Erik Stafford, 2002, Limited arbitrage and equity markets,
         Journal of Finance 57, 551-584.
Neal, Robert, with Simon Wheatley, 1998, Do measures of investor sentiment predict stock
         returns, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 34, 523-547.
Ofek, Eli and Matthew Richardson, 2002, DotCom Mania: The rise and fall of internet stocks,
         Journal of Finance 58, 1113-1138.
Peng, Lin, and Wei Xiong, 2002, Capacity constrained learning and asset price comovement,
         Princeton University working paper.
Reinganum, Marc R., 1983, The anomalous stock market behavior of small firms in January:
         Empirical tests for tax-loss selling effects, Journal of Financial Economics 12, 89-104.
Ritter, Jay, 1984, The 'hot issue' market of 1980, The Journal of Business 57, 215-40.
Ritter, Jay, 1991, The long-run performance of initial public offerings, Journal of Finance 46, 3-
         27.
Ritter, Jay, 2003, Some factoids about the 2002 IPO market, University of Florida working
         paper.
Shiller, Robert J., 1981, Do stock prices move too much to be justified by subsequent changes in
         Dividends?, American Economic Review 71, 421-436.
Shiller, Robert J., 2000, Irrational Exuberance, Princeton University Press.
Shleifer, Andrei, 2000, Inefficient Markets, Oxford University press.
Shleifer, Andrei, and Robert W. Vishny, 1997, The limits of arbitrage, Journal of Finance 52,
         35-55.
Siegel, Jeremy, 1998, Stocks for the Long Run, McGraw-Hill.
Smith, E. E., E. J., Shoben, and L. J. Rips, 1974, Structure and process in semantic memory: A
         featural model for semantic decisions, Psychological Review 81, 214-241.
Speiss, D. Katherine, and John Affleck-Graves, 1995, Underperformance in long-run stock
         returns following seasoned equity offerings, Journal of Financial Economics 38, 243-
         267.
Spiess, Katherine, and John Affleck-Graves, 1999, The long-run performance of stock returns
         following debt offerings, Journal of Financial Economics 54, 45-73.
Stambaugh, Robert F., 1999, Predictive regressions, Journal of Financial Economics 54, 375-
         421.
Stigler, George J., 1964, Public regulation of the securities markets, Journal of Business 37, 117-
         142.
Swaminathan, Bhaskaran, 1996, Time-varying expected small firm returns and closed-end fund
         discounts, Review of Financial Studies 9, 845-87.
Wachter, Jessica, 2000, Habit formation and the cross-section of asset returns, Ch. 4 of Ph.D.
         dissertation, Harvard University.




                                                  35
Wurgler, Jeffrey, and Katia Zhuravskaya, 2002, Does arbitrage flatten demand curves for
       stocks?, Journal of Business 75, 583-608.
Zweig, Martin E., 1973, An investor expectations stock price predictive model using closed-end
       fund premiums, Journal of Finance 28, 67-87.




                                                 36
Figure 1. Investor Sentiment. The first panel shows the year-end, value-weighted average discount on closed-end
mutual funds. The data on prices and net asset values (NAVs) come from Neal and Wheatley (1998) for 1962
through 1993; CDA/Wiesenberger for 1994 through 1998; and turn-of-the-year issues of the Wall Street Journal for
1999 and 2000. The second panel shows detrended log turnover. Turnover is the ratio of reported share volume to
average shares listed from the NYSE Fact Book. We detrend using the past five-year average. The third panel shows
the annual number of initial public offerings. The fourth panel shows the average annual first-day returns of initial
public offerings. Both series come from Jay Ritter, updating data analyzed in Ibbotson, Sindelar, and Ritter (1994).
The fifth panel shows gross annual equity issuance divided by gross annual equity plus debt issuance from Baker
and Wurgler (2000). The sixth panel shows the year-end log ratio of the value-weighted average market-to-book
ratios of payers and nonpayers from Baker and Wurgler (2003). The dashed line (left axis) is raw data. We regress
each measure on the growth in industrial production, the growth in durable, nondurable and services consumption,
the growth in employment and a flag for NBER recessions. The solid line (right axis) is the residuals from this
regression. The final panel presents a first principal component index of the six orthogonalized measures. In the
index, turnover, the average annual first-day return, and the dividend premium are lagged one year relative to the
other three measures.


            Panel A. Closed-end fund discount %                                                            Panel B. Turnover %

       30                                                        15                         25                                                   15
       25                                                        10                         20                                                   10
       20                                                                                   15
                                                                 5
       15                                                                                   10                                                   5
       10                                                        0
                                                                                             5                                                   0
        5                                                        -5
        0                                                                                    0                                                   -5
                                                                 -10                        -5
       -5
                                                                 -15                       -10                                                   -10
      -10
      -15                                                        -20                       -15                                                   -15
            1962 1967 1972 1977 1982 1987 1992 1997                                              1962 1967 1972 1977 1982 1987 1992 1997


                      Panel C. Number of IPOs                                                       Panel D. Average first-day return

      1200                                                       600                        80                                                   60
                                                                                            70                                                   50
      1000                                                       400
                                                                                            60                                                   40
       800                                                       200                        50                                                   30
                                                                                            40                                                   20
       600                                                       0
                                                                                            30                                                   10
       400                                                       -200                       20                                                   0
                                                                                            10                                                   -10
       200                                                       -400
                                                                                             0                                                   -20
            0                                                    -600                      -10                                                   -30
                1962 1967 1972 1977 1982 1987 1992 1997                                          1962 1967 1972 1977 1982 1987 1992 1997


                Panel E. Equity share in new issues                                                      Panel F. Dividend premium

      50                                                         20                         40                                                   50
                                                                                            30                                                   40
                                                                 15
      40                                                                                                                                         30
                                                                 10                          20                                                  20
      30                                                                                     10                                                  10
                                                                 5
                                                                                              0                                                  0
      20                                                         0                                                                               -10
                                                                                            -10
                                                                 -5                                                                              -20
                                                                                           -20
      10                                                                                                                                         -30
                                                                 -10                       -30                                                   -40
       0                                                         -15                       -40                                                   -50
           1962 1967 1972 1977 1982 1987 1992 1997                                            1962    1967 1972   1977 1982   1987 1992   1997



                                                   Panel E. Sentiment index (SENTIMENT)

                                             3.5
                                             2.5
                                             1.5
                                             0.5
                                            -0.5
                                            -1.5
                                            -2.5
                                                   1962   1967       1972   1977   1982   1987    1992   1997
Figure 2. Average Annual Coefficients. Average annual coefficients from monthly univariate regressions of returns on firm characteristics X.
                                                                     Rit = a t + bt X it −1 + eit
The firm characteristics are size, age, total risk, indicator variables for profitable firms and dividend payers, book-to-market ratio, external finance over assets,
and sales growth decile. Size is the log of market equity. Market equity (ME) is price times shares outstanding from CRSP. Age is the number of years since the
firm’s first appearance on CRSP. Total risk is the annual standard deviation in monthly returns from CRSP. Earnings (E) is defined as income before
extraordinary items (Item 18) plus income statement deferred taxes (Item 50) minus preferred dividends (Item 19). The book-to-market ratio is the log of the ratio
of book equity to market equity. Book equity (BE) is defined as shareholders equity (Item 60) plus balance sheet deferred taxes (Item 35). External finance (EF)
is equal to the change in assets (Item 6) less the change in retained earnings (Item 36). When the change in retained earnings is not available we use net income
(Item 172) less common dividends (Item 21) instead. Sales growth decile is formed using NYSE breakpoints for sales growth. Sales growth is the percentage
change in net sales (Item 12). For the last three characteris tics, we analyze the top (solid) and bottom (dashed) seven deciles separately.

                Panel A. log(ME)                                          Panel B. Age                                          Panel C. Total Risk

    1.0                                                     0.08                                                    50
                                                            0.06                                                    40
    0.5                                                     0.04                                                    30
                                                            0.02                                                    20
    0.0                                                     0.00
                                                                                                                    10
   -0.5                                                    -0.02
                                                           -0.04                                                     0
   -1.0                                                    -0.06                                                   -10
                                                           -0.08                                                   -20
   -1.5                                                    -0.10                                                   -30
           1963
           1965
           1967
           1969
           1971
           1973
           1975
           1977
           1979
           1981
           1983
           1985
           1987
           1989
           1991
           1993
           1995
           1997
           1999
           2001




                                                                   1963
                                                                   1965
                                                                   1967
                                                                   1969
                                                                   1971
                                                                   1973
                                                                   1975
                                                                   1977
                                                                   1979
                                                                   1981
                                                                   1983
                                                                   1985
                                                                   1987
                                                                   1989
                                                                   1991
                                                                   1993
                                                                   1995
                                                                   1997
                                                                   1999
                                                                   2001




                                                                                                                          1963
                                                                                                                          1965
                                                                                                                          1967
                                                                                                                          1969
                                                                                                                          1971
                                                                                                                          1973
                                                                                                                          1975
                                                                                                                          1977
                                                                                                                          1979
                                                                                                                          1981
                                                                                                                          1983
                                                                                                                          1985
                                                                                                                          1987
                                                                                                                          1989
                                                                                                                          1991
                                                                                                                          1993
                                                                                                                          1995
                                                                                                                          1997
                                                                                                                          1999
                                                                                                                          2001
                   Panel D. E>0                                           Panel E. D>0                                         Panel F. log(BE/ME)

    3.0                                                     3.0                                                     2.5
    2.0                                                     2.0                                                     2.0
    1.0                                                     1.0                                                     1.5
    0.0                                                     0.0                                                     1.0
   -1.0                                                    -1.0                                                     0.5
   -2.0                                                    -2.0                                                     0.0
   -3.0                                                    -3.0                                                    -0.5
   -4.0                                                    -4.0                                                    -1.0
   -5.0                                                    -5.0                                                    -1.5
           1963
           1965
           1967
           1969
           1971
           1973
           1975
           1977
           1979
           1981
           1983
           1985
           1987
           1989
           1991
           1993
           1995
           1997
           1999
           2001




                                                                   1963
                                                                   1965
                                                                   1967
                                                                   1969
                                                                   1971
                                                                   1973
                                                                   1975
                                                                   1977
                                                                   1979
                                                                   1981
                                                                   1983
                                                                   1985
                                                                   1987
                                                                   1989
                                                                   1991
                                                                   1993
                                                                   1995
                                                                   1997
                                                                   1999
                                                                   2001




                                                                                                                          1963
                                                                                                                          1965
                                                                                                                          1967
                                                                                                                          1969
                                                                                                                          1971
                                                                                                                          1973
                                                                                                                          1975
                                                                                                                          1977
                                                                                                                          1979
                                                                                                                          1981
                                                                                                                          1983
                                                                                                                          1985
                                                                                                                          1987
                                                                                                                          1989
                                                                                                                          1991
                                                                                                                          1993
                                                                                                                          1995
                                                                                                                          1997
                                                                                                                          1999
                                                                                                                          2001
                  Panel G. EF/A                                          Panel H. GS/10

    10.0                                                   6.0
     5.0                                                   4.0

     0.0                                                   2.0
                                                            0.0
    -5.0
                                                           -2.0
   -10.0                                                   -4.0
   -15.0                                                   -6.0
   -20.0                                                   -8.0
           1963
           1965
           1967
           1969
           1971
           1973
           1975
           1977
           1979
           1981
           1983
           1985
           1987
           1989
           1991
           1993
           1995
           1997
           1999
           2001




                                                                   1963
                                                                   1965
                                                                   1967
                                                                   1969
                                                                   1971
                                                                   1973
                                                                   1975
                                                                   1977
                                                                   1979
                                                                   1981
                                                                   1983
                                                                   1985
                                                                   1987
                                                                   1989
                                                                   1991
                                                                   1993
                                                                   1995
                                                                   1997
                                                                   1999
                                                                   2001
Table 1. Summary Statistics, 1963-2001. Panel A summarizes the returns variables. Returns are measured monthly. Momentum (MOM) is defined as the
cumulative return for the eleven-month period between 12 and two months prior to t. Panel B summarizes the size, age, and risk characteristics. Size is the log of
market equity. Market equity (ME) is price times shares outstanding from CRSP in the June prior to t. Age is the number of years between the firm’s first
appearance on CRSP and t. Total risk (σ) is the annual standard deviation in monthly returns from CRSP for the 12 months ending in the June prior to t. Panel C
summarizes profitability variables. The earnings-price ratio is defined for firms with positive earnings. Earnings (E) is defined as income before extraordinary
items (Item 18) plus income statement deferred taxes (Item 50) minus preferred dividends (Item 19). Book equity (BE) is defined as shareholders equity (Item
60) plus balance sheet deferred taxes (Item 35). Panel D reports dividend variables. Dividends (D) are equal to dividends per share at the ex date (Item 26) times
shares outstanding (Item 25). Panel E reports variables used as proxies for growth opportunities and distress. The book-to-market ratio is the log of the ratio of
book equity to market equity. External finance (EF) is equal to the change in assets (Item 6) less the change in retained earnings (Item 36). When the change in
retained earnings is not available we use net income (Item 172) less common dividends (Item 21) instead. Sales growth decile is formed using NYSE breakpoints
for sales growth. Sales growth is the percentage change in net sales (Item 12). In Panels C through E, accounting data from the fiscal year ending in t-1 are
matched to monthly returns from July of year t through June of year t+1. All variables are Winsorized at 99.5 and 0.5 percent.


                                                                Full Sample                                                Subsample Means
                                              N        Mean             SD        Min           Max         1960s    1970s        1980s        1990s      2000-1
                                                                                            Panel A. Returns
Rt (%)                                 1,398,495         1.38         18.69     -98.13       2400.00          1.06      1.59        1.24         1.45        1.20
MOM t-1 (%)                            1,398,495        13.44         60.31     -85.99        359.42         21.40     12.50       14.85        12.10       12.02
                                                                                          Panel B. Size and Age
MEt-1 ($M)                             1,398,495         576          2,153          1        21,623           392      238          373          807       1,412
Age t (Years)                          1,398,495        13.72         13.91       0.03          69.17        16.02     12.96       13.84        13.70       14.14
σ t-1 (%)                              1,375,961        14.21          8.92       0.00          62.39         9.40     12.58       13.68        14.77       21.59
                                                                                           Panel C. Profitability
E+/BEt-1 (%)                           1,398,495        10.62         10.31       0.00          67.14        12.13     12.09       11.29         9.27        9.09
E>0t-1                                 1,398,495         0.76          0.42       0.00           1.00         0.95      0.91        0.77         0.68        0.63
                                                                                         Panel D. Dividend Policy
D/BEt-1 (%)                            1,398,495         1.97          2.96       0.00          17.61         4.43      2.72        1.98         1.36        1.05
D>0t-1                                 1,398,495         0.45          0.50       0.00           1.00         0.78      0.65        0.48         0.30        0.24
                                                                              Panel E. Growth Opportunities and Distress
BE/MEt-1                               1,398,495         0.93          0.86       0.02           5.78         0.70      1.35        0.92         0.72        0.81
EF/At-1 (%)                            1,365,152        11.69         24.98     -69.17        131.18          7.11      6.34       10.71        14.76       19.13
GSt-1 (Decile)                         1,349,505         5.93          3.19       1.00          10.00         5.65      5.66        5.97         6.12        5.90
Table 2. Investor Sentiment. Means, standard deviations, and correlations for measures of investor sentiment. The first measure (CEFD) is the year-end, value-
weighted average discount on closed-end mutual funds. The data on prices and net asset values (NAVs) come from Neal and Wheatley (1998) for 1962 through
1993; CDA/Wiesenberger for 1994 through 1998; and turn-of-the-year issues of the Wall Street Journal for 1999 and 2000. The second measure (TURN) is
detrended log turnover. Turnover is the ratio of reported share volume to average shares listed from the NYSE Fact Book. We detrend using the past five-year
average. The third measure (NIPO) is the annual number of initial public offerings. The fourth measure (RIPO) is the average annual first-day returns of initial
public offerings. Both IPO series come from Jay Ritter, updating data analyzed in Ibbotson, Sindelar, and Ritter (1994). The fifth measure (S) is gross annual
equity issuance divided by gross annual equity plus debt issuance from Baker and Wurgler (2000). The sixth measure (PD-ND ) is the year-end log ratio of the
value-weighted average market-to-book ratios of payers and nonpayers from Baker and Wurgler (2003). Turnover, the average annual first-day return, and the
dividend premium are lagged one year relative to the other three measures. In the first panel, we present raw data. In the second panel, we regress each measure
on the growth in industrial production, the growth in durable, nondurable and services consumption, the growth in employment and a flag for NBER recessions.
The adjusted measures are the residuals from these regressions. SENTIMENT is the first principal component of the six orthogonalized measures. a, b, and c
denote statistical significance at 1%, 5%, and 10%.


                                                                                                           Correlations
                   Mean           SD          Min           Max     SENTIMENT            CEFD         TURN         NIPO         RIPO              S     PD-ND
                                                                             Panel A. Raw data
CEFDt               8.83         8.11        -10.41        23.70            -0.60a         1.00
                                                                                 a
TURNt-1             5.21         7.94        -11.60        18.66             0.69        -0.30c         1.00
                                                                                 a               a
NIPOt             358.41       262.76          9.00       953.00             0.66        -0.57         0.38b        1.00
                                                                                 a            b               a
RIPOt-1            16.94        14.93         -1.67        69.53             0.80        -0.41         0.50         0.35b         1.00
                                                                                 a                            c
St                 19.53         8.34          7.83        43.00             0.43          0.01        0.30         0.16          0.26         1.00
       D-ND                                                                      a               a            a           a          a
Pt-1                0.20        18.67        -33.17        36.06            -0.76         0.53         -0.50       -0.56        -0.58          -0.12        1.00
                                                             Panel B. Controlling for macroeconomic conditions
CEFDt               0.00         6.15        -18.33         9.16            -0.64a         1.00
                                                                                 a
TURNt-1             0.00         6.73        -11.31        11.45             0.72        -0.29c         1.00
                                                                                 a               a
NIPOt               0.00       226.30       -435.98       484.15             0.74        -0.46         0.39b        1.00
RIPOt-1             0.00        14.31        -23.55        46.54             0.83a       -0.45a        0.53a        0.44a         1.00
                                                                                 a            b            b              a
St                  0.00         6.15        -12.17        14.29             0.66        -0.40         0.32         0.50         0.47a         1.00
       D-ND                                                                      a               c            a           a          a
Pt-1                0.00        16.89        -43.20        35.96            -0.77         0.28         -0.60       -0.46        -0.68         -0.28c        1.00
Table 3a. Two-way Sorts: Closed-End Fund Discount and Firm Characteristics. For each month, we form ten portfolios according to the NYSE breakpoints
of firm size (ME), age, total risk, earnings-book ratio for profitable firms (E/BE), dividend-book ratio for dividend payers (D/BE), book-to-market ratio
(BE/ME), external finance over assets (EF/A), and sales growth (GS). We also calculate portfolio returns for unprofitable firms and nonpayers. We then report
average portfolio returns over months where the standardized CEFD (orthogonalized to macroeconomic conditions) from the previous year-end is positive,
negative, and the difference between the two averages.


               CEFDt-1                                                 Decile                                                            Overall
                                                                                                                                                           >0-
                              ≤0        1        2        3        4        5        6       7        8        9       10     10-1     10-5        5-1     ≤0
ME             Positive              2.39     1.93     1.81     1.80     1.83     1.63     1.62     1.50     1.38     1.31    -1.08    -0.52   -0.57
               Negative              0.46     0.21     0.36     0.24     0.54     0.34     0.45     0.55     0.47     0.38    -0.08    -0.16       0.08
             Difference              1.93     1.73     1.46     1.56     1.29     1.30     1.17     0.95     0.91     0.93    -1.00    -0.35   -0.65
Age            Positive              1.95     1.99     2.06     1.94     2.03     1.98     1.57     1.67     1.63     1.48    -0.48    -0.55       0.08
               Negative              -0.24    0.48     0.67     0.46     0.64     0.64     0.65     0.66     0.58     0.72     0.96    0.08        0.88
             Difference              2.20     1.51     1.39     1.47     1.40     1.34     0.91     1.01     1.05     0.76    -1.44    -0.64   -0.80
σ              Positive              1.35     1.51     1.52     1.68     1.82     1.92     1.91     2.08     2.17     2.37     1.01    0.54        0.47
               Negative              0.84     0.84     0.78     0.66     0.69     0.52     0.49     0.39     0.41     0.07    -0.77    -0.62   -0.15
             Difference              0.51     0.67     0.74     1.02     1.13     1.40     1.42     1.69     1.76     2.29     1.78    1.16        0.62
E/BE           Positive      2.48    2.21     2.08     2.10     1.92     1.79     1.95     1.90     1.88     1.77     1.87    -0.34    0.08    -0.42      -0.62
               Negative      0.24    0.53     0.65     0.89     0.53     0.48     0.49     0.38     0.50     0.48     0.36    -0.17    -0.11   -0.06      0.23
             Difference      2.24    1.68     1.44     1.21     1.39     1.31     1.46     1.52     1.38     1.29     1.51    -0.17    0.20    -0.36      -0.85
D/BE           Positive      2.35    2.07     1.91     1.92     1.77     1.72     1.59     1.52     1.46     1.44     1.37    -0.70    -0.34   -0.35      -0.63
               Negative      0.12    0.60     0.52     0.72     0.47     0.61     0.67     0.77     0.70     0.72     0.81     0.21    0.20        0.01   0.53
             Difference      2.23    1.47     1.39     1.19     1.30     1.11     0.92     0.75     0.75     0.71     0.56    -0.91    -0.54   -0.36      -1.16
BE/ME          Positive              1.47     1.71     1.77     1.86     1.86     1.93     2.12     2.11     2.33     2.58     1.10    0.72        0.39
               Negative              -0.26    0.09     0.35     0.38     0.57     0.67     0.67     0.76     0.89     0.94     1.21    0.37        0.83
             Difference              1.74     1.62     1.42     1.49     1.29     1.26     1.45     1.35     1.44     1.64    -0.10    0.34    -0.44
EF/A           Positive              2.52     2.19     2.08     1.98     1.83     1.88     1.88     1.79     1.92     1.66    -0.86    -0.17   -0.69
               Negative              0.76     0.75     0.85     0.77     0.73     0.62     0.39     0.38     0.25    -0.47    -1.23    -1.20   -0.03
             Difference              1.76     1.44     1.23     1.21     1.10     1.26     1.49     1.42     1.67     2.12     0.37    1.02    -0.66
GS             Positive              2.36     2.04     1.97     1.79     1.82     1.88     1.99     2.08     1.90     1.81    -0.56    -0.01   -0.54
               Negative              0.66     0.60     0.58     0.65     0.62     0.66     0.68     0.56     0.35    -0.42    -1.09    -1.05   -0.04
             Difference              1.70     1.44     1.38     1.14     1.20     1.21     1.31     1.52     1.55     2.23     0.53    1.04    -0.50
Table 3b. Two-way Sorts: Sentiment Index and Firm Characteristics. For each mo nth, we form ten portfolios according to the NYSE breakpoints of firm
size (ME), age, total risk, earnings-book ratio for profitable firms (E/BE), dividend-book ratio for dividend payers (D/BE), book-to-market ratio (BE/ME),
external finance over assets (EF/A), and sales growth (GS). We also calculate portfolio returns for unprofitable firms and nonpayers. We then report average
portfolio returns over months where the standardized SENTIMENT (orthogonalized to macroeconomic conditions) from the previous year end is positive,
negative, and the difference between the two averages.


            SENTIMENTt-1                                                 Decile                                                         Overall
                                                                                                                                                          >0-
                                ≤0        1        2        3       4        5        6       7        8        9      10     10-1    10-5        5-1     ≤0
ME                Positive              0.88     0.81    0.79     0.80     0.95    0.85     1.09     1.01    0.99     0.97     0.08    0.01       0.07
                  Negative              2.33     1.66    1.65     1.52     1.66    1.36     1.21     1.23    1.03     0.91    -1.43   -0.75    -0.68
                Difference             -1.45    -0.84   -0.86    -0.72    -0.71    -0.51   -0.13    -0.22    -0.04    0.06     1.51    0.77       0.74
Age               Positive              0.35     0.96    1.09     1.03     1.29    1.26     1.00     1.13    1.06     1.07     0.72   -0.23       0.95
                  Negative              1.75     1.80    1.89     1.63     1.63    1.62     1.39     1.39    1.36     1.27    -0.47   -0.36    -0.11
                Difference             -1.40    -0.84   -0.80    -0.60    -0.34    -0.35   -0.40    -0.25    -0.30   -0.20     1.20    0.13       1.06
σ                 Positive              1.26     1.26    1.09     1.11     1.16    1.02     0.99     0.97    0.89     0.61    -0.65   -0.55    -0.09
                  Negative              1.04     1.22    1.35     1.42     1.57    1.69     1.68     1.81    2.01     2.25     1.21    0.69       0.53
                Difference              0.22     0.04   -0.26    -0.31    -0.40    -0.67   -0.70    -0.83    -1.12   -1.64    -1.86   -1.24    -0.62
E/BE              Positive     0.62     0.72     0.98    0.91     0.90     0.94    0.89     0.93     1.03    1.04     0.91     0.20   -0.03       0.23   0.32
                  Negative     2.51     2.33     2.02    2.30     1.82     1.57    1.82     1.64     1.62    1.45     1.60    -0.72    0.03    -0.76     -0.85
                Difference    -1.89    -1.61    -1.04   -1.39    -0.92    -0.63    -0.93   -0.72    -0.59    -0.41   -0.69     0.92   -0.06       0.98   1.16
D/BE              Positive     0.62     0.99     1.00    1.19     0.95     1.08    1.05     1.16     1.13    1.08     1.02     0.04   -0.06       0.09   0.45
                  Negative     2.26     1.96     1.69    1.68     1.53     1.46    1.39     1.27     1.17    1.21     1.27    -0.69   -0.19    -0.50     -0.77
                Difference    -1.64    -0.97    -0.70   -0.49    -0.58    -0.38    -0.33   -0.11    -0.04    -0.13   -0.25     0.73    0.13       0.59   1.21
BE/ME             Positive              0.26     0.77    0.93     0.97     1.06    1.15     1.15     1.19    1.31     1.36     1.10    0.30       0.80
                  Negative              1.27     1.35    1.47     1.55     1.62    1.68     1.91     1.94    2.19     2.47     1.19    0.85       0.35
                Difference             -1.01    -0.58   -0.54    -0.58    -0.56    -0.53   -0.76    -0.75    -0.88   -1.11    -0.10   -0.55       0.45
EF/A              Positive              1.23     1.14    1.32     1.26     1.21    1.20     1.06     0.90    0.79     0.15    -1.07   -1.06    -0.01
                  Negative              2.39     2.07    1.84     1.71     1.56    1.54     1.49     1.54    1.69     1.44    -0.95   -0.12    -0.82
                Difference             -1.16    -0.93   -0.52    -0.45    -0.35    -0.34   -0.43    -0.64    -0.90   -1.28    -0.12   -0.94       0.81
GS                Positive              0.98     1.17    1.21     1.13     1.19    1.17     1.23     1.13    0.89     0.18    -0.80   -1.02       0.21
                  Negative              2.36     1.74    1.60     1.54     1.48    1.60     1.69     1.79    1.65     1.62    -0.74    0.14    -0.88
                Difference             -1.37    -0.58   -0.39    -0.41    -0.28    -0.43   -0.46    -0.66    -0.76   -1.44    -0.07   -1.16       1.09
Table 4. Baseline Regressions, Monthly Returns. Average coefficients and t-statistics from monthly regressions of returns on firm characteristics (X), size
(log(ME)), book-to-market (log(BE/ME)), and momentum (MOM).
                                      Rit = at + bt X it −1 + st log (ME )it −1 + ht log ( BE ME )it −1 + mt MOM it −1 + eit
We only report the average of b t . The firm characteristics are firm size (log(ME)), age (log(Age)), total risk (σ), an indicator variable for profitable firms (E>0)
and dividend payers (D>0), book-to-market ratio (log(BE/ME)), external finance over assets (EF/A), and sales growth decile (GS). The first panel shows
univariate results. The second panel includes book-to-market, size, and momentum as control variables. Standard errors are equal to the time series standard
deviation of b t divided by the number of months.


       ME                   Age                      σ                 E>0                   D>0               BE/ME                 EF/A                 GS/10
      s       t(s)         b        t(b)         b        t(b)        b         t(b)        b       t(b)        h       t(h)         b       t(b)         b        t(b)
                                                                           Panel A. Univariate
   -0.17     [-3.3]     0.04       [0.7]      1.45       [1.0]     -0.26      [-1.3]     -0.17     [-0.8]    0.47      [6.5]     -1.64      [-6.7]     -0.59      [-4.6]
                                                     Panel B. Controlling for Book-to-Market, Size, and Momentum
   -0.18     [-3.4]     0.10       [2.8]                                                                     0.31      [4.4]
   -0.16     [-3.7]                          -0.40       [-0.4]                                              0.34      [5.4]
   -0.16     [-3.3]                                                -0.05      [-0.4]                         0.35      [4.9]
   -0.16     [-3.5]                                                                      0.05      [0.4]     0.34      [5.1]
   -0.14     [-2.4]                                                                                          0.52      [6.6]
   -0.16     [-3.0]                                                                                          0.26      [3.8]     -1.16      [-6.8]
   -0.15     [-2.8]                                                                                          0.32      [4.4]                           -0.26      [-2.7]
Table 5. Time Series Regressions, Monthly Returns Coefficients. Two-stage regression. In the first stage, we compute coefficients from monthly regressions
of returns on firm characteristics (X), size (log(ME)), book-to-market (log(BE/ME)), and momentum (MOM).
                                     Rit = at + bt X it −1 + st log (ME )it −1 + ht log ( BE ME )it −1 + mt MOM it −1 + eit
The firm characteristics are firm size (log(ME)), age (log(Age)), total risk (σ), an indicator variable for profitable firms (E>0) and dividend payers (D>0), book-
to-market ratio (log(BE/ME)), external finance over assets (EF/A), and sales growth decile (GS). When we analyze growth opportunities, we exclude the top
(bottom) three deciles for book-to-market ratio (external finance, sales growth). When we analyze distress, we exclude the bottom (top) three deciles for book-to-
market ratio (external finance, sales growth). In the second stage, we regress the monthly coefficients b t on measures of investor sentiment, each standardized to
have unit variance.

                                                                bˆt = c + dSENTIMENTt −1 + u t
Coefficients are matched to the closed-end fund discount (CEFD), the number of IPOs (NIPO), and the equity share (S) for the calendar year one year before t.
Coefficeints are matched to detrended log turnover (TURN), the average annual first-day return (RIPO), and the dividend premium (PD-ND ) for the calendar year
two years before t. All sentiment measures are orthogonalized to macroeconomic conditions. The first seven columns show univariate results. The last column
includes size, book-to-market, and momentum as control variables in the first-stage regression and uses the sentiment index in the second stage. Bootstrap p-
values are in braces.


                                                                                                                                                       SENTIMENTt-1
                                                                                                                                                       Controlling for
                                                                                                                                                        ME, BE/ME,
                     CEFDt-1            TURN t-2          NIPO t-1           RIPO t-2             S t-1           P t-2 D-ND          SENTIMENTt-1       and MOM
                       d      p(d)        d     p(d)        d        p(d)     d         p(d)     d        p(d)      d          p(d)       d    p(d)         d     p(d)
ME                   -0.2    [.00]      0.1    [.10]      0.2     [.00]     0.1     [.18]      0.1        [.06]   -0.0     [.49]        0.1    [.02]      0.1    [.03]
Age                  -0.2    [.01]      0.1    [.14]      0.3     [.00]     0.1     [.13]      0.2        [.01]   -0.0     [.59]        0.2    [.01]      0.0    [.51]
σ                    6.7     [.00]     -3.6    [.07]     -7.5     [.00]     -4.8    [.01]      -5.0       [.01]   3.0      [.16]        -6.4   [.00]     -3.5    [.01]
E>0                  -0.7    [.00]      0.5    [.03]      0.9     [.00]     0.5     [.03]      0.5        [.03]   -0.4     [.09]        0.7    [.00]      0.4    [.01]
D>0                  -0.8    [.00]      0.5    [.06]      1.0     [.00]     0.4     [.09]      0.6        [.01]   -0.3     [.31]        0.7    [.00]      0.4    [.00]
BE/ME                -0.0    [.65]      0.1    [.47]      0.1     [.13]     0.0     [.74]      0.1        [.16]   -0.0     [.98]        0.1    [.41]      0.2    [.09]
EF/A                 0.6     [.02]     -0.1    [.73]     -0.6     [.03]     -0.2    [.49]      -0.8       [.00]   0.0      [.97]        -0.4   [.15]     -0.3    [.19]
GS                   0.2     [.15]     -0.1    [.51]     -0.3     [.05]     -0.2    [.31]      -0.3       [.07]   0.1      [.67]        -0.2   [.15]     -0.1    [.44]
BE/ME (1-7)          -0.1    [.29]      0.1    [.17]      0.3     [.01]     0.1     [.31]      0.2        [.09]   -0.1     [.41]        0.2    [.09]      0.2    [.05]
EF/A (4-10)          1.8     [.00]     -0.7    [.20]     -1.9     [.00]     -0.9    [.06]      -1.5       [.01]   0.6      [.31]        -1.6   [.00]     -0.8    [.03]
GS (4-10)            0.1     [.00]     -0.1    [.03]     -0.1     [.00]     -0.1    [.04]      -0.1       [.01]   0.1      [.10]        -0.1   [.00]     -0.1    [.01]
BE/ME (4-10)         0.1     [.26]     -0.1    [.21]     -0.1     [.16]     -0.1    [.46]      0.0        [.91]   0.2      [.15]        -0.1   [.18]      0.0    [.70]
EF/A (1-7)           -2.1    [.00]      1.1    [.09]      2.4     [.00]     1.4     [.04]      0.7        [.33]   -1.4     [.07]        2.0    [.01]      0.9    [.02]
GS (1-7)             -0.1    [.02]      0.1    [.03]      0.1     [.00]     0.0     [.11]      0.0        [.26]   -0.0     [.10]        0.1    [.02]      0.0    [.08]
Table 6. Time Series Regressions, Portfolios. Regressions of long-short portfolio returns on measures of sentiment (S), each standardized to have unit variance,
the market risk premium (RMRF), the Fama-French factors (HML and SMB), and a momentum factor (UMD).
                          R X it = high,t − R Xit =low,t = c + dSENTIMENTt −1 + βRMRF t + sSMB t + hHML t + mUMDt + u t
The long-short portfolios are formed based on firm characteristics (X): firm size (ME), age, total risk (σ), profitability (E), dividends (D), book-to-market ratio
(BE/ME), external finance over assets (EF/A), and sales growth decile (GS). High is defined as a firm in the top three NYSE deciles; low is defined as a firm in
the bottom three NYSE deciles; medium is defined as a firm in the middle four NYSE deciles. Monthly returns are matched to the closed-end fund discount
(CEFD), the number of IPOs (NIPO), and the equity share (S) for the calendar year one year before t. Monthly returns are matched to detrended log turnover
(TURN), the average annual first-day return (RIPO), and the dividend premium (PD-ND ) for the calendar year two years before t. All sentiment measures are
orthogonalized to macroeconomic conditions. The first seven columns show univariate results. The last column includes RMRF, SMB, HML, and UMD as
control variables. Bootstrap p-values are in braces.


                                                                                                                                                       SENTIMENTt-1
                                                                                                                                                       Controlling for
                                                                                                                                                        ME, BE/ME,
                                CEFDt-1          TURN t-2         NIPO t-1         RIPO t-2           S t-1           P t-2 D-ND      SENTIMENTt-1       and MOM
                                  d     p(d)       d     p(d)       d     p(d)       d     p(d)       d       p(d)      d     p(d)        d    p(d)        d      p(d)
ME         SMB                  0.4    [.01]    -0.2    [.39]    -0.6    [.00]    -0.1    [.48]    -0.3       [.13]   0.1     [.61]     -0.3   [.07]     -0.2     [.18]
Age        High-Low            -0.6    [.02]     0.3    [.19]     0.9    [.00]     0.2    [.25]     0.6       [.01]   -0.1    [.57]      0.6   [.02]     0.2      [.09]
σ          High-Low             0.9    [.00]    -0.5    [.06]    -1.0    [.00]    -0.4    [.12]    -0.7       [.02]   0.4     [.28]     -0.8   [.01]     -0.4     [.03]
E          >0 − <0             -0.7    [.00]     0.5    [.05]     0.9    [.00]     0.4    [.07]     0.5       [.03]   -0.4    [.09]      0.7   [.00]     0.5      [.02]
D          >0 − =0             -0.8    [.00]     0.5    [.07]     1.0    [.00]     0.4    [.10]     0.6       [.01]   -0.3    [.28]      0.7   [.00]     0.4      [.01]
BE/ME      HML                 -0.1    [.45]     0.1    [.49]     0.2    [.23]     0.2    [.19]     0.2       [.20]   0.0     [.89]      0.2   [.30]     0.1      [.67]
EF/A       High-Low             0.2    [.15]    -0.1    [.63]    -0.3    [.01]    -0.1    [.36]    -0.3       [.01]   0.1     [.37]     -0.2   [.08]     -0.1     [.30]
GS         High-Low             0.1    [.21]    -0.0    [.71]    -0.2    [.07]    -0.1    [.33]    -0.2       [.14]   0.0     [.69]     -0.2   [.17]     -0.1     [.45]
BE/ME      Low-Medium          -0.1    [.25]     0.2    [.23]     0.3    [.02]     0.1    [.38]     0.2       [.06]   -0.1    [.48]      0.2   [.09]     0.1      [.31]
EF/A       High-Medium          0.4    [.01]    -0.2    [.07]    -0.5    [.00]    -0.2    [.09]    -0.4       [.01]   0.2     [.10]     -0.4   [.00]     -0.2     [.01]
GS         High-Medium          0.4    [.00]    -0.3    [.04]    -0.5    [.00]    -0.3    [.04]    -0.3       [.02]   0.2     [.13]     -0.4   [.00]     -0.2     [.01]
BE/ME      High-Medium          0.1    [.39]    -0.1    [.44]    -0.1    [.26]    -0.0    [.69]     0.0       [.89]   0.1     [.18]     -0.1   [.33]     -0.1     [.47]
EF/A       Low-Medium          -0.2    [.00]     0.2    [.02]     0.2    [.00]     0.1    [.16]     0.1       [.32]   -0.1    [.12]      0.2   [.01]     0.2      [.00]
GS         Low-Medium          -0.3    [.02]     0.2    [.03]     0.3    [.01]     0.2    [.14]     0.2       [.15]   -0.2    [.13]      0.3   [.02]     0.2      [.09]
Table 7. Conditional Market Betas. Regressions of long-short portfolio returns on the market risk premium (RMRF) and the market risk premium interacted
with measures of sentiment (S) , each standardized to have unit variance.
                                   R X it = high,t − R Xit =low,t = c + dSENTIMENTt −1 + β (e + fSENTIMENTt −1 )RMRFt + u t
The long-short portfolios are formed based on firm characteristics (X): firm size (ME), age, total risk (σ), profitability (E), dividends (D), book-to-market ratio
(BE/ME), external finance over assets (EF/A), and sales growth decile (GS). High is defined as a firm in the top three NYSE deciles; low is defined as a firm in
the bottom three NYSE deciles; medium is defined as a firm in the middle four NYSE deciles. Monthly returns are matched to the closed-end fund discount
(CEFD), the number of IPOs (NIPO), and the equity share (S) for the calendar year one year before t. Monthly returns are matched to detrended log turnover
(TURN), the average annual first-day return (RIPO), and the dividend premium (PD-ND ) for the calendar year two years before t. All sentiment measures are
orthogonalized to macroeconomic conditions. T-statistics are heteroskedasticity robust.


                                       CEFDt-1             TURN t-2            NIPO t-1             RIPO t-2              S t-1              P t-2 D-ND         SENTIMENTt-1
                                        βf     t(βf)        βf       t(βf)       βf     t(βf)        βf        t(βf)     βf       t(βf)       βf       t(βf)        βf       t(βf)
ME             SMB                   -0.01    [-0.2]      -0.02      [-0.6]   -0.03    [-0.8]      0.02        [0.5]   -0.01      [-0.3]    0.05       [1.4]      -0.02      [-0.5]
                                                              b                                        b                                        b                     b
Age            High-Low              -0.02    [-0.5]     -0.13       [-2.9]    0.01       [0.4]   -0.13       [-2.7]   0.02       [0.6]    0.15        [3.0]     -0.10       [-2.2]
σ              High-Low               0.05     [1.1]       0.10      [2.0]    -0.07    [-1.7]      0.10        [1.9]   -0.06      [-1.3]   -0.07       [-1.4]     0.04       [0.8]
E              >0-<0                  0.08     [1.7]       0.09      [1.9]    -0.06    [-1.6]      0.05        [0.9]   -0.07      [-1.5]   -0.04       [-0.7]     0.00       [0.0]
D              >0-<0                 -0.02    [-0.5]     -0.10b      [-2.2]    0.05       [1.2]    -0.08      [-1.8]   0.02       [0.6]     0.06       [1.4]      -0.05      [-1.0]
BE/ME          HML                    0.04     [0.9]     -0.12b      [-3.0]   -0.06    [-1.7]     -0.08b      [-2.2]   -0.07      [-1.9]   0.16a       [3.6]     -0.12b      [-3.2]
                                                              b                                        b                                        b                     b
EF/A           High-Low               0.00     [0.2]      0.08       [4.1]    -0.00       [0.0]   0.10         [4.4]   -0.00      [-0.3]   -0.14       [-6.8]    0.09        [3.9]
                                                                                                       b                                        b                     b
GS             High-Low              -0.03    [-0.2]       0.30      [1.3]    -0.19    [-1.0]     0.55         [3.3]   0.06       [0.3]    -0.84       [-3.8]    0.46        [2.1]
                                                              b                                        b                                        b                     b
BE/ME          Low-Medium             0.01     [0.2]     -0.07       [-2.5]   -0.01    [-0.3]     -0.09       [-2.8]   -0.04      [-1.4]   0.12        [3.4]     -0.09       [-2.8]
                                                              b                                        b                                        b                     b
EF/A           High-Medium            0.01     [0.7]      0.07       [3.0]    -0.02    [-1.0]     0.08         [3.2]   -0.01      [-0.4]   -0.09       [-3.4]    0.06        [2.4]
                                                              b                                        b                                        b                     b
GS             High-Medium           -0.00    [-0.2]      0.07       [3.0]    -0.01    [-0.6]     0.08         [3.6]   -0.00      [-0.1]   -0.10       [-4.1]    0.07        [2.8]
                                                                 a                a                       a                                        a                     a
BE/ME          High-Medium            0.03     [1.9]     -0.06       [-3.3]   -0.05    [-2.6]     -0.04       [-3.2]   -0.03      [-1.6]   0.10        [4.5]     -0.07       [-3.9]
                                                                                                                                                   a
EF/A           Low-Medium            -0.01    [-0.8]       0.02      [1.2]     0.02       [1.3]    0.02        [1.3]   0.00       [0.3]    -0.05       [-3.5]     0.03       [1.9]
GS             Low-Medium             0.00     [0.0]      -0.04      [-1.7]   -0.01    [-0.4]      -0.03      [-1.7]   0.01       [0.4]     0.01       [0.7]      -0.02      [-1.1]

a
    Statistically significant βf that matches the sign of the return predictability from Tables 5 and 6.
b
    Statistically significant βf that does not match the sign of the return predictability from Tables 5 and 6.
Table 8. Announcement Effects. For each calendar quarter, we form ten portfolios according to the NYSE breakpoints of firm size (ME), age, total risk,
earnings-book ratio for profitable firms (E/BE), dividend-book ratio for dividend payers (D/BE), book-to-market ratio (BE/ME), external finance over assets
(EF/A), and sales growth (GS). We also calculate average announcement effects for unprofitable firms and nonpayers. We then regress the average quarterly
earnings announcement effects for each portfolio on lagged values of the sentiment index.
                                                            Rt = a + bSENTIMENTt −1 + u t
We report b. Quarterly average announcement effects are matched to the sentiment index for the calendar year one year before t. The sentiment measure is
orthogonalized to macroeconomic conditions. T-statistics are heteroskedasticity robust.


                                                                                   Decile
                          ≤0            1           2            3            4             5          6            7           8            9          10
ME                                  -0.20        -0.02        -0.01       -0.11        -0.06       -0.06        -0.01        -0.04        0.00        -0.06
                                   [-2.24]     [-0.28]      [-0.11]      [-1.26]     [-1.02]      [-0.88]      [-0.22]     [-0.77]      [0.04]       [-1.09]
Age                                 -0.09         0.01        -0.08       -0.10        -0.15        0.00         0.05        -0.05       -0.03        -0.15
                                   [-0.84]      [0.10]      [-1.23]      [-1.22]     [-2.01]      [-0.04]      [0.87]      [-0.74]      [-0.55]      [-3.09]
σ                                    0.06         0.03        0.01         0.04        -0.07       -0.04        -0.02        -0.02       -0.08        -0.31
                                    [0.91]      [0.73]       [0.25]      [0.75]      [-1.29]      [-0.59]      [-0.21]     [-0.24]      [-1.03]      [-3.55]
E/BE                    -0.33       -0.23         0.06        0.11        -0.16        -0.13       -0.06        -0.03        0.00        -0.01         0.10
                      [-2.96]      [-2.19]      [0.83]       [0.84]      [-1.76]     [-1.52]      [-0.68]      [-0.32]      [0.04]      [-0.14]      [1.47]
D/BE                    -0.19        0.00        -0.09        -0.04       -0.02        -0.06        0.00        -0.07        -0.11        0.03        -0.05
                      [-2.26]      [-0.02]     [-1.32]      [-0.64]      [-0.33]     [-1.01]      [-0.08]      [-1.20]     [-2.07]      [0.55]       [-0.72]
BE/ME                               -0.10         0.00        0.04        -0.03        -0.06        0.02        -0.11        0.00        -0.13        -0.18
                                   [-1.43]     [-0.07]       [0.54]      [-0.45]     [-0.90]       [0.30]      [-1.74]     [-0.03]      [-1.54]      [-1.62]
EF/A                                -0.06        -0.06        0.03        -0.08        0.01        -0.07        -0.15        -0.03       -0.14        -0.06
                                   [-0.57]     [-0.77]       [0.54]      [-1.23]      [0.11]      [-1.12]      [-2.65]     [-0.50]      [-2.02]      [-0.70]
GS                                  -0.24        -0.05        -0.11       -0.03        -0.03        0.02        -0.07        0.00        -0.06        -0.06
                                   [-2.36]     [-0.62]      [-1.39]      [-0.46]     [-0.55]       [0.34]      [-1.21]      [0.08]      [-0.91]      [-0.68]
