                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        THE OPTIMAL DESIGN OF UNEMPLOYMENT
                       INSURANCE AND EMPLOYMENT PROTECTION.
                                    A FIRST PASS

                                            Olivier Blanchard
                                               Jean Tirole

                                          Working Paper 10443
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w10443


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       April 2004




We are grateful to Daron Acemoglu, Suman Basu, Javier Ortega, John Hassler, and to the participants to the
third Toulouse Macroeconomics workshop for helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of
the author(s) and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2004 by Olivier Blanchard and Jean Tirole. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
The Optimal Design of Unemployment Insurance and Employment Protection. A First Pass
Olivier Blanchard and Jean Tirole
NBER Working Paper No. 10443
April 2004, Revised November 2005
JEL No. D60, E62, H21, J30, J32, J38, J65
                                        ABSTRACT


        Much of the policy discussion of labor market institutions has been at the margin, with

proposals to tighten unemployment benefits, reduce employment protection, and so on. There has

been little discussion however of what the ultimate goal and architecture should be. The paper

focuses on characterizing this ultimate goal, the optimal architecture of labor market institutions.

        We start our analysis with a simple benchmark, with risk averse workers, risk neutral firms

and random shocks to productivity. In this benchmark, we show that optimality requires both

unemployment insurance and employment protection---in the form of layoff taxes; it also requires

that layoff taxes be equal to unemployment benefits.

        We then explore the implications of four broad categories of deviations: limits on insurance,

limits on layoff taxes, ex-post wage bargaining, and heterogeneity of firms or workers. We show

how the architecture must be modified in each case. The scope for insurance may be more limited

than in the benchmark; so may the scope for employment protection. The general principle remains

however, namely the need to look at unemployment insurance and employment protection together,

rather than in isolation.

Olivier Blanchard                                     Jean Tirole
Department of Economics                               IDEI
MIT                                                   21 Allees de Brienne
Cambridge, MA 02139                                   31000 Toulouse
and NBER                                              France
blanchar@mit.edu                                      tirole@cict.fr
Introduction
Unemployment insurance and employment protection are typically discussed and studied
in isolation. In this paper, we argue that they are tightly linked, and we focus on their
optimal joint design.
   We start our analysis in Section 1 with a simple benchmark. Workers are risk averse;
entrepreneurs run firms and are risk neutral. The productivity of any worker-firm match
is random. If productivity is low enough, the worker and the firm may separate, in which
case the worker becomes unemployed.
   In this benchmark, a simple way to achieve the optimum is for the state to pay un-
employment benefits so as to insure workers, and to levy layoff taxes so as to lead firms
to internalize the cost of unemployment and take an efficient layoff decision. Thus, the
benchmark shows the tight conceptual relation between unemployment insurance and em-
ployment protection—defined as layoff taxes.
   The optimum has two further characteristics: The first is that layoff taxes are equal
to unemployment benefits: This common level delivers both full insurance and production
efficiency. The second, which follows from the first, is that state intervention is not needed.
The same allocation is achieved by having firms voluntarily pay severance payments to
their workers; in effect, severance payments act both as unemployment insurance and
layoff taxes.
   This leads us to examine, in Sections 2 to 5, how these conclusions are affected by the
introduction of four empirically-relevant deviations from the benchmark, from limits on
unemployment insurance, to limits on the ability of firms to pay layoff taxes, to ex–post
wage bargaining, and to ex–ante heterogeneity of either workers or firms. In each case,
we ask two questions: The first is how the distortion affects the optimal combination of
unemployment insurance and layoff taxes. The second is whether state intervention is
required.
   We find that, in general, efficiency and insurance require different levels of layoff taxes
and unemployment benefits, with the difference being financed through payroll taxes —
positive or negative.
   The fact that layoff taxes are in general not equal to unemployment benefits also implies
that individual firms can no longer implement the optimum on their own (i.e. through sev-
erance payments). A pooling or insurance agency is needed to receive payments both from
firms which lay workers off and from firms that do not, and to distribute unemployment


                                              2
benefits to laid off workers. We show that, in some cases, this role can be filled by a private
agency, with voluntary participation by firms, but that in others, participation must be
compulsory, implying a clear role for the state. We also show, in Section 6, that, while, in
some cases, insurance can be provided through a combination of severance payments by
firms and unemployment benefits by the agency, in other cases, the agency must require
exclusivity in the provision of insurance, lest the outcome be suboptimal.
    Before we start, we want to emphasize the limits of our analysis. Our framework
is a static, one-period, model. As such, it represents a substantial step back from recent
dynamic models of either unemployment insurance or employment protection. We do so for
two reasons. First, we want to focus on the joint design of unemployment insurance and
employment protection, which makes things more difficult. Second, we want to explore
a large number of labor market imperfections, starting from as simple a benchmark as
feasible. We believe that the conclusions we draw from our model, about the articulation
of unemployment insurance and employment protection, about the relative use of layoff
and payroll taxes in response to various market imperfections, and about the role of the
state, are quite general and can help design better systems. In that context, we draw, in
Section 7, what we see as our main conclusions and our intended extensions.


1     A benchmark
1.1    Assumptions
Tastes and technology are as follows:

• The economy is composed of a continuum of mass 1 of workers, a continuum of mass (at
least) 1 of entrepreneurs, and the state.

• Entrepreneurs are risk neutral. Each entrepreneur can start and run a firm. There is a
fixed cost of creating a firm, I, which is the same for all entrepreneurs.
    If a firm is created, a worker is hired, and the productivity of the match is then revealed.
Productivity is given by y from cdf G(y), with density g(y) on [0, 1]. The firm can either
keep the worker and produce, or lay the worker off, who then becomes unemployed.
    Realizations are iid across firms; there is no aggregate risk.

• The firm, but not the worker (or for that matter third parties such as an insurance


                                               3
company or the state) observes y.1

• Workers are risk averse, with utility function U (.). Absent unemployment benefits, utility
if unemployed is given by U (b) (so b is the wage equivalent of being unemployed).

1.2      The optimal allocation
Let ȳ be the threshold level of productivity below which workers are laid off. Let w be the
payment to the workers who remain employed, and µ be the payment to the workers who
are laid off.
       The optimal allocation maximizes expected worker utility subject to the economy’s
resource constraint:2


                          max VW ≡ G(ȳ)U (b + µ) + (1 − G(ȳ))U (w)
                         {w,µ,ȳ}

subject to:                                 Z      1
                         V ≡ −G(ȳ)µ +                 y dG(y) − (1 − G(ȳ))w = I
                                              ȳ

       From the first–order conditions, it follows that:

                                                w∗ = b + µ∗                                            (1)

                                                       ȳ ∗ = b                                        (2)

Given ȳ ∗ , the levels of w∗ and µ∗ are determined by the resource constraint.
       Condition (1) is an insurance condition: Workers achieve the same level of utility,
whether employed or laid-off and unemployed.
       Condition (2) is an efficiency condition: From the point of view of total output, it is
efficient for firms to produce so long as productivity exceeds the wage equivalent of being
unemployed (we shall call b the production-efficient threshold level).
   1
     This assumption is maintained throughout the paper, except in Section 4 which introduces ex-post
bargaining, and in which both the worker and the firm observe the realization of y.
   2
     We derive the optimal allocation ignoring the assumption that y is observed only by the firm. We shall
show below that this optimal allocation can indeed be implemented.




                                                          4
1.3    Implementation
Any provision of insurance by the firm (a severance payment) can be duplicated by the
state through unemployment benefits in this economy. At best, severance payments are
redundant; in some circumstances (those envisioned in Section 2), we shall see that they
must actually be ruled out in order to implement the optimal allocation. So, until we discuss
alternative implementation schemes in Section 6, we assume away severance payments.
     Consider now the following implementation of the optimal benchmark allocation:

• Stage 1. The state chooses a payroll tax rate τ , a layoff tax rate f , and unemployment
benefits µ.

• Stage 2. Entrepreneurs decide whether to start firms and pay the fixed cost.
     They offer contracts to workers. Contracts are characterized, explicitly, by a wage w,
and, implicitly (since y is not contractable), a threshold productivity level ȳ below which
the worker is laid off.
     As all firms face the same cost and distribution of productivity, in equilibrium, all
workers are initially hired.

• Stage 3. The productivity of each job is realized. Firms decide whether to keep or dismiss
workers.


     To show how the optimal allocation can be implemented, we work backwards in time.

     At Stage 3, the cutoff ȳ is such that the firm is indifferent between keeping the worker
and paying w + τ in wage and payroll tax and dismissing the worker and paying layoff tax
f:
                                           ȳ = w + τ − f.                                (3)

     If y > ȳ, the firm keeps the worker, produces y, pays w to the worker, and τ to the
state. If y < ȳ, the firm lays the worker off, pays f to the state; the state pays µ to the
worker.

     At Stage 2, firms’ wage offer w satisfies the free entry condition:
                                     Z     1
                   VF ≡ −G(ȳ)f +              y dG(y) − (1 − G(ȳ))(w + τ ) = I.         (4)
                                      ȳ


                                                    5
   Consider now the problem faced by the government in choosing taxes and unemploy-
ment benefits at Stage 1. Condition (3) implies that to induce firms to take the production-
efficient layoff decision ȳ ∗ = b, the following condition must hold:

                                        w + τ − f = b.                                    (5)

Because optimal insurance further requires that w = b + µ, the state’s policy must satisfy:

                                          f − τ = µ.                                      (6)

   The net fiscal cost to the firm of laying off a worker must be equal to the unemployment
benefits paid to the worker by the state. Note that this condition implies a positive relation
between the layoff and the payroll tax rates: For given unemployment benefits, the higher
the payroll tax, the higher the layoff tax needed to induce the firm to take the production-
efficient decision.
   The government budget constraint implies a second relation between taxes and benefits:

                           VG ≡ −G(ȳ)(µ − f ) + (1 − G(ȳ))τ = 0                         (7)

   This constraint implies a negative relation between the layoff and the payroll tax rates:
For given unemployment benefits, the higher the payroll tax, the lower the layoff tax
required to balance the budget. Combining the two conditions gives:

                                     f = µ,          τ =0                                 (8)

The layoff tax must be equal to unemployment benefits, and the payroll tax rate is equal
to zero. The payment of layoff taxes equal to unemployment benefits makes firms fully
internalize the cost of insurance provided by the state to the unemployed.
   We summarize our results in Proposition 1.


Proposition 1. In the benchmark, the optimal allocation is such that workers are fully
insured (b + µ∗ = w∗ ), and the threshold productivity is equal to the wage equivalent of
being unemployed (ȳ ∗ = b).


                                               6
    Implementation is achieved through unemployment benefits equal to µ∗ , and layoff
taxes f = µ∗ . Payroll taxes are equal to zero. Put another way, the contribution rate,
defined as the ratio of layoff taxes to unemployment benefits, is equal to one.


2     Limits on Insurance
In our benchmark, workers could be and were fully insured. In practice, there are various
reasons why this may not be feasible. Workers may require incentives not to shirk when
employed, or to search when unemployed. Or there may be a non–pecuniary loss associated
with becoming unemployed. We explore the implications of this last assumption, and return
to a discussion of other potential reasons later.
    Assume that the utility of workers is now given by U (c) if employed, and by U (c) − B
if unemployed, so B > 0 is the utility cost of being unemployed. All other assumptions are
the same as in the benchmark.

2.1    The optimal allocation
The optimal allocation is the solution to:3

                      max VW ≡ G(ȳ)(U (b + µ) − B) + (1 − G(ȳ))U (w),
                     {w,µ,ȳ}


subject to the resource constraint:
                                            Z     1
                         V ≡ −G(ȳ)µ +                y dG(y) − (1 − G(ȳ))w = I.
                                             ȳ

From the first–order conditions, it follows that:

                                                w∗ = b + µ∗ .                                          (9)

                                                                B
                                           ȳ ∗ = b −                    .                            (10)
                                                             U 0 (w∗ )
Given ȳ ∗ , the levels of w∗ and µ∗ are determined by condition that the resource constraint
holds with equality.
  3
    In deriving the optimal allocation, we again ignore the constraint that y is only observed by the firm.
Again, we show below that this allocation can be implemented.



                                                         7
       Condition (9) shows that marginal utility is equalized across employment and unem-
ployment. Because B > 0 however, this implies that utility is lower when unemployed.

       Condition (10) shows that the threshold level of productivity, ȳ ∗ , is lower than the
production-efficient level b.4

2.2      Implementation
Assume, as before, that the state first chooses taxes and benefits, the firms then enter and
offer a wage to workers, and, finally, productivity is realized. To describe how the optimal
allocation is implemented, we again work backwards in time.5
       At Stage 3, the threshold productivity below which the firm lays a worker off is still
given by:
                                               ȳ = w + τ − f.                                       (3)

       At Stage 2, the wage must satisfy the free entry condition:
                                         Z     1
                    VF ≡ −G(ȳ)f +                 y dG(y) − (1 − G(ȳ))(w + τ ) = I.
                                          ȳ

       Consider thus the problem faced by the government in choosing taxes and unemploy-
ment benefits at Stage 1. From equations (3) and (10), it follows that, to induce firms to
take the socially-optimal layoff decision ȳ ∗ = b − B/U 0 (w), the following condition must
hold:
                                                              B
                                         f −τ =µ+                     .
                                                            U 0 (w)
The net fiscal cost to the firm of laying off a worker must exceed the unemployment benefits
paid to the worker by an amount which depends on the cost of becoming unemployed.
       The other condition on taxes and benefits comes from the government budget con-
straint:
                                 −G(ȳ)(µ − f ) + (1 − G(ȳ))τ = 0.
   4
     This overemployment result should be familiar from the “implicit contract literature” (in particular
Baily (1974), Azariadis (1975), Akerlof and Miyazaki (1980)): The lower layoff rate serves as a partial
substitute for unemployment insurance.
   5
     We continue to assume that severance payments are equal to zero. In this case, the assumption is not
innocuous: Allowing for both unemployment benefits and severance payments would lead to a co-insurance
problem and a suboptimal allocation. We discuss the issue in Section 6.




                                                        8
Combining these two conditions gives:

                                                 B
                                     f =µ+               ,      τ <0                                 (11)
                                               U 0 (w)

The layoff tax must exceed unemployment benefits, implying, for budget balance, a negative
payroll tax.
      We summarize our results in Proposition 2.

Proposition 2. (i) In the presence of limits to insurance, the threshold productivity in the
socially efficient allocation is lower than the wage equivalent of being unemployed (ȳ ∗ < b):
The lower incidence of unemployment partly compensates for the limits on insurance when
unemployed.
(ii) Unemployment benefits, µ, must be financed by a combination of layoff taxes which
exceed these benefits (f > µ) and of negative payroll taxes, (τ < 0). Put another way, the
contribution rate must now be greater than one.

2.3      Implications and discussion
• The main result in Proposition 2 is that, in the presence of limits to insurance, layoff
taxes must exceed unemployment benefits — the contribution rate must be greater than
one. The higher the utility cost of unemployment, the lower the layoff rate, the larger the
layoff taxes.
      This implies that, with respect to variations in B, unemployment insurance and em-
ployment protection are therefore substitutes: The lower the feasible level of insurance, the
higher the implied level of employment protection. Higher employment protection however
is a poor substitute for insurance, as it leads to distortions in the layoff decision. Thus,
unemployment insurance reforms which reduce B (we shall give an example below, when
interpreting B as a result of the need for search incentives) have both favorable direct
(better insurance) and indirect (lower layoff taxes and lower distortions) effects.

• The second result is that payments by firms in case of layoffs must be larger than payments
to the laid–off workers. This obviously could not be achieved by severance payments, which
imply equal payments by firms and payments to workers, and requires the presence of a
third party.6 We have taken this third party to be the state, collecting layoff taxes and
  6
      This is an example of the general proposition (for example Holmström (1982)) that, when both incen-


                                                     9
(negative) payroll taxes, and paying unemployment benefits to workers. Formally, what
is needed is a pooling or insurance agency, collecting payments from firms that layoff,
paying unemployment benefits to workers, and distributing the difference to the remaining
firms. In this case, firms who join are better off. The agency may therefore be private and
participation voluntary.

• We formalized limits to insurance as coming from a non-financial cost of being unem-
ployed. The limits may come instead from incentives.
    Consider for example a modification of the benchmark based on shirking. Once hired,
but before productivity is revealed, the worker decides whether to shirk or not. Shirking
brings private benefits B but results in zero productivity and thus a layoff. Shirking is
unobservable. Thus, to prevent shirking, the following condition must hold:

                                 (1 − G(ȳ))(U (w) − U (b + µ)) ≥ B.                                     (12)

The expected utility gain from being employed relative to being unemployed must exceed
some value B. The characterization of the optimum and the implementation are then
identical to those above, except for the replacement of B/U 0 (w) by (1 − G(ȳ))B/U 0 (w) in
the relevant equations.7
    An alternative rationalization comes from the need to motivate the unemployed to
search. While we cannot formally analyze this case in our one-period model, search incen-
tive constraints are likely to lead however to results similar to those we have derived. The
difference in utility between unemployment and employment has to be sufficient to induce
search effort, yielding a constraint of the form (U (w) − U (b + µ) ≥ B). A full treatment
would however require a dynamic model, and we cannot provide it here.


3     Shallow pockets
In our benchmark, firms were risk neutral and had deep pockets. These assumptions are
again too strong. Even in the absence of aggregate risk, the owners of many firms, especially
small ones, are not fully diversified, and thus are likely to act as if they were risk averse.
tives and insurance considerations are present, there is typically a need for a “budget breaker”, such as an
insurance company or the state.
   7
     Under the more general assumption that shirking does not yield zero productivity but instead shifts
the distribution of y from G(·) to H(·), with G(·) stochastically dominating H(·), results are less clear cut.
In the absence of further restrictions, it is not necessarily the case that f is greater than µ.


                                                     10
And, even if entrepreneurs are risk neutral, information problems in financial markets are
likely to lead to restrictions on the funds available to firms. In this section, we focus on
the implications of limited funds.
    We assume that each entrepreneur starts with assets I + f¯, where f¯ ≥ 0 is therefore
the free cash flow available to the firm after investment. While it is a convenient starting
point, the exogeneity of f¯ is obviously too stark, and we discuss a number of extensions
below.

3.1      The optimal allocation
The government budget constraint (7), the threshold condition (3), and the condition that
payments by the firm in case of layoff cannot exceed free cash flow (f ≤ f¯), can be combined
to give the following constraint on ȳ, w and µ:8              9



                                     G(ȳ)µ − (1 − G(ȳ))(ȳ − w) ≤ f¯.

    Therefore, the optimal allocation is the solution to:

                           max VW ≡ G(ȳ)U (b + µ) + (1 − G(ȳ))U (w),
                          {w,µ,ȳ}


subject to the resource constraint:
                                             Z      1
                          V ≡ −G(ȳ)µ +                 y dG(y) − (1 − G(ȳ))w = I,
                                               ȳ

and the additional constraint:

                                     G(ȳ)µ − (1 − G(ȳ))(ȳ − w) ≤ f¯.
   8
     One may wonder whether allowing for job creation subsidies/taxes in addition to payroll and layoff taxes
might alleviate the shallow pocket constraint, and improve the allocation. This is not the case. Subsidies,
even if allowed in the government budget constraint, would not appear in the equation below.
   9
     This constraint is derived as follows. First rewrite the threshold condition as τ = ȳ − w + f and replace
τ in the government budget constraint to get −G(ȳ)(µ − f ) + (1 − G(ȳ))(ȳ − w + f ) = 0: For a given ȳ − w,
the lower f , the lower is µ. Reorganize and use f ≤ f¯ to get the equation in the text.




                                                          11
From the first-order conditions, it follows that the worker still receives full insurance10 :

                                              w∗ = b + µ∗ .

Furthermore, if the second constraint is binding (that is, if f¯ is less than unemployment
benefits in the optimal allocation derived in Section 1) :

                                                     (µ∗ − f¯)
                                      ȳ ∗ = b +                  > b.                                 (13)
                                                   (1 − G(ȳ ∗ ))

       By limiting payments by firms in case of layoff, the shallow pocket constraint prevents
the state from achieving the production-efficient threshold, and the layoff rate is now higher
than the production-efficient level. The tighter the shallow pocket constraint — the lower
f¯, the larger (µ∗ − f¯), the higher ȳ ∗ , and so, the larger the layoff rate. The levels of ȳ ∗ ,
w∗ , and µ∗ are determined by (13), the full insurance condition, and the condition that
the resource constraint holds with equality.
       The optimal allocation still offers full insurance to workers. But limited funds lead to
a higher threshold productivity, and thus a higher layoff rate than in the benchmark.

3.2      Implementation
If the shallow-pocket constraint is binding, the state chooses the layoff tax f = f¯. Given
unemployment benefits µ∗ , the government budget constraint then implies:

                                            G(ȳ ∗ )
                                     τ=                (µ∗ − f¯) > 0.
                                          1 − G(ȳ ∗ )

As unemployment benefits exceed layoff taxes, payroll taxes must be positive.
       The threshold productivity chosen by firms is therefore given by:

                                                     G(ȳ ∗ )                          ∗
                                                                      ¯) − f¯ = b + (µ − f ) .
            ȳ ∗ = b + µ∗ + τ − f = b + µ∗ +                    (µ∗
                                                                    − f
                                                   1 − G(ȳ ∗ )                     1 − G(ȳ ∗ )
  10
    To see why the presence of shallow pockets does not prevent full insurance, consider an allocation where
w > b + µ. Now, consider a decrease in the wage of ∆w < 0 and an equal increase in payments by firms
to the state. This change affects neither the threshold condition nor the firm’s profit. Use these increased
payments to increase unemployment benefits by −[(1 − G(ȳ))/G(ȳ)]∆w. Together, these changes imply a
change in utility of [−(1 − G(ȳ))U 0 (w) + (1 − G(ȳ))U 0 (b + µ)](−∆w) > 0. Thus, welfare can be improved
until workers are fully insured.




                                                      12
   This is the same expression as in (13), and so, layoff and payroll taxes indeed implement
the optimal allocation. The derivation shows that we can think of the shallow pocket
constraint as affecting the threshold productivity level directly (through the limit on the
layoff tax) and indirectly (through the need for positive payroll taxes); both the lower layoff
tax and the higher payroll tax reduce the fiscal cost of layoff for firms, and thus lead to a
layoff rate higher than the production-efficient level.
   By the same argument as before, the resource constraint implies that workers receive
the optimal w∗ and µ∗ .
   We summarize the results in Proposition 3.

Proposition 3. In the presence of shallow pockets, workers remain fully insured (w∗ =
b+µ∗ ). The threshold productivity is higher than the wage equivalent of being unemployed
(ȳ > b), leading to a higher layoff rate than in the benchmark.
     This allocation can be implemented by the government choosing unemployment benefits
µ∗ , and financing them partly through layoff taxes f¯, and partly through payroll taxes,
τ > 0. Put another way, the implementation implies now a contribution rate smaller than
one.

   As before, implementation can be achieved by a pooling agency, receiving contributions
¯
f G(ȳ ∗ ) from firms that layoff and contributions τ (1 − G(ȳ ∗ ) from those that do not, and
paying unemployment benefits G(ȳ ∗ )µ∗ to laid–off workers. Firms have an incentive to
join, and the agency may therefore be private.

3.3      Discussion
Two extensions of this analysis of shallow pockets are explored more formally in a com-
panion paper (Blanchard-Tirole 2005). Here is a short summary of the conclusions of that
paper:

(a) Endogenization of limited pocket-depth. There are at least two reasons why firms have
shallow pockets. The first reason is that they may not want to have deep pockets even if
they can. This arises when, in contrast to the maintained assumption of this paper, the
government policy is set after rather than before firms invest. Suppose, for example, that
the state cannot commit and sets (τ, f, µ) after firms have invested and hired workers, but
before they learn the productivity of the match. In this case, firms will obviously choose to
be “judgment proof”, i.e. to have no assets left in case of layoff, so f¯ = 0. The threshold is

                                              13
then given by: ȳ ∗ = b + µ∗ /(1 − G(ȳ ∗ ). The high threshold, and by implication, the high
layoff rate, reflects two distortions, one coming from zero layoff taxes and the other from
positive payroll taxes.
    Second, firms may have limited access to external finance due to a dearth of pledgeable
income. When the entrepreneurs enjoy a rent R > 0 in case of continuation, investors
cannot appropriate the full surplus from continuation, which leads to more layoffs than
in the benchmark. We find however that, in this case, the state should still make the
“investor-entrepreneur coalition” fully accountable for the cost of layoffs, so the optimal
contribution rate remains equal to one.

(b) Multi-activity firms. A concern often expressed by policy makers is that, even if the
firm can pay the layoff taxes, it may have to close otherwise healthy activities. The
companion paper, in a two-activity context, investigates the possibility and implication
of such “spillovers” or “snowball” effects. It shows that the state in general does not want
to collect the fully collectable amount (f in the notation of this section) in case of partial
layoffs. If it did collect the full amount, the marginal layoff tax on further layoffs would
be equal to zero (as the state cannot collect more than f .) This would in turn provide
excessive incentives for the firm to shut down entirely when having low productivity only
in one activity.


4    Ex-post wage bargaining
Our benchmark embodied the assumption that wages were set ex-ante, i.e. at the time of
hiring. This had the implication that, by offering unemployment insurance to risk averse
workers, a firm could not only offer a lower wage, but actually lower its expected labor
costs.
    To some extent however, there is always some room for ex-post bargaining. When this is
the case, a firm which has to pay a layoff tax if it lays a worker off is in a weaker bargaining
position vis-á-vis that worker; a worker who will receive unemployment benefits if laid
off is in a stronger position. The layoff tax, the severance payments, and the provision
of unemployment benefits both lead to higher, not lower, wages, and thus increase labor
costs.
    In this section, we therefore modify our earlier assumption about wage setting, assume
ex-post wage bargaining instead, and characterize the optimal allocation and its imple-


                                              14
mentation under ex-post wage bargaining. In order to avoid the complexities attached
to bargaining under incomplete information, we assume, in this section only, that both
the firm and the worker observe productivity ex post.        Thus “ex-post wage bargaining”
includes the assumption of symmetric information between worker and firm ex post.

4.1   A formalization of wage bargaining
The following formalization captures the effects of benefits and taxes on ex-post wage
determination in a simple way:
   Assume wage setting now takes place after productivity is realized, and is the outcome
of a two-stage game. In stage 1, the worker makes a wage offer to the firm. The firm can
either accept the offer or turn it down. If it turns it down, the wage is set in stage 2, either
by the worker with probability β, or by the firm with probability 1 − β.
   Under the assumption that the firm chooses the threshold level of productivity so as
to maximize profit ex-post, in stage 2, the highest wage the firm will accept, and therefore
the wage offered by the worker, is equal to y − τ + f . The lowest wage the worker will
accept, and therefore the wage offered by the firm, is equal to b + µ. Thus, the expected
wage in stage 2 is given by β(y − τ + f ) + (1 − β)(b + µ). This implies that, in stage 1, the
worker will make the highest offer acceptable by the (risk neutral) firm, i.e. an offer of

                           w(y) = β(y − τ + f ) + (1 − β)(b + µ).

   The higher the layoff tax, or the lower the payroll tax, or the higher the unemployment
benefits, the higher is the wage.
   The threshold value for productivity, ȳ, is given by the condition that w(ȳ) + τ − ȳ = f .
Using the expression for the wage and rearranging:

                                      ȳ = b + µ + τ − f.                                  (14)

Note that the threshold is privately efficient. Just as in the benchmark, the combination
of f = µ, τ = 0 would deliver the production-efficient threshold, ȳ = b. But, as we shall
see, other considerations are now relevant.
   Expression (14) allows us to rewrite the wage schedule as:

                                 w(y) = (b + µ) + β(y − ȳ).                               (15)


                                              15
The wage paid to the marginal worker, the worker in a job with productivity equal to
the threshold level, is equal to (b + µ), the wage equivalent of being unemployed plus
unemployment benefits and severance payments. The wage then increases with β times
the difference between productivity and threshold productivity.

4.2    The optimal allocation
The optimal allocation solves the same problem as in the benchmark, subject to the ad-
ditional constraint that the wage is no longer a decision variable, but is instead given by
equation (15):
                                                          Z        1
                          max G(ȳ) U (b + µ) +                        U (w(y)) dG(y),
                          {µ,ȳ}                              ȳ

subject to the resource constraint:
                                          Z    1
                              −G(ȳ)µ +            (y − w(y)) dG(y) = I,
                                          ȳ

and the wage relation
                                   w(y) = b + µ + β(y − ȳ).

Under pure ex-post wage bargaining, the scope for unemployment benefits to provide in-
surance to workers is extremely limited: An increase in unemployment benefits does not
change the slope of the income schedule, increasing all wages by an amount equal to un-
employment benefits. Put differently, the only degree of freedom is the location of the kink
ȳ in the worker’s income schedule. The solution can be characterized as follows:

   The threshold level of productivity is implicitly defined by:
                                                          ·                        ¸
                          ∗       β(1 − G(ȳ ∗ ))                E[U 0 |y ≥ ȳ ∗ ]
                         ȳ = b +                             1−                     ,        (16)
                                      g(ȳ ∗ )                      E U0
                        R1
where E[U 0 |y ≥ ȳ] ≡ ( ȳ∗ U 0 (w(y))dG(y))/(1 − G(ȳ ∗ )) is the expected value of marginal
                                                      R1
utility if employed, and E U 0 ≡ G(ȳ ∗ )U 0 (b + µ) + ȳ∗ U 0 (w(y)) dG(y) is the unconditional
expected value of marginal utility.
   So long as β is strictly positive, and workers strictly risk averse, then the expected
marginal utility if employed is less than the unconditional expected marginal utility, and
so ȳ ∗ is greater than b. The layoff rate exceeds the production-efficient level. Setting ȳ ∗ = b


                                                     16
(and f = µ) would achieve production efficiency. Our formalization shows that it is optimal
to choose a threshold higher than the production-efficient level so as to decrease income
uncertainty. The more risk averse the workers, or the stronger the workers in bargaining,
the higher the threshold level, and so the higher the layoff rate.11

    Given ȳ, µ and by implication the wage schedule w(y) are determined by the resource
constraint above.

4.3     Implementation through payroll and layoff taxes
Replacing ȳ from (16) in the expression for the threshold decision of firms, (14), gives the
first relation between f and τ :
                                                            ·                     ¸
                                    (1 − G(ȳ ∗ ))              E[U 0 |y ≥ ȳ ∗ ]
                          f −τ =µ−β                          1−                     .                      (17)
                                       g(ȳ ∗ )                    E U0

    The other relation is given, as before, by the budget constraint, equation (7). As the
second term on the right side of equation (17) is now negative, f − τ < µ. Together with
the government budget constraint, this implies f < µ and so, a contribution rate below
one. The reason is clear from above: The optimal threshold is higher than the production-
efficient level. This is achieved by lowering the contribution rate from its benchmark value,
namely unity. By implication, payroll taxes must be positive, in order to finance the
shortfall of the unemployment insurance system.
  11
     One way of getting more intuition for the optimal threshold is to combine the first and the second
constraints, and reorganize to read:
                                Z 1                                        Z 1
                 G(ȳ)(b + µ) +     ((b + µ) + β(y − ȳ)) dG(y) ≤ G(ȳ)b +     y dG(y) − I.
                                  ȳ                                           ȳ

The left side gives the value of total workers’ income (the sum of wages, reservation wages, and benefits)
in the economy. The right side gives the value of total income in the economy. The two are the same, as
free entry implies zero profit income.
   Suppose, counterfactually, that changes in ȳ do not affect total income, and so do not affect total workers’
income. Then, changes in ȳ change the shape of the income profile without affecting the total workers’
income. An increase in ȳ implies that more workers receive (µ + b). The overall workers’ income remains
the same, but the income schedule is flatter. Indeed, the best value of ȳ from the point of insurance is
ȳ = 1, where all workers receive the same income.
   The assumption that changes in ȳ do not affect total income is, however, clearly incorrect. Starting from
ȳ = b, small changes in ȳ do not affect total income; this implies that, as it decreases risk, at least a small
increase in ȳ is desirable; this explains why the optimal ȳ exceeds b. But, as ȳ increases, the output loss
increases, and total income decreases. For ȳ = 1 for example, total income is just b and so µ must be equal
to zero. This implies that the optimal value of ȳ is greater than b, but less than one.


                                                       17
    Note that for β = 0, i.e. if workers have no bargaining power, then we obtain the same
characterization as in the benchmark: f = µ and µ = w − b. As β becomes positive, and
the wage schedule is now increasing in productivity, it can be shown that the equations
above imply:
                                       df   dµ
                                          <    < 0.
                                       dβ   dβ
That is, both the unemployment benefit and the layoff tax decrease as the workers acquire
more bargaining power, and the layoff tax falls faster, leading to a decreasing contribution
rate.

    We summarize our results as follows:

Proposition 4. When wages are set through ex–post bargaining, utility for the marginal
worker is the same as for the unemployed workers, and workers with higher productivity
receive a higher wage. These outcomes are independent of the state’s policy choices. It
is optimal to induce a threshold higher than the production-efficient level: (ȳ ∗ > b). This
choice decreases the uncertainty faced by workers at some cost in efficiency.
    This optimal allocation can in turn be implemented through a combination of layoff
taxes, payroll taxes, and unemployment benefits. Layoff taxes must be less than unem-
ployment benefits, with payroll taxes used to make up the difference; equivalently, the
contribution rate must be less than one.


5       Heterogeneity
We have assumed so far that all workers and all firms were ex-ante identical. In reality, they
clearly are not. Firms differ in the distribution of productivity shocks (or, more generally,
the distribution of productivity and relative demand shocks) they face, and in their initial
assets. Workers also differ in the distribution of productivity. We study in this section
the implications of heterogeneity in productivity, both on the firm and on the worker side,
both observed and unobserved.

5.1     Heterogeneity of firms
A worry often expressed by policy makers is that, if some firms have higher layoff rates
than others, a layoff tax will penalize them more, and this may be undesirable.


                                             18
   To explore this idea, suppose there are two types of firms, “strong” and “weak”, which
differ in their productivity distributions. The productivity of “strong firms” is drawn from
cumulative distribution GH (·) and that of “weak firms” from distribution GL (·).12 The
distribution function of strong firms stochastically dominates that of weak firms: for all y
in (0, 1), GH (y) < GL (y). The fraction of strong firms is equal to ρ.
   Let us start with the assumption that this heterogeneity is unobserved, so the state is
unable to tell the two types of firms apart. Let us also start with the assumption that the
state sets a uniform policy (τ, f, µ). We return to these two assumptions below.
   Note that given the distribution assumptions and uniform taxation, strong firms have
higher expected profits than weak firms. We assume that the number of strong firms is
fixed. Thus, at the creation margin, the free entry condition is relevant for weak firms only.
By contrast, both types may lay workers off, so the destruction margin is relevant for both
types of firms.
   The fact that the free entry condition is relevant only for weak firms makes it more
difficult to follow the optimal allocation/implementation approach we have followed until
now. We take instead the more “pedestrian” route of solving the optimization problem of
the state given firms’ behavior.
   We assume that the state maximizes the welfare of workers. Allowing the state to also
put some weight on the positive rents earned by the owners of strong firms would not alter
the results. The state’s optimization problem is given by:

                     max            [ρGH (ȳ) + (1 − ρ)GL (ȳ)] U (b + µ)
                  {τ,f,µ,w,ȳ}
                                    + [ρ(1 − GH (ȳ)) + (1 − ρ)(1 − GL (ȳ))] U (w),

subject to the free-entry condition for weak firms
                                               Z    1
                                 −GL (ȳ)f +            (y − w − τ )dGL (y) = I,
                                               ȳ

the government budget constraint

                                  −[ρGH (ȳ) + (1 − ρ)GL (ȳ)] (µ − f )
                         +[ρ(1 − GH (ȳ)) + (1 − ρ)(1 − GL (ȳ))] τ           = 0,
   12
R 1 We assume that the weak firms are not too unproductive. Namely we assume that bGL (b) +
 b
    ydGL (y) ≥ I : Weak firms have positive NPV for the production-efficient threshold.


                                                           19
and the threshold productivity condition, which is the same for weak and strong firms:

                                       ȳ = w + τ − f.

The solution can then be characterized as follows:

   • The state fully insures workers: w = b + µ.

   • The threshold level of productivity is given by:

                                              ρ(GL (ȳ) − GH (ȳ))
                                ȳ = b +                               .
                                           (ρgH (ȳ) + (1 − ρ)gL (ȳ))


     By the definition of weak and strong firms, GL (ȳ) > GH (ȳ). So, unless ρ = 0, the
     threshold level is higher than the efficient level.


   This solution is in turn implemented by choosing layoff taxes lower than unemployment
benefits, so through a contribution rate lower than unity. The difference is financed through
payroll taxes.

   The intuition for why the contribution rate is less than one is as follows: Both types of
firms may lay workers off and so the destruction margin applies to all firms. By contrast, the
creation margin corresponds to the weak firms only. The state can then improve workers’
welfare by allowing for some cross-subsidy from strong to weak firms—transferring some of
the rents of strong firms to wages. Because the state is unable to assess the firms’ strength,
the cross-subsidy operates through the contribution rate: Weak firms lay workers off more
than strong firms and so benefit more from a contribution rate smaller than unity.

   Can the state do better by offering menus and letting firms self select? Appendix 1
shows that while offering a menu improves efficiency, the solution carries the main char-
acteristics of the uniform policy, namely cross-subsidization of weak firms by strong firms,
with a contribution rate for weak firms below one.

   If heterogeneity is observable, i.e. if the state is able to tell weak and strong firms
apart, the state can do even better. Characterizing the optimal policy is straightforward:
It is still optimal to subsidize weak firms. This can now be done however by offering a

                                               20
job creation subsidy to the weak firms, while setting the net contribution rate equal to
1 for both types of firms. This achieves the desired redistribution from strong to weak
firms, while avoiding distortions at the destruction margin. (Note that both layoff and
payroll taxes must be higher than in the benchmark, as the extra revenue is needed to
finance job creation subsidies to weak firms. The difference between the layoff tax and the
payroll tax remains however equal to unemployment benefits, so there is no distortion at
the destruction margin.)

    We can summarize our results as follows:

Proposition 5. Suppose that there are two types of firms: “strong” or “weak”. Strong
firms have productivity distribution GH (·), weak firms GL (·), and GL (y) > GH (y) for all
y in (0, 1).
    If this heterogeneity is unobserved, and if the state relies on a uniform policy, then the
optimal policy is to fully insure workers (w = b + µ), choose a threshold level higher than
the efficient level (ȳ > b), and implement it through a contribution rate less than one.
    If the state offers a menu instead, then the optimal menu separates the firms and has
the following properties: Workers are fully insured. Strong firms face a net contribution
rate of unity, and choose the efficient threshold. Weak firms face a net contribution rate
below one, and the threshold exceeds the efficient level. The underlying mechanism remains
the same, cross-subsidization of weak firms through the use of a lower contribution rate.
    Whether the state offers menus or not, it is optimal, if the proportion of weak firms is
small enough, to not have them operate at all—at the cost of some ex-ante unemployment—
and to set a unit contribution rate.
    If heterogeneity is observed by the state, then the optimal policy is to offer a job creation
subsidy to weak firms, choose the efficient threshold for productivity, and implement it
through a unit net contribution rate for both types of firms.

5.2    Heterogeneity of workers
Another frequently expressed worry is that some workers are more likely to be laid-off than
others, and that a layoff tax may make firms more reluctant to hire them, and thus make
these workers worse off.
    To explore this idea, we set up a case very similar to that of firms. We assume there
are two types of workers, “high-ability” and “low-ability” workers. High-ability workers


                                               21
have a productivity distribution given by GH (.), low-ability workers a distribution given by
GL (·), with GL (y) > GH (y) for all y in (0, 1).13 The fraction of workers with high ability
is equal to ρ.
       We assume that firms know the workers’ abilities. Proceeding in parallel with the earlier
case of heterogeneity in firms, we start by assuming both that the state does not know the
workers’ abilities, and that it chooses a uniform policy (τ, f, µ).
       We can simplify the set-up of the optimization problem, by noting that workers of each
type will be fully insured, and that, because high-ability workers are more valuable to
firms, they will be paid more, both when employed and when unemployed.
       Suppose therefore that low-ability workers receive w when employed, and µ when un-
employed, and are fully insured, so w = b + µ. High-ability workers will then receive w + ∆
when employed, and µ + ∆ when unemployed (so w + ∆ = b + µ + ∆), where ∆ is the
additional expected profit brought about to the firm by a high-ability worker. Noting that
∆ does not affect the layoff decision, so the threshold productivity is the same for both
types of workers, it follows that ∆ is given by:
                                                Z        1
              ∆ = [GL (ȳ) − GH (ȳ)] f +                    [y − (b + µ) − τ ] [dGH (y) − dGL (y)] .
                                                    ȳ

       Payment of ∆ can be achieved by wage-indexed unemployment benefits, so a worker
who is paid w + ∆ receives µ + ∆ (and the firm pays correspondingly higher layoff taxes
when laying a high-ability worker off).

       With this characterization of wage setting, and assuming that the state maximizes a
utilitarian social welfare function, the optimal policy is the solution to:

                           max {(1 − ρ) U (b + µ) + ρ U (b + µ + ∆)} ,
                          {τ,f,µ,ȳ}


subject to the free entry condition
                                         Z      1
                          −GL (ȳ) f +              [y − (b + µ) − τ ] dGL (y) = I,
                                           ȳ
  13
    We assume
          R1      that the low productivity workers are not too unproductive. Namely we assume that
bGL (b) + b ydGL (y) ≥ I: Under observed heterogeneity, the low-ability workers are sufficiently productive
to justify investment by firms.




                                                               22
and the government budget constraint

     [(1 − ρ) GL (ȳ) + ρGH (ȳ)] (f − µ) + [(1 − ρ) [1 − GL (ȳ)] + ρ [1 − GH (ȳ)]] τ = 0,

where ∆ and ȳ have been defined above.

   The solution has the following form:

• If the proportion of low-ability workers is high enough, then the threshold for productivity
is given by:

                          ρ(1 − ρ)[GL (ȳ) − GH (ȳ)] [U 0 (µ + b) − U 0 (µ + b + ∆)]
           ȳ = b +                                                                       .
                      [(1 − ρ)gL (ȳ) + ρgH (ȳ)] [(1 − ρ)U 0 (µ + b) + ρU 0 (µ + b + ∆)]

Note that GL (ȳ) − GH (ȳ) is positive, and so is U 0 (µ + b) − U 0 (µ + b + ∆). So the fraction
on the right is positive, and the optimal threshold is higher than the efficient level.
   This solution is in turn implemented by using a contribution rate below unity, with the
rest of unemployment benefits being financed by payroll taxes.

• If the fraction of low-ability workers is small enough, however, then it is not optimal to
facilitate their employability. No job is created for them, and they receive unemployment
benefits µ for sure. In this case, threshold productivity is given by:

                                                ȳ = b.

This solution is implemented by relying on a gross contribution rate greater than one:
f /µ > 1; and a net contribution rate equal to one: f − τ = µ. The payroll tax rate is in
turn given by τ = [(1 − ρ)/ρ] µ.

   The intuition for these results is as follows. When both types of workers are employed,
the use of a contribution rate below one reduces the cost to firms of hiring a low-ability
worker. This in turn leads to a higher relative wage for low-ability workers, and therefore
reduces inequality, but at some cost in efficiency. If the proportion of low-ability workers
is very low, it is more efficient to have them not work, and then to choose tax rates so as
to have efficient separations for high-ability workers.
   Because unemployment benefits for low-ability workers exceed corresponding layoff
taxes, the solution requires having both a positive payroll tax and a correspondingly higher

                                                  23
layoff tax on high-ability workers. This increases revenues while maintaining a net contri-
bution rate equal to one.14
       Note that the logic of the results under firm and worker heterogeneity is similar: Weak
workers (firms) are more likely to be laid off (to lay off), and an incomplete internalization
of the externality of the layoff on the UI fund benefits the creation margin.

       What if the state can offer menus and firms then self-select? It is straightforward to
show that the state then offers two options, one aimed at firms that announce they have
hired a high-ability worker, one aimed at firms that announce they have hired a low-ability
worker. The first option has a net contribution rate equal to one. The second option has
a net contribution rate below one. Both types of workers are fully insured. Thus, just
as in the uniform case, heterogeneity leads to lower layoff taxes, but in this case only for
low-ability workers.

       What happens if differences between workers are observable? When the state can
tell apart high-ability from low-ability workers—for example if workers are in bad health
or disabled—then the optimal policy is to offer a job creation subsidy (or, equivalently,
uniformly lower payroll and layoff taxes) to firms if they hire a low-ability worker. The net
contribution rate can then be set equal to one for both types, and the destruction margin
is undistorted for both types. In general, when differences are only partly observable, the
solution combines job creation subsidies and a net contribution rate below one.

       We summarize our results in the following proposition:

Proposition 6. Suppose that there are two types of workers: “high-ability” and “low-
ability”. High-ability workers have productivity distribution GH (·), low-ability workers
GL (·), and GL (y) > GH (y) for all y in (0, 1).
       If this heterogeneity is unobserved and the state relies on a uniform policy, then the
optimal policy is to fully insure workers (w = b + µ), choose a threshold level higher than
the efficient level (ȳ > b), and implement it through a contribution rate less than one.
The lower layoff tax leads in effect to a transfer from high-ability workers to low-ability
workers.
       If the state offers a menu instead, then the optimal menu separates workers and has
the following properties: Workers are fully insured. Firms hiring high-ability workers face
  14
    This result is related to the result in Cahuc and Jolivet (2003) where the need to finance a public good
also leads to higher layoff and payroll tax rates.


                                                    24
a net contribution rate of unity, and choose the efficient threshold. Firms hiring low-ability
workers face a net contribution rate below one, and the threshold exceeds the efficient level.
The underlying mechanism remains the same, cross-subsidization of low-ability workers
through the use of a lower contribution rate.
    Whether or not the state is allowed to use menus, it is optimal, if the proportion of
low-ability workers is small enough, to leave them unemployed, and use a unit contribution
rate for the remaining, high-ability workers.
    If heterogeneity is observed by the state, then the optimal policy is to offer a job
creation subsidy to low-ability workers, and choose an efficient threshold for productivity,
and implement it through a unit contribution rate.


6    Mixing unemployment benefits and severance pay
We have assumed throughout that the state was the sole provider of insurance to workers.
We saw how, even under this assumption, the state was able to implement the optimal al-
location. This assumption however raises two issues relative to the scope for private-sector
provision of insurance. The first is whether a private third-party insurer can substitute
for the state. As we have seen, the answer is yes as long as redistributive concerns, across
firms or across workers, are absent, i.e. except in section 5. The second issue is whether
the third party insurer, whether the state or a private insurance company, needs to de-
mand exclusivity and prohibit the firm from offering supplemental insurance in the form
of severance pay.
    A recurrent theme of the insurance literature is that the insurer must be wary of the
externality imposed by supplemental insurance contracts (Pauly (1974)). For this reason,
insurance companies often demand exclusivity and managerial compensation contracts pre-
vent executives from undoing their incentives through insider trading or derivatives con-
tracts with financial institutions. In the context of this paper, the state’s provision of
insurance to workers raises the question of welfare-reducing supplemental insurance.
    Let us first note that allowing severance pay does not reduce (nor, of course, does
it increase) welfare when the state already provides full insurance to workers. Intuition
suggests, and analysis confirms, that the firm does not want to undo the full insurance pro-
vided by the state by overinsuring the worker (severance pay) or underinsuring her (asking
the worker to return some of the unemployment benefits, assuming this were feasible).
Thus, the analysis of Sections 1 (benchmark), 3 (shallow pockets) and 5 (firm or worker

                                             25
heterogeneity) is immune to the introduction of severance pay.
   The co-insurance problem may therefore arise only when the worker is imperfectly
insured, that is in Sections 2 (incomplete insurance) and 4 (ex post wage bargaining). In
Section 4, though, the firm is unable to exchange a bit more insurance against a lower
wage. Indeed, severance pay increases the wage one-for-one; if µF denotes the severance
pay, the new wage function, w(y),
                            b     can be written as:

                     w(y)
                     b    = β (y − τ + f + µF ) + (1 − β) (b + µ + µF )
                          = w(y) + µF .

   The threshold value for productivity, y, is given by the condition that w(y)
                                                                           b    +τ −y =
f + µF ; that is, the threshold
                                     y =b+µ+τ −f

is independent of severance pay. Put differently, the introduction of severance pay exerts
no externality on the state (as it doesn’t change y) and only serves to increase labor costs.
Thus, the analysis of Section 4 is also immune to the introduction of severance pay.
   The only case in which co-insurance reduces welfare and exclusivity is therefore optimal
is that of incomplete insurance (Section 2). To see this, return to stage 2 and allow firms
to offer, as in the benchmark, contracts which specify both a wage w and a severance
payment, µF . The expected utility of workers is given by:

                    VW ≡ G(ȳ)(U (b + µF + µ) − B) + (1 − G(ȳ))U (w),

And the free entry condition is given by:
                                          Z     1
               VF ≡ −G(ȳ)(f + µF ) +               y dG(y) − (1 − G(ȳ))(w + τ ) = I.
                                           ȳ

Now, starting from µF = 0, and assuming the economy is at the optimal allocation, so
w = b + µ, consider the effects of a small increase in µF . From the two equations above, it
follows that
                                            g(ȳ)
                                  dVW =             BdµF > 0.
                                          1 − G(ȳ)
Firms therefore have an incentive to offer more insurance than required in the optimal
allocation. The reason why is that increasing µF has two effects on the expected utility of


                                                     26
workers. First, it creates a wedge between marginal utility when employed and unemployed;
starting from the optimal allocation, this effect is of second order. The other is that it
reduces the probability of a layoff; because the loss in utility from becoming unemployed
is equal to U (w) − U (b + µ) + B = B, this effect is of first order and dominates the first.
When firms increase µF however, they decrease layoffs, and given that layoff taxes exceed
unemployment benefits paid by the state, they impose a negative externality on the state.
This is why, in the end, letting firms freely choose severance payments leads to a suboptimal
allocation.


Proposition 7. In the incomplete insurance extension of Section 2, allowing the firm to
pay severance payments in addition to the unemployment benefits paid by the state leads to
oversinsurance, an unemployment insurance deficit and suboptimal welfare. By contrast,
severance pay has no impact on welfare in the benchmark and in the other extensions.


7    Extensions and Conclusions
We are very much aware however of the limits of our analysis. Even within our one-period
model, there are a number of issues still to be explored. Let us mention two.

    An important issue not taken up here is that of quits versus layoffs. If we think of layoffs
as triggered by productivity shocks (shocks to y), and quits as triggered by reservation wage
shocks (shocks to b, or to the disutility of work—which we do not have explicitly in our
model), and we think of the layoff tax as applying only in case of layoffs, this raises two
sets of issues. The first is actions by firms to induce workers they would like to lay off to
quit instead (harassment), and actions by workers to induce firms they would like to quit
to lay them off instead (shirking). The second is actions by firms and workers together
to mislabel quits and layoffs. The incentives to harass, shirk, or cooperatively misreport,
depend very much in each case on the contribution rate. We have informally explored these
issues in Blanchard and Tirole (2003b), but a formal treatment remains to be given.
    Another issue is the role of judges, who, in many European countries, play a central role,
and are often ultimately in charge of deciding whether layoffs are justified or not. Clearly,
the logic of our argument is that this is better accomplished through a combination of layoff
taxes and severance payments, with the decision then being left to the firm. But our look at
the implications of imperfections, from shallow pockets to heterogeneity, also suggests the

                                              27
desirability of adapting layoff taxes to particular situations. This can in principle be done
through offering menus, or allowing taxes to be conditional on observable characteristics
of firms, or by leaving some discretion to judges. It remains to be shown however if and
when judges do in fact have the information, the ability, and the incentives, to take better
and more informed decisions.

   Then, and obviously so, there are dynamic issues we could not consider at all in our one–
period model. Dynamic models of the labor market with risk aversion and imperfections
are notoriously hard to solve. The only model we know which derives optimal institutions—
defined as the optimal combination of payroll taxes, layoff taxes, job creation subsidies or
taxes, and unemployment benefits—was developed by Mortensen and Pissarides (2003).
However, it assumes risk neutrality and so cannot deal in a convincing way with the
interaction between insurance and efficiency. (A model by Alvarez and Veracierto [1998]
has risk averse workers, self-insurance as well as state-provided insurance, payroll and layoff
taxes, and severance payments. While it shows (numerically) the effects of changes in some
of these instruments, it does not give a characterization of optimal taxes and benefits.) We
see two extensions of our model as essential:
   The first is the role and the implications of self insurance by workers (in terms of the
model here, the role and implications of the endogeneity of b). In this context, an important
question is the role, if any, of mandatory individual unemployment accounts such as are
being considered or introduced in a number of Latin American countries. (Three papers
provide a useful starting point here. All three allow for self-insurance, and look at the
role of state-provided insurance in the presence of other imperfections. In Hansen and
Imrohoroglu (1992), moral hazard in search limits the scope for state-provided insurance.
In Acemoglu and Shimer (1999, 2000), state-provided insurance affects search, which in
turn affects match quality.)
   The second is the role of experience rating systems, such as the US system, as ways
of implementing the collection of layoff taxes. This requires a careful look not only at the
dynamic problem of the firm, but at the exact nature of the financial constraints that it
faces.

   We feel, nevertheless, that as it stands, the paper can be helpful in thinking about
reform about employment protection in Europe (the origin of the paper was indeed a
request to define the contours of employment protection reform in France; our conclusions
are presented in Blanchard and Tirole [2003a,b]):

                                              28
    The basic conclusion from the benchmark that unemployment benefits should be fi-
nanced through layoff taxes is straightforward conceptually. It is however very much at
odds with reality in Europe. All European unemployment insurance systems are financed
through payroll rather than layoff taxes; other things equal, both lead to too high a layoff
rate.
    The lack of layoff taxes is counterbalanced however, in many countries, by heavy judicial
intervention. This suggests that a shift from judicial intervention to higher layoff taxes on
firms may be desirable, reducing uncertainty and channeling layoff costs into unemployment
benefits.
    The basic conclusion from considering limits to insurance—that in the presence of limits
to insurance, higher layoff taxes and a contribution rate larger than one are justified—is
also very relevant. Employment protection is then a partial substitute for insurance, but
this comes at the cost of production efficiency. This suggests the importance of reforms of
unemployment insurance which allow for better insurance while still providing incentives to
search. Recent reforms, which make unemployment benefits more explicitly conditional on
search and acceptance of jobs if available, go in that direction. If successful, they can bring
not only better insurance, but also lower employment protection and lower production
inefficiencies.
    The final broad insight is that layoff and payroll tax schedules should be tailored to
the economic environment in which firms operate. Lower layoff taxes and higher payroll
taxes are called for in industries, countries, or periods in which firms have shallow pockets.
Similarly, unobserved firm or worker heterogeneity suggests relying more on payroll taxes,
and less on layoff taxes in the financing of unemployment benefits.




                                              29
References
 [1] Acemoglu, D., and R. Shimer, (1999), “Efficient Unemployment Insurance”, Journal of Polit-
    ical Economy, 107-5, October, 893-928.


 [2] Acemoglu, D., and R. Shimer, (2000), “Productivity Gains from Unemployment Insurance”,
    European Economic Review, 44-7, June, 1195-1224.


 [3] Akerlof, G., and H. Miyazaki (1980) “The Implicit Contract Theory of Unemployment Meets
    the Wage Bill Argument,” Review of Economic Studies, 48: 321–338.


 [4] Alvarez, F., and M. Veracierto (1998), “Search, Self-Insurance and Job Security provisions,”
    working paper WP98-2, Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago.

 [5] Azariadis, C. (1975) “Implicit Contracts and Underemployment Equilibria,” Journal of Polit-
    ical Economy, 83: 1183–1202.

 [6] Baily, M.(1974) “Wages and Employment under Uncertain Demand,“ Review of Economic
    Studies, 41: 37–50.

 [7] Blanchard, O., and J. Tirole (2003a), “Redesigning the Employment Protection System,” De
    Economist, 152: 1-20.

 [8] —– (2003b), “Licenciements et Institutions du Marché du Travail,” Rapport pour le Conseil
    d’Analyse Economique. La Documentation Française, pp. 7–50.

 [9] —– (2005), “Layoff Taxes and Shallow Pocket Firms,” mimeo, MIT and University of
    Toulouse.

[10] Cahuc, P. and G. Jolivet, (2003), “Do We Need More Stringent Employment Protection Leg-
    islation?”, mimeo Paris I.

[11] Hansen, G. and A. Imrohoroglu, (1992) “The Role of Unemployment Insurance in an Economy
    with Liquidity Constraints and Moral Hazard”, Journal of Political Economy, 100-1, February,
    118-142.

[12] Holmström, B. (1982) “Moral Hazard in Teams,” Bell Journal of Economics, 13-2: 324-340.


                                               30
[13] Mortensen, D., and C. Pissarides (2003) “Taxes, Subsidies and Equilibrium Labor Market
    Outcomes”, Designing Inclusion: Tools to Raise Low-End Pay and Employment in Private
    Enterprise, Edmund S. Phelps (ed), Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

[14] Pauly, M. (1974) “Overinsurance and Public Provision of Insurance: The Roles of Moral
    Hazard and Adverse Selection”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 88(1): 44-62.




                                             31
Appendix 1: Policy menus under firm heterogeneity
   Suppose the state offers an option (τL , fL ) targeted at weak firms and another (τH , fH )
at strong firms, rather than the single option (τ, f ). With obvious notation change (thresh-
olds, payroll and layoff taxes are now indexed by the type of firm), the optimization problem
is identical to the problem above, except that the last constraint,

                                            ȳ − [w + τ − f ] = 0,

is replaced by the constraints:

                         ȳL − [w + τL − fL ] = 0, ȳH − [w + τH − fH ] = 0,

and the incentive compatibility constraint that the strong firms do not want to masquerade
as weak ones is given by:
                     Z   1                                              Z   1
  −GH (ȳH ) fH +            (y − w − τH ) dGH (y) ≥ −GH (ȳL ) fL +            (y − w − τL ) dGH (y).
                      ȳH                                                ȳL

It is useful at this point to define the net contribution rate as the ratio of the layoff tax
minus the payroll tax to unemployment benefits, (fi − τi )/µi , i = H, L. Note that, so long
as the net contribution rate is equal to one, the layoff decision is efficient: What matters
here is not the layoff tax itself, but the difference between the layoff tax and the payroll
tax.
   The solution can then be characterized as follows:

   • The state still fully insures workers: w = b + µ.

   • Strong firms face a net contribution rate equal to one, and so choose the efficient
       threshold:
                                            ȳH = b and fH − τH = µ.

   • Weak firms face a net contribution rate below one, and so choose a threshold higher
       than the efficient level:

                                            GL (ȳL ) − GH (ȳL )
                              ȳL = b + ρ                         and fL − τL ≤ µ.
                                             (1 − ρ)gL (ȳL )



                                                     32
