NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

FISCAL SHENANIGANS, TARGETED FEDERAL HEALTH CARE FUNDS,
AND PATIENT MORTALITY
Katherine Baicker
Douglas Staiger
Working Paper 10440
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10440
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2004

This research was funded by NIA grant P01 AG19783-02. The authors thank Amitabh Chandra, Mark
Duggan, Jonathan Skinner, and seminar participants at several seminars for helpful suggestions. The views
expressed herein are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
©2004 by Katherine Baicker and Douglas Staiger. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.

Fiscal Shenanigans, Targeted Federal Health Care Funds, and Patient Mortality
Katherine Baicker and Douglas Staiger
NBER Working Paper No. 10440
April 2004
JEL No. H0, I0
ABSTRACT

The federal government spends billions of dollars each year on programs designed to increase the
resources available to hospitals that serve the poor. This paper explores the intended and unintended
effects of such targeted funds. First, how do these funds distort the behavior of state and local
governments who wish to appropriate the funds for other uses? Second, to the extent that these funds
do increase resources in the targeted hospitals, do patients benefit? We use the rapid and uneven
growth in Medicaid Disproportionate Share Hospital (DSH) payments across states and hospitals
to answer these questions. We identify states that were most able to appropriate DSH funds and
show that, while DSH payments to public hospitals in these states were systematically diverted,
DSH payments to other hospitals and in other states were not diverted. Additional resources that
were made available to hospitals (rather than appropriated by the state) were associated with
significant declines in infant and post-heart attack mortality. A range of evidence suggests that these
improvements were due to better hospital care. Overall, our analysis implies that public subsidies
can be an effective mechanism for improving medical care and outcomes for the poor, but that the
impact is limited by the ability of state and local government to divert the targeted funds.
Katherine Baicker
Dartmouth College
Department of Economics
6106 Rockefeller Hall
Hanover, NH 03755
and NBER
kbaicker@dartmouth.edu

Douglas Staiger
Dartmouth College
Department of Economics
Rockefeller Hall, Room 322
Hanover, NH 03755-3514
and NBER
dstaiger@dartmouth.edu

I. INTRODUCTION
The federal government spends billions of dollars each year on programs designed to
improve health care for the poor and disadvantaged. We explore the intended and unintended
effects of such targeted funds. First, how do these funds distort the behavior of state and local
governments who wish to appropriate the funds for other uses? Second, to the extent that these
funds do increase resources devoted to the targeted population, do patients benefit? The answers
to these two questions shed light on whether (and at what cost) federal funds targeted in this way
are able to achieve their goals.
We evaluate the effects of a large public program subsidizing hospitals serving the poor.
These safety-net hospitals were financially squeezed beginning in the 1980s as the number of
uninsured patients rose and reimbursements for insured patients were constrained by increasingly
cost-conscious insurance providers. Beginning in the late 1980s, state and federal governments
responded to the increasing burden on safety-net hospitals by incorporating direct subsidies to
these hospitals into Medicare and Medicaid. In theory, these subsidies were intended to assure
the continued survival of safety net hospitals and thereby maintain access to high quality care for
poor and uninsured patients. Surprisingly little is known about whether these public subsidies
have had any impact on patient care, despite spending of nearly $200 billion during the 1990s on
these programs by state and federal governments.
We use a new source of nationwide data on subsidies provided to hospitals through the
Medicaid Disproportionate Share (DSH) program to look at the impact that these funds had on
patient mortality. We begin by investigating the extent to which state governments appropriated
these DSH funds through creative financing mechanisms. Recent reports by the GAO (2000)
and Coughlin et al. (2000) suggest that state governments were able to capture much of the DSH
payments through various schemes, and we present additional direct evidence that these financial

1

“shenanigans” went on in government-owned hospitals in many but not all states. We use the
results of this analysis to separate out funds captured by the state from those that actually went to
hospitals, and then relate the amount of “effective” DSH payments (subsidies not captured by the
state) to changes in patient mortality over the decade in which the DSH program was introduced.
We find that effective subsidies were significantly related to declines in infant and post heartattack mortality.

This effect came primarily through improvements in survival during

hospitalization, not through later mortality or through declines in incidence of low-weight births
or heart attacks, suggesting that improved medical care in the hospital was the causal factor.
Our evidence highlights the importance of heterogeneity in state responses to program
incentives. For example, previous work by Duggan (2000) evaluating California’s DSH program
found that public subsidies to safety-net hospitals did not improve infant mortality rates because
subsidies of over $1 billion per year did not translate into increased spending on patients. Our
results suggest that most of the DSH money in California was captured by the state, so that there
was little net impact on patient care. In contrast, however, we find evidence that other states
were less able to divert the targeted funds, and DSH money in these states was associated with
improved patient outcomes. Overall, our analysis suggests that public subsidies can be an
effective mechanism for improving medical care and outcomes for the poor, but that the impact
is limited by the ability of state and local government to divert the targeted funds.

II. THE DISPROPORTIONATE SHARE PROGRAM
The Medicare and Medicaid Disproportionate Share Hospital programs were created in
1986 and 1989 to compensate certain hospitals for the care they provided to under- and
uninsured patients. Hospitals serving more of these patients relative to the fully-insured were
believed to have less capacity to offset uncompensated care costs themselves, since there were
fewer paying patients over which to spread the burden. The DSH programs increased the per2

patient reimbursement received by hospitals with a high fraction of Medicaid or uninsured
patients. Medicaid DSH grew rapidly, reaching payments of roughly $17 billion by 1992 before
stabilizing. Payments through the Medicare DSH program were $4.5 billion in 1998 (Nicholson
and Song, 1991), while Medicaid DSH payments were $16 billion – representing 9 percent of
federal Medicaid vendor payments.
Unlike the federal Medicare program, Medicaid is a joint federal-state program. Each
state has much freedom to determine eligibility, generosity of benefits, and payment structure for
its Medicaid recipients. The federal government matches state Medicaid expenditures at a rate
based on state per capita income, with wealthier states receiving a match of 50 percent and the
poorest state receiving a match rate of up to 82 percent. While Medicare DSH payments to
hospitals are determined by federal formula, Medicaid DSH payments are determined by
individual states, and matched by the federal government.
This structure for many years provided the opportunity for savvy states to extract greater
federal matching funds without increasing their net Medicaid expenditures. Throughout the
1990s, states exploited different loopholes in the federal DSH statutes to increase the effective
match rate. As the GAO reports (1994, 2000) and Coughlin, Ku, and Kim (2000) show, many
states extracted billions in “extra” Medicaid DSH payments.
One such mechanism used in the early 1990s was the imposition of provider-specific
taxes. For example, a state could impose a tax of $1 billion dollars on a particular hospital. It
could then pay the hospital $1 billion dollars in DSH payments, which would be matched by the
federal government with at least $500 million – a net increase in state resources, accompanied by
no change in resources to the hospital. 1991 and 1993 legislation curtailed the use of such
schemes, and limited the ability of states to divert DSH funds paid to private hospitals (Coughlin
et al., 2000).

3

By the mid 1990s, the primary mechanisms through which a state could appropriate DSH
funds involved payments to government-owned hospitals. The most direct mechanism was to
pay DSH funds directly to hospitals run by the state. Interviews with state officials suggest that
most of the DSH payments to state hospitals were appropriated by the state and resulted in no net
increase of funds for patient care (Ku and Coughlin, 1995). This type of self-dealing was
common in mental health and long-term care facilities where state ownership is common, but
was limited in acute-care facilities because fewer than 5% of acute-care hospital beds are in state
owned facilities (Coughlin et al, 2000).
A less direct mechanism that was more commonly used in acute care settings was to pay
DSH funds to public hospitals run by county and local governments, and then divert the funds
back to the state through an intergovernmental transfer (IGT). Intergovernmental transfers are
direct fund transfers between different levels of government that are both legal and commonly
used in government finance. In the context of DSH, however, IGT were allegedly used to
circumvent the intent of the Medicaid DSH program. For example, the GAO (1994) documented
the transfer of a $277 million federal/state DSH payment to a Michigan county nursing facility,
which wired $271 million back to the state the same day. Both regulation and legislation in the
late 1990s curtailed the use of some of the most obvious schemes, and the Balanced Budget Act
of 1997 implemented reforms aimed at reining in the overall size of the DSH program (although
many of these restrictions did not take effect until after 2000). Nevertheless, there is widespread
belief that many of these schemes, and IGT schemes in particular, continue to be used widely.
III. A MODEL OF STATE BEHAVIOR
Because Medicaid is administered by the states, each state is free to determine both the
amount of DSH money to distribute and the rules for deciding which hospitals receive these
funds, subject to broad guidelines established by the federal government. In order to understand
4

the incentives influencing state governments to appropriate DSH funds for other uses, we
develop a simple model of state behavior. The model has three key features. First, we assume
that the state derives some benefit from paying subsidies to hospitals that serve the poor,
presumably in the form of improved access and health outcomes among the population served by
these hospitals. Second, we assume that the state can expropriate any amount of DSH funds paid
to public (but not private) hospitals through the use of IGT. Finally, we assume that the federal
rules constrain the state so that it must make similar DSH payments to all public and private
hospitals that serve a similar proportion of poor patients. Thus, for each set of hospitals serving
a similar proportion of poor patients, the state must determine the level of the DSH payment (if
any) along with the amount of IGT to divert from the public hospitals.
Let X represent the net payment per patient made to a hospital (DSH net of any IGT), and
let ρ represent the proportion of poor patients served in the hospital. Suppose that the benefits of
the payments are given by ρf(X), where f′>0 and f″<0. In other words, the benefits of these
payments are larger in hospitals that serve more poor patients, and are increasing in the amount
of the payment but with declining marginal benefit. In private hospitals, which pay no IGT, the
net payment is simply the DSH amount (per patient), so that X=DSH. In public hospitals, the
payment is net of IGT so that X=DSH-IGT (where IGT is also per patient). If public hospitals
account for a proportion π of all hospitals, then the total benefits of DSH payments to hospitals
with a given ρ are given by:
Benefits = (1 − π )ρ f (DSH ) + π ρ f (DSH − IGT )

(1)

Thus, the benefits are a weighted average of the benefits at private and public hospitals.
The net cost of DSH payments depends on two factors. First, the federal government
pays a portion of all Medicaid costs (the Federal Medical Assistance Percentage or FMAP)
which varies from 0.5 to 0.82 depending on the income of each state. Second, the state receives
5

a proportion of the DSH money back in the form of IGT, where the amount depends on the
proportion of hospitals that are public. Thus, the total net cost to the state is given by:
Costs = DSH (1 − FMAP ) − π IGT

(2)

Where the first term represents the state direct contribution, while the second term represents the
funds diverted back to the state through the IGT mechanism.
The state chooses the DSH payment going to all hospitals and the IGT payment coming
from public hospitals to maximize its benefits net of costs. As a benchmark, we begin by
considering a state with no public hospitals (π=0) or, equivalently, a state that chooses not to use
the IGT mechanism. In this case, the state chooses DSH to satisfy the first order condition given
by:

ρ f ′(DSH ) = 1 − FMAP

(3)

The left hand side of equation 3 represents the marginal benefits of payments to the hospitals,
while the right hand side represents the marginal cost of these payments to the state (i.e., the state
share). Thus, because of the federal subsidy, the state increases DSH payments to the point
where the marginal benefit of an additional dollar is less than a dollar. Moreover, because the
marginal benefit of any DSH payment increases with ρ, the state will choose to make larger DSH
payments to hospitals serving a larger proportion of poor patients. Hospitals with a sufficiently
low ρ will be at a corner solution with DSH=0, i.e. the state will choose to make no DSH
payments to hospitals serving few poor patients.
In the more general case in which the state has public hospitals, the state chooses DSH
and IGT to satisfy two first order conditions that can be simplified to be:

ρ f ′(DSH − IGT ) = 1

ρ f ′(DSH ) = 1 −

6

FMAP
1− π

(4a)

(4b)

These two first order conditions have a very natural interpretation. Equation (4a) states that the
marginal benefit of the net payments made to public hospitals is equal to 1 – since the state
controls the net amount going to public hospitals through the unsubsidized IGT, the state will use
the IGT to reduce the net payment until the marginal dollar returns one dollar in marginal
benefits. Thus, any increase in the DSH payment is undone dollar-for-dollar by IGT in the
public hospitals.
Equation (4b) implies that the marginal benefit of the payments made to private hospitals
is set equal to the net marginal cost of these payments to the state. When there are no public
hospitals (π=0), the marginal cost is simply the state share (1-FMAP). With public hospitals, the
net marginal cost is lower since any increase in DSH payments is fully paid back to the state by
the proportion of hospitals (π) that are public. In the extreme, when the proportion of hospitals
that are private (1-π) is smaller than the federal match, the marginal cost of higher DSH
payments becomes negative, i.e. at the margin the state finances more than the entire state
contribution through the IGT mechanism, and the DSH program becomes a money machine for
the state. In this case, federal caps on DSH payments to hospitals would be binding, as states
would otherwise increase DSH payments without bound.
Figure 1 illustrates the solution to the model graphically. As the state raises DSH
payments, the marginal benefit declines. The state sets DSH payments so that the marginal
benefit equals the marginal cost in private hospitals (1 – FMAP/(1-π)), and then sets IGT so that
the marginal benefit equals the marginal cost in public hospitals (1). The use of the IGT
mechanism lowers the marginal cost in private hospitals compared to what it would have been in
the absence of IGT (1-FMAP), and therefore increases the DSH payments that a state is willing
to make.
The assumptions of this model capture several features of the current DSH program.
States’ DSH payment formulas are usually based on the fraction of each hospital’s patients who
7

are uninsured or covered by Medicaid. States have a great deal of latitude in creating payment
formulas – for example, California makes payments only to hospitals with a proportion of
uninsured/Medicaid patients above a certain threshold, and the payments are an increasing
function of that proportion above the threshold – but must generally treat hospitals with similar
proportions of poor patients similarly. There is also now an overall cap on DSH payments that
limits a state’s ability to extract federal dollars. Moreover, the most widely publicized examples
of financial shenanigans involving IGT payments have occurred in non-acute care hospitals,
were public ownership is the norm (π is high) and states are likely to face a negative marginal
cost of increasing DSH payments..
This simple model also has a number of straightforward implications that help to identify
which states were most likely using the IGT mechanism and that correspond well with observed
state behavior. First, the model suggests that having a large proportion of public hospitals,
particularly if those public hospitals are more likely to serve a large proportion of poor patients,
will encourage states to use the IGT mechanism. Among states that use the IGT mechanism, we
would expect higher DSH payments. Moreover, holding the proportion of poor patients in a
hospital (ρ) constant, states using the IGT mechanism will raise DSH payments more if a larger
proportion of hospitals are public. Thus, states using the IGT mechanism will tend to pay a
larger proportion of their overall DSH payments to public hospitals.

IV. EMPIRICAL FRAMEWORK
Our empirical analysis proceeds in three parts. We begin with an analysis of fiscal
shenanigans at the state level, focusing on the factors that our model suggest should be
associated with a state’s use of intergovernmental transfers (IGT). In particular, we evaluate
how states that used IGT differed from other states in terms of fundamental factors (existing state
characteristics that facilitated the use of IGT) and in terms of other features of their DSH
8

program that were likely to arise in response to the use of the IGT mechanism. The primary goal
of this first part of the analysis is to identify the states that were most likely to be engaging in
fiscal shenanigans with DSH money.
In the second part of the analysis, we decompose total DSH payments into “effective”
and “ineffective” components, where effective DSH is defined as DSH payments that are most
likely to increase the financial resources available to acute-care hospitals. In particular, we define
effective DSH payments as those that are unlikely to be appropriated by the state, i.e. payments
to private hospitals, or to county or local hospitals in states that were not appropriating the gains
through IGT or similar strategies.

The primary challenge in this part of the analysis is

determining the extent to which each state was appropriating DSH funds from county hospitals.
In the last part of the analysis, we estimate the relationship between effective DSH funds
and infant and post-heart attack mortality.

In particular, we investigate whether counties

receiving effective DSH payments in the late 1990s experienced a larger decline in mortality
since the late 1980s compared to counties receiving either no DSH payments or ineffective DSH
payments. Our analysis uses long differences (from a period just prior to the DSH program to a
period following five years of stable DSH payments) to focus on long-run effects of DSH
payments.
A. Identifying States Engaging in Fiscal Shenanigans

The goal of the first part of our analysis is to identify the states that were most likely to
be engaging in fiscal shenanigans with DSH money through the use of inter-governmental
transfers (IGT). Our model suggests several factors that should influence the extent that states
engage in this behavior. For obvious reasons, a direct and reliable measure of the extent to which
each state expropriated DSH funds is not available. Therefore, we consider three alternative
state-level proxies that should be associated with the extent to which a state expropriated DSH
9

funds. Our most direct proxy is whether the state self-reported that it used IGT to finance DSH
payments in a survey of state Medicaid programs conducted by the Urban Institute (Coughlin et
al, 2000). While this serves as a potential marker for states that were using the IGT mechanism,
it is only available for a subset of states that responded to the survey and one might question the
accuracy of self-reports on this issue in the face of ongoing investigations into such schemes by
the GAO and others. Our second proxy is the size of DSH payments in each state relative to its
Medicaid and uninsured patient hospital days. A state that appropriated a fraction of DSH funds
for its own uses had more incentive to increase the size of their DSH program, so the overall size
of the DSH program (relative to the patients it was intended to serve) should be higher in states
using the IGT mechanism. Our final proxy is the fraction of all DSH payments to acute care
hospitals that went to county and other local-government hospitals.

Any state that was

appropriating DSH funds from county hospitals had a strong incentive to funnel funds toward
these hospitals, so the proportion of these funds going to county hospitals should be higher in
states using the IGT mechanism.
To evaluate the plausibility of these proxies we ran state-level regressions to determine
whether each proxy was related to three state characteristics that our model suggests should have
facilitated the use of IGT. First, to the extent that there were returns to scale in running the IGT
scheme, states with larger populations should have been more likely to use the IGT. Such
returns to scale would arise if setting up such a scheme required fixed costs in terms of time or
hiring staff with sufficient financial savvy. A second important characteristic that should have
facilitated the use of IGT was whether county hospitals accounted for a large fraction of hospital
beds in the state. States with a larger share of county hospitals had relatively more county
hospitals on which to operate the IGT mechanism (increasing the benefit of using IGT to the
state) and relatively fewer private hospitals that might potentially also qualify for DSH payments
(reducing the cost to the state). A final characteristic that should have facilitated the use of IGT
10

was whether county hospitals differed from private hospitals in the proportion of patients that
were Medicaid or uninsured. As discussed above, state rules for allocating DSH payments had
to be at least superficially consistent with the original purpose of benefiting hospitals with a
disproportionate share of poor patients. Thus, it was much easier for states to target DSH
payments to county hospitals if poor patients were a much larger proportion of patients at county
hospitals relative to private hospitals.
B. Identifying Effective DSH Payments

The goal of the second part of our analysis is to separate DSH payments into those
payments that were likely to affect acute care hospitals, and those payments that were likely to
be ineffective. There are two reasons that DSH payments may have been ineffective. First, a
large fraction (22%) of DSH payments went to non-acute hospitals that do not treat newborns or
heart attack victims, primarily state institutions for mental disease. Second, DSH payments may
have been ineffective if they were appropriated by the state.
The extent to which DSH payments were appropriated by the state varies by type of
hospital and by state. As discussed above, DSH payments to state-owned acute care hospitals
(14% of all payments) were easily appropriated by the state because of the direct financial
integration of the state and these hospitals. In contrast, it was difficult for states to appropriate
DSH payments to private acute care hospitals (36% of all DSH payments). Because private
hospitals are independent entities, states could only extract DSH funds through formal means
(observable to federal auditors) such as provider taxes or adjustments of other Medicaid
payments. Since legislation in the early 1990s curtailed the use of such schemes, by the late
1990s it is unlikely that much of the DSH payments going to private hospitals were being
appropriated by the state.

The ability of states to appropriate DSH payments from local

11

government hospitals (primarily county hospitals, accounting for 30% of DSH payments) was
less clear, and depended on the extent to which each state used IGT or similar mechanisms.
In order to identify the proportion of DSH payments to county hospitals that were
ineffective, we must know the extent to which states appropriated DSH payments from local
government hospitals. To answer this question, we take an empirical approach that uses the
relationship between DSH payments and the amount of IGT observed in county financial data.
Figure 2 illustrates this relationship. When a typical state (with a 50% federal match rate) makes
a $1 million DSH payment to a county hospital, the federal government will reimburse the state
by $0.5 million. Because county hospitals are financed as part of the parent county government,
the $1 million DSH payment will show up as intergovernmental revenue (from the state to the
county) in county financial data. If the county hospital keeps a proportion of funds (δ), and
returns the remainder (1-δ) to the state then this will appear as an intergovernmental expenditure
in the county financial data. Thus, for every dollar in DSH payments there will be an increase of
δ in net IGT to the county (the difference between revenues and expenditures) while the
remainder (1-δ) represents ineffective DSH payments.

Note also that the net cost of this

transaction to the state is equal to the difference between δ and the federal Medicaid match rate,
i.e. the DSH payment costs the state nothing so long as the county hospital only keeps the federal
share and returns the state share.
To identify the extent to which states appropriated DSH payments from local government
hospitals, we take an empirical approach. We have a number of potential indicators for whether a
state was appropriating DSH payments from public hospitals (described above): the share of
DSH payments going to government hospitals, the average DSH payment per Medicaid or
uninsured patient, and estimates of the share of non-federal revenues paying for DSH in each
state that come from IGT. The empirical question is which, if any, of these measures is a good
indicator of states that are appropriating DSH payments from local public hospitals.
12

To estimate δ we run regressions of the form:

∆ net IGTi,(97 / 99)−(87 / 89) = α s + θ (1 − captures )DSHi,county,(98 / 00) + δ captures DSHi,county,(98/ 00)
+ Γ∆ X i,(98 / 00)−(87 / 89) + ε i

(5)

The dependent variable in this regression is the change in net IGT per capita for a county
between the late 1980s (prior to DSH) and the late 1990s. We difference the data at the county
level to remove any fixed county-level differences in net IGT, and we use a long difference
beginning just prior to the introduction of the DSH program to focus on long-run impacts of
DSH payments.
The key right hand side variable in this regression is the amount of DSH per capita going
to county hospitals in the late 1990s. Note that this variable is in effect the difference in DSH
payments between the late 1980s and the late 1990s, since there were no sizable DSH payments
until the early 1990s. We interact the DSH variable with a dummy variable (capture) that
indicates whether the state is likely to be using IGT to appropriate DSH payments. We construct
the dummy “capture” a number of ways, based on our three proxy measures for whether a state
was using IGT (discussed above). If these proxies are informative, then we would expect the
effect of DSH on net IGT to be near one in states that are not capturing DSH payments (θ=1) and
below one in states that capture a share of DSH payments (δ<1), with δ representing the effective
fraction of DSH payments that were not appropriated by the state. Finally, the regression also
controls for state fixed effects and changes in percent black, unemployment, and per capita
income at the county level.
Note that our estimate of δ only measures the proportion of DSH funds that remain with
the county, but not necessarily with the county hospital itself. Because county hospitals are
financed as part of the parent county government, we do not observe transfers between the
county government and its hospitals. Thus, we can observe through the county’s net
intergovernmental revenues the net increases in resources available to the county and its hospital,
13

but not the fraction of that net increase devoted to hospital spending in particular. Thus, our
estimates may overstate the extent to which DSH payments to county hospitals are effective.
C. Estimating the Impact of Effective DSH Payments on Patient Mortality

To estimate the relationship between DSH payments and patient mortality, we
decompose total DSH payments into effective and ineffective payments and then run a
regression of the change in mortality between the late 1980s and the late 1990s on the amount of
each DSH going to the county in the late 1990s. Our analysis is done at the county (rather than
hospital) level to avoid issues of patient selection across hospitals and because both the county
financial data and the mortality data are only available at the county level. Separate regressions
are run based on mortality rates derived for newborns (percent of infants that died within 28 days
or 1 year of birth) and elderly patients with heart attacks (percent that died within 90 days or 1
year of heart attack). Mortality rates in both of these patient populations are believed to be
sensitive to the quality of medical care provided in the hospital. Additional detail on how these
variables are constructed is provided below.
The regression we run is of the form:
∆ MR i ,(98 / 00 )−(87 / 89 ) = α s + β 1 DSH i ,effective,(98 / 00 ) + β 2 DSH i ,ineffective ,(98 / 00 )
+ Γ∆ X i ,(98 / 00 )−(87 / 89 ) + ε i

(6)

The dependent variable is the change in the mortality rate between the late 1980s and the late
1990s. The regression also controls for state fixed effects and changes in the same county-level
covariates. In the regression using infant mortality, we have also controlled for the change in the
proportion of single parent households in the county.
The key independent variables are measures of effective and ineffective DSH per capita,
where the coefficient on ineffective DSH is expected to be zero and the coefficient on effective
DSH is expected to be negative (associated with declines in mortality). In states that do not
14

appropriate DSH payments (capture=0), we define effective DSH as the sum of all DSH
payments to private acute care hospitals plus DSH payments to county or district hospitals. In
states that appropriate DSH payments (capture=1), we only include the effective fraction (δ) of
DSH payments going to local government hospitals, where δ is the coefficient estimated in
equation (5).

Ineffective DSH is defined as the remaining DSH payments (to non-acute

hospitals, state hospitals, and the ineffective fraction to local government hospitals in states with
capture=1).

V. DATA
Data for this analysis come from several different sources, and are summarized in Table
1. Analysis is performed at the county level, using data from the late 1980s and the late 1990s.
A. DSH Payments

Beginning in 1998, CMS requested that each state make available an annual report of the
hospitals receiving DSH payments and the amount they received. Most states have complied
with this request in at least one year since 1998. We matched the hospitals listed in these reports
with their American Hospital Association identification number whenever possible, but some
listings were ambiguous, and some states (such as Alabama and Michigan) reported aggregated
figures that could not be used. Overall, we were able to match 90 percent of DSH dollars
reported. Hospital allocations were then aggregated to the county level. When multiple years of
data were available, the county values were averaged across years. After discarding Alaska,
Hawaii, and the District of Columbia, we were left with data on DSH payments to 2579 (of the
3042) US counties.

By matching hospital payments to AHA provider information from the

Hospital File, we were able to calculate DSH payments at the county level by hospital ownership
(public (state, county, district) versus private) and by hospital service (general, children’s,

15

psychiatric, etc.). We supplement this data with details on state-level DSH allocations and
financing gathered by Coughlin et al. (2000), including information on the degree to which states
used intergovernmental transfers from localities to finance their spending on DSH, and the total
spending on the DSH program relative to the number of Medicaid and uninsured patients in the
state in 1997. These data come in large part from a survey conducted by the Urban Institute.
Table 2 shows DSH payments by ownership and service for the DSH data we use in our
analysis. Coughlin et al. show that state-owned mental health facilities represented only 2.1
percent of Medicaid patient days, but specialized state facilities received 20 percent of the DSH
payments. Similarly, while private hospitals account for almost 70 percent of Medicaid patient
days, they received only 37 percent of DSH payments. Through skewed allocations such as this,
Coughlin et al. suggest, states were able to recapture at least 15 percent of federal DSH payments
for general revenues.
B. County Finances

Data on county budgets come from the annual Survey of Government Finances and the
Census of Government Finances conducted by the Bureau of the Census.

We use real

(1999=100) per capita three-year average spending and revenue figures for 1987-1989 and 19971999. All counties are included in the survey years of 1987 and 1997, but only 1/2 to 2/3 are
included in (non-Census) Survey years. Not all counties report all categories of revenues or
expenditures in any given year. Intergovernmental revenues are almost $400 per capita in 19971999, representing more than 1/3 of all county revenues.

(Note that intergovernmental

expenditures are much smaller, and missing for many counties.) DSH payments to hospitals
(public and private) within a county are about a tenth the size of intergovernmental revenues
from all sources.

16

In order to examine the effect on county finances of increases in DSH payments to
county hospitals, we subtract intergovernmental expenditures from intergovernmental revenues
to generate net intergovernmental revenues. DSH payments to county hospitals will appear as
intergovernmental revenues in the county budget, and any funds that the county hospitals return
to the state will appear as intergovernmental expenditures.
C. Infant Mortality and Low Birth Weight

Data on infant births, birth weight, and deaths are reported at the county level in the 2003
Area Resource File compiled by the National Center for Health Workforce Analysis. We use
several different measures of infant mortality. We construct 28-day and 1-year mortality in
1988-1990 and 1998-2000 from reported 3-year averages of births and deaths by race. For
earlier periods we use the reported 5-year average infant mortality rate.

These data are

summarized in Table 1. There was a significant decline in infant mortality during this period,
with 28-day mortality dropping from 5.8 per thousand in 1988-1990 to 4.6 in 1998-2000. We
similarly construct the average incidence of low birth weight from reported 3-year averages of
the number of low birth weight babies.
D. Heart Attacks and Post-heart Attack Mortality

Data on the incidence of heart attacks (acute myocardial infarctions, or AMIs) and postAMI mortality are constructed from the Medicare Claims data from 1989-2000, along with data
through 2001 on mortality. These data include 20 percent of Medicare admissions for 1989 to
1991, and 100 percent from 1992 to 2000. We use every fee-for-service heart attack admission
to create a longitudinal cohort of 2.5 million fee-for-service enrollees age 65 or over coded with
acute myocardial infarction. We assign patients to counties based on their residence (rather than
where they were treated), and use linked death certificate data to see whether patients survived a
90-day or one-year window.
17

From this micro-data we construct a risk-adjusted county-year level measure of post-AMI
mortality by regressing 1-year and 90-day mortality on a full set of age (5-year age categories,
65-69, 70-74, etc.), race, and sex interactions, and ten co-morbidities (including cancer
(metastatic and non-metastatic), diabetes, liver dysfunction, vascular disease, pulmonary
disorders, dementia, and severity of heart attack).1

Thus secular changes in demographic

composition, severity of AMI, and health status are controlled for. We then calculate the
residual mortality for each year in our sample, 1989 to 2000. The measures of heart attack
mortality we use in the rest of our analysis thus refer to demographic and illness adjusted postAMI mortality among Medicare recipients over age 65. We use three-year averages (1989-1991
and 1998-2000) of this mortality in our analysis. In 1998-2000, 23 percent of Medicare heart
attack victims died within 90 days, which represented a five-percentage-point decline from 19891991.
We construct the county-year level incidence of heart attacks similarly, adjusting for the
age, sex, and race of county populations. An average of 0.78 percent of the population suffered a
heart attack in 1998-2000, down from 0.81 in 1989-1991.
E. Covariates

Other county-level covariates come from the Area Resource File, including the
unemployment rate, per capita income, fraction of single parent households, and population,
measured as the county-level change from 1990 to 1999. We use county population by race for
1990 and 1999 from the Bureau of the Census.

1

Over this period there was a marked decline in the severity of diagnosed AMIs, with less-fatal subendocardial or
non-q wave AMI rising from 25% of all AMIs in 1989 to half in 2000 (in part because of better detection
techniques). We therefore control for whether heart attacks are q wave or non-q-wave in our regression analysis.

18

We calculate the number of beds in hospitals of different ownerships and types from the
1999 Medicare Impact files, as well as the Medicare DSH adjustment factor (which captures the
fraction of poor and uninsured patients treated by each hospital) for public and private hospitals.

VI. RESULTS
Our empirical analysis answers three questions. First, which states were most likely to be
engaging in fiscal shenanigans with DSH money through the use of inter-governmental transfers
(IGT)? Second, to what extent did DSH payments in these states actually increase the resources
available to county hospitals, rather than being appropriated by the state through IGTs? Third,
how much did the resulting increases in DSH payments going to hospitals affect patient
mortality?
A. Fiscal Shenanigans and State Characteristics

Some simple descriptive statistics suggest that states may have directed DSH payments
toward government owned hospitals in order to exploit the IGT mechanism, and that the extent
of this practice varied considerably across states. Figure 3 illustrates the distribution of per
capita DSH payments to state hospitals, county and district hospitals, and private hospitals in the
counties represented in our data. Most counties contained no state hospitals receiving DSH
payments, but of the 135 that did, 32 received more than $200 in payments to state hospitals per
capita – representing more than $2 billion in DSH payments per year. In contrast, only 7 of the
735 counties containing private hospitals that received DSH funds received more than $200 in
payments to private hospitals per capita and the vast majority received less than $25 per capita.
This skewed distribution of DSH payments to state (and to a lesser extent other public) hospitals
is what would be expected if large DSH payments were being directed to public hospitals that
can then divert a share of these funds back to the state.

19

In addition, there was a great deal of heterogeneity across states in both the size of DSH
payments and in the degree to which the payments were channeled to state and county hospitals.
Figure 4 illustrates the mix of DSH payments by hospital ownership in each state. In New
Hampshire less than 14 percent of DSH funds went to state hospitals while the remainder (nearly
$100 per capita) went to private hospitals. In contrast, 96 percent of DSH payments in Louisiana
went to state hospitals, totaling over $150 per capita. In many other states (including such
populous states as California, Florida and Texas) a large fraction of DSH payments went to
county and district hospitals.

This variation is not driven solely by differences in the states’

existing hospital structures: for example, only 11 percent of Louisiana’s hospitals are stateowned.
Both the model and the data thus suggest that there will be variation in the degree to
which different states expropriated DSH payments through IGT. In Table 3, we evaluate the
plausibility of three alternative proxies that should be associated with the extent to which a state
expropriated DSH funds. The first column contains results from a state-level regression in which
the dependent variable is the share of state DSH contributions that were financed by local IGT
(as reported in the Urban Institute survey). This measure is only available for 34 states, but if it
were reported accurately this would be the most direct proxy for which states were using the IGT
mechanism. The three right hand side variables in this regression were each expected to be
positively related to the use if IGT because they increased the net benefits that a state could
derive from the use of the IGT mechanism.
As expected, column (1) shows that states with larger populations and states with a larger
share of hospital beds in county hospitals were significantly more likely to report using IGT.
Consistent with the model, there was also more use of IGT in states where there was a large
difference between county and private hospitals in the proportion of poor patients they served (as
measured by the fraction of private hospitals serving a smaller proportion of poor patients than
20

the median county hospital), although this effect was only marginally statistically significant.
Similar results were found when the dependent variable was the amount of DSH going to county
hospitals per Medicaid and uninsured persons in the state (column 2) or the share of DSH
payments going to county hospitals as opposed to private hospitals (column 3). Thus, all three
proxies for whether a state was using IGT to appropriate DSH payments have the expected
positive relationship to state characteristics that should have encouraged the use of the IGT.
As another plausibility check on our three proxies, Table 4 compares the characteristics
of states that report the use of inter-governmental transfers to fund DSH to those states that do
not. The initial justification for these proxies was that states using IGT would have incentives to
have larger DSH programs (relative to the population it was intended to serve) and to funnel
funds towards county hospitals in particular. As expected, states reporting the use of IGT to fund
DSH spent more than twice as much per capita on DSH, spent more than five times as much per
Medicaid or uninsured patient, and spent a larger fraction of their DSH funds on county
hospitals.
B. DSH Payments and County Budgets

We next estimate the effect of DSH payments on county net intergovernmental revenues,
using long-differences to account for any time-invariant county characteristics. Table 5 presents
estimates of equation (5). Column (1) shows that each dollar of DSH payment going to county
hospitals increased net county resources by 60 cents. This estimate suggests that the average
state appropriated the remaining 40 cents through IGT. Since the state share of Medicaid is at
most 50%, this estimate is consistent with the view that states largely recouped their original
contribution to the DSH payments (i.e. largely avoided providing any net matching funds for
DSH payments to county hospitals). The funds remaining with the county represent a net
increase in resources available to the county, but we have no information indicating whether
21

these funds were spent on hospitals themselves or other county functions. Thus, the 60 cents of
effective DSH payment is an upper bound on the amount of resources that eventually went to
county hospitals.
Column (2) adds DSH payments made to other hospitals located in the county, broken
down by ownership of the hospital: district hospitals (semi-independent county hospitals, etc.),
state hospitals, and private hospitals. The coefficient on DSH payments to county hospitals
changes little from column (1). As expected, we find no significant relationship between DSH
payments to state or private hospitals and net IGT: these hospitals are independent of county
governments and DSH payments to them are unrelated to county budgets. The relationship
between DSH payments to district hospitals and net IGT lies somewhere in the middle in terms
of magnitude, reflecting the fact that some but not all district hospitals are closely affiliated with
county governments and are incorporated into county budgets. Thus, these results suggest that
changes in net IGT are accurately capturing the net impact of DSH payments to local
government hospitals on county budgets.
The remaining columns of Table 5 estimate separate effects of DSH in states that are
likely to appropriate more of the DSH payments going to county hospitals (capture=1 in equation
(1)) and those that are not (capture=0 in equation (5)). We present results for three alternative
methods of identifying states that are likely to appropriate more DSH: (1) states that reported
using IGT to fund DSH, (2) states that had above average DSH per Medicaid and uninsured
patient, and (3) states that had an above average share of DSH going to public hospitals. The
results for these three alternative methods are qualitatively similar. In states that are likely to
appropriate DSH payments, we estimate that the proportion of DSH payments to county
hospitals that remain in the county is around 0.5 and is significantly below 1, implying that these
states are appropriating roughly half of DSH payments to county hospitals. In the remaining
states the effect of DSH payments on net IGT are less precisely estimated, but are never
22

significantly different from 1 – suggesting that these states did not appropriate DSH payments to
county hospitals.
In general, our three indicators for whether a state was likely to appropriate DSH
payments yield results that are consistent with expectations. Counties in states where our
indicators suggest there was little opportunity to redirect DSH payments got to keep the full
amount of the DSH payments they received, while counties in states where our indicators
suggest greater possibilities for redirection saw their net intergovernmental revenues rise by only
50 cents for each dollar of DSH payment received. In comparing across the three indicators,
identifying states based on the share of DSH going to public hospitals (the last column) appears
to yield the most precise estimates. Therefore, we use these results as our preferred estimates in
determining whether DSH funds were likely to affect patient outcomes.
C. DSH Payments and Patient Mortality

We now turn to the question of whether DSH payments had an effect on patient
mortality, examining both infant mortality and post-heart attack (AMI) mortality. We begin by
estimating the relationship between DSH payments and changes in mortality. After establishing
these relationships, we investigate the mechanisms through which those effects might occur.
Table 6 presents estimates of regressions of the form specified in equation (6), in which
the unit of observation is the county and the dependent variable is either the change in 28-day
infant mortality or the change in 90-day AMI mortality for Medicare recipients between the late
1980s and the late 1990s. We report estimates from three separate specifications of the DSH
variable. In columns (1) and (4) we include total DSH payments per capita made to all hospitals
in the county. In the next columns, we break these into effective and ineffective DSH payments,
as described earlier (with county hospital DSH payments being allocated according to the results
from the last column of Table 5). The last columns break DSH payments down further in order
23

to investigate whether our breakdown of county hospital DSH payments accurately identified
states in which such payments had less impact on patient mortality. In particular, we break out
the components of effective and ineffective DSH that are accounted for by county and district
acute care hospital payments versus other hospitals.
Column (1) of Table 6 shows that for each additional $100 per capita of DSH payments
made to hospitals within a county, there was a statistically significant reduction in 28-day infant
mortality of .065 percentage points, or .65 infant deaths per thousand births. Column (2)
estimates that all of this effect is associated with effective DSH dollars, which are estimated to
reduce infant mortality by .107 percentage points. In contrast, the estimate for ineffective DSH
dollars is a third the size and statistically indistinguishable from zero. Moreover, when we
further decompose DSH payments in column (3), we see that effective DSH payments to both
private and county hospitals have effects on infant mortality that are similar in magnitude and
individually significant, while ineffective DSH payments to both county and other types of
hospitals have smaller estimated effects that are statistically insignificant. Overall, these results
suggest that DSH payments for acute care hospitals that were not appropriated by the state
resulted in significant improvements in infant mortality.
Similarly, column (4) shows that an additional $100 per capita in DSH payments reduced
90-day AMI mortality by .92 percentage points, or 9.2 deaths per thousand heart attacks.
Column (5) shows that effective DSH dollars were associated with a larger decline of 2.13
percentage points, while ineffective DSH dollars had virtually no effect. Column (6) again
shows that effective payments to public and private hospitals had similar effects, resulting in
significant improvements in AMI mortality.
How big are these reductions in mortality?

A simple calculation suggests that the

reductions in mortality are modest given the amount of money spent on the DSH program. The
.065 percentage point reduction in infant mortality associated with each $100 per capita increase
24

in DSH spending implies that each $11 million in DSH spending resulted in one baby saved.
Similarly, the 0.92 percentage point reduction in post-AMI mortality associated with a $100 per
capita increase in DSH spending implies that $12 million in DSH spending resulted in one life
saved (a larger reduction in mortality for a smaller population of patients). Taken together, these
estimates imply that one life was saved for every $6 million dollars in DSH payments. A similar
calculation based only on effective DSH payments would reduce the cost per life to about $3
million. Of course, these crude calculations understate the total benefits resulting from DSH
payments because they do not count benefits that accrue to other patient groups or from other
uses to which DSH funds are diverted. Nevertheless, these estimates are in line with similar
calculations done for other increases in Medicaid spending. For example, Currie and Gruber
(1996) study the effects of Medicaid eligibility expansions on infant mortality, and find that
while the most cost-effective targeted expansions cost almost $1 million per infant saved,
broader expansions cost more than $4 million per infant saved. Moreover, they note that these
figures are significantly less than the cost of other policies that are routinely implemented.
Thus, our estimated effects are modest in terms of lives saved per dollar, but well within the
range of the existing literature.
Improving access to high quality care is particularly important for poor and
disadvantaged populations, given the well-documented racial disparities in health care (Smedley
et al., 2003) and the fact that poor and minority populations often receive care at hospitals with
below-average quality of care (Skinner et al., 2003; Weech-Maldonado et al., 2003). While we
would like to examine the differential effect of DSH dollars on patients of different races, cell
sizes for black infants and AMI patients are too small (and standard errors thus too big) to draw
significant distinctions. For example, each $100 per capita in effective DSH reduces black infant
mortality by .19 with a standard error of .13, and reduces white infant mortality by .07 with a
standard error of .02. There are a number of reasons that one would expect DSH payments to
25

have larger effects on infant mortality among blacks. First, black infants die at twice the rate of
white infants and are twice as likely to be low birth weight, thus making them a population that
is particularly vulnerable to changes in hospital care. In addition, black infants are more likely to
be born in hospitals receiving DSH payments, since these hospitals by definition are more likely
to serve poor populations. While the estimated coefficients are all consistent with a larger effect
on black mortality, the standard errors are too large to reject that they are the same.
Robustness

In Tables 7 and 8 we report results from a number of alternate specifications intended to
document the robustness of our estimates to reasonable changes in specification, and to
investigate whether our results may be driven by spurious correlation between DSH payments
and county-level trends in mortality.
Table 7 repeats our primary specification, regressing changes in infant and AMI mortality
on effective and ineffective DSH (as in column 2 of Table 6), but using alternative methods of
identifying states in which DSH payments to county hospitals are likely to be ineffective because
of state expropriation. In columns (1) and (4) we identify states reporting a high share of nonfederal funding for DSH coming from local government IGTs as having ineffective DSH going
to public hospitals (as in column (3) of Table 5). In columns (2) and (5) we identify states with
high DSH per Medicaid or uninsured patient as having ineffective DSH going to public hospitals
(as in column (4) of Table 5). Columns (3) and (6) reproduce the results from Table 6, using our
preferred metric, which identified states based on a high share of DSH going to public hospitals
(as in column (5) of Table 5). Identifying ineffective DSH using any of these alternate methods
does not substantially alter the results. Thus, our results do not appear to be particularly sensitive
to the metric used to identify states that appropriate DSH payments.

26

A key empirical concern is that counties receiving DSH payments are likely to differ
systematically from other counties (for example, having a poorer population and perhaps higher
infant or AMI mortality) and that these pre-existing differences may generate different trends in
mortality independent of DSH payments per se. Our finding that only effective DSH payments
are related to mortality alleviates some of this concern, as it is not obvious why trends would
differ only in counties receiving effective DSH. Table 8 estimates a variety of additional
specifications to further allay concerns that our results are driven by such a spurious correlation
between DSH payments and county-level trends in infant or AMI mortality.
The first columns of each panel of Table 8 replicate our base results from Table 6 for
comparison. In the second two columns, we include a dummy variable for whether a county
received any DSH payments at all in order to control for any broad differences in trends in such
counties. Adding this dummy variable to the specification has no effect on our basic estimates,
and the coefficient on this dummy is small and insignificant. Thus, there is a clear dose-response
relationship, i.e. changes in infant and AMI mortality rates are proportional to the amount of
DSH payment a county receives.
Another potential concern is that poorer hospitals with higher mortality may have
experienced both larger declines over this period and higher DSH payments, without any causal
connection between the two. In columns (3) and (7) we test whether this difference in the initial
level of infant or AMI mortality can account for the more rapid decline in mortality associated
with DSH payments. In these specification, we include mortality in the earlier period (19881990 for infant mortality, 1989-1991 for AMI mortality) on the right-hand side, and instrument
for this variable (with infant mortality in 1985-1987 or AMI mortality for 1992-1994) to correct

27

the estimates for measurement error.2 The coefficient on the lag is negative and significant in
both cases, suggesting that there was mean reversion at the county level over this decade in both
infant and post-heart attack mortality. Nevertheless, the resulting estimates of the effect of DSH
payments on infant mortality are not appreciably different, with a $100 increase in effective DSH
payments resulting in a drop in infant mortality of .1 (with a robust standard error of .02). The
effect of DSH payments on AMI mortality is somewhat lower after controlling for mean
reversion, but still statistically significant.
Finally, we might also be concerned that we are capturing unusual trends in infant
mortality because of the rapid but uneven improvements seen in the late 1980s and early 1990s
with the introduction of surfactants. In column (4) we re-estimate the same specification, but
substituting changes in one-year infant mortality between 1976-80 and 1988-90. Subsequent
DSH dollars have no effect on mortality changes from this pre-period, with a small positive and
insignificant estimated coefficient. Unfortunately, earlier data on AMI mortality is not available
to do a similar robustness check.
Mechanisms

There are two fundamentally different mechanisms by which DSH funds might have
reduced mortality rates among hospital patients. First, patients may have received better hospital
care as the result of the additional DSH funds, either because of improved care at all hospitals or
because of patients receiving their care at better hospitals (as argued in Duggan, 2000).
Alternatively, the additional DSH funds may have been used for public health and outreach
programs that affected hospital mortality rates through changes in patient risk factors (such as

2

Unfortunately 28-day infant mortality is not available for this period in the ARF, so we use 1-year mortality. We
use later AMI mortality because the first year of data we have for this variable is 1989. For this reason we are also
not able to replicate column (4) for AMI mortality.

28

prenatal care or other health behaviors) or selection in the underlying population being admitted
to the hospital (as would occur if the incidence of heart attacks declined).
We take two approaches to disentangle these stories. First, we look at the incidence of
the risk factors for the mortality outcomes we examine: the fraction of infants born with low
birth weight (LBW) (and then mortality conditional on that fraction), and the incidence of heart
attacks (and then mortality conditional on that incidence). The fraction of LBW babies should
capture an important component of patient risk within hospitals. Furthermore, advancements in
medical care are almost entirely manifested in reductions in mortality conditional on birth
weight, not in reductions in the incidence of LBW. Reductions in the incidence of LBW can
largely be attributed to improvements in maternal health and prenatal care. Similarly, the
incidence of AMI within a county should capture any important selection effects that would alter
the underlying health status of patients admitted with an AMI.
Columns (1) and (2) of Table 9 explore the effect of DSH payments on the change in the
incidence of LBW between the late 1980s and the late 1990s. Total DSH payments in general
and effective DSH spending in particular seem to have a small but significant effect on LBW.
The estimate implies that a $100 increase in effective DSH per capita is associated with a 0.26
percentage point decline in the fraction of babies born with low birth weight, relative to a base of
about 7.5 percent. Thus, there is some slight evidence that effective DSH may have reduced low
birth weight, presumably through improved prenatal care. Columns (3) and (4) re-estimate the
effect of DSH payments on 28-day infant mortality holding the fraction LBW constant. The
results are quite similar to those found in Table 6: the effect of DSH payments comes through
the hospital treatment of babies even holding constant the primary risk factor. In other words,
the effect of DSH payments on low birth weight is much too small to account for the relationship
between DSH payments and infant mortality. Similarly, columns (7) and (8) show that there is
virtually no effect of DSH payments on the incidence of heart attacks, and columns (9) and (10)
29

show that holding the incidence of heart attacks constant does not change the effect of DSH
payments on post-heart attack mortality.
Second, we examine longer-run mortality to see whether mortality reductions seem to
come from in-hospital care or from broader factors. Most of the effect of care within the hospital
should be seen in the period immediately following hospital admission, rather than months later.
Columns (5) and (6) of Table 9 replicate the main specifications from Table 6 but with infant
mortality between 28 days and one year as the dependent variable, while columns (11) and (12)
use AMI mortality between 90 days and one year. We see no significant effects of DSH
payments here – the effect of these payments on mortality seems to come through care in the
hospital, not post-discharge.
Overall, these results suggest that the effect of DSH payments on infant and AMI
mortality operates primarily through improved hospital care – not through prenatal care or
selection (which would reduce LBW or the incidence of heart attacks and suggest little effect on
mortality holding LBW or incidence constant) or through other factors that affect mortality postdischarge.

VII. CONCLUSION
Our analysis suggests that public subsidies can be an effective mechanism for improving
medical care and outcomes for the poor, but that their impact is limited by the ability of state and
local government to divert the targeted funds. While funds that are diverted to other uses may
result in other benefits to society (such as tax abatement or subsidies of other government
programs), this dilutes the intended impact of the subsidies and thereby reduces their costeffectiveness in terms of the program’s stated goals. Clearly, ongoing legislative attacks reflect
the belief by many that the amount of diversion involved in the DSH program is excessive.
Nevertheless, our analysis suggests that while the cup may be half empty, it is still half full.
30

Despite a significant amount of diversion by the states, the Medicaid DSH program appears to
have contributed to significant declines in patient mortality in many areas during the 1990s.

31

REFERENCES
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, Medicaid Disproportionate Share Hospital Reports,
http://www.cms.gov/dsh/default.asp , accessed January 15, 2004.
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, CMS Statistics, Department of Health and Human Services,
2002.
Coughlin, Teresa, and David Liska, Changing State and Federal Payment Policies for Medicaid
Disproportionate Share Hospitals, Health Affairs, Volume 17, No. 3, 1998.
Coughlin, Teresa, Leighton Ku, Johnny Kim, Reforming the Medicaid Disproportionate Share Hospital
Program, Health Care Financing Review, Vol. 22 No. 2, Winter 2000.
Currie, Janet, and Jonathan Gruber, Saving Babies: The Efficacy and Cost of Recent Changes in the
Medicaid Eligibility of Pregnant Women, Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 104 No. 6, 1996.
Corman, Hope, Theodore Joyce, and Michael Grossman, A Cost-Effectiveness Analysis of Strategies to
Reduce Infant Mortality, Medical Care, Vol. 26 No. 4, 1988.
Currie, Janet, and Jonathan Gruber, The Technology of Birth: Health Insurance, Medical Interventions,
and Infant Health, NBER Working Paper 5985, 1997.
Cutler, David, Your Money or Your Life: Strong Medicine for America’s Health Care System, Oxford
University Press, 2004.
Cutler, David, and Ellen Meara, The Technology of Birth: Is It Worth It? Frontiers in Health Policy
Research, Vol. 3, 2000.
Duggan, Mark, Hospital Ownership and Public Medical Spending, Quarterly Journal of Economics,
Nov 2000.
General Accounting Office, Medicaid: States Use Illusory Approaches to Shift Program Costs to Federal
Government, Letter Report, GAO/HEHS-94-133, Aug 1, 1994.
General Accounting Office, Medicaid: State Financing Schemes Again Drive Up Federal Payments,
Statement of Kathryn G. Allen before the Senate Committee on Finance, GAO/T-HEHS-00-193,
Sept 6, 2000.
Gruber, Jonathan, Medicaid, in Means-Tested Transfer Programs in the United States (R. Moffitt,
ed.), University of Chicago Press, Chicago, 2003.
Kominski, Gerald and Stephen Long, Medicare’s Disproportionate Share Adjustment and the Cost of
Low-income Patients, Journal of Health Economics, Vol. 16, 1997.
Ku, Leighton, and Teresa Coughlin, Medicaid Disproportionate Share and Other Financing Programs,
Health Care Financing Review, Vol. 16 No. 3, 1995.
National Center for Health Workforce Analysis, Area Resource File, Department of Health and Human
Services, 2003.
Nicholson, Sean and David Song, The Incentive Effects of the Medicare Indirect Medical Education
Policy, Journal of Health Economics, Vol. 20, 2001.

Skinner, Jonathan, Weinstein, James N., Sporer, Scott M., Wennberg, John E., Racial, Ethnic,
and Geographic Disparities in Rates of Knee Arthroplasty among Medicare Patients, New
England Journal of Medicine, 349(14) October 2 2003:1350-1359.
Smedley, Brian et al. (ed.), Unequal Treatment: Confronting Racial and Ethnic Disparities in
Healthcare, National Academy Press, 2003.

Weech-Maldonado, R.J. , L.S. Morales , M.N. Elliot , K. Spritzer , G. Marshall and R.D. Hays,
Race/Ethnicity, Language, and Patients’ Assessments of Care in Medicaid Managed
Care, Health Services Research, 2003, 38(3):789-808.

FIGURE 1
State Choice of DSH and IGT

MC, MB

MC PUB = 1

MC PRIV =
1−

FMAP
1− π

MB = ρ f ′( X )

DSH-IGT

DSH

X

FIGURE 2

Effects of DSH Funds on Intergovernmental Spending
Example: state spends $1 million on DSH

Rev to state: $.5 m

State

Fed

IGR: $1 m DSH payment
IGX: (1-δ) * $1 m

to county hospital

to state

County Hospital
Internal Transfer?

County

Keeps δ * $1 m

FIGURE 3

0

50

100

150

200

Distribution of DSH to State Hospitals

600
Frequency
0

0

0

50

10

200

Frequency
20

Frequency
100
150

400

30

200

40

250

DSH Spending per Capita by Hospital Type

0

50

100

150

200

Distribution of DSH to County/District Hospitals

0

50

100

150

200

Distribution of DSH to Private Hospitals

0

50

100

150

FIGURE 4

DSH Spending per Cap by Hospital Ownership

LA
NH
SC
MO
CT
NJ
MA
RI
MS
TX
CA
KY
ME
VT
WA
NV
WV
CO
MD
AZ
NY
DE
FL
NC
IL
UT
IN
KS
MN
VA
NM
OR
IA
PA
NE
WI
ND
ID
OK
AR
SD
MT
WY

Private
Local Public
State Public

Table 1: Summary Statistics
Mean

Std Dev

N

County Budgets (real per capita)
Total Revenues
Annual Average, 1997/1999
Change, 1987/1989 to 1997/1999

1092
167

1198
232

2724
2716

Intergovernmental Revenues
Annual Average, 1997/1999
Change, 1987/1989 to 1997/1999

396
66

468
99

2712
2704

Intergovernmental Expenditures
Annual Average, 1997/1999
Change, 1987/1989 to 1997/1999

64
17

98
47

1778
1586

41

76

2577

Infant Mortality (per thousand births)
28-day, All Births
Annual Average, 1998/2000
Change, 1988/1990 to 1998/2000

4.6
-1.2

1.8
2.0

2758
2753

Low Birth Weight (per thousand births)
Annual Average, 1998/2000
Change, 1988/1990 to 1998/2000

74.4
6.7

15.0
10.1

2758
2753

AMI Mortality (90-days, risk adjusted)
Annual Average, 1998/2000
Change, 1989/1991 to 1998/2000

0.23
-0.05

0.03
0.07

2520
2478

7.8
-0.3

2.7
2.4

2524
2522

DSH Payments (real per capita)
Annual Average, 1998/2000

Incidence of AMI (per thousand, age-sex-race adjusted)
Annual Average, 2000
Change, 1989/1991 to 1998/2000

Notes:

Budget data are measured in real (1999=100) per capita dollars and come from the Survey
of Government Finances.
DSH based on CMS hospital-level DSH data merged with AHA identifiers and aggregated
to county level.
Infant mortality and LBW data are from the Area Resource File.
AMI mortality from Medicare Claims data, age, sex, race, illness adjusted.
All means are weighted by 1998 population, except mortality (weighted by incidence).

Table 2: DSH Payments by Type of Hospital
Millions of Dollars
(share of total)

State

County &
Local Public

NFP

FP

General/
Children's

1,324
(.14)

2,708
(.29)

2,862
(.30)

354
(.04)

Other

1,809
(.19)

57
(.01)

31
(.00)

89
(.01)

Total for our sample (matched to AHA IDs):
Notes:

$9.5 billion

DSH data posted by CMS, matched to AHA hospital ID
to obtain county, type, and service of hospital, then
aggregated to county level.

Table 3: Predictors of Financial "Shenanigans"
Share of State Funds from
Local Intergovernmental
Transfers

County DSH per
Medicaid/Uninsured
Person

Share of County and
Private Hospital DSH
Going to Counties

Difference in Fraction of Poor
Patients Served by County
and Private Hospitals

0.44
(.24)

50.7
(24.4)

0.24
(.16)

Public Share of Hospital
Beds

1.11
(.44)

94.7
(42.4)

0.92
(.31)

Log of Population

0.15
(.04)

10.9
(4.8)

0.08
(.04)

Mean of Dependent Variable
N

0.18
34

21.0
43

0.20
42

Notes:

State-level analysis.
DSH spending data aggregated to county-level, based on CMS hospital-level DSH data merged with AHA
identifiers, measured in real per capita dollars (1998-2000).
DSH/Medicaid and reported use of IGTs for 1997 from Coughlin, Ku, and Kim (2000)
Data on overlap of poverty distribution (based on Medicare DSH adjustment factor) and on hospital beds
from Medicare Impact Reports.

Table 4: Characteristics of States that Use Intergovernmental
Transfers to Fund DSH

States Not Using IGT
Mean
Std Dev

DSH ($ Per Capita)

22.9

34.7

57.1

30.4

To State Hospitals
Share of Total

13.4
0.59

31.7

18.6
0.33

10.2

To County Hospitals
Share of Total

2.0
0.09

5.5

11.5
0.20

13.6

8.3

22.2

50.4

46.2

0.17

0.27

0.34

0.32

DSH to County Hospitals Per
Medicaid/Uninsured Patient
County Share of DSH to County and
Private Hospitals
N

States Using IGT
Mean
Std Dev

23

11

Notes: State-level analysis.
DSH expenditures are measured in real per capita dollars.
DSH spending data aggregated to county-level, based on CMS hospital-level
DSH data merged with AHA identifiers 1998-2000).
DSH/Medicaid and reported use of IGTs for 1997 from Coughlin, Ku, and

Table 5: The Effect of DSH Spending on County Budgets
Change in Net Intergovernmental Revenues
(1)
Change in DSH to County Hospitals

0.60
(.13)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

0.63
(.13)

Change in DSH to District Hospitals

0.42
(.17)

Change in DSH to State Hospitals

0.08
(.11)

Change in DSH to Private Hospitals

0.11
(.16)

Change in DSH to County * Dummy for States with High Local
Intergovernmental Transfer Share

0.51
(.09)

Change in DSH to County * Dummy for States with Low Local
Intergovernmental Transfer Share

2.23
(.71)

Change in DSH to County * Dummy for States with High
County DSH per Medicaid/Uninsured Patient

0.55
(.12)

Change in DSH to County * Dummy for States with Low
County DSH per Medicaid/Uninsured Patient

1.77
(1.03)

Change in DSH to County * Dummy for States with High
Share of County and Private Hospital Spending to Counties

0.55
(.12)

Change in DSH to County * Dummy for States with Low Share
of County and Private Hospital Spending to Counties

1.95
(.54)

Probability Coefficients Equal
Observations
Notes:

1420

1420

0.014

0.242

0.010

1261

1420

1420

County-level analysis. Change is from late 80s to late 90s, measured as 3-year averages.
County budget data from annual Survey of Government Finances.
DSH/Medicaid and reported IGT use from Coughlin, Ku, and Kim (2000)
DSH data aggregated to county-level, based on CMS hospital-level DSH data merged with AHA identifiers.
All expenditures are measured in real per capita dollars.
Covariates include fraction black, unemployment rate, per capita income, and state fixed effects.
Standard errors in parentheses, clustered at state level. Regressions weighted by population.

Table 6: The Effect of Change in Per Capita DSH Spending on Mortality
Change in 28-day Infant Mortality
(Effect of $100 Change)

Change in 90-day AMI Mortality
(Effect of $100 Change)

All Births

All AMIs

(1)
Change in DSH to All Hospitals

(2)

(3)

(4)

-0.065
(.021)

(6)

-0.92
(.64)
-0.106
(.028)

Change in "Effective" DSH
(Using low share to public hospitals)

(5)

-2.13
(.58)

Change in DSH to Private General/
Children's Hospitals

-0.109
(.037)

-1.39
(.78)

Change in Effective DSH to County/ District
General/ Children's Hospitals

-0.106
(.025)

-3.94
(1.64)

-0.033
(.022)

Change in "Ineffective" DSH
(Using high share to public hospitals)

-0.09
(.83)

Change in Ineffective DSH to County/
District General/ Children's Hospitals

-0.021
(.080)

0.78
(3.11)

Change in Other Ineffective DSH

-0.034
(.022)

-0.08
(.83)

0.009

Probability Effective DSH = Ineffective DSH
Observations

2520

2517

0.037
2517

2477

2474

Notes:
County-level analysis. Change is from late 80s to late 90s, measured as 3-year averages.
Data from ARF (infant mortality and covariates), Medicare Claims (AMI), CMS (DSH).
Mortality measured in percentage points. AMI mortality adjusted for age, sex, race, and illness.
Covariates include fraction black, unemployment rate, per capita income, and state fixed effects.
Standard errors in parentheses, clustered at state level. Regressions weighted based on births or AMI in each period.
"Effective" DSH defined following column (5) of Table 5.

2474

Table 7: Impact of Different Measures of Effective DSH
Dependent Variable:
"Effective" defined as:

Change in 28-day Infant Mortality

Change in 90-day AMI Mortality

Low Local
Igovt Transfer

Low County DSH
per Medicaid

Low County
Share

(1)

(2)

(3)

Low Local Igovt Low County DSH
Transfer
per Medicaid
(4)

(5)

Low County
Share
(6)

Change in Effective DSH
(Effect of $100 change)

-0.108
(.035)

-0.106
(.027)

-0.106
(.028)

-1.91
(.66)

-1.98
(.60)

-2.13
(.58)

Change in Other DSH
(Effect of $100 change)

-0.049
(.021)

-0.032
(.022)

-0.033
(.022)

-0.19
(.83)

-0.16
(.78)

-0.09
(.83)

0.120

0.005

0.009

0.064

0.035

0.037

Probability Equal

Notes:
County-level analysis. Change is from late 80s to late 90s, measured as 3-year averages.
Data from ARF (infant mortality and covariates), Medicare Claims (AMI), CMS (DSH).
Mortality measured in percentage points. AMI mortality adjusted for age, sex, race, and illness.
Covariates include fraction black, unemployment rate, per capita income, and state fixed effects.
Standard errors in parentheses, clustered at state level. Regressions weighted based on births or AMI in each period.
"Effective DSH" measures correspond to Table 3.

Table 8: Robustness Checks
AMI Mortality

Infant Mortality

Change in 28-day infant mortality Change in 1- Change in 90-day AMI mortality (1989/91
year mortality
(1988/90 to 1998/00)
to 1998/00)
(1976/80 to
1988/90)
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

Change in Effective DSH
(Effect of $100 change)

-0.106
(.028)

-0.106
(.029)

-0.100
(.022)

0.009
(.036)

-2.13
(.58)

-2.20
(.59)

-1.11
(.48)

Change in Other DSH
(Effect of $100 change)

-0.033
(.022)

-0.033
(.022)

-0.016
(.015)

0.036
(.027)

-0.09
(.83)

-0.14
(.87)

-0.08
(.48)

Dummy for any DSH

Infant mortality in 1988/90
(instrumented with mortality
in 1985/87)

0.001
(.014)

0.003
(.005)
-0.37
(.08)

AMI mortality in 1989/91
(instrumented with mortality
in 1992/1994)
Notes:
County-level analysis. Change is from late 80s to late 90s, measured as 3-year averages.
Data from ARF (infant mortality and covariates), Medicare Claims (AMI), CMS (DSH).
Mortality measured in percentage points. AMI mortality adjusted for age, sex, race, and illness.
Covariates include fraction black, unemployment rate, per capita income, and state fixed effects.
Standard errors in parentheses, clustered at state level. Regressions weighted based on births or AMI in each period.
"Effective" DSH defined following column (5) of Table 5.

-0.45
(.10)

Table 9: How DSH Spending Affects Mortality
AMI outcomes

Infant Mortality Outcomes

Change in fraction
born LBW

(1)
Change in DSH to All Hospitals
(Effect of $100 change)

(2)

-0.186
(.056)

Change in 28-day
mortality

(3)

(4)

-0.054
(.020)

Change in mortality Change in incidence
between 28 days and
of AMI
one year
(5)

(6)

0.002
(.009)

(7)

(8)

-0.01
(.02)

Change in 90-day
AMI mortality

(9)

(10)

-0.95
(.65)

Change in mortality
between 90 days and
one year
(11)

(12)

-0.30
(.31)

Change in "Effective" DSH
(Effect of $100 change)

-0.266
(.089)

-0.090
(.030)

-0.001
(.013)

-0.04
(.04)

-2.19
(.61)

0.12
(.37)

Change in "Ineffective" DSH
(Effect of $100 change)

-0.126
(.093)

-0.026
(.019)

0.004
(.015)

0.00
(.04)

-0.10
(.08)

-0.62
(.53)

Change in Fraction Low Birth
Weight

0.060
(.005)

0.059
(.005)

Change in incidence of AMI

Notes:
County-level analysis. Change is from late 80s to late 90s, measured as 3-year averages.
Data from ARF (infant mortality and covariates), Medicare Claims (AMI), CMS (DSH).
Mortality measured in percentage points. AMI mortality adjusted for age, sex, race, and illness.
Covariates include fraction black, unemployment rate, per capita income, and state fixed effects.
Standard errors in parentheses, clustered at state level. Regressions weighted based on births or AMI in each period.
"Effective" DSH defined following column (5) of Table 5.

-2.03
(.57)

-2.03
(.57)

