                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       INVESTMENT, CAPACITY, AND UNCERTAINTY:
                              A PUTTY-CLAY APPROACH

                                            Simon Gilchrist
                                           John C. Willliams

                                         Working Paper 10446
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w10446


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       April 2004




This paper is a modified version of “Investment, Capacity, and Output: A Putty-Clay Approach.” We
appreciate the research assistance provided by Steven Sumner and Joanna Wares and thank Flint Brayton,
Jeff Campbell, Thomas Cooley, Russell Cooper, Sam Kortum, John Leahy and two anonymous referees for
helpful comments. The opinions expressed here do not necessarily reflect the views of the management of
the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and not
necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2004 by Simon Gilchrist and John C. Williams. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.
Investment, Capacity, and Uncertainty: A Putty-Clay Approach
Simon Gilchrist and John C. Williams
NBER Working Paper No. 10446
April 2004
JEL No. D24, E22, E23
                                         ABSTRACT

We embed the microeconomic decisions associated with investment under uncertainty, capacity

utilization, and machine replacement in a general equilibrium model based on putty-clay technology.

In the presence of irreversible factor proportions, a mean-preserving spread in the productivity of

investment raises aggregate investment, productivity, and output. Increases in uncertainty have

important dynamic implications, causing sustained increases in investment and hours and a medium-

term expansion in the growth rate of labor productivity.

Simon Gilchrist
Department of Economics
Boston University
270 Bay State Road
Boston, MA 02215
and NBER
sgilchri@bu.edu

John C. Williams
Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco
Economic Research
101 Market Street
San Francisco, CA 94105
john.c.williams@sf.frb.org
1    Introduction
In real business cycle models that emphasize the role of embodied technolog-
ical change, technological booms are driven by increases in the mean level of
productivity of investment projects. In this paper, we investigate the macroe-
conomic consequences of changes in the variance of productivity of investment
projects. In recent papers, Campbell, Lettau, Malkiel and Xu (2001) and
Goyal and Santa-Clara (2003) demonstrate that the idiosyncratic component
of stock returns, a measure of uncertainty in the return on investment, is sub-
ject to large and highly persistent shifts over time. However, there has been
little study of the eﬀects of such shifts on the aggregate economy. We ﬁnd
that in the putty-clay model permanent shifts in the distribution of returns
have ﬁrst-order eﬀects on aggregate investment, hours, and productivity. The
dynamics resulting from such shifts diﬀer sharply from those obtained with
putty-putty capital or from shocks to the mean level of technology.
    In an environment where capital is vintage speciﬁc and hence irreversible,
increases in idiosyncratic uncertainty provide productivity beneﬁts through
the optimal allocation of variable factors such as labor across project outcomes
that are embodied in ﬁxed factors, such as capital. The size of the productivity
gains and the transition dynamics associated with such productivity gains
depend on the underlying production structure. If production is putty-putty,
as in the benchmark vintage capital model introduced by Solow (1960), an
increase in the variance of project returns has macroeconomic consequences
that are isomorphic to an increase in the mean level of project returns. The
productivity gains associated with the increase in variance occur quickly, and
the subsequent boom in output, hours, and investment is relatively short-lived.
   With putty-clay capital the dynamic response to a change in the variance
of project outcomes diﬀers signiﬁcantly from that of a change to the mean
level of technology. An increase in the variance of project returns extends
the economic life of existing capital relative to new capital and produces a
substantial delay in the arrival of productivity gains. A permanent increase in
the variance of project returns generates a hump-shaped response of the growth
rate of labor productivity with the peak response occurring ten to ﬁfteen years
later; in contrast, the peak response to a permanent increase in the level of


                                       1
technology occurs on impact. Overall, these results suggest a new mechanism
whereby variation in the second moment of project returns can have ﬁrst-order
eﬀects on aggregate quantities.
   The Cobb-Douglas production technology has long been a popular choice
in macro-economic research owing to its analytical convenience and empirically
supported long-run balanced-growth properties. However, the malleability of
capital inherent to the Cobb-Douglas framework severely restricts the anal-
ysis of issues related to irreversible investment, including investment under
uncertainty, capacity utilization, and capital obsolescence and replacement.
In particular, a key assumption needed to achieve aggregation with Cobb-
Douglas technology and heterogeneous capital goods is that labor be equally
ﬂexible in the short and the long run. This assumption implies that, absent
modiﬁcations such as costs of operating capital, all capital goods are used in
production and that the short-run elasticity of output with respect to labor
equals the long-run labor share of income.
   Putty-clay technology, originally introduced by Johansen (1959), provides
an alternative description of production and capital accumulation that breaks
the tight restrictions on short-run production possibilities imposed by Cobb-
Douglas technology and provides a natural framework for examining issues
related to irreversible investment. With putty-clay capital, the ex ante pro-
duction technology allows substitution between capital and labor, but once
the capital good is installed, the technology is Leontief, with productivity de-
termined by the embodied level of vintage technology and the ex post ﬁxed
choice of capital intensity.2 An impediment to the adoption of the putty-clay
framework has been the analytical diﬃculty associated with a model in which
one must keep track of all existing vintages of capital. While recent research
has made signiﬁcant progress in incorporating aspects of putty- clay technol-
ogy while preserving analytical tractability, these eﬀorts have not provided a
full treatment of issues related to irreversible investment and capacity utiliza-
tion; see, for example, Cooley, Hansen and Prescott (1995), and Atkeson and
Kehoe (1999).
   In Gilchrist and Williams (2000), we develop a general equilibrium model
   2
    Putty-clay capital was studied intensely during the 1960s, but received relatively little
attention again until the 1990s. See Gilchrist and Williams (2000) for further references.



                                             2
with putty-clay technology in which aggregate relationships are explicitly de-
rived from the microeconomic decisions of investment, capacity utilization,
and machine replacement. In that paper, we investigated the eﬀects of shifts
in disembodied and embodied technology on the economy. This model has
already proven to be useful in a number of other applications (Gilchrist and
Williams (2001), Wei (2003)). In this paper, we extend this model to incor-
porate time variation in the variability of project returns. We then examine
the steady-state and dynamic relationships between uncertainty, productivity
and investment.
   Our analysis contributes to the large theoretical literature that identi-
ﬁes channels through which uncertainty may inﬂuence investment. Bernanke
(1983) and Pindyck (1991) stress the negative inﬂuence that uncertainty has
in a model where there exists an “option value” to waiting to invest. Because
the uncertainty considered in this paper is resolved only after investment de-
cisions are made, our work is more directly related to the work of Hartman
(1972) and Abel (1983). These authors emphasize the positive eﬀect that in-
creased uncertainty may have on ﬁrm-level investment because expected proﬁts
increase with uncertainty. In our framework, increased uncertainty raises ex-
pected proﬁts but reduces the expected marginal return to capital, causing
a reduction in capital intensity at the microeconomic level. As a result, an
increase in idiosyncratic uncertainty reduces investment at the project level
but raises investment in the aggregate. The former result is broadly consistent
with the empirical evidence of a negative relationship between investment and
uncertainty at the ﬁrm level (Leahy and Whited 1996).
  The remainder of this paper is divided as follows: Section 2 describes the
model and equilibrium conditions. Section 3 shows the equilibrium determi-
nation of utilization rates and provides closed-form expressions for aggregate
economic variables as functions of the equilibrium utilization rate. Section
4 considers the general-equilibrium implications of increased uncertainty on
investment, output and productivity. Section 5 concludes.




                                      3
2       The Model
In this section, we describe the putty-clay model and derive the equilibrium
conditions. The underlying ex ante production technology is assumed to be
Cobb-Douglas with constant returns to scale, but for capital goods in place,
production possibilities take the Leontief form: there is no ex post substi-
tutability of capital and labor at the microeconomic level. In addition to
aggregate technological change, we allow for the existence of idiosyncratic un-
certainty regarding the productivity of investment projects, the variance of
which may change over time. To characterize the equilibrium allocation, we
ﬁrst discuss the optimization problem at the project level and then describe
aggregation from the project level to the aggregate allocation.3

2.1     The Investment Decision
Each period, a set of new investment “projects” becomes available. Constant
returns to scale implies an indeterminacy of scale at the level of projects, so
without loss of generality, we normalize all projects to employ one unit of
labor at full capacity. We refer to these projects as “machines.” Capital goods
require one period for initial installation and then are productive for 1 ≤
M ≤ ∞ periods. The productive eﬃciency of machine i initiated at time t is
aﬀected by a random idiosyncratic productivity term. In addition, we assume
all machines, regardless of their relative eﬃciency, fail at an exogenously given
rate that varies with the age of the machine. In summary, capital goods are
heterogeneous and are characterized by three attributes: vintage (age and level
of aggregate embodied technology), capital intensity, and the realized value of
the idiosyncratic productivity term.
   The productivity of each machine, initiated at time t, diﬀers according to
the log-normally distributed random variable, θ(i)t , where
                                                1
                           ln θ(i)t ∼ N (ln θt − σt2 , σt2 ).
                                                2
The aggregate index θt measures the mean level of embodied technology of
vintage t investment goods, and σt2 is the variance of the idiosyncratic shock
    3
    This section extends the analysis in Gilchrist and Williams (2000) by incorporating
time-variation in the degree of idiosyncratic uncertainty.


                                           4
for capital goods installed of that vintage.4 The mean correction term − 12 σt2
implies that E(θ(i)t |θt ) = θt . We assume θt follows a nonstochastic trend
growth process with gross growth rate (1 + g)1−α .
   The idiosyncratic shock to individual machines is not observed until after
the investment decisions are made. We also assume that after the revelation
of the idiosyncratic shock, further investments in existing machines are not
possible. Subject to the constraint that labor employed, L(i)t+j , is nonnegative
and less than or equal to unity (capacity), ﬁnal goods output produced in
period t + j by machine i of vintage t is

                             Y (i)t+j = θ(i)t k(i)αt L(i)t+j ,

where k(i)t is the capital-labor ratio chosen at the time of installation. Denote
the labor productivity of a machine by

                                   X(i)t ≡ θ(i)t k(i)αt .

The only variable cost to operating a machine is the wage rate, Wt . Idle
machines incur no variable costs and have the same capital costs as operat-
ing machines. Given the Leontief structure of production, these assumptions
imply a cutoﬀ value for the minimum eﬃciency level of machines used in pro-
duction: those with productivity X(i)t ≥ Wt are run at capacity, while those
less productive are left idle. Owing to trend productivity growth and relatively
long-lived capital, the mean labor productivity of the most recent vintage is
substantially higher than that of all other existing machines. Obsolescence
through embodied technical change implies that older vintages have lower av-
erage utilization rates than newer vintages.
   To derive the equilibrium allocation of labor, capital intensity, and in-
vestment, we begin by analyzing the investment and utilization decision for
a single machine. Deﬁne the time t discount rate for time t + j income by
            j      −1
R̃t,t+j ≡    s=1   Rt+s , where Rt+s is the one period gross interest rate at time
   4
     The assumption of log-normally distributed idiosyncratic productivity, as in Campbell
(1998), facilitates the analysis of aggregate relationships while preserving the putty-clay
characteristics of the microeconomic structure. In particular, there exists a well-deﬁned
aggregate production function with a short-run elasticity of output with respect to labor
strictly less than that of the Cobb-Douglas alternative. This result is in contrast to that
of Houthakker (1953), who ﬁnds that a Leontief microeconomic structure aggregates to a
Cobb-Douglas production function if the distribution of idiosyncratic uncertainty is Pareto.

                                             5
t + s. At the machine level, capital intensity is chosen to maximize the present
discounted value of proﬁts to the machine
                                               
                                                M                                           
             max              E −k(i)t +              R̃t,t+j (1 − δj )(X(i)t − Wt+j )L(i)t+j ,   (1)
       k(i)t ,{L(i)t+j }M
                        j=1                     j=1



                               s.t.          X(i)t = θ(i)t k(i)αt ,
                                             0 ≤ L(i)t+j ≤ 1, j = 1, . . . , M,
                                             0 < k(i)t < ∞,

where δj is the probability a machine has failed exogenously by j periods and
expectations are taken over the time t idiosyncratic shock, θ(i)t .
   Because investment projects are identical ex ante, the optimal choice of the
capital-labor ratio is equal across all machines in a vintage; that is, k(i)t =
kt , ∀i. Denote the mean productivity of vintage t capital by Xt = θt ktα . Given
the log-normal distribution for θ(i)t , the expected labor requirement at time t
for a machine built in period s is given by

                                    Pr(X(i)s > Wt |Wt , θt ) = 1 − Φ(zts ),

where Φ (·) is the cumulative distribution function of the standard normal and
                                                                         
                                              1                 1
                                      zts   ≡    ln Wt − ln Xs + σs2 .
                                              σs                2
Letting F (X(i)s ) denote the cumulative distribution function of X(i)s , we can
similarly compute expected output to be
                               ∞
                                    X(i)s dF (X(i)s ) = (1 − Φ(zts − σs ))Xs ,
                              Wt

where the expression on the right-hand side follows from the formula for the
expectation of a truncated log-normal random variable.5 Capacity utilization
of vintage s capital at time t—the ratio of actual output produced from the
capital of a given vintage to the level of output that could be produced when
capital is fully utilized—equals (1 − Φ(zts − σs )).
   5
    If ln(µ) ∼ N (ζ, σ 2 ), then E(µ|µ > χ) = (1−Φ(γ−σ))
                                                    (1−Φ(γ)) E(µ) where γ = (ln(χ) −
                                                                   ∞
ζ)/σ (Johnson, Kotz and Balakrishnan 1994). This implies that χ µdF (µ) = E(µ|µ >
χ) Pr(µ > χ) = (1 − Φ(γ − σ))E(µ), where F () denotes the cumulative distribution function
of µ.


                                                           6
   Expected net income in period t from a vintage s machine, πts , conditional
on Wt , is given by
                                                                                  
              πts   = (1 − δt−s ) (1 −     Φ(zts   − σs ))Xs − (1 −   Φ(zts ))Wt       .

Substituting this expression for net income into equation 1 eliminates the
future choices of labor from the investment problem. The remaining choice
variable is kt .
   The choice of kt has a direct eﬀect on proﬁtability through its eﬀect on the
expected value of output Xt .6 The ﬁrst-order condition for an interior solution
for kt is given by

                               
                               M
                    kt = αEt         R̃t,t+j (1 − δj ) 1 − Φ(zt+j
                                                              t
                                                                  − σt ) Xt .                  (2)
                               j=1


   New machines are put into place until the value of a new machine (the
present discounted value of net income) is equal to the cost of a machine, kt ,

             
             M
   kt = Et         R̃t,t+j (1 − δj ) (1 − Φ(zt+j
                                             t
                                                 − σt ))Xt − (1 − Φ(zt+j
                                                                     t
                                                                         ))Wt+j .              (3)
             j=1

This is the free-entry or zero-proﬁt condition. The ﬁrst term on the right-
hand side of equation 3 equals the expected present discounted value of output
adjusted for the probability that the machine’s idiosyncratic productivity draw
is too low to proﬁtably operate the machine in period t + j. The second term
equals the expected present value of the wage bill, adjusted for the probability
of such a shutdown. Equations 2 and 3 jointly imply that, in equilibrium,
the expected present value of the wage bill equals (1 − α) times the expected
present value of revenue.
   6
     For any given realization of θit , a higher choice of kt raises the probability that a machine
will be utilized in the future. This increase in utilization raises both expected future output
and expected future wage payments. Because the marginal machine earns zero quasi rents,
this eﬀect has no marginal eﬀect on proﬁtability, however; that is,
                          ∂πts   1                  1
                            s  =    φ(zts − σs )Xs − φ(zts )Wt = 0,
                          ∂zt    σs                 σs

where φ(·) denotes the probability density function for a standard normal random variable.




                                                   7
2.2     Aggregation
Total labor employment, Lt , is equal to the sum of employment from all ex-
isting vintages of capital

                                  
                                  M
                         Lt =           (1 − Φ(ztt−j ))(1 − δj )Qt−j ,               (4)
                                  j=1

where Qt−j is the quantity of new machines started in period t − j. Aggregate
ﬁnal output, Yt , is

                         
                         M
                  Yt =         (1 − Φ(ztt−j − σt−j ))(1 − δj )Qt−j Xt−j .            (5)
                         j=1

In the absence of government spending or other uses of output, aggregate
consumption, Ct , satisﬁes
                                         Ct = Yt − kt Qt ,                           (6)

where kt Qt is gross investment in new machines.

2.3     Preferences
To close the model, we posit that the representative household maximizes the
present value of household utility, where preferences are described by
                                 ∞                              1−γ
                           1             Ct (Nt − Lt )ψ
                              Et   β t Nt                                ,           (7)
                         1 − γ t=0             Nt

where β ∈ (0, 1), ψ > 0, γ −1 > 0 is the intertemporal elasticity of substitution,
and Nt = N0 (1 + n)t is the size of the household, the growth rate of which
is assumed to be exogenous and constant.7 Households optimize over these
preferences subject to the standard intertemporal budget constraint. We as-
sume that claims on the proﬁts streams of individual machines are traded; in
equilibrium, households own a diversiﬁed portfolio of all such claims.
   The ﬁrst-order condition with respect to consumption is given by

                                   Uc,t = βEt Rt,t+1 Uc,t+1 ,                        (8)
   7
    Note that we assume that per capita utility is weighted by the size of the household.
The following analysis would be nearly unchanged if instead we assumed that preferences
were not weighted by the size of the household.


                                                 8
where Uc,t+s denotes the marginal utility of consumption. The ﬁrst-order con-
dition with respect to leisure/work is given by

                                 Uc,t Wt + UL,t = 0,                           (9)

where UL,t denotes the marginal utility associated with an incremental increase
in work (decrease in leisure).


3     The Steady State
Our goal in this paper is to analyze the eﬀect of changes in project uncertainty
on output, productivity, and capacity both in the long-run and along the tran-
sition path. To determine the long-run eﬀect of an increase in uncertainty, we
ﬁrst characterize the steady-state conditions of the economy and show how
the steady-state conditions depend on the level of idiosyncratic uncertainty.
In analyzing the eﬀects of changes in uncertainty, we ﬁrst consider the ﬁrm’s
employment and output decisions in partial equilibrium and then proceed to
consider the investment and capacity decisions in a general equilibrium anal-
ysis.
    We begin with the case of no technological or population growth. This
case is analytically tractable and allows us to prove the uniqueness of the
steady-state equilibrium utilization rate and to derive closed-form solutions
for the steady-state values of all variables as functions of this utilization rate.
The case of positive growth is taken up in later in the section. For the positive
growth case, we provide a set of suﬃcient conditions for there to exist a unique
non-stochastic balanced growth path.

3.1    The Zero-Growth Economy
The zero-growth economy is obtained by setting g = n = 0. For further
simplicity, we assume M = ∞ and δj = 1 − (1 − δ)j−1 for some depreciation
rate δ > 0. Letting lower case letters denote steady-state per capita quantities
and suppressing time subscripts, we deﬁne z = (1/σ)[ln(w) − ln(θk α ) + 12 σ 2 ].
Equation 4 then implies that steady-state labor equals the steady-state capital
utilization rate times the total stock of machines, q/δ ,

                              l = (1 − Φ(z))(q/δ),                            (10)

                                         9
while equation 5 implies that steady-state output is equal to the steady-state
capacity utilization rate times potential output

                          y = (1 − Φ(z − σ))θk α (q/δ).                      (11)

For a given capital-labor ratio and stock of machines, labor and output are
increasing in the rate of utilization.
    Equations 10 and 11 provide an implicit relationship between labor and
output that may be interpreted as the short-run production function for this
economy (holding k and q ﬁxed). Taking the ratio of partial derivatives, ∂y / ∂l ,
                                                                         ∂z ∂z
we obtain an expression for the marginal product of labor (MPL),
                                       φ(z − σ) α
                             MP L =            θk .                          (12)
                                         φ(z)

Taking second derivatives, we obtain     ∂M P L
                                           ∂l
                                                  = −σM P L, which implies strict
concavity of the short-run production function.
   Combining equations 10 , 11, and 12, the elasticity of output with respect
to labor may be expressed as
                                 ∂ ln y   h(z − σ)
                                        =                                    (13)
                                 ∂ ln l     h(z)
where h(x) ≡ φ(x)/(1 − Φ(x)), the hazard rate for the standard normal. This
ratio plays a key role in determining the equilibrium rate of capital utilization.
   Combining equations 2, 10, and 11 and solving for the capital-labor ratio
per machine yields
                                                         1
                                 α                        1−α
                       k=           (1 − Φ(z − σ))θ             ,            (14)
                                r+δ
where r = β −1 − 1 is the steady-state equilibrium real interest rate. Except
for the adjustment for capacity utilization (1 − Φ(z − σ)), this is the standard
expression for the steady-state capital-labor ratio in a zero-growth economy.
The adjustment factor implies that the optimal capital-labor ratio for new
machines is increasing in the capacity utilization rate.
   In equilibrium, the wage rate equals the marginal product of labor or,
equivalently, the eﬃciency level of the marginal machine. The ﬁrst-order con-
dition for the labor-leisure decision, equation 9, and the aggregate resource
constraint, equation 6, yield

                                        10
                                            c
                                w = ψ          ,                           (15)
                                           1−l
and

                                c = y − kq.                                (16)

   To close the model and solve for the equilibrium rate of capital utilization,
we ﬁrst express the zero-proﬁt condition as a monotonic function of z. In
steady state, per-period proﬁts (net of capital expenditures) are given by

              Π = (1 − Φ(z − σ))θk α − (1 − Φ(z))w − (r + δ)k,             (17)

where (r + δ)k equals per-period capital expenditures. Using equation 14,
we may alternatively express per-period capital expenditures by α(1 − Φ(z −
σ))θk α . Net proﬁts may then be written
                                              y
                        Π = (1 − Φ(z))[(1 − α) − w].
                                              l
   The free-entry condition requires that expected net proﬁts equal zero, so
that, in equilibrium, labor’s share of output equals the wage bill: (1−α)y = wl,
just as in the neoclassical vintage model with Cobb-Douglas production. In
the vintage model, this equality is achieved by allocating more labor to high-
eﬃciency machines and less to low-eﬃciency machines so that the marginal
product of labor is equal across machines. Each factor (labor and capital) is
paid its share of output so that net proﬁts are zero. In the putty-clay model,
marginal products are not equalized across individual machines. Instead, a
worker employed on a highly eﬃcient machine is more productive than one
employed on a low eﬃciency machine. Free entry of new machines then deter-
mines the utilization rate consistent with zero equilibrium net proﬁts.
   To see the link between free entry and utilization, we use the equilibrium
condition that the wage rate equals the productivity of the marginal machine to
obtain ∂∂ ln y
          ln l
               = wl
                 y
                    . Equation 13 combined with the free-entry condition then
determines the steady-state value of z and thereby the steady-state capital
utilization rate (1 − Φ(z)). We state this result in the following proposition
(proofs of all propositions appear in the appendix).

                                      11
Proposition 1 For the zero-growth economy, there exists a unique equilibrium
value of z that satisﬁes:
                                    h(z − σ)
                            1−α=             ,                           (18)
                                      h(z)
where h(x) = φ(x)/(1 − Φ(x)) is the hazard rate for the standard normal.

    To complete the description of the model, we combine equations 11, 14,
15, and 16 and use the free entry condition to solve for steady-state labor

                                           (1 − α)
                             l=                             .            (19)
                                  1 − α + ψ(1 − αδ/(r + δ))

Note that steady-state labor is independent of z and σ, the degree of idiosyn-
cratic uncertainty. As in the case of the standard Solow vintage model, a
mean-preserving spread to idiosyncratic productivity acts like an aggregate
disembodied productivity shock with respect to the labor allocation decision
and thus has no eﬀect on steady-state labor. (The Solow vintage capital model
is described in the appendix.) Equilibrium values for all remaining aggregate
variables are then computed from z and l.
    An implication of Proposition 1 is that the steady-state capacity utiliza-
tion rate is decreasing in σ.8 The degree of idiosyncratic uncertainty and the
resulting distribution of unused capacity determine the short-run response of
the economy to shocks. In the very short run, during which the distribution of
machines is ﬁxed, an expansion of output is achieved through the utilization
of marginal machines, and the sensitivity of the marginal product of labor
to increases in output depends on the density of machines available on the
margin. Letting (1/w) denote the inverse of the real wage, we can obtain the
short-run elasticity of supply by taking logs and then, using the deﬁnition of
z, diﬀerentiating equation 11 with respect to w to obtain:

                                         ∂ ln y   h(z − σ)
                                  −             =          .
                                      ∂ ln(1/w)      σ

The hazard rate h(z − σ) measures machine eﬃciency for machines in use,
relative to overall machine eﬃciency. Because the degree of idiosyncratic un-
certainty determines the equilibrium utilization rate, it also inﬂuences the
  8
      See the proof of Proposition 4.



                                              12
slope of the aggregate supply curve. For a low level of σ, the equilibrium ca-
pacity utilization rate is high, implying that the marginal machine is in the
upper tail of the productivity distribution. In this region of the distribution,
machine quality falls oﬀ rapidly and marginal cost rises sharply as output ex-
pands. Thus, a low degree of idiosyncratic uncertainty implies a low elasticity
of supply and a steep supply curve.
   Figure 1 plots the log of the inverse of the wage against the log of output
for the Solow vintage model and two choices of σ for the putty-clay model. In
each case, the stock of capital goods is held ﬁxed at its steady-state level, and
each curve is computed by varying the amount of labor input. In log-terms,
the slope of the supply curve is equal to the inverse of the elasticity of supply.
In the Solow vintage model, the elasticity of supply is constant and equal to
1−α
 α
    , and therefore the supply curve is log-linear. In the putty-clay model, the
elasticity of supply, h(z−σ)
                         σ
                             , is decreasing in utilization, implying that the slope
of the supply curve increases as output increases. For any given σ, the slope of
the supply curve is increasing at an increasing rate as lower and lower quality
machines are brought on line.
   At the steady-state equilibrium, the slope of the short-run aggregate supply
curve is negatively related to the degree of idiosyncratic uncertainty and is
always greater than the slope implied by the Solow vintage model. These
results are summarized in the following proposition.

Proposition 2 For the zero-growth putty-clay economy, the slope of the ag-
gregate supply curve holding capital ﬁxed, ∂ ln(1/w)
                                              ∂ ln y
                                                          σ
                                                     = h(z−σ) , is increasing and
convex in ln y. Evaluated at the steady-state equilibrium, the slope of the ag-
gregate supply curve is decreasing in the level of idiosyncratic uncertainty and
                      α
is bounded below by 1−α  .

    Proposition 2 implies that the short-run response of the economy to shocks
to technology depends on σ, the degree of idiosyncratic uncertainty. For low
levels of σ, production is relatively inﬂexible in the short-run and marginal
costs rise rapidly as output expands. Owing to such sharply rising marginal
costs, an increase in θ, the mean level of technology, leads to only a modest
increase in output, hours, and investment in the short-run. Over time, as more
investment occurs, capacity expands and the economy can increase output

                                        13
                                     Figure 1: Aggregate Supply Curve


        Inverse of real wage (log)                          σ =.20




                                     Solow
                                     vintage
                                                                            σ =.40




                                                 Y (σ=.20)      Y (σ=.40)
                                                  ss             ss




                                                   Output (log)

Notes: The solid line shows the short-run relationship between the inverse of
the real wage and output for the putty-clay model with σ = 0.4. The dashed
line shows the same for the economy with σ = 0.2. The dotted line shows this
relationship for the Solow vintage model. These calculations are based on the
steady-state values of k, q, and θ.

at lower cost. Transition dynamics are more prolonged for low σ economies
than high σ economies. As documented in Gilchrist and Williams (2000), for
suﬃciently low levels of σ, the model is capable of generating hump-shaped
output dynamics in response to persistent shocks to technology.9

3.2     The Balanced Growth Economy
Generalizing the results obtained above for the case of positive growth is com-
plicated by the fact that the economy can no longer be summarized by a single
vintage of capital and associated hazard rate, but instead depends on a set of
hazard rates that vary across vintages of capital. Nonetheless, we are able to
obtain conditions under which a unique balanced growth path exists. We also
obtain similar results regarding how the shape of the short-run supply curve
   9
     Campbell and Fisher (2000) provide an alternative analysis of the relationship between
idiosyncratic uncertainty and aggregate dynamics.


                                                       14
depends on σ, the degree of idiosyncratic uncertainty.
   Along the balanced growth path, per capita output, consumption, and
investment grow at rate g, and labor and labor capacity grow at rate n. We
use lower case letters to indicate steady-state values of variables, normalized by
appropriate time trends, and k̃ to indicate the normalized steady-state capital-
labor ratio. We deﬁne the growth-adjusted discount rate β̃ ≡ β(1 + g)−γ .
Let z denote the diﬀerence between the average eﬃciency of the leading edge
technology and the current wage rate in steady state, z ≡ (ln w−ln x+ 12 σ 2 )/σ,
and let z(i) denote the diﬀerence between the average eﬃciency of vintage i
and the current wage rate z(i) ≡ z + (i/σ) ln(1 + g).
   On the balanced growth path, the normalized levels of output, consump-
tion, labor, and the wage rate are given by

                         
                         M
            y = qx             ((1 + g)(1 + n))−j (1 − δj ) 1 − Φ(z(j) − σ) ,       (20)
                         j=1

                                             c = y − k̃q,                           (21)
                                  
                                  M
                         l=q           (1 + n)−j (1 − δj ) 1 − Φ(z(j)) .            (22)
                                 j=1

                                (1 + g)−j xφ(z(j) − σ)
                      w=                               , j = 1, . . . , M.          (23)
                                       φ(z(j))
Note that y/q, c/q, l/q, and w depend only on the values of k̃ (directly and
indirectly through x = k̃ α ) and z. The ﬁrst-order condition for k̃ and the
zero-proﬁt condition yield two equations in z and k̃

             
             M                                             
    k̃ = α         β̃ (1 − δj )
                     j
                                         1 − Φ(z(j) − σ) x ,                        (24)
             j=1

           
           M                                                                   
    k̃ =         β̃ j (1 − δj )      1 − Φ(z(j) − σ) x − (1 + g)j 1 − Φ(z(j)) w .(25)
           j=1

By combining these last three equations, we obtain the balanced growth equi-
librium condition for z.
   As in the zero-growth economy, an equilibrium value of z is determined
by setting utilization rates so that a weighted average of vintage labor shares
equals 1−α. In the case of positive growth, however, these weights are not ﬁxed
constants as in the zero-growth case, but instead depend on z. As a result, with

                                                 15
positive growth one cannot rule out a priori the existence of multiple steady-
state values of z without additional assumptions, as stated in the following
proposition.

Proposition 3 Let

                              β̃ j (1 − δj )(1 − Φ(z(j) − σ))
                  v(z(j)) =                                     ,                (26)
                              i=1 β̃ (1 − δi )(1 − Φ(z(i) − σ))
                              M      i


                                         M
deﬁne a set of weights such that         j=1   v(z(j)) = 1, then there exists at least
one steady-state value of z that satisﬁes

                                   
                                   M
                                                   h(z(j) − σ)
                       (1 − α) =         v(z(j))               .                 (27)
                                   j=1               h(z(j))

                                                                               M
A suﬃcient condition for uniqueness of the equilibrium is that the sum         j=1   β̃ j (1−
δj )(1 − Φ(z(j) − σ)) be log-concave in z.

    Note that the possibility of multiple balanced growth equilibria exists only
in the case of nonzero trend technological growth. This potential for multi-
ple steady states distinguishes this model from its putty-putty counterpart.
Nonetheless, numerical analysis of the model suggests that multiple equilibria
occur only in “unusual” regions of the parameter space, for example, when the
trend growth rate of technology is extremely large and the value of α lies in
a limited range. Further discussion of these issues appears in the appendix.
In the following analysis, the parameterized version of the model possesses a
unique steady state.


4     Reallocation Beneﬁts, Investment, and Un-
      certainty
In this section, we consider the general equilibrium eﬀects of a permanent in-
crease in uncertainty. We ﬁrst analyze the eﬀect of an increase in σ on the
long-run properties of the model. We then characterize the transition dynam-
ics as the economy moves from a less ﬂexible, low idiosyncratic uncertainty
economy to a more ﬂexible, high idiosyncratic uncertainty economy. This ex-
ercise is of interest for theoretical reasons – in our model, a mean preserving

                                          16
spread to project outcomes has ﬁrst-order eﬀects on both transition dynamics
and steady-state levels. It is also of interest for empirical reasons – recent
evidence shows that the idiosyncratic variance associated with the return to
capital at the ﬁrm level has doubled over the postwar period and explains
a large fraction of the total volatility of stock market returns (Campbell et
al. 2001).

4.1           The steady-state eﬀect of an increase in uncertainty
We start by considering the eﬀect of an increase in σ on the steady-state
of the putty-clay model. To obtain analytical results we focus on the zero-
growth economy. As in the Solow vintage model, an increase in idiosyncratic
uncertainty increases productivity by allowing labor to be reallocated from
low productivity to high productivity projects. In the putty-clay model, this
reallocation is limited by the Leontief nature of production however.10 A
complete characterization of the eﬀect of an increase in σ on the steady-state
equilibrium is summarized in the following proposition.

                                                         dz
Proposition 4 For the zero-growth economy,               dσ
                                                              > 1, the steady-state capital-
labor ratio per machine, k, and capacity utilization are strictly decreasing in
σ. Output, consumption, total investment, and the wage rate are increasing in
                      ln y                                                ln y
σ, with elasticity dd ln σ
                           = σh(z). By comparison, in the Solow model, dd ln σ
                                                                               =
1
α
    > σh(z).

The long-run elasticity of output with respect to σ in the Solow model can be
deduced directly from equation 29 by computing the equivalent variation in
θ implied by variation in σ, and noting that the long-run elasticity of output
with respect to θ is unity.
                                                                                       dz
   In the case of strictly positive growth, we still obtain the result that            dσ
                                                                                            >1
         dk
and    < 0. With growth, changes in σ inﬂuence the eﬀective depreciation
         dσ
rate. As a result, labor is not independent of σ and the aggregate eﬀects are
    10
     In the Solow vintage model, project-level capital expenditures are irreversibly tied to a
speciﬁc realization of idiosyncratic productivity θ(i)t but labor can be costlessly reallocated
across projects after the realization occurs. A mean-preserving spread causes a reallocation
of labor from low productivity to high productivity machines, equalizing the marginal prod-
uct of labor across machines. This reallocation increases productivity in proportion to σ
and raises the return to capital, causing investment and output to increase.


                                              17
diﬃcult to characterize analytically. Numerical calculations indicate that the
results in proposition 4 generalize to the case of positive growth for relevant
values of σ.
   Proposition 4 implies that an increase in idiosyncratic uncertainty reduces
investment at the project level but increases aggregate investment. Project
managers pay k and in eﬀect buy an option to produce in the future. The
option is exercised (production occurs) if the ex post realization of revenues
exceeds wage costs.11 Ceteris paribus, an increase in uncertainty raises the
value of the option and increases expected proﬁts. Although expected proﬁts
per machine increase with σ, the partial equilibrium eﬀect (holding wages
ﬁxed) on k is ambiguous and depends on the utilization rate.12 In general
equilibrium, higher proﬁts induce new entry. New entry drives up the wage
rate, thereby reducing utilization and eroding proﬁts. The increase in the wage
rate causes a reduction in k. The additional investment that occurs through
the extensive margin more than oﬀsets the reduction in investment that occurs
through the intensive margin, and aggregate investment unambiguously rises
in response to an increase in idiosyncratic uncertainty.
   The productivity gains associated with an increase in σ depend on the
extent to which the economy can reallocate labor from low productivity to high
productivity projects. The elasticity of output with respect to σ captures the
beneﬁts from this reallocation of labor. In steady state, ln(X(it ) = ln(θ(i)t k α )
is normally distributed with variance σ 2 . The standard formula for a truncated
normal implies
            d ln y
                   = σh(z) = E(ln(X(i)t )|X(i)t > W ) − E ln(X(i)t ).                   (28)
            d ln σ
  11
      Pindyck (1988) also considers the option value associated with machine shutdown. In his
framework, holding constant the option value associated with waiting to invest, an increase
in uncertainty raises investment. This result contrasts with that described below.
   12
      In the putty-clay model, the relationship between k and proﬁts—given by equation 17—
combines both the standard concave relationship owing to diminishing returns to capital and
the eﬀect of k on expected utilization rates. The expected marginal product of capital (i.e.
the derivative of gross proﬁts with respect to k) is given by M P K = α(1 − Φ(z − σ))k α−1 .
The derivative of the marginal product of capital with respect to σ, holding wages ﬁxed,
equals ∂MPK∂σ   = φ(z − σ)αk α−1 σz . For z < 0, that is, at steady-state capital utilization
rates exceeding 50%, a mean-preserving spread reduces capacity utilization and the optimal
choice of k.




                                             18
Thus the size of the reallocation beneﬁts depends on the diﬀerence between
the average eﬃciency of machines in use relative to the mean-eﬃciency of all
machines.13
  This result has important implications for the transition dynamics de-
scribed below. A permanent increase in σ causes the real wage to rise. In
the initial periods following the rise in σ, the real wage reﬂects the existing
distribution of capital however and is low relative to the new steady-state.
Low real wages imply only limited reallocation beneﬁts in the short-run. Over
time, as real wages rise, so do the reallocation beneﬁts associated with the
increase in σ. Thus, relative to an increase in the mean-level of productivity,
increases in the variance of productivity are expected to have delayed eﬀects
on output, hours and investment.

4.2        The Dynamic Eﬀects of Increases in Uncertainty
We now consider the transition dynamics associated with an increase in id-
iosyncratic uncertainty. Using numerical simulations of the log-linearized
model, we examine the eﬀect of a one-time permanent increase in idiosyn-
cratic uncertainty for the growth economy described above.
   We calibrate our model to match standard long-run properties of the post-
war U.S. data, including average capacity utilization. We set α = 0.3, β =
0.98, δ = 0.08, γ = 1 and ψ = 3. In steady state, the capital utilization rate of
capital goods that are i periods old equals (1 − Φ(z + (i/σ) ln(1 + g))). From
this formula we see that the two key determinants of the vintage utilization
schedule are the long-run growth rate of embodied technology and the degree
of idiosyncratic uncertainty.
    The primary eﬀect of positive trend productivity growth on machine re-
placement is to shorten the useful life of capital goods. Owing to more rapid
growth in real wages, an increase in g speeds up the process of machine re-
placement, shifting the utilization schedule forward in time. The degree of
idiosyncratic uncertainty, on the other hand, mainly aﬀects the shape of the
  13
       For x ∼ N (µ, σx ),                                       
                                                            µ−ω
                             E(x|x > ω) = E(x) + σx h
                                                             σx
where h(z) = φ(z)/(1 − Φ(z)).


                                            19
                                          Figure 2: Steady-State Capacity Utilization
                                    1.2
                                                                                   σ =.05
                                                                                   σ =.15
                                    1.0                                            σ =.25
        Capacity Utilization Rate


                                    0.8


                                    0.6


                                    0.4


                                    0.2


                                    0.0
                                                5       10          15       20    25       30
                                                          Vintage Age (in years)

Notes: The ﬁgure plots the steady-state capacity utilization for a given vin-
tage rate as a function of the age of capital in the vintage for economies with
diﬀerent parameterizations of σ.

utilization schedule. In the case of low idiosyncratic uncertainty, the depre-
ciation schedule is close to that of the “one-hoss shay” whereby machines of
any given vintage have essentially the same economic lifespan. For high σ,
the depreciation schedule resembles exponential decay.14 Figure 2 shows the
steady-state capital utilization rates for diﬀerent values σ.15 In order to match
the 82 percent average capacity utilization rate of the manufacturing sector of
the U.S. economy over the period 1960-2000, we choose σ = 0.2.
   Figures 3 and 4 compare the dynamic responses from an increase in σ to
that of an increase in the mean level of embodied technology, θ.16 In each
  14
     The pattern of scrapping relates to the potential presence of “replacement echoes” of
the type studied by Boucekkine, Germain and Licandro (1997), where an initial investment
surge leads to recurring spikes in investment as successive vintages are retired. In the
context of our putty-clay model, pronounced replacement echoes occur only in the absence of
mechanisms that lead to the smoothing of capital goods replacement over time. Speciﬁcally,
necessary conditions for replacement echoes to exist in our putty-clay model are a low degree
of idiosyncratic uncertainty and a high intertemporal elasticity of consumption.
  15
     For the examples shown in ﬁgure 2, we assume there is no “exogenous” capital depre-
ciation (δ = 0).
  16
     Total factor productivity (TFP) is constructed using the standard Solow formula:


                                                               20
           Figure 3: Dynamic Responses of Hours, Output, and Productivity

                              Increase in Mean                          Increase in Variance
    1.0
    0.8




                                                            0.8
                                              Output
                                              Hours
    0.6




                                                            0.4
    0.4
    0.2




                                                            0.0
    0.0




                      10                      20                   10               20




                                                            0.08
                           Labor Productivity Growth
    0.15




                           TFP Growth
                                                            0.06
    0.10




                                                            0.04
    0.05




                                                            0.02
    0.0




                       10                       20                 10                 20



Notes: The left-hand panels show the impulse responses to an unanticipated
permanent one percent increase in the mean level of productivity, θ. The
right-hand panels show the impulse responses to a permanent increase in the
idiosyncratic variance of productivity, σ 2 . The scale of the increase in σ is
chosen so that the long-run increase in output is the same (one percent) as in
the shock to the mean level of productivity. All results are shown as percentage
point deviations from steady-state; time periods correspond to years.

case, we calibrate the size of the shock to produce a 1 percent increase in the
steady-state level of output. In the case of a shock to σ, this corresponds to an
increase in σ of about 0.04, which implies a 20 percent increase in the standard
deviation of returns. Such a 20 percent increase in volatility is conservative
relative to the range of low frequency movements in idiosyncratic volatility
documented by Campbell et al. We focus on a permanent increase in σ based
on the ﬁnding by Campbell et al. (2001) that the idiosyncratic component of
stock returns exhibits near unit root behavior.
∆ ln T F Pt = ∆ ln(Yt ) − α∆ ln(Kt ) − (1 − α)∆ ln(Nt ), where capital is measured using the
perpetual inventory method Kt = (1 − δ)Kt−1 + It .


                                                       21
   The dynamic response of the economy to an increase in the mean level of
technology embodied in capital is discussed in Gilchrist and Williams (2000).
An increase in θ represents a reduction in the cost, in terms of foregone con-
sumption, of new capital goods. Owing to the associated increase in investment
demand, investment spending, labor, and output all increase upon impact of
the shock. The economy continues to display high levels of investment (rel-
ative to output) and high levels of employment for a number of years after
the shock. Output rises, while the investment rate (I/K) and employment fall
monotonically along the transition path. Productivity growth – both labor
and total-factor productivity – is highest at the onset of the shock, when the
newer, more productive capital is small relative to the existing stock of old
capital. Consequently, the growth rates of both labor and total-factor produc-
tivity fall monotonically over time. In percentage terms, the productivity gains
associated with the new investment fall as the existing capital stock embodies
a larger fraction of new capital relative to old capital.
   The transition dynamics associated with an increase in the idiosyncratic
variance diﬀer dramatically from those associated with an increase in the mean
level of embodied technology. While the main transition dynamics of an in-
crease in θ occur in the ﬁrst ﬁve years after the shock, an increase in σ produces
a transition dynamic whose peak eﬀect occurs ten to ﬁfteen years after the ini-
tial innovation. In the long run, an increase in variance raises output, labor
productivity, and real wages, and causes an increase in aggregate investment.
In the short run, an increase in σ has little eﬀect on output, employment, or
investment. Over time, output and employment rise, with employment peak-
ing nearly ten years after the shock. The investment rate (I/K) peaks even
later. Although total-factor productivity growth is highest at the onset of the
shock, the growth rate of labor productivity rises for ten years. Overall, the
increase in the variance of idiosyncratic returns produces a medium-run boom
in labor hours, investment, and labor-productivity growth.17
    An increase in the variance of project outcomes yields a substantial delay
  17
    While Gilchrist and Williams (2000) document the fact that the putty-clay model with
low sigma produces a hump-shaped response of labor hours to permanent increases in the
mean level of embodied technology, neither the standard real business-cycle model nor the
putty-clay model produces a hump-shaped response of labor productivity growth to perma-
nent increases in either embodied or disembodied technology.



                                           22
                            Figure 4: Investment Dynamics

                         Increase in Mean                             Increase in Variance




                                                          1.0
                        Investment Rate (I/K)
    2.0
    1.5




                                                          0.6
    1.0




                                                          0.2
    0.5




                                                          -0.2
    0.0




                   10                     20                     10               20




                                                          8
    3




                        Investment per Machine (k)


                                                          6
                        Number of Machines (Q)

                                                          4
    2




                                                          2
                                                          0
    1




                                                          -2
    0




                                                          -6
    -1




                   10                     20                     10               20



Notes: See Figure 3.

in the investment response and productivity gains. This delay occurs for two
reasons. First, the productivity gains associated with an increase in variance
depend on the extent of reallocation. As discussed above, the extent of real-
location is tied to the real wage. Prior to the increase, the current real wage
reﬂects the existing capital stock whose distribution is determined by the ini-
tially low level of σ. At the onset of the shock, new investment is small relative
to existing capital, and the increase in variance has very little impact on the
real wage. Because wages are low relative to the new steady state, utilization
rates on new machines are relatively high, and there is very little reallocation of
labor within the new vintages. Over time, as the existing capital stock reﬂects
the higher level of σ, real wages rise and the economy experiences a higher rate
of machine shutdown and reallocation. Because reallocation beneﬁts are slow
to arrive, there is little incentive to increase aggregate investment in the short
run. The pace of investment reﬂects the beneﬁts to reallocation. As a result,


                                                     23
the economy displays strong co-movement among the investment-output ratio,
labor hours, and labor productivity growth.
   The second reason for the delay is that an increase in the variance of project
outcomes for new machines extends the eﬀective life of existing capital and
slows down the rate at which new machines are introduced to the economy. An
increase in variance implies a lower level of capital intensity for new machines
relative to old machines. As ﬁgure 4 shows, capital intensity of new machines
falls immediately to near its new long-run steady-state value. The drop in
machine intensity is oﬀset by a surge in investment at the extensive margin,
resulting in a relatively stable investment-to-output ratio. However, existing
machines are more capital intensive than is optimal relative to the new steady
state. The relatively high capital intensity of old machines implies a higher
mean eﬃciency level for old machines relative to new machines and a lower
probability of shutdown for existing capital than would have occurred with
no change in variance. As the scrappage rate of existing machines falls, the
economy has less incentive to invest in new machines in the short-run. Over
time, old machines are eventually scrapped, and investment picks up.


5    Conclusion
In this paper, we investigate the macroeconomic consequences of changes in
idiosyncratic uncertainty of project returns in a putty-clay model of capital
accumulation. The model that we develop provides a set of microeconomic
foundations for the analysis of investment under uncertainty, capacity utiliza-
tion, and machine retirement in a general equilibrium framework. Aggregation
over heterogeneous capital goods results in a well-deﬁned aggregate production
function that preserves the putty-clay microeconomic structure. The aggregate
production function takes an intermediate form between that of Cobb-Douglas
and that of Leontief, depending on the degree of idiosyncratic uncertainty.
   In this environment, an increase in idiosyncratic uncertainty reduces in-
vestment at the project level but raises aggregate labor productivity and in-
vestment. Relative to an increase in the mean level of technology, an increase
in idiosyncratic variance also has important implications for transition dynam-
ics. In the putty-clay model, an increase in variance results in a pronounced


                                       24
expansion in output, hours and investment, whose combined eﬀect produces
a sustained increase in trend labor productivity growth over a ten-to-ﬁfteen
year period.
   The long-lasting expansion following an increase in variance is a result of
two opposing forces – a decrease in the desired capital-to-labor ratio at the
machine level and an increase in the desired number of machines in the aggre-
gate. Because existing machines have high capital-to-labor ratios relative to
new machines, the rate of economic depreciation on existing machines falls and
the overall rate of investment is diminished relative to an expansion triggered
by an increase in mean productivity. More generally, the putty-clay model
implies that expansionary forces that reduce desired capital-to-labor ratios at
the machine level have long lasting transition dynamics. In the putty-clay
model, the desired capital-to-labor ratio at the machine level is a decreasing
function of the rate of technological change. We therefore expect that tran-
sition dynamics to a new steady-state growth rate are much slower in the
putty-clay model relative to the more standard putty-putty alternative. By
the same logic, our results also suggest that permanent reductions in labor
income taxes imply substantially slower dynamic adjustment in the putty-clay
model. We leave a full exploration of these issues to future research.




                                      25
References
Abel, Andrew, “Optimal Investment under Uncertainty,” American Eco-
   nomic Review, 1983, 73, 228–33.

Atkeson, Andrew and Patrick J. Kehoe, “Models of Energy Use: Putty-
   Putty Versus Putty-Clay,” American Economic Review, September 1999,
    pp. 1028–1043.

Bagnoli, M. and T. Bergstom, “Log-concave probability and its applica-
    tions,” 1989. University of Michigan mimeo.

Bernanke, Ben, “Irreversibility, Uncertainty, and Cyclical Investment,”
    Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1983, 98, 85–106.

Boucekkine, Raouf, Marc Germain, and Omar Licandro, “Replace-
    ment Echoes in the Vintage Capital Growth Model,” Journal of Economic
    Theory, 1997, 74, 333–48.

Campbell, Jeﬀrey R., “Entry, Exit, Embodied Technology, and Business
   Cycles,” Review of Economic Dynamics, April 1998, 1, 371–408.

    and Jonas D. M. Fisher, “Idiosyncratic Risk and Aggregtae Employ-
    ment Dynamics,” September 2000. mimeo, University of Chicago.

Campbell, John Y., Martin Lettau, Burton G. Malkiel, and Yexiao
    Xu, “Have Individual Stocks Become More Volatile? An Empirical Ex-
    ploration of Idiosyncratic Risk,” Journal of Finance, February 2001, 56
    (1), 1–43.

Cooley, Thomas F., Gary D. Hansen, and Edward C. Prescott, “Equi-
    librium Business Cycles with Idle Resources and Variable Capacity Uti-
    lization,” Economic Theory, 1995, 6, 35–49.

Gilchrist, Simon and John C. Williams, “Putty-Clay and Investment: A
    Business Cycle Analysis,” Journal of Political Economy, October 2000,
    108 (5), 928–960.




                                    26
     and     , “Transition Dynamics in Vintage Capital Models: Explaining
    the Postwar Catch-up of Germany and Japan,” February 2001. Finance
    and Economics Discusion Series, paper 2001-7, Board of Governors of the
    Federal Reserve System.

Goyal, Amit and Pedro Santa-Clara, “Idiosyncratic Risk Matters!,” Jour-
   nal of Finance, June 2003, 58 (3), 975–1007.

Hartman, Richard, “The Eﬀects of Price and Cost Uncertainty on Invest-
   ment,” Journal of Economic Theory, 1972, 5, 285–266.

Houthakker, H.S., “The Pareto Distribution and the Cobb-Douglas Produc-
    tion Function in Activity Analysis,” Review of Economic Studies, 1953,
    60, 27–31.

Johansen, Leif, “Substitution versus Fixed Production Coeﬃcients in the
    Theory of Economic Growth: A Synthesis,” Econometrica, April 1959,
    27, 157–176.

Johnson, Norman L., Samuel Kotz, and N. Balakrishnan, Continuous
    Univariate Distributions, Volume 1, Second Edition, New York: John
    Wiley & Sons, 1994.

Leahy, John V. and Toni M. Whited, “The Eﬀect of Uncertainty on In-
    vestment: Some Stylized Facts,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking,
    1996, 29, 64–83.

Pindyck, Robert S., “Irreversible Investment, Capacity Choice, and the
    Value of the Firm,” American Economic Review, 1988, 78, 969–985.

    , “Irreversibility, Uncertainty, and Investment,” Journal of Economic Lit-
    erature, 1991, 29, 1110–1148.

Solow, Robert M., “Investment and Technological Progess,” in Kennetth J.
    Arrow, Amuel Karlin, and Patrick Suppes, eds., Mathematical methods in
    the social sciences 1959, Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 1960.

Wei, Chao, “Energy, the Stock Market, and the Putty-clay Investment
    Model,” American Economic Review, March 2003, 93 (1), 311–323.


                                     27
Appendix
Results regarding the hazard rate of the standard normal
distribution:
In the following, let h(x) denote the hazard rate for the standard normal
distribution, h(x) ≡ φ(x)/(1 − Φ(x)). From the deﬁnition of the hazard rate,
we know h(x) = E(y|y > x), y ∼ N (0, 1), which implies that h(x) > 0 and
h(x) > x, for all x.

Result 1: h(x) is monotonically increasing in x, with limx→−∞ h (x) = 0 and
limx→+∞ h (x) = 1.
Proof:       Taking the derivative of h(x), we have h (x) = h(x)(h(x) − x) > 0,
where the inequality follows directly from the deﬁnition of the hazard rate of
the standard normal. To establish the lower limit of h (x), ﬁrst note that
limx→−∞ h(x) = 0. Then, limx→−∞ h (x) = − limx→−∞ xh(x) = − limx→−∞ xφ(x) =
0, where the ﬁnal equality results from applying l’Hopital’s rule. To establish
the upper limit, note that application of l’Hopital’s rule yields limx→+∞ h (x) =
limx→+∞ h(x)/x. Applying l’Hopital’s rule yields limx→+∞ h(x)   x
                                                                    = limx→+∞ (1+
1
x2
   )   = 1, which establishes the result.

Result 2: h(x) is log-concave, that is, ln(h(x)) is strictly concave in x.18
                                                                                    h (x)
Proof:     To prove log-concavity, we need to show that ∂ ln(h(x))
                                                            ∂x
                                                                   =                h(x)
                                                                                             is
                                                      
decreasing in x, which is true if h (x) < 1. Consider h (x)

                      h (x) = h(x)[(h(x) − x)2 + (h (x) − 1)]

which is strictly positive if h (x) ≥ 1. Suppose h (x∗ ) ≥ 1 for some x∗ . Then,
h (x) is increasing at x∗ , implying h (x) > 1 and h (x) > 0 for all x > x∗ , a
result which contradicts limx→+∞ h (x) = 1, established in Result 1. Alterna-
tively, it is straightforward to show that for the standard normal distribution
Var(y|y > x) = 1 − h (x), which implies h (x) < 1 for all x.

Result 3: h(x) is strictly convex in x.
Proof: Let g(x) = [(h(x) − x)2 + (h (x) − 1)]; then, h (x) > 0 iﬀ g(x) >
0. Given the limiting results established above, it is straightforward to obtain
  18
    Bagnoli and Bergstom (1989) provide some results on properties of log-concave distri-
bution functions, including a proof that the reliability function 1 − Φ(x) is log-concave. We
require, however, that the hazard rate itself be log-concave.


                                             28
limx→−∞ g(x) = ∞ and limz→+∞ g(x) = 0. Now, consider g  (x)

                     g  (x) = 2(h(x) − x)(h (x) − 1) + h(x)g(x)

which is strictly negative if g(x) ≤ 0. Suppose g(x∗ ) ≤ 0 for some x∗ , implying
that g  (x∗ ) < 0. This then implies that g(x) < 0 and g  (x) < 0 for all x > x∗ ,
a result which contradicts limx→+∞ g(x) = 0.
                                                h(x−c)
Result 4: For a given constant c > 0,             h(x)
                                                         is monotonically increasing in
x with limx→−∞ h(x−c)
                h(x)
                      = 0 and limx→+∞           h(x−c)
                                                 h(x)
                                                         = 1.
Proof:        To prove that h(x − c)/h(x) is monotonically increasing in x, we
compute
         ∂(h(x − c)/h(x))   h(x − c)
                          =          h(x − c) − (x − c) − (h(x) − x) .
               ∂x             h(x)
which is positive if the term in brackets is positive. We therefore need to show
that h(y) − y > h(x) − x for y < x which is true if h (x) < 1, that is, if h(x)
is log-concave, which is proven in Result 2 above. To show the lower limit,
                                 2   1−Φ(x)
we note that h(x−c)
               h(x)
                    = e(2xc−c )/2 1−Φ(x−c)   and take limits. To establish the
upper limit, we use the mean value theorem to obtain h(x) = h(x − c) + ch (x∗ )
for x − c < x∗ < x. We then use x∗ < x and h (x) > 0 to obtain the bounds
                    (x)                                (x)
1 > h(x−c)
      h(x)
           > 1 − hh(x)   c. Result 1 implies limx→+∞ hh(x)   = 0, which establishes
the result.

Result 5:        For a given constant c > 0, c (h(x − c) − (x − c)) (h(x) − x) >
h(x − c) − h(x) + c.
Proof:     Let

                    f (x) = c[ω(x − c)ω(x)] + [ω(x) − ω(x − c)],

where ω(x) = h(x) − x > 0. Taking limits we obtain limx→−∞ ω(x) = ∞,
limx→+∞ ω(x) = 0, implying limx→−∞ f (x) = ∞ and limx→+∞ f (x) = 0. Tak-
ing derivatives, we have ω  (x) = h (x) − 1 < 0 and ω  (x) = h (x) > 0. Since
ω(x) is decreasing and strictly convex in z, we have ω  (x) < ω  (x − c) and

      f  (x) = c[ω  (x − c)ω(x) + ω(x − c)ω  (x)] + [ω  (x) − ω  (x − c)] < 0.

Given that limx→−∞ f (x) = ∞ and limx→+∞ f (x) = 0, f  (x) < 0 implies
f (x) > 0 for all x.

                                           29
Proof of proposition 1: Result 4 implies that for any given σ > 0, h(z −
σ)/h(z) is monotonically increasing with limz→−∞ h(z−σ)
                                                     h(z)
                                                          = 0 and limz→+∞           h(z−σ)
                                                                                     h(z)
                                                                                             =
1. Hence, there is a single value of z that satisﬁes equation 18.
                                      ∂ ln y
Proof of proposition 2: Let η = ∂ ln(1/w)    = h(z−σ)
                                                  σ
                                                      denote the elasticity
of supply. From Result 1, we know that h(z) is log-concave which implies
h(z−σ)−(z−σ) > h(z)−z and h (z − σ) < 1 . Using h (z) = h(z)(h(z)−z),
and taking partial derivatives, we have: ∂ ∂η
                                           ln y
                                                = − h(z−σ)−(z−σ)
                                                         σ
                                                                 < 0 and
  ∂2η          (h (z−σ)−1)
∂(ln y)2
           =     σh(z−σ)
                              < 0 implying that the slope of the supply curve, η −1 , is
increasing and convex in ln(y). To show η −1 is decreasing in σ, we note
that in equilibrium η = (1−α)h(z)
                            σ
                                  . Taking derivatives, we obtain

                                      dη    h (z) dz  1
                                         =(           − )η
                                      dσ    h(z) dσ σ
                                                 dz   h(z−σ)−(z−σ)
and totally diﬀerentiating equation 18 we obtain dσ = h(z−σ)−h(z)+σ > 1 where
the inequality again follows from log-concavity of h(z) . Combining these
expressions we have
                                                                    
                      dη   (h(z − σ) − (z − σ)) (h(z) − z) 1
                         =                                −   η.
                      dσ        h(z − σ) − h(z) + σ         σ
Result 5 relies on convexity of h(z) to show that the term in brackets is strictly
                                                  dη
positive for any σ > 0 . This establishes that dσ    > 0 , and the slope of the
supply curve is strictly decreasing in σ at the steady-state equilibrium. To
establish the lower bound for the slope of the supply curve, in equilibrium, we
note that h(z − σ) = (1 − α)h(z) and h(z − σ) − (z − σ) > h(z) − z implies
αh(z) < σ and therefore η = (1−α)h(z)
                                 σ
                                      < 1−α
                                         α
                                            .

Proof of proposition 4: Equation 18 deﬁnes z as an implicit function of σ
     dz
with dσ > 1 following immediately from the increasing hazard property of the
standard normal distribution (see the proof of proposition 3). Diﬀerentiating
the capital-labor ratio k with respect to σ, and using equation 18 we obtain
d ln k
 dσ
     = −h(z)( dσ
              dz
                 − 1) < 0. Because steady-state labor is independent of σ,
the ﬂow of new machines is proportional to the inverse of the capital utiliza-
tion rate. Thus, an increase in σ leads to a fall in the steady-state capital
utilization rate proportional to the increase in the number of new machines:

                                               30
d ln q                             ln k       ln q
 dσ
            dz
     = h(z) dσ > 0 . Combining ddσ      with ddσ   , we obtain the result that in-
                               d ln(kq)
vestment kq is increasing in σ: dσ = h(z) > 0. Equations 11 and 14 imply
that output is linear in investment: y = 1−β(1−δ)
                                            αβ
                                                              ln y
                                                  kq so that ddσ   = h(z) > 0.
Thus, output and investment rise by the identical h(z) percent in response to
a unit increase in σ, and the investment share of output is invariant to the
degree of idiosyncratic uncertainty. Finally the result that, at the equilibrium,
                                        1
the selasiticity σh(z) <                α
                                             is established in the proof of proposition 2.


The Economy with Growth

Proof of proposition 3: Let Ψ(z) ≡ M            j                      h(z(j)−σ)
                                          j=1 β̃ (1−δj )(1−Φ(z(j)−σ)) h(z(j)) ,
                                                    Ψ(z)
and Γ(z) ≡ Mj=1 β̃ (1 − δj )(1 − Φ(z(j) − σ)). Then Γ(z) =
                  j                                          M          h(z(j)−σ)
                                                             j=1 v(z(j)) h(z(j))
and the balanced growth equilibrium condition may be written

                                                                     Ψ(z)
                                                     (1 − α) =            .
                                                                     Γ(z)

Following the proof of result 2, it is straightforward to show that limz→−∞ Ψ(z)
                                                                            Γ(z)
                                                                                 =
                Ψ(z)                                 Ψ(z)
0 and limz→+∞ Γ(z) = 1. Thus, by continuity of Γ(z) , there exists at least one
value of z that satisﬁes the equilibrium condition.
    To prove that log-concavity of Γ(z) implies uniqueness of the equilibrium
                       2
we show that ∂ ln Γ(z)
                ∂z 2
                       < 0 implies Ψ(z)
                                   Γ(z)
                                        is monotonically increasing in z. Tak-
ing derivatives and using the facts that Ψ (z) = σΨ(z) + Γ (z) and Γ (x) =
−        M
         i=1   β̃ j (1 − δj )φ(z(j) − σ), we obtain
                                                                             
                               ∂ Ψ(z)
                                 Γ(z)      Ψ(z)      Ψ(z)                          ∂ ln Γ(z)
                                        =σ      + 1−                                         .
                                ∂z         Γ(z)      Γ(z)                             ∂z

Taking second derivatives we obtain
                                                                                     
                    ∂ 2 Ψ(z)
                        Γ(z)        Γ (z)                ∂ Ψ(z)
                                                            Γ(z)   Ψ(z)                     ∂ 2 ln Γ(z)
                               = σ−                           + 1−
                     ∂z 2           Γ(z)                   ∂z      Γ(z)                         ∂z 2
     ∂ 2 ln Γ(z)
If       ∂z 2
                   < 0 then the second term in this expression is negative. Given
                                                                              Ψ(z)
                                            Γ (z)                           ∂ Γ(z)
Γ (x) < 0 we have σ −                      Γ(z)
                                                     > 0, so that             ∂z
                                                                                      < 0 implies that the ﬁrst
                                                               Ψ(z ∗ )
                                                             ∂ Γ(z∗ )
term is also negative. Now suppose                              ∂z
                                                                         < 0 for some z ∗ . Then we have


                                                             31
   Ψ(z ∗ )
∂ 2 Γ(z∗ )                                   ∗

  ∂z 2
        < 0, implying that 0 < Ψ(z        )
                                    Γ(z ∗ )
                                            < 1 and Ψ(z)
                                                    Γ(z)
                                                         is strictly decreasing on
  ∗                                            Ψ(z)
(z , ∞) , a result that contradicts limz→+∞ Γ(z) = 1.

     Uniqueness of equilibrium depends on log-concavity of Γ(z). In the remain-
der of this section of the appendix, we provide some analysis of the conditions
needed to guarantee the log-concavity of Γ(z) ≡ M  j=1 β̃ (1 − δj )(1 − Φ(z(j) −
                                                         j

σ)). We also consider what set of parameter values may lead to multiple
equilibria.
   To begin, consider the function Γ (z)Γ(z) − Γ (z)2 which, if negative,
guarantees log-concavity of Γ(z) and hence uniqueness of the equilibrium. We
know that the reliability function (1 − Φ(x)) is log-concave and Γ(z) is the
weighted sum of such functions, which, while not suﬃcient to guarantee log-
concavity, suggests that it may be diﬃcult to produce circumstances under
which it does not obtain. Let ωj = β̃ j (1 − δj ) and zj = z(j) − σ. After some
manipulation we obtain


                                       
                                       M 
                                         M
             Γ (z)Γ(z) − Γ (z)2 =             ωj ωk φ(zj )[(zj )(1 − Φ(zk ) − φ(zk )]
                                       j=1 k=1
                                                                               
                                       
                                       M 
                                         M
                                                                zj
                                  =         ωj ωk φ(zj )φ(zk )        −1
                                    j=1 k=1                    h(zk )
                                                                               
                                       
                                       M 
                                         M
                                                                zk
                                  =         ωj ωk φ(zj )φ(zk )        −1
                                    j=1 k=1                    h(zk )
                                                                              
                                         
                                         M 
                                           M
                                                                    zj − zk
                                       +         ωj ωk φ(zj )φ(zk )         .
                                         j=1 k=1                     h(zk )

The ﬁrst term in this expression is clearly negative. The second term may
be positive if for some j, k we have large productivity diﬀerentials between
vintages j and k.
   Because zj is linearly increasing in machine age, a large productivity diﬀer-
ential is likely to occur when vintage j is substantially older and less produc-
tive than vintage k. In this case, however, the contribution of this term to the
sum is relatively small owing to discounting, both explicitly through the term
β̃ j (1 − δj ) and implicitly through a low value of φ(zj ). Furthermore, for any
positive term (zj − zk )/h(zk ) > 0 there is an equally weighted negative term
(zk − zj )/h(zj ) < 0. This suggests that only under extreme parameterizations

                                                 32
can we have large productivity diﬀerentials that yield positive values of any
magnitude for
                                                                        
                                      (zj − zk ) (zk − zj )
                   ωj ωk φ(zj )φ(zk )           +           ,
                                        h(zk )     h(zj )

the weighted sum of these components. In turn, these positive values must be
large enough to oﬀset the negative sum in the ﬁrst component of Γ (z)Γ(z) −
Γ (z)2 .
   Note that log-concavity of Γ(z) is a suﬃcient, not necessary, condition for
a unique steady-state value of z. Indeed, it is not necessary that Ψ(z)/Γ(z) be
monotonically increasing, as long as it crosses (1 − α) only once. Numerical
experiments suggest that multiple equilibria only occur when both the trend
productivity growth rate is exorbitantly high, so that productivity diﬀerentials
across vintages are large, and when discounting through the real interest rate
and depreciation is very low. For example, we obtain multiple equilibria in
the model when σ = 0.1, δj = 0, j = 1, . . . , M , γ = 0.1, g = 0.6 (60 percent
per annum), and β = 0.999. These parameter values imply that z2 − z1 >
5. Relatively small adjustments in parameter values result in the number of
equilibria collapsing to one. We have found no evidence of multiple equilibria
using more conventional parameterizations that would typically characterize
the capital accumulation process in a general equilibrium model calibrated
based on empirical moments of industrialized economies.

The Solow Vintage Model
By relaxing the restriction that ex post capital-labor ratios are ﬁxed, the model
described above collapses to the putty-putty vintage capital model initially
introduced by Solow (1960), modiﬁed to allow for time-varying idiosyncratic
uncertainty. For the Solow vintage model, deﬁne the capital aggregator, Kt ,
by
                           M 
                                         (1−α)σ 2    1/α
                                                t−j
                    Kt ≡         θt−j e      2α              (1 − δj )It−j ,   (29)
                           j=1

where It denotes gross aggregate capital investment in period t. The two terms
that multiply investment ﬂows measure the level of embodied technology at
the time of installation of the capital good, θ, and the scale correction that


                                              33
results from aggregating across machines with diﬀering levels of idiosyncratic
productivity, subject to the marginal product of labor being equal across all
machines. Aggregate production in period t is given by

                                Yt = Ktα L1−α
                                          t   .                          (30)

If we assume that δj = 1 − (1 − δ)j−1 and M = ∞, we obtain the following
capital accumulation equation:
                                                   2
                                             (1−α)σt−1   1/α
                 Kt = (1 − δ)Kt−1 + θt−1 e      2α             It−1 .

Note that in this economy with putty-putty capital, a mean-preserving spread
to idiosyncratic productivity is equivalent to an increase in embodied produc-
tivity at the aggregate level. Both of these factors enter the model through
the capital accumulation equation and are equivalent to a reduction in the
economic cost of new capital goods.




                                      34
