                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         ACCESS TO CARE, PROVIDER CHOICE AND
                        RACIAL DISPARITIES IN INFANT MORTALITY

                                              Anna Aizer
                                         Adriana Lleras-Muney
                                             Mark Stabile

                                         Working Paper 10445
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w10445


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       April 2004




Corresponding authors: alleras@princeton.edu, Anna_Aizer@brown.edu. We would like to thank Sherry
Glied, David Cutler and the participants of the lunch seminar at Princeton, the NBER Health Care Meetings,
Harris School at the University of Chicago and McGill University for their comments and suggestions. We
are also very grateful to Janet Currie for providing us with the vital statistics data and Mark Duggan for
providing access to his data and answering many of our questions regarding California’s DSH program.
Adriana Lleras-Muney received financial support from the National Institute on Aging, Grant Number K12-
AG00983 to the National Bureau of Economic Research.The views expressed herein are those of the author(s)
and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2004 by Anna Aizer, Adriana Lleras-Muney, and Mark Stabile. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Access to Care, Provider Choice and Racial Disparities in Infant Mortality
Anna Aizer, Adriana Lleras-Muney, and Mark Stabile
NBER Working Paper No. 10445
April 2004
JEL No. I12, I18
                                        ABSTRACT

This paper explores whether choice of provider explains any of the observed infant health gradients,

and if so, why poor women choose different providers than their richer neighbors. We exploit an

exogenous change in policy that occurred in California in the early 1990s that suddenly increased

Medicaid payments to hospitals and which lead to a sharp change in where women with Medicaid

delivered. To characterize the extent to which poor women responded to the increase in provider

access, we calculate hospital segregation indices (which measure the extent to which Medicaid

mothers delivered in separate hospitals than privately insured mothers residing in the same

geographic area) both before and after the policy change for each market in California and show that

it fell sharply after the policy change. Even though black mothers responded least to the increase

in provider choice afforded by the policy change, they benefited the most from hospital

desegregation in terms of reduced neonatal mortality and decreased incidence of very low birth

weight. In contrast, other groups with lower initial neonatal mortality moved more and gained less

in terms of improvements in birth outcomes.

Anna Aizer                       Adriana Lleras-Muney              Mark Stabile
Department of Economics          Department of Economics           Department of Economics
Brown University                 Princeton University              University of Toronto
64 Waterman Street               320 Wallace Hall                  150 St. George Street
Box B                            Princeton, NJ 08544               Toronto, ON
Providence, RI 02912             and NBER                          M5S 3G7
anna_aizer@brown.edu             alleras@princeton.edu             and NBER
                                                                   mark.stabile@utoronto.ca
                                          I. Introduction
Children born to poor parents in the US are more than twice as likely to die within the

first year as those born to higher income parents (Gortmaker and Wise, 1997). It has long

been hypothesized that these differences are due, in part, to unequal access to care faced

by the poor. Although previous research has shown that efforts to improve financial

access to care for low-income pregnant women has resulted in significant declines in

infant mortality among the poor (Butler and Scotch, 1978; Currie and Gruber, 1996),

income gradients in health remain large: for example in 1990 neonatal mortality rates for

Medicaid mothers were 33% larger for privately insured mothers.1 Despite these efforts,

the poor still largely seek care in separate facilities than their privately insured

counterparts. For example, in California in 1990, women with Medicaid were 37 percent

more likely to deliver in public hospitals relative to their privately insured neighbors.

This could explain differences in outcomes if there are large differences across hospitals

in the quality of care. Hospital quality, however, is very difficult to measure (McClellan

and Staiger, 1999).

        In this paper we explore whether choice of provider explains any of the infant

health gradients that we observe and if so, why poor women choose different providers

than their privately insured counterparts.2 With respect to the second question, there are

two possible (though not mutually exclusive) explanations. Medicaid may pay less than

market price and there is some existing evidence to support this (Yudlowski, 1990). As

such, women with Medicaid may be constrained in their choice of provider. It may also

be that even without such a constraint, poor women still choose alternative (and lower

1
 See Table I.
2
 Along similar lines, Chandra and Skinner (2003) have shown that blacks utilize lower quality hospitals,
and suggest they do so due to their geographic proximity to such hospitals.


                                                    2
quality) providers, which would suggest a potential market failure. Whether and to what

extent each of these can explain differences in the choice of provider has important (and

different) policy implications for improving the health of the poor.

        To answer these questions we exploit an exogenous change in policy that

occurred in California in the early 1990s that suddenly increased Medicaid payments to

hospitals and which lead to a sharp change in where women on Medicaid delivered.3 We

focus on pregnant women because they constitute a large fraction of the Medicaid

population, they have adequate time to choose a hospital for delivery and because there is

evidence that access to high quality hospital care can affect neonatal mortality (Cutler

and Meara, 1999).

        In order to characterize the extent to which poor women responded to the increase

in provider access, we calculate hospital segregation indices both before and after the

policy change for each county in California. The hospital segregation index is a measure

of the extent to which women with Medicaid delivered in separate hospitals from women

with private insurance residing in the same geographic area. We then look at whether

greater rates of hospital desegregation resulted in improved health outcomes, measured

by neonatal mortality and birth weight. Our approach is based on the idea that gradients

in health cannot be attributed to differences in health care access if there are no

differences across income in hospital choice. Rather than attempt to measure differences

in the quality of the hospitals mothers choose, we look to see whether a more equal

distribution of hospital choice lowers health inequities.




3
 See Duggan, 2000 and Duggan, 2002 for thorough explanation and analysis of this policy change in terms
of its impact on the ownership type of hospitals in which Medicaid patients were seen.


                                                  3
        We also examine whether within the Medicaid population there were differences

in the rate at which specific subgroups of pregnant women switched hospitals. The

decision to go a different hospital depends on the costs and benefits associated with the

change. There is evidence that suggests that even among the poor these costs and benefits

might differ significantly. Hispanics tend to have slightly better birth outcomes compared

with the general population of Medicaid mothers, while the less educated and particularly

blacks have worse birth outcomes.4 Thus black and low educated mothers may benefit

more from accessing higher quality hospitals. We also hypothesize that more educated

mothers may be better informed both about the newly available hospitals and about their

quality (or perhaps about the importance of having access to quality care); and thereby

may respond at higher rates.5

        We find that among those with Medicaid, black mothers responded least to the

increase in provider choice afforded by the policy change. This does not appear related

to residential isolation. Interestingly, black mothers benefited the most from hospital

desegregation in terms of reduced neonatal mortality and decreased incidence of very low

birth weight. The neonatal mortality rate for black mothers with Medicaid coverage

declined from 8.6 to 7.8 per thousand over this period. Our estimates suggest that most

(92 percent) of this decline can be attributed to increased access to care. In contrast,

other groups with lower initial neonatal mortality moved more and gained less in terms of




4
  In 1990, the rate of neonatal mortality in California was 4.1 per 1000 births. For blacks, the figure was
more than twice as great (8.6) – which is considerably higher than other low SES groups. For single
mothers the rate was 5 per 1000, for high school drop-outs it was 4.6 per 1000 and for Hispanics it was 4
per 1000 for the same period.
5
  Babies of more educated mothers (in the population) have better health outcomes (e.g. Currie and Moretti
2003). Better access to information and differential use of information have been shown to be predict
infants’ health (Meara, 2001)


                                                     4
improvements in birth outcomes. We do not find any evidence that more educated

mothers were more responsive than the average Medicaid mother.

       This paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the data. In section 3 we

describe the policy changes that took place in California in 1991 in further detail. We

then look at changes in hospital choice among Medicaid mothers, and for different socio-

economic groups within Medicaid in section 4. We then analyze the impact of these

hospitals choices on neonatal mortality (Section 5) and present a series of specification

checks (Section 6). We discuss the results in Section 7 and Section 8 concludes.


                                          II. Data

       We use California Birth certificate data matched to death certificate data from

1989 through 1995. These data contain individual level records of all the births that

occurred in California as well as information about the parents. The former includes

infant characteristics (gestational age, birth weight, fetal death, infant mortality by cause

and age of death). The latter includes mother’s age, education, race, marital status, type

of insurance coverage, zip code of residence, previous number of live births, and prenatal

care (when initiated and number of visits). The hospital of delivery and its location are

also recorded.

       We restrict our sample to mothers that had either Medicaid or private insurance

(eliminating the small proportion of mothers whose primary source of insurance was

listed as Medicare, Worker’s Compensation, etc. as they are an unrepresentative group of

mothers). We drop Medicaid mothers with more than a college degree: they too are likely

a very select and unrepresentative group. We also drop teenage moms as teen birth rates

are changing over this period for reasons independent of DSH. Finally, we restrict our


                                              5
attention to urban areas, excluding roughly ten percent of the sample residing in very

rural areas.6 Our results are not sensitive to these sample restrictions. Because we focus

on changes at the county level, we collapse all the individual births into cells defined by

county, year of birth, maternal race, education, age, marital status, whether foreign-born

and Medicaid status.

         Descriptive statistics are in Tables I.a and I.b. They indicate that neonatal

mortality fell during this period, and it did so more for mothers on Medicaid than others.

They also show that during this period some characteristics of mothers changed: the share

of mothers on Medicaid, the share Hispanic and the share foreign born rose quite

substantially. We discuss our methods to control for these changes in the underlying

population of women with Medicaid in the analyses in later sections.

         In table I.b we document that in 1990, there were large differences in health

outcomes among Medicaid mothers: all outcomes are worse for children of black

mothers, followed by high school dropouts, whites and then Hispanics.


           III. California’s Disproportionate Share (DSH) Program

         In the 1980s the Federal government passed legislation that allowed the states to

compensate hospitals that served a disproportionate share of disadvantaged patients.7

Under DSH each state was to design and administer its own program, and the Federal

government would provide matching funds for DSH reimbursements. California’s DSH

program was created at the end of 1990 and it stipulated that hospitals whose Medicaid

(and indigent) related costs exceed 25% in the previous year would receive substantial


6
  Rural was defined as a zip code of which less than 25% of the population lived in an urban area as
determined by the 1990 Census.
7
  See Appendix A for details on the history and functioning of the DSH program.


                                                     6
per diem reimbursements. These reimbursements increased as a function of the number

of low income patients above 25%.8 Funds were first received by hospitals in the fiscal

year 1991-1992.

         Because of its generosity, the DSH program provided an incentive for many

private hospitals to drastically increase the number of Medicaid patients that they served

(Duggan 2000a). As a result, in a short period of time, there was a large re-distribution of

Medicaid patients from public to private hospitals. Figures 1a-c document this change:

from 1990 to 1995, the share of Medicaid patients going to public hospitals fell from

about 65% to 40%, whereas the share of Medicaid patients going to non-profit hospitals

rose from about 22% to more than 40%. This redistribution of patients across hospitals

was limited to those with Medicaid: the distribution of patients with private insurance

across hospitals stayed constant throughout the period.

         Prior to the implementation of DSH, Medicaid mothers were largely seen in

separate hospitals than the privately insured. Controlling for location (and thus

geographic access to hospitals) women with Medicaid in California were 37 percentage

points more likely to go to public hospitals than their privately insured neighbors (only

11% go to public hospitals).9 After the implementation of DSH, and corresponding with

the changes for the Medicaid population as a whole, the share of Medicaid births in

public hospitals fell between 1990 and 1995 with a corresponding increase in Medicaid

births in private hospitals (see figures 2a and 2b). Consistent with these trends, the



8
  Because funds distributed under DSH increased from 6 to 39% of total Medicaid funds between 1990 and
1992, and due to suspicions that funds were given to hospitals that did not primarily serve the Medicaid
population, in 1993 congress reformed DSH, imposing additional eligibility restrictions to contain costs.
9
  Using our sample of mothers, we estimated a linear regression of the probability of delivering in a public
hospital as a function of Medicaid status, controlling for zip code fixed effects. We report the coefficient on
the Medicaid dummy from this regression.


                                                      7
number of hospitals eligible to receive DSH payments increased over this period, from 13

percent in 1990 to 28 percent in 1994-1995.10 DSH accounted for 0.2 percent of total

Medicaid spending in 1990 and 19.3 percent by 1995.

         This suggests that the choice set of Medicaid patients prior to DSH was indeed

restricted due to Medicaid payment rates that were lower than market and as the price

paid by Medicaid increased, so did competition for these patients. We treat this payment

increase introduced by DSH as an exogenous increase in the hospital choice set of

Medicaid patients and especially expectant mothers. Expectant mothers are a particularly

interesting group to analyze the impact of expansions in access on hospital choice: they

have little uncertainty regarding their future health care needs and they have time to make

informed choices. Also, they are a large sample: Medicaid moms make up a large fraction

of Medicaid patients (46 percent of all Medicaid patients in California in 1990) and

Medicaid covers a large fraction of all expectant mothers (40 percent in California in

1990). Finally because Medicaid covers all birth-related expenses, income and direct

costs do not play an important role in determining hospital choice for this sample.



                                 IV. Trends in hospital choice
A. Measuring Hospital Segregation

     To characterize the change in the distribution of Medicaid deliveries over this period

within their market, we calculate a Tauber “segregation” index (Tauber and Tauber,

1965) which measures the extent to which Medicaid mothers deliver in separate hospitals

than those privately insured. In our sample 94 percent of mothers gave birth within their
10
  These are the percentages for hospitals in our hospital data, a sample of 339 hospitals for which the State
of California provided numbers (Mark Duggan generously gave us access to this information which he
obtained).


                                                      8
county. As such, we define a mother’s potential choice set as all providers in her county

of residence.11 For each county and year we create a Tauber Hospital Segregation

Index12 (HSI) as follows:

                                                     n
                                                           Mcaidi pvtpayi
                                     HSI= 1 / 2 * ∑              −
                                                    i =1   Mcaid   pvtpay

In the expression above, i indexes each hospital in the county. The first term is the

number of Medicaid deliveries in hospital i over the total number of Medicaid deliveries

in the county in a given year. The second term is similarly defined, but for privately

insured deliveries. The segregation index ranges from zero to one, with zero being un-

segregated, and one being totally segregated. Levels above 0.6 are considered high

(Massey and Denton 1993).

         The HSI captures the extent to which Medicaid and privately insured mothers

deliver in the same hospitals. In segregated counties, Medicaid mothers deliver in

different hospitals from the privately insured. In relatively un-segregated (or integrated)

counties, Medicaid and privately insured mothers are more likely to deliver in the same

hospitals. Intuitively, the HSI tells us the proportion of Medicaid (or privately insured)

mothers who would have to switch hospitals for the county to be un-segregated. The

index captures all of the information about the distribution of patients across hospitals

within a county, and, importantly, it is NOT a function of the share of Medicaid mothers




11
   More specifically, we find that half of all mothers deliver in a hospital within five miles of her zipcode of
residence and 85 percent of mothers deliver in a hospital within 16 miles of her zip code.
12
   This index is also known as the dissimilarity index. There are other measures of spatial segregation, such
as the index of centralization or isolation, but they do not seem appropriate in the context of the hospital
market.


                                                           9
in the county. If segregation were 0, then health gradients could not be attributed to

differential access to care.13

        The use of the segregation index to characterize the hospital choice set of mothers

in a given county is based on the revealed preferences argument: presumably if mothers

choose different hospitals after DSH it is because they prefer them along some

dimension. We assume throughout this paper that mothers choose the hospital where they

deliver (evidence based on patient surveys suggests that patients play a significant role in

choice of hospital either indirectly through the choice of physician or directly in

consultation with their physicians14). Therefore, the segregation index should decrease

more in areas where more and “better” hospitals began serving the Medicaid population

after the implementation of DSH. Recall from Figures 1b and 2b that there was almost no

change in the type of hospitals chosen by privately insured mothers over this period;

therefore we operate under the assumption, which we will test in section VI, that most of

the changes in segregation are due to the behavior of Medicaid mothers subsequent to the

implementation of the DSH policy.

        Because the extent to which a county is segregated in a given year might reflect

differences in the underlying characteristics of the Medicaid and privately insured

populations that vary across counties, we look at within county changes in hospital

segregation 1990-1995. We argue that changes over this brief period can be attributed to

DSH alone, not to any neighborhood sorting, and can therefore be taken as exogenous

when explaining changes in birth outcomes at the county level.


13
   Although the existence of hospital segregation does not per se imply that health gradients are due to
health care--this is a necessary but not sufficient condition.
14
   For example, work by Berkowitz and Flexnor (1981) states that roughly half of all individuals surveyed
reported that the choice of hospital was at least “a 50/50 collaborative effort” with their physician.


                                                    10
B. Trends in Hospital Desegregation: 1989 -1995

          Figure 3a shows the trends in hospital segregation throughout the period. Prior to

1991, hospital segregation was rising. But the level of hospital segregation declines from

.59 to .51 or 13.5 percent beginning in 1990-1991, coincident with the implementation of

DSH. This reflects the fact that pregnant women on Medicaid began delivering in

hospitals that previously served mainly privately insured women.

          There is considerable variation across counties in the extent to which hospital

segregation changed over this period. Most counties (63 percent) experienced a decrease

in segregation but segregation remained roughly the same or increased in others. The

largest decline occurred in Riverside County (about 35 percentage points) and the largest

increase occurred in Fresno. (See Appendix B for individual county trends in segregation

over this period). In section VI, we provide evidence that the extent to which counties

become desegregated over this period is not related to underlying characteristics of the

Medicaid population, but rather the existing structure of the hospital market and the fact

that some hospitals faced greater incentives under DSH to serve Medicaid patients than

others.

          We re-calculate the segregation index for three different subgroups: Hispanic

mothers, Black mothers and mothers without a high school degree.15 The trends for these

segregation indexes are in Figure 3b. Overall, it appears that Hispanic mothers and high

school drop outs experience the same decline in segregation as the general population of

Medicaid mothers (though the initial levels are higher). Black Medicaid mothers appear

15
  We hold constant the privately insured distribution (i.e. all the share pvtpayi/pvtpay is the same for all
indexes) and use the group specific distribution across hospitals (so instead of including all Medicaid
mothers in the segregation index, we include black Medicaid or Hispanic Medicaid).


                                                      11
to be the exception, experiencing much smaller declines in segregation relative to non-

black Medicaid mothers.

           In Tables II and III we examine these patterns more formally. In Table II we

present results of a non-parametric analysis of the trend in hospital segregation over this

period in which we regress hospital segregation on indicator variables for each year

1989-1995 (with 1991 omitted) as well as indicators for black, Hispanic and whether a

high school dropout and include county fixed effects.16 This enables us to test both

whether the trend appears to break in 1991, as well as whether the trend post 1991 is

linear in form. As is evident from the table, hospital segregation seems to be increasing

prior to 1991 (though the coefficient estimates are not significantly different from zero)

but after 1991 appears to be decreasing in a linear fashion. At the bottom of Table II we

provide f-statistics of tests of the break in trend which confirm that the break in trend did

occur in 1991, coincident with the launching of DSH. Furthermore there are no other

breaks in the trends in any other years. We cannot reject the assumption of a linear

downward trend post 1991 (f statistic 1.03, p-value 0.379).

           To more formally test whether some groups appear to have moved more or less

upon the implementation of DSH, we specify a linear trend post-1991 and interact the

trend with race and education indicators. This can be written as:


            HSI retc = β0 + β1 * t + β2 * post 91 + β3 * t * post 91
            + β4 * X r + β5 * t * X r + β6 * post 91 * X r + β7 * t * post 91 * X r + γ c + eretc


where the dependent variable is hospital segregation index for a given race r, educational

group e, year t and county c. We interact the time trend t, the post 91 dummy, post91,

16
     Thus each cell is a race, education, year, county group.


                                                        12
and the trend after 1991 (t*post91) with X, which stands for race and education dummies.

We include county fixed effects (γc). The three (mutually exclusive) race categories are

Black, Hispanic and non-Black/non-Hispanic.17 The two educational groups are HS drop-

outs and HS graduates. The results are in Table III. Prior to 1991 there does not appear to

be any significant trend in segregation (β1=0.00384 and imprecisely estimated) but after

1991, segregation begins to decline significantly (β3 = -0.0359). In addition it appears to

decline much more slowly for Blacks post-1991 (β7 = 0.0169), slightly more slowly for

Hispanics (β7 = 0.00263) and slightly faster for HS drop outs (β7 = -0.0029). However,

only the estimate for blacks is precisely estimated. Below the table we present the results

of tests of significance between the post-1991 trends for blacks vs. Hispanics and HS

drop outs. The coefficient for less than high school does not support the hypothesis that

more educated mothers would move at faster rates due to information advantages (if

anything it suggest the less educated mothers moved more). There does not appear to be

any significant effect for Hispanics.

           Only the post-1991 decline in hospital segregation for blacks is significantly less

steep than it is for other groups. While we might expect that as high risk patients, black

mothers would move more, prior research has found that even conditional on health

insurance coverage, blacks exhibit different patterns of care. For example, Currie and

Thomas (1995) find that black children do not receive as many doctor visits or check-ups

as other similarly insured children. Currie and Reagan (1998) find that the probability

that black children receive regular check-ups is more highly dependent on geographic

proximity to public providers than other groups with similar health insurance coverage.



17
     In California, there are very few Black mothers who report Hispanic ethnicity.


                                                       13
As such, the finding that they are less responsive to the increase in provider access

despite their risk profile is not necessarily surprising.




                  V. The effect of hospital desegregation on infant health


A. Preliminary Evidence

             The birth outcome we analyze is neonatal mortality (death within 28 days of

delivery, excluding fetal deaths18) because it better reflects the impact of the hospital of

delivery on birth outcomes than does infant mortality (all deaths within one year) or low

birth weight (LBW). To identify the impact of changes in access on improvements in

neonatal mortality, we examine how changes in hospital segregation affect rates of

neonatal mortality for different groups. If mothers moved to better hospitals then this

should be reflected in better outcomes. In counties where mothers did not move, i.e. in

which segregation did not decline, we do not expect to see any effect.

             On average, neonatal mortality improved over the period 1990-1995 although

there were differences in the rate of improvement across groups. The natural experiment

created by the policy change allows for a number of interesting comparisons. First we

can compare changes in birth outcomes for Medicaid mothers relative to the privately

insured. Then, we can compare birth outcomes for those with Medicaid in areas that

witnessed declines in segregation with those in areas with no decline/small increases in

segregation over this period.

             Overall, neonatal mortality declined more for Medicaid births relative to the

privately insured between 1990 and 1995 (Figure 4a). In addition, as is evident in figure
18
     We exclude fetal deaths because these are well-known to be underreported (CDC 1994)



                                                                14
4b, neonatal mortality among Medicaid births declined more in areas with decreases in

segregation than in areas with increases in segregation. But this comparison is subject to

the criticism that there may be other differences between counties that witnessed

decreases in segregation versus those that did not that might be behind the improvements

in birth outcomes. Thus as a second comparison, we can use privately insured deliveries

in the same counties as controls and compare the relative improvements in neonatal

mortality for Medicaid births versus privately insured births within the same county. We

expect the improvements of Medicaid relative to private to be greater in counties with

decreases in segregation and that is what we find. In Figure 4c we see that while the rate

of neonatal mortality fell by 8 per 10,000 for Medicaid, the rate fell by less (6 per 10,000)

for the privately insured in counties with declines in segregation. In figure 4d we present

the same rates but for counties with no change or a small increase in segregation. While

neonatal mortality fell for privately insured births at the same rate in these counties as

they did in counties with declines in segregation (6 per 10,000), the rate of decline for

Medicaid births was much lower – only 2 per 10,000.

       Thus the preliminary evidence suggests that hospital desegregation lowers income

health gradients. In the next section we present results from formal regression analyses

that allow more precise measures of changes in segregation while controlling for other

factors that may affect birth outcomes. In addition, because existing evidence suggests

that within the low-income population there exist important differences in the way

subgroups access care and our own evidence suggests that some groups were less

responsive to the increase in provider choice, we look more specifically at how




                                             15
desegregation affects subgroups of the Medicaid population defined by race and

education.


B. Regression Results

         Our initial estimates of the impact of hospital desegregation on health outcomes

are difference-in-differences estimates in which we compare the differences in birth

outcomes for Medicaid mothers vs. privately insured mothers in areas that witnessed

large declines in segregations vs. those in areas with small/no declines in segregation.

The difference-in-difference estimate is represented by β1 in the following equation:


         healthgtc = β 0 + β1 * ln(1 − segregationtc ) * Medicaid
         + β 2 * Medicaid + β 3 * ln(1 − segregationtc ) + I (1995 = 1) + γ c + Xδ + ε gtc


where X is a set of age, race, foreign-born and marital status dummies. The dependent

variable is neonatal mortality for a given group g in year t county c. The sample consists

of two years of data (1990 and 1995),19 and we include an indicator for 1995 as well as

county fixed effects. We chose ln(1-segregation) as our measure of segregation because

changes in segregation appear to have a greater impact in areas where segregation was

initially high, thereby rejecting a linear functional form.20 If de-segregation results in a

decline in neonatal mortality, β1 (the D-in-D estimate) will be negative. By including an

indicator for Medicaid we control for potential differences in underlying trends in

neonatal mortality between Medicaid and privately insured mothers. County indicators

control for trends at the county level that may be correlated with changes in segregation


19
   Because the changes in segregation occurred slowly (as shown in previous section), we chose to do the
analysis with only two years, one immediately before, and one after.
20
   The log of de-segregation (1-segregation) is concave in de-segregation therefore convex in segregation.


                                                    16
and affect neonatal mortality. And the year dummy controls for national trends in

neonatal mortality. Therefore β1 is identified from changes in segregation within counties

over time among the Medicaid population. We interpret this coefficient to capture the

health benefits that accrued to Medicaid mothers that moved to hospitals the previously

served mainly the privately insured. In the absence of any changes in segregation, we

should observe no changes in neonatal mortality. To the extent that mother moved to

higher quality hospitals, then neonatal mortality should fall more in those counties where

mothers moved the most. The standard errors are clustered at the county level.

        The difference-in-differences estimate is small and insignificant (Table IV,

Column 1). Thus, consistent with Duggan (2000) we find that on average, even though

Medicaid mothers chose to deliver in different hospitals once they were able to access

them, there appears to have been no observable decline in neonatal mortality.

        To test whether expanding access to care matters more for different subgroups

defined by education and race, we report triple difference estimates of the impact of a

decline in hospital segregation for black, Hispanic and poorly educated mothers with

Medicaid. For example, the triple difference estimates for blacks are represented by β1 in

the following equation:


  healthgtc = β 0 + β1 * ln(1 − segregationtc ) * Medicaid * Black
  + β 2 * ln(1 − segregationtc ) * Medicaid + β 4 * Medicaid * Black
  + β 5 * Medicaid + β 6 * Black + β 7 * ln(1 − segregationtc ) + I (1995 = 1) + γ c + Xδ + ε gtc


This specification includes all the same controls as the previous one. The estimated

coefficients with the triple interactions are in column two of Table IV. For blacks

(column 2), the triple interaction term is negative and significant. The coefficient


                                                17
suggests that a decline in segregation of 0.08 (the average over this period) results in a

decline in black neonatal mortality of about 0.000738 percentage points. On a baseline of

0.0086 (neonatal mortality rate among black Medicaid), this represents a decline of 8.6

percent (evaluated at the level of segregation in 1990).21 Note that black neonatal

mortality among Medicaid mothers fell from 0.0086 to 0.0078, so the decline in

segregation explains about 92 percent of the decline for this group. The results for high

school drop-outs (column 3) and Hispanics (column 4) suggest that desegregation had no

impact on neonatal mortality for these groups. This could be a result of their lower

neonatal mortality rates, suggesting decreasing marginal product of neonatal care.

         We investigate these findings further. In the next table (Table V), we present

estimates stratified by initial level of segregation. We separate counties into those with

high levels of segregation (greater than the mean in 1990) and counties with low initial

levels of segregation. This exercise reveals that for blacks all of the effects on neonatal

mortality are being driven by reductions in segregation in counties that were originally

very segregated. The effect is about 2/3 larger in these counties than for the average. On

the other hand the coefficient is insignificant for counties with low levels of segregation

in 1990. And we still find that changes in segregation had no impact for Hispanics or

high school drop-outs.

         We also look at the impact of changes in segregation on a number of other

outcomes that could be potentially affected by access to better hospitals, namely low and

very low birth weight, and the adequacy of prenatal care.22 These results are in Table VI.

Birth weight an important marker for health, and it is also an outcome that is influenced

21
   Note that the effect of a unit change in segregation on neonatal mortality is given by β(1/(1-HSI)).
Therefore the effect of a change of –0.09 is given by β(1/(1-HSI))(-0.09)
22
   We do not have any other measures of behaviors during pregnancy.


                                                     18
by events during pregnancy, not just by the quality of the hospital at delivery. For blacks,

we find that desegregation significantly lowered the percentage of very low birth weight

babies, but had no effect of the percentage of low birth weight babies or in the use of

prenatal care.23 Our estimates suggest the declines in segregation in this period lowered

the incidence of very low birth weight among black babies by 0.0018 percentage points

or 5% relative to the mean in 1990. According to these results the entire decline in very

low birth weight among black babies observed between 1990 and 1995 can be attributed

to declines in segregation.

         Gould (2000) finds that residential segregation is correlated with low birth weight

among blacks; our results suggest that this is partially due to access to higher quality care.

These results also suggest that there was some change in maternal behaviors during

pregnancy. Finally note that Table VI also shows that there were no effects for Hispanics

or high school drop-outs on any other outcome.

         Not all decreases in neonatal mortality among blacks are due to increases in birth

weight: if we control for low birth weight (Panel C of Table VI) we still find a very large

effect of desegregation on neonatal mortality. These results suggest that it is the access to

quality care for the delivery that is responsible for most of the improvements in neonatal

mortality that we observe. These results are consistent with previous findings that access

to high quality neonatal medical care is an important determinant of birth outcomes

(Cutler and Meara, 1999).




23
   We present results for the percent of mothers with inadequate prenatal care, but the results are identical if
we use the number of prenatal care visits, the month when prenatal care began or the Kotelchuk Index.
Irrespective of the measure we use, we do not find that changes in segregation led to improvements in the
use of prenatal care.


                                                      19
                                   VI. Specification checks

        In this section we investigate the possibility that the hospital desegregation

witnessed over this period is due to factors other than DSH, such as changes in the

composition of Medicaid (or more generally changes in demographics), changes in

residential segregation or changes in the hospital market. We conclude that they did not

and provide further evidence that the changes were driven by the new incentives created

by DSH. We also test the robustness of our results and include a discussion of other

possible mechanisms behind the improvements in outcomes for blacks that we observe.

We concentrate on blacks since we do not find any effect of changes in segregation on

other Medicaid mothers.



A. Medicaid expansions

        Table I showed that the characteristics of Medicaid pregnant women changed

over the period 1990-1995 which is most likely due to expansions in Medicaid eligibility

at the beginning of the period. It is possible that women who became eligible for

Medicaid were both more likely to attend private hospitals and to have lower neonatal

mortality risk. The two most significant expansions consisted of an increase in the

financial eligibility for Medicaid from 100 to 185 percent of the Federal Poverty Line in

1989 and an expansion of Medicaid eligibility to undocumented pregnant women in

1990.24 The former would have the effect of increasing the average health of mothers on

Medicaid while the latter would likely have the opposite effect. In addition, the financial

eligibility expansion also raises the possibility of crowd-out, in which case the

24
  The changes in Medicaid eligibility that took place in California between 1989 and 1995 are documented
in Appendix C.


                                                  20
composition of privately insured mothers would also change over this period. This would

cast doubt on our ability to use the privately insured as a control in this context, (though

the bias introduced by this change in the control group would understate our results.)

However, the impact of the expansions in financial eligibility is likely small because

according to the state, in 1995, only 8.2 percent of all Medicaid deliveries were to women

qualifying under the expansions.25 In addition, we dropped all Medicaid deliveries to

mothers with a college degree, further mitigating the impact of the eligibility expansions.

        To better understand the changing composition of Medicaid births and how this

might affect our results, we present trends in the number of Medicaid deliveries to native

and foreign born mothers over this period. As Figure 5 illustrates, total Medicaid births

increased substantially over the 1990s as the expansions took effect. However, it appears

that almost all this growth was in foreign-born mothers. The number of Medicaid births

to native-born mothers remained relatively constant over this period.

        Furthermore the change in segregation does not appear to be driven by this

change in the composition of Medicaid. In Figure 3C we show that the trends for the

segregation index are not very different if we exclude all foreign-born mothers (both

Medicaid and privately insured). And since foreign-born undocumented mothers are on

average less healthy than the average Medicaid mother, this change in composition would

bias our results downwards (rather than upwards).

         Nonetheless, we re-estimate our main results by restricting our sample only to

native-born mothers,26 and recalculate the changes in segregation only for this group. The


25
   Medical Care Statistics, “MediCal Funded Deliveries, 1994-2000.” State of California, Department of
Health.
26
   We do not know whether foreign-born mother are undocumented, so we exclude all foreign-born mothers
from the analyses.


                                                 21
results (panel A of Table VII) are quantitatively similar to those we present in Tables IV

and V.27 We also calculated segregation indexes only for black Medicaid mothers and

used it instead of the overall segregation index. Our results, reported in panel B of table

VII, are unchanged.28



B. Residential segregation

         Another possibility is that changes in where Medicaid mothers reside may drive

the change in where they deliver. To investigate this possibility we present trends in

residential segregation of Medicaid mothers (Figure 3). Residential segregation at the

county level is calculated just like hospital segregation but based on share within zip

codes rather than hospitals. While hospital segregation begins to fall in 90-91 coincident

with the launching of DSH, residential segregation is actually increasing slightly over this

period suggesting that any changes in where Medicaid mothers resided over this period

did not drive the change in hospital desegregation that we witness.



C. The hospital market and incentives created under DSH

         Finally we investigate the factors that may explain changes in segregation

directly. We regress changes in segregation on other county level changes: changes in

demographics, changes in residential segregation, changes in the hospital market

(hospital openings and closings) and variables related to hospital incentives created under




27
   The effects of segregation appear to be somewhat larger for counties with initially low levels of
segregation, but they remain statistically insignificant.
28
   Using group specific indexes does not alter our previous conclusions for less than high school and
Hispanics—Results available upon request.


                                                    22
DSH in 1990. If desegregation is caused by DSH, we expect only the hospital incentives

in 1990 to predict changes in segregation.

       Following Duggan, we include as the following measures of incentives: the

number of hospitals in the county (counties with more hospitals are more competitive),

percent of private hospitals (private hospitals responded more strongly to incentives

created under DSH), percent of hospitals with low income number between 15 and 25,

percent of hospitals with low income number above 25 (these two variables capture the

fact that hospitals close to 25 had a large incentive to increase the number of Medicaid

patients, but hospitals above the threshold also had incentives since the reimbursements

were increasing in the number of Medicaid patients), and the interaction between

incorporation and low income number. The dependent variable is the change in

segregation from 1990 to 1995, thus positive coefficients correspond to decreases in

segregation.

       As expected the only variables that are significant are the variables related to

incentives (Table VIII). The percent of hospitals with low-income numbers between 15

and 25 or with low-income number above 25 that are private reduce segregation (both

coefficients are significant at the 10% level). The percent of public hospitals increases

segregation, although the coefficient is only significant for those with low-income

numbers between 15 and 25. These “incentive variables” are jointly significant at the

10% level. Not only all the other coefficients are insignificant, they are not jointly

significant (both test statistics are reported at the bottom of table VIII). Thus, differences

across counties in desegregation can be explained by initial market conditions as

predicted by Duggan. They are not explained by changes in hospitals markets or




                                              23
Medicaid characteristics. We note however that these results must be taken with caution

since we only have 30 observations, and therefore our low power may prevent us from

finding significant effects. Nonetheless, these results are consistent with our hypothesis

that hospital desegregation over this period appears to have been driven mostly by the

introduction of DSH.



D. Robustness checks

        Another concern arises from the fact that our empirical strategy relies on changes

overtime within a small number of counties.29 In order to verify the robustness of the

results and insure that they are not driven by one or two counties, we re-estimate the main

specifications, dropping one county at a time. The resulting distribution of the estimated

betas suggests that the results are very stable (see Table IX). There does not appear to be

any one county that drives our results for black mothers.


E. Why did Blacks move less?

We found that segregation fell more slowly for Blacks than for other Medicaid moms.

We have so far interpreted this as reflecting a smaller responsiveness of Blacks to the

increased choice set. Another possibility is that the hospitals that sought to attract new

Medicaid patients as a result of DSH were located disproportionately close to Hispanics

and other low income groups and farther away from blacks. Chandra and Skinner (2003)

suggest that one reason blacks use lower quality hospitals is their geographic proximity to

such hospitals. We find no evidence for this hypothesis in the California data. In both

1990 and 1995, black Medicaid mothers had access to significantly more hospitals within

29
  There are 58 counties in California and we restrict our sample to 30 of them. 28 counties are dropped
because they are mostly rural (and thus sparsely populations) and/or have very few hospitals.


                                                   24
5 miles, both public and private, than other Medicaid mothers (see Appendix D).

Although it must be noted that we do not know if the quality of hospitals differs on

average, our results suggest that there are additional reasons why blacks attend lower

quality hospitals. It does not appear that lower mobility is due to smaller benefits (at least

in terms of health gains, since, in fact, we find larger benefits). So we conclude that

blacks must face larger costs (of some sort) associated with changing hospitals (although

note that we cannot directly test this hypothesis with our data).



F. Alternative Mechanisms

       We have argued that the positive impact of desegregation on outcomes reflects the

fact that Medicaid mothers chose to deliver in different (presumably better) hospitals

when their access to such hospitals increased. However, other factors may be responsible

for the declines in neonatal mortality. First, quality within hospitals may have improved

with the infusion of DSH funds, although Duggan (2000a) finds that hospitals did not use

DSH funds to invest in quality. Alternatively, quality could have improved due to the

increase in competition among hospitals that sought to attract Medicaid patients. Both

suggest private mothers would have been positively affected as well. If this were the case,

it would lead us to underestimate the effect of desegregation on birth outcomes among

Medicaid mothers.

       Alternatively, we could be overestimating the impact of DSH if Medicaid mothers

displaced privately insured mothers into worse hospitals, or resulted in crowded hospitals

with lower quality care. We know of no evidence that hospitals were at full capacity over

this period. In 1995 in California, among the 405 general acute care hospitals, there were




                                             25
only 3 hospitals operating at or above 87% occupancy and 9 hospitals at or above 80%.

On average occupancy rates for that year were below 50%.30 Additionally, our evidence

suggests that privately insured mothers did not go to different hospitals after the

implementation of DSH.




                                 VII. Interpretation and Implications

           We have found that implementation of DSH, which effectively increased

Medicaid payment rates for hospitals that qualified, resulted in substantial desegregation

of poor publicly insured mothers from separate, often public, hospitals. Interestingly,

within Medicaid, most subgroups defined by race, ethnicity or education, took advantage

of the increase in access at roughly similar rates with the exception of one group – black

mothers. Ironically, it is black mothers who benefited the most from the increase in

provider access in terms of reduced neonatal mortality. Over this period, neonatal

mortality for black mothers on Medicaid declined 8.6 percent, and nearly the entire

decline is attributable to the increase in access to hospital care.

           Several conclusions can be drawn from these findings. First, differential access to

health care is still an important determinant of health for blacks and has not been

eliminated through expansions in public health insurance, nor can it be explained by

persistent residential segregation. Yet simply expanding the number and quality of

hospitals available to blacks is not sufficient to induce them to utilize higher quality care,

as evidenced by our finding that blacks (who stood to gain the most) moved the least.

30
     Statistics come from the annual hospital financial data maintained by OSHPD.




                                                                26
       Second, the fact that so many women with Medicaid switched providers after the

introduction of DSH suggests that their choice of provider had previously been

constrained because Medicaid payments were below market price. Raising payments

increases the amount of competition among hospitals for poor patients and enhances their

access to high quality hospital care. In addition, our finding that neonatal mortality

declined and that the decline was in most part not due to increases in birth weight implies

that quality of care at the hospital of delivery is an important determinant of birth

outcomes.

       The fact that we find significant improvements in birth outcomes only among

those with the highest initial levels of mortality suggests that the marginal productivity of

neonatal medical technology is declining. As a result we should expect further increases

in access to care to result in smaller improvements in neonatal mortality. Also, it

suggests that hospital quality may matter only for extreme cases, thus it may not be

surprising to find small or no effects of hospital quality on health for the average patient.

       And finally, the finding that among Medicaid mothers, those who stood to gain

the most because of higher initial rates of neonatal mortality moved less than others with

relatively little to gain has important implications for both the proper functioning of the

market for health care as well as how to value high quality care. The fact that black

mothers moved at lower rates could be a sign of inefficiency in the hospital market -

either a lack of information or possible discrimination. It is also possible that black

mothers have higher costs of switching hospitals relative to other mothers. It is not

possible with our data to investigate these issues but our results certainly suggest that

more research in this area is needed.




                                             27
        As to why other Medicaid mothers moved, even though they appeared to have

received no benefit - we can think of two distinct reasons. One is that these mothers

moved because private hospitals offered amenities that these mothers value but that are

not related to the quality of care provided. Alternatively these mothers value ex-ante the

availability of high quality care. In other words, it is possible that quality serves as

insurance: it is very unlikely that any one-mother may need a neonatal intensive care unit,

but the value of its availability in the event of a complication is extremely high. Again,

we do not have the ability to distinguish between these hypotheses. But in either case

since mothers took advantage of the increase in access by choosing alternative hospitals;

this implies that their choices were previously constrained and that DSH improved their

welfare. This suggests that an evaluation of the social benefits of programs such as DSH

should include improvements in welfare that are not captured by changes in objective

measures of health such as infant mortality.




                                               28
                                       References


Almond, D., K. Chay and M. Greenstone (2001), “Civil Rights, the War on Poverty, and
Black-White Convergence in Infant Mortality in Mississippi,” Berkeley University
Mimeo.

Berkowitz E. and W. Flexnor (1981), “The Market for Health Services: Is there a Non
Traditional Consumer?,” Journal of Health Care Marketing. 81: 25-34.
Butler, J. A. and R. K. Scotch (1978), “Medicaid and Children: Some Recent Lessons and
Reasonable Next Steps.” Public Policy 26:3. 1978.

Kenneth C. Y. and M. Greenstone (2003), “The Impact Of Air Pollution On Infant
Mortality: Evidence From Geographic Variation In Pollution Shocks Induced By A
Recession,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 118 (3) pp. 1121-1167.

Center for Disease Control (1994), From Data to Action. CDC's Public Health
Surveillance for Women, Infants, and Children. Lynne S. Wilcox and James S. Marks,
Eds. Center for Disease Control’s Maternal & Child Health Monograph

Chandra, A. and J. Skinner (2003), “Geography and Racial Health Disparities,” National
Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 9613, February.

Coughlin, T. A. and D. Liska (1997), “The Medicaid Disproportionate Share Hospital
Payment Program: Background and Issues,” The Urban Institute Series A., No. A-14,
October.

Currie, J. and E. Moretti (2003), “Mother's Education and the Intergenerational
Transmission of Human Capital: Evidence from College Openings,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 118(4)

Currie, J. and D. Thomas (1995), “Medical Care for Children: Public Insurance, Private
Insurance and Racial Differences in Utilization,” Journal of Human Resources, XXX, 1.

Currie, J. and P. Reagan (1998), “Distance to Hospital and Children’s Access to Care: Is
Being Closer Better and for Whom?,” National Bureau of Economic Research Working
Paper 6836.

Cutler, D. M. and E. Meara (1999), “The Technology of Birth: Is it Worth it?,” National
Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 7390.

Deaton, A. and C. Paxson, “Mortality, Education, Income, and Inequality among
American Cohorts,” The Economics of Aging, Vol. 8, Wise, David A., ed., Chicago:
University of Chicago Press for NBER, forthcoming




                                           29
Duggan, M. G. (2000a), “Hospital Ownership and Public Medical Spending,” Quarterly
Journal of Economics, November.

Duggan, M. G. (2000), “Hospital Market Structure and the Behavior of Not-for-profit
Hospitals: Evidence from Responses to California’s Disproportionate Share Program,”
National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 7966.

Gortmaker, S. and P. Wise (1997), “The First Injustice: Socioeconomic Disparities,
Health Services Technology and Infant Mortality,” American Review of Sociology. 23:
147-70.

Huen, W. (1999), “California’s Disproportionate Share Hospital Program: Background
Paper,” Medi-Cal Policy Institute, January.

Massey, D. S. and M. L. Eggers (1990), “The Ecology of Inequality: Minorities and the
Concentration of Poverty, 1970-1980,” The American Journal of Sociology, Vol. 95, No.
5, pp. 1153-1188.

Massey, D. S. and N. A. Denton (1993), American Apartheid: Segregation and the
Making of the Underclass. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.

McClellan, M. and D. Staiger (1999), “The Quality of Health Care Providers,” National
Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 7327

Meara, E. (2001) “Why is Health Related to Socio-Economic Status,” NBER Working
Paper No. w8231

Pappas, G. S. Queen, W. Hadden and G. Fisher (1993), “The Increasing Disparity in
Mortality Between Socioeconomic Groups in the United States, 1960 and 1986,” The
New England Journal of Medicine.

Smedley, B. D., A. Y. Stith, and A. R. Nelson (2002), Editors, Committee on
Understanding and Eliminating Racial and Ethnic Disparities in Health Care, “Unequal
Treatment: Confronting Racial and Ethnic Disparities in Health Care,” National
Academy Press.

Yudlowsky, B. K., J. D. C. Cartland and S. S. Flint (1990), “Pediatrician Participation in
Medicaid: 1979 to 1989.” Pediatrics 85:567-77.




                                            30
        Figure 1a. Share of Medicaid Patients at Each
                      Type of Hospital

0.700
0.600
0.500
                                                   1. Public
0.400
                                                   2. Non-Profit
0.300
                                                   3. For-Profit
0.200
0.100
0.000
            1990        1993         1995



         Figure 1b. Share of Indigent Patients at Each
                      Type of Hospital

1.000

0.800

0.600                                               1. Public
                                                    2. Non-Profit
0.400
                                                    3. For-Profit
0.200

0.000
            1990        1993         1995




        Figure 1c. Share of Private Patients at Each Type
                           of Hospital

0.800
0.700
0.600
0.500                                                 1. Public
0.400                                                 2. Non-Profit
0.300                                                 3. For-Profit
0.200
0.100
0.000
            1990         1993             1995




                                     31
      Figure 2a. Share of Medicaid Deliveries at
                Each Type of Hospital
0.7000
0.6000
0.5000
                                                Public
0.4000
                                                Non-Profit
0.3000                                          For-Profit
0.2000
0.1000
0.0000
           1990       1993        1995




         Figure 2b. Share of Private Deliveries at Each
                       Type of Hospital

0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
                                                             Public
0.5
                                                             Non-Profit
0.4
                                                             For-Profit
0.3
0.2
0.1
0.0
          1990           1993            1995




                                32
          Figure 3a: County Segregation in California, 1989-
                                1995

 0.7

0.65

 0.6
0.55

 0.5
                                                                       Hospital Segregation - all
0.45
                                                                       Housing Segregation - all
 0.4

0.35
 0.3

0.25

 0.2
       1989   1990   1991    1992     1993     1994      1995




       Figure 3b: Segregation index for sub groups of
                  the Medicaid population

0.75

0.73

0.71
0.69

0.67                                                                         all
                                                                             hispanic
0.65
                                                                             black
0.63
                                                                             <HS
0.61
0.59

0.57

0.55
       1989   1990    1991     1992     1993      1994          1995




                                        33
              Figure 3c: Trends in segregation, all mothers and native born only


 0.7

0.65

 0.6

0.55
                                                                                   all
 0.5
                                                                                   Native born only
0.45

 0.4

0.35

 0.3
       1989     1990       1991      1992      1993      1994      1995




                                            34
               Figure 4A: Changes in neonatal m ortality 1990-1995 by insurance status


           0
    -0.0001                  1990                            1995

    -0.0002
    -0.0003
    -0.0004
                                                                                         Private
    -0.0005
                                                                                         Medicaid
    -0.0006
    -0.0007
    -0.0008
    -0.0009
     -0.001




          Figure 4b: Changes in neonatal mortality amond Medicaid mothers, by change in
                                          segregation


     0
                      1990                            1995
-0.0001

-0.0002

-0.0003

-0.0004                                                                       Increases in segregation
-0.0005                                                                       Decreases in segregation

-0.0006

-0.0007

-0.0008

-0.0009




                                                 35
              Figure 4c: Changes in neonatal mortality 1990-1995 for counties with decreases
                                   in segregation, by insurance status


     0
-0.0001                      1990                               1995

-0.0002
-0.0003
-0.0004
                                                                                               Private
-0.0005
                                                                                               Medicaid
-0.0006
-0.0007
-0.0008
-0.0009
 -0.001




                   Figure 4d: Changes in neonatal mortality 1990-1995 for counties with
                               increases in segregation, by insurance status


          0
                             1990                               1995
 -0.0001

 -0.0002

 -0.0003

 -0.0004
                                                                                           Private
 -0.0005
                                                                                           Medicaid
 -0.0006

 -0.0007

 -0.0008

 -0.0009

  -0.001




                                                   36
         Figure 5: Number of Medicaid births by foreign status, 1989-1995

180000


160000


140000

                                                                            Foreign
120000
                                                                            Native

100000


80000


60000
         1989    1990     1991      1992     1993     1994     1995




                                       37
                                     Table I.a
                                  Summary statistics

                                  All                     Medicaid                 Private

Year                     1990            1995         1990       1995       1990             1995

Hospital Segregation    0.6552           0.5637       0.6504     0.5615     0.6583       0.5656
                       (0.0002)         (0.0002)     (0.0004)   (0.0003)   (0.0003)     (0.0003)
Neonatal Mortality      0.0041           0.0035       0.0048     0.0040     0.0036       0.0031
                       (0.0001)         (0.0001)     (0.0001)   (0.0001)   (0.0001)     (0.0001)
LBW                     0.0592           0.0617       0.0712     0.0680     0.0513       0.0563
                       (0.0004)         (0.0004)     (0.0007)   (0.0006)   (0.0004)     (0.0005)
Medicaid                0.3955           0.4651
                       (0.0008)         (0.0008)
Foreign-born            0.4213           0.4666       0.5985     0.6241     0.3054       0.3297
                       (0.0008)         (0.0008)     (0.0013)   (0.0012)   (0.0010)     (0.0011)
Black                   0.0826           0.0749       0.1123     0.0921     0.0632       0.0599
                       (0.0004)         (0.0004)     (0.0008)   (0.0007)   (0.0005)     (0.0005)
Hispanic                0.4078           0.4656       0.6262     0.6756     0.2640       0.2826
                       (0.0008)         (0.0008)     (0.0013)   (0.0012)   (0.0009)     (0.0010)
<HS                     0.3160           0.3169       0.5915     0.5585     0.1348       0.1055
                       (0.0008)         (0.0008)     (0.0013)   (0.0012)   (0.0007)     (0.0007)
Single                  0.2888           0.2915       0.5310     0.4628     0.1303       0.1426
                       (0.0007)         (0.0008)     (0.0013)   (0.0012)   (0.0007)     (0.0008)

                       Notes: standard errors in parenthesis




                                                38
                        Table I.b
       Summary statistics among Medicaid mothers,
      by demographic characteristics, 1990 and 1995

                                         1990         1995
Neonatal Mortality
Black                                    0.0084   0.0077

non-Black                                0.0043   0.0036

Hispanic                                 0.0043   0.0034

<HS                                      0.0047   0.0035

Very Low Birth Weight (VLBW)
Black                                    0.038        0.036

non-Black                                0.011        0.012

Hispanic                                 0.011        0.012

<HS                                      0.012        0.012

Low Birth Weight (LBW)
Black                                    0.162        0.152

non-Black                                0.060        0.059

Hispanic                                 0.056        0.056

<HS                                      0.063        0.062

Inadequate prenatal care
Black                                    0.347        0.244

non-Black                                0.386        0.237

Hispanic                                 0.409        0.233

<HS                                      0.424        0.254




                           39
                      Table II
    Non-Parametric Trends in Hospital Segregation

Dependent variable:                   Hospital segregation index

1989                                           -0.0118
                                              [0.0057]
1990                                           -0.0044
                                              [0.0056]
1992                                           -0.0155
                                              [0.0055]
1993                                            -0.045
                                              [0.0055]
1994                                           -0.0685
                                              [0.0055]
1995                                           -0.0962
                                              [0.0055]
Black                                           0.0936
                                              [0.0040]
Hispanic                                        0.0677
                                              [0.0036]
HS drop out                                    0.0569
                                              [0.0031]
Constant                                        0.5511
                                              [0.0044]

Observations                                    1552
R-squared                                       0.91
Constant                                       0.5511

P-values
Test of trend break 1990                        0.752
Test of trend break 1991                        0.038
Test of trend break 1992                        0.134
Test of trend break 1993                        0.521
Test of trend break 1994                        0.662
Test of linear trend post 1991                  0.379




                                 40
                          Table III
Differences in Linear Trend post-1991 by Race and Education

 Dependent variable:                                         HSI               HSI

 year*post 1991                                           -0.03244           -0.03589
                                                         [0.00332]          [0.00560]
 year*post 1991*Black                                                        0.01689
                                                                            [0.00829]
 year*post 1991*<HS                                                           -0.0029
                                                                            [0.00687]
 year*post 1991*Hispanic                                                     0.00263
                                                                            [0.00788]
 year                                                     0.00589            0.00384
                                                         [0.00283]          [0.00477]
 year*Black                                                                  -0.00529
                                                                            [0.00697]
 year*<HS                                                                     0.00737
                                                                            [0.00585]
 year*Hispanic                                                                0.00085
                                                                            [0.00678]
 indicator- post 1991                                      2.9612            3.28456
                                                         [0.30215]          [0.50998]
 post 1991*Black                                                              -1.5481
                                                                            [0.75434]
 post 1991*<HS                                                               0.26148
                                                                            [0.62524]
 post 1991*Hispanic                                                          -0.25653
                                                                            [0.71715]
 Black                                                    0.09361            0.56251
                                                         [0.00399]          [0.62731]
 Hispanic                                                 0.06772            -0.00354
                                                         [0.00362]          [0.61096]
 HS drop out                                              0.05692            -0.61549
                                                         [0.00310]          [0.52644]
 Constant                                                 0.01524            0.20423
                                                         [0.25495]          [0.42956]

 Observations                                                1552              1552
 R-squared                                                   0.91              0.91
               Notes: standard errors (in brackets) are clustered at the county level.




                                          41
                                                      Table IV
                                Impact of Hospital Segregation on Neonatal Mortality
                                                              (1)                 (2)                  (3)              (4)
                                                              All                Black                <HS            Hispanic
      Medicaid* ln(1-HSI)*black                                                 -0.0032
                                                                               [0.0016]
      HSI*black                                                                 0.0015
                                                                               [0.0014]
      Medicaid*black                                                            0.0115
                                                                               [0.0058]
      Medicaid* ln(1-HSI)*<HS                                                                       -0.0007
                                                                                                   [0.0011]
      HSI*<HS                                                                                       -0.0001
                                                                                                   [0.0009]
      Medicaid*<HS                                                                                   0.0013
                                                                                                   [0.0038]
      Medicaid*ln(1-HIS)*Hispanic                                                                                     0.0006
                                                                                                                     [0.0008]
      HSI*Hispanic                                                                                                   -0.0009
                                                                                                                     [0.0004]
      Medicaid*Hispanic                                                                                              -0.0002
                                                                                                                     [0.0009]
      Medicaid*ln(1-HSI)                                    0.0001               0.0003              0.0004           0.0000
                                                          [0.0004]             [0.0004]            [0.0005]          [0.0005]
      HSI                                                  -0.0004              -0.0005             -0.0004          -0.0002
                                                          [0.0006]             [0.0006]            [0.0006]          [0.0003]
      HS drop out                                           0.0005               0.0005             0.0014            0.0005
                                                          [0.0002]             [0.0002]            [0.0032]          [0.0003]
      Age 20-29                                             0.0006               0.0006             0.0006            0.0006
                                                          [0.0002]             [0.0002]            [0.0002]          [0.0001]
      Age 30-34                                             0.0009               0.0009             0.0009            0.0009
                                                          [0.0002]             [0.0002]            [0.0002]          [0.0003]
      Black                                                 0.0042              -0.0014              0.0041            0.004
                                                          [0.0003]             [0.0049]            [0.0003]          [0.0005]
      Asian                                                -0.0002              -0.0002             -0.0002          -0.0003
                                                          [0.0004]             [0.0004]            [0.0004]          [0.0002]
      Hispanic                                              0.0004               0.0004             0.0003           -0.0002
                                                          [0.0002]             [0.0002]            [0.0002]          [0.0005]
      other race                                           0.0007                0.0007              0.0007           0.0006
                                                          [0.0004]             [0.0004]            [0.0004]          [0.0003]
      single                                                0.0000               0.0000              0.0000           0.0000
                                                          [0.0002]             [0.0002]            [0.0002]          [0.0002]
      Foreign Born                                         -0.0008              -0.0008             -0.0008          -0.0008
                                                          [0.0002]             [0.0002]            [0.0002]          [0.0002]
      commercial HMO penetration                           -0.0047              -0.0048             -0.0046           -0.0045
                                                          [0.0021]             [0.0021]            [0.0021]          [0.0018]
      Observations                                           9068                 9068                9068             9068
      R-squared                                              0.04                 0.04                0.04              0.04
Notes: standard errors (in brackets) are clustered at the county level. Regressions are weighted by number of observations in each cell
                                                  and they include county fixed effects




                                                                 42
                                           Table V
    The effect of hospital segregation on neonatal mortality, by initial level of segregation

                                                     High           Low            High            Low            High           Low

Medicaid* Ln(1-segregation)*black                  -0.0053         0.0033
                                                   [0.0021]       [0.0055]
Ln(1-segregation)*black                             0.0035        -0.0016
                                                   [0.0025]       [0.0028]
Medicaid*black                                     -0.0056         0.0019
                                                   [0.0024]       [0.0028]
Medicaid* Ln(1-segregation)*<HS                                                  -0.0005        -0.0019
                                                                                 [0.0009]       [0.0044]
Ln(1-segregation)*<HS                                                            -0.0002        -0.0038
                                                                                 [0.0006]       [0.0038]
Medicaid*<HS                                                                     -0.0017        -0.0026
                                                                                 [0.0010]       [0.0024]
Medicaid* Ln(1-segregation)*Hispanic                                                                            0.0003         0.0064
                                                                                                               [0.0010]       [0.0036]
Ln(1-segregation)*Hispanic                                                                                     -0.0005        -0.0055
                                                                                                               [0.0006]       [0.0014]
Medicaid*Hispanic                                                                                              -0.0003         0.0024
                                                                                                               [0.0011]       [0.0019]
Medicaid*Ln(1-segregation)                          0.0005        -0.0017         0.0005         0.0012         0.0002        -0.0031
                                                   [0.0005]       [0.0023]       [0.0007]       [0.0014]       [0.0007]       [0.0014]
Ln(1-segregation)                                  -0.0004         0.0002        -0.0002         0.0005        -0.0001         0.0013
                                                   [0.0007]       [0.0014]       [0.0006]       [0.0014]       [0.0005]       [0.0015]
Medicaid                                            0.0013         0.0001         0.0017         0.0020         0.0013        -0.0002
                                                   [0.0006]       [0.0013]       [0.0009]       [0.0009]       [0.0009]       [0.0010]
HS drop out                                         0.0004         0.0007         0.0009        -0.0001         0.0004         0.0007
                                                   [0.0003]       [0.0007]       [0.0008]       [0.0022]       [0.0003]       [0.0007]
Black                                               0.0083         0.0018         0.0044         0.0028         0.0044         0.0027
                                                   [0.0034]       [0.0019]       [0.0006]       [0.0008]       [0.0006]       [0.0008]


Observations                                         4331           4737           4331           4737            4331           4737

R-squared                                            0.06            0.02           0.06           0.03           0.05           0.02




  Notes: standard errors (in brackets) are clustered at the county level. Regressions are weighted by number of observations in each cell
   and they include county fixed effects Regressions include all other controls in table IV (age, HMO penetration, other races, foreign
                                                               born dummies)




                                                                   43
                                              Table VI
                             The effect of segregation on other outcomes
                                       % Very low birth weight % Low birth weight % Inadequate prenatal care
Panel A: Blacks
Medicaid* Ln(1-segregation)*black             -0.0090               -0.0103                -0.0085
                                              [0.0029]              [0.0123]               [0.0183]
Ln(1-segregation)*black                        0.0021               -0.0047                -0.0080
                                              [0.0031]              [0.0071]               [0.0122]
Medicaid*black                                -0.0014                0.0319                -0.0196
                                              [0.0034]              [0.0137]               [0.0222]
Medicaid*Ln(1-segregation)                     0.0010               -0.0019                -0.0345
                                              [0.0005]              [0.0016]               [0.0297]
Ln(1-segregation)                              0.0014                0.0024                 0.0058
                                              [0.0012]              [0.0021]               [0.0288]
Medicaid                                       0.0043                0.0104                 0.1288
                                              [0.0008]              [0.0023]               [0.0379]
Black                                          0.0205                0.0435                 0.0404
                                              [0.0036]              [0.0066]               [0.0177]
Panel B: High School dropouts
Medicaid* Ln(1-segregation)*<HS                0.0012                0.0016                 0.0291
                                              [0.0011]              [0.0032]               [0.0157]
Ln(1-segregation)*<HS                         -0.0038               -0.0123                 0.0143
                                              [0.0010]              [0.0032]               [0.0178]
Medicaid*<HS                                  -0.0008                0.0018                -0.0146
                                              [0.0009]              [0.0022]               [0.0124]
Medicaid*ln(1-segregation)                    -0.0005               -0.0065                -0.0456
                                              [0.0008]              [0.0031]               [0.0232]
Ln(1-segregation)                              0.0017                0.0023                 0.0068
                                              [0.0012]              [0.0021]               [0.0293]
Medicaid                                       0.0053                0.0146                 0.1217
                                              [0.0010]              [0.0031]               [0.0301]
<HS                                            0.0034                0.0141                 0.0658
                                              [0.0010]              [0.0026]               [0.0159]
Panel C: Hispanics
Medicaid* Ln(1-segregation)*Hispanic           0.0020                0.0034                -0.0170
                                              [0.0018]              [0.0039]               [0.0346]
Ln(1-segregation)*Hispanic                    -0.0025               -0.0181                -0.0498
                                              [0.0017]              [0.0038]               [0.0356]
Medicaid*Hispanic                              0.0002                0.0015                -0.0073
                                              [0.0009]              [0.0022]               [0.0050]
Medicaid*Ln(1-segregation)                    -0.0014               -0.0078                -0.0267
                                              [0.0013]              [0.0045]               [0.0168]
Ln(1-segregation)                              0.0016                0.0027                 0.0081
                                              [0.0012]              [0.0021]               [0.0284]
Medicaid                                       0.0051                0.0197                 0.1515
                                              [0.0013]              [0.0039]               [0.0223]
Hispanic                                       0.0036                0.0086                 0.0295
                                              [0.0009]              [0.0027]               [0.0058]



                                                     44
                            Table VII
          Specification checks--Black Medicaid mothers

                                            (1)           (2)            (3)
                                            All        High HSI        Low HSI

Panel A: Native only
Medicaid*ln(1-HIS)*black                 -0.0034         -0.0047         -0.0027
                                        [0.0019]        [0.0026]        [0.0101]
Observations                              4812            2359            2453
R-squared                                  0.06            0.07            0.04

Panel B: Black segregation index
Medicaid*ln(1-HSI)*Black         -0.0027                 -0.0047         0.0021
                                [0.0016]                [0.0022]        [0.0062]
Observations                      9068                    4548            4520
R-squared                          0.04                    0.06           0.02

Panel C: Controlling for low birth weight
Medicaid*ln(1-HSI)*black          -0.0026                -0.0053         -0.0009
                                 [0.0016]               [0.0022]        [0.0078]
Observations                       9065                   4546            4519
R-squared                           0.08                   0.09            0.06

      Notes: standard errors (in brackets) are clustered at the county level.




                                       45
                                      Table VIII
             What county characteristics explain decreases in segregation?
Dependent variable: Segregation change (1990-1995)           Coef.     mean     std dev
Mean 0.088, s.d. (0.80)

1990 incentive variables
Low Income Number (LIN) between 15 and 25                     -0.915   0.128    0.088
                                                             [0.395]
LIN above 25                                                  -0.200   0.202    0.126
                                                             [0.320]
Private hospital                                              -0.007   0.833    0.173
                                                             [0.108]
Private * LIN(15-25)                                          0.790    0.111    0.089
                                                             [0.377]
Private * LIN(25+)                                            0.973    0.135    0.085
                                                             [0.486]
Total number of hospitals                                     -0.001   34.116   28.462
                                                             [0.002]
Changes in population and market characteristics
Change in % less than high school                             0.196    -0.005   0.024
                                                             [1.102]
Change in % 20-29                                             -2.156   0.044    0.020
                                                             [2.599]
Change in % age 30-35                                         -0.973   -0.014   0.010
                                                             [3.679]
Change in % single                                            -0.214   -0.006   0.023
                                                             [0.962]
Change in % black                                             -4.419   0.007    0.009
                                                             [4.257]
Change in % Hispanic                                          -0.525   -0.060   0.030
                                                             [1.474]
Change in % Asian                                             -1.076   -0.011   0.014
                                                             [2.676]
Change in % other race                                        3.881    -0.007   0.008
                                                             [2.672]
Change in % foreign born                                      0.070    -0.050   0.022
                                                             [2.287]
Change in housing segregation index                           -0.941   -0.012   0.024
                                                             [0.671]
Change in the number of hospitals                             -0.082   -0.058   0.083
                                                             [0.204]

F-statistics (p-value)
Joint significance of the 1990 incentive variables            2.68
                                                             (0.07)
Joint significance of the changes in population and market    1.19
                                                             (0.38)




                                                     46
                                         Table IX
            Distribution of Estimated Coefficients, dropping one county at a time

                                All                 High Segregation        Low Segregation

Mean                          -0.00315                   -0.00523                -0.00137
Median                        -0.00216                   -0.00527                -0.00099
Minimum                       -0.00406                   -0.00664                -0.02330
Maximum                       -0.00196                   -0.00404                0.00489
Standard Error                 0.00006                    0.00006                 0.00061
95 % CI                  [-.00327, -.00303]         [-.00535, -.00511]      [-.00260, -.00014]




                                              47
                                     Appendix A
                   Background on the Disproportionate Share program

History

Hospitals that served Medicaid patients often lost money: Medicaid reimbursement rates
were not sufficient to cover the cost of treating Medicaid patients. Additionally, hospitals
that did not serve many private patients did not have enough profits from these patients to
cross-subsidize the cost of low-income patients. The Disproportionate Share program
(DSH) was first introduced in the 1980 and 1981 Omnibus Reconciliation Acts (OBRA)
to attempt to alleviate this problem. However it wasn’t until 1986, when caps on
reimbursements were freed, that states could fully exploit DSH. Each state instituted its
own DSH program.

How DSH works

   •   DSH payments made by the states are eligible for federal reimbursements at a rate
       of 50 to 80%
   •   Hospitals qualify for DSH if:
       1- # Medicaid inpatient days > state mean + s.d.
       2- Low income number (revenues from low income patients, i.e. Medicaid and
           indigent)> 25% total revenues
   •   Reimbursement for hospitals that qualify:
       1- If qualify in year t, then in year t+1 get a per diem amount
       2- Reimbursement is a increasing non-linear function of a hospitals’ low income
           number
       3- Low income number is calculated using a formula that weights Medicaid
           patients more than indigent patients
   •   Restrictions:
           o In 1992 reimbursements were capped at 12% of total Medicaid spending,
               with exceptions for high spending states such as California.
           o There are other restrictions at the hospitals level, like hospitals cannot
               make a profit using DSH funds
   •   Hospitals have greater incentives to attract Medicaid rather than indigent patients
           o Because the low income formula weights them more heavily than indigent
               patients
           o Because Medicaid patients are also reimbursed at a certain rate through
               regular Medicaid
           o They may be healthier
   •   Indirect effects
           o No effects on other Medicaid programs
           o HMO: DSH and managed care are in conflict. Managed care lowers costs
               mostly through decreasing inpatients care (making it into outpatient care
               or lowering utilization rates). However the DSH formal is based in
               inpatient days.



                                            48
                                             Appendix B
                 Hospital Segregation Index by county and year, for 30 urban counties

County                          1989      1990         1991    1992     1993       1994   1995

Alameda                        0.671      0.677        0.667   0.637    0.647     0.623   0.630
Butte                          0.209      0.156        0.270   0.201    0.139     0.084   0.031
Contra Costa                   0.781      0.809        0.824   0.833    0.844     0.810   0.749
Fresno                         0.432      0.535        0.547   0.602    0.615     0.630   0.649
Kern                           0.976      0.977        0.984   0.971    0.952     0.914   0.908
Los Angeles                    0.723      0.722        0.723   0.693    0.657     0.644   0.621
Marin                          0.025      0.116        0.038   0.080    0.107     0.078   0.083
Merced                         0.052      0.002        0.035   0.004    0.012     0.055   0.026
Monterey                       0.331      0.404        0.478   0.421    0.401     0.349   0.325
Napa                           0.073      0.199        0.193   0.197    0.308     0.277   0.265
Orange                         0.700      0.690        0.669   0.634    0.623     0.615   0.621
Placer                         0.012      0.029        0.005   0.001    0.007     0.012   0.027
Riverside                      0.718      0.820        0.758   0.672    0.557     0.511   0.471
Sacramento                     0.446      0.455        0.467   0.467    0.465     0.413   0.371
San Bernardino                 0.636      0.662        0.741   0.744    0.686     0.567   0.461
San Diego                      0.338      0.359        0.418   0.443    0.439     0.431   0.395
San Francisco                  0.645      0.669        0.659   0.684    0.692     0.674   0.661
San Joaquin                    0.367      0.373        0.361   0.365    0.360     0.336   0.344
San Mateo                      0.514      0.532        0.490   0.511    0.483     0.474   0.395
Santa Barbara                  0.447      0.338        0.339   0.304    0.269     0.322   0.327
Santa Clara                    0.732      0.755        0.749   0.703    0.645     0.624   0.605
Santa Cruz                     0.346      0.364        0.411   0.433    0.432     0.470   0.418
Shasta                         0.069      0.042        0.040   0.000    0.000     0.001   0.129
Solano                         0.614      0.649        0.721   0.720    0.703     0.707   0.636
Sonoma                         0.256      0.543        0.615   0.662    0.668     0.640   0.617
Stanislaus                     0.401      0.280        0.297   0.331    0.348     0.367   0.384
Sutter                         0.006      0.002        0.006   0.000    0.000     0.000   0.000
Tulare                         0.216      0.267        0.319   0.216    0.210     0.192   0.027
Ventura                        0.760      0.795        0.789   0.791    0.736     0.651   0.547




                                                  49
                                 Appendix C
          Changes in Medicaid Eligibility Laws Between 1989 and 1995


Year   Change in Medicaid Law

1989   Income eligibility increased from 110% to 185% of the federal poverty line.
       Eligibility workers are out stationed to high-volume clinics. Increased
       reimbursement to obstetric providers.


1990   Coverage extended to undocumented foreign-born women


1992   Asset test eliminated for women with incomes between 185% and 200% of the
       federal poverty line.


1993   Presumptive eligibility implemented, allowing immediate temporary coverage
       for women who believe they are eligible. Shortened application form
       introduced.


1994   Asset test eliminated for all women with incomes below 200% of the federal
       poverty line.




                                        50
                                        Appendix D
                 Geographic Access to Hospitals for Medicaid Mothers, by Race

                           1990                                           1995
              Total       Private     Public     Hospital    Total       Private     Public     Hospital
             Hospitals   Hospitals   Hospitals   Chosen     Hospitals   Hospitals   Hospitals   Chosen
             within 5    within 5    within 5    within 5   within 5    within 5    within 5    within 5

Black         3.962       3.359       0.603       0.592       3.67       3.137       0.533       0.641

Non-Black     3.123       2.733        0.39       0.619      3.097       2.716       0.381       0.643

Difference     0.839       0.626       0.213      -0.027      0.573       0.421       0.152      -0.002
              [0.024]     [0.023]     [0.005]    [0.005]     [0.024]     [0.024]     [0.005]    [0.005]

Obs.          51930       51930       51930       51930      55955       55955       55955       55955


Within
County
Means
Black         3.482       2.967       0.514       0.604      3.291       2.829       0.462       0.656

Non-Black     3.297       2.875       0.422       0.615      3.211       2.809       0.402       0.638

Difference     0.185       0.092       0.092      -0.011      0.08        0.02        0.06       0.018
              [0.020]     [0.019]     [0.005]    [0.005]     [0.020]     [0.018]     [0.005]    [0.005]

Obs.          51930       51930       51930       51930      55955       55955       55955       55955




                                                   51
