NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

FINANCIAL-SECTOR FDI AND HOST COUNTRIES:
NEW AND OLD LESSONS
Linda Goldberg
Working Paper 10441
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10441
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2004

The views expressed in this paper are the author’s and do not necessarily reflect the position of the Federal
Reserve Bank of New York or the Federal Reserve System. Valuable comments were provided by participants
in the Bank for International Settlements Committee on Global Financial Stability in Basle, at the 2004 ASSA
meetings in San Diego, and at the Trinity College of Dublin Conference on Micro and Macro Perspectives
on FDI. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
©2004 by Linda Goldberg. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Financial-Sector FDI and Host Countries: New and Old Lessons
Linda Goldberg
NBER Working Paper No. 10441
April 2004
JEL No. F3, F4
ABSTRACT

Many of the lessons from foreign direct investment (FDI) research on manufacturing and extractive
resource industries are applicable to financial-sector FDI. This paper reviews the main findings and
policy themes of FDI research, with a primary focus on the host country implications of FDI for
emerging market economies. Evidence on technology transfers, productivity spillovers, wage
effects, macroeconomic growth, and fiscal and tax concerns are emphasized. Throughout this
review, I stress that parallel findings often arise independently in the separate research programs that
focus on general and financial-sector FDI. I also emphasize that some important differences between
the results of FDI into these sectors are apparent, especially with respect to their implications for
local institution building and business cycles. These differences, more so than the similarities,
should be the focus of concentrated research efforts.
Linda Goldberg
Federal Reserve Bank of New York
33 Liberty Street
New York, NY 10045
and NBER
linda.goldberg@ny.frb.org

I.

Introduction
In the 1990s, foreign direct investment (FDI) became the largest single source of

external finance for many developing countries. For the most part, discussions of the
causes and effects of FDI have mainly focussed on manufacturing and real production
activity (“general” FDI). Financial-sector FDI also has soared. Yet, research efforts on
the general FDI and the financial-sector FDI have been orthogonal, and cross citation has
been rare. This orthogonality is surprising: financial FDI shares many of the features of
more general FDI in productive services. This paper attempts to bridge this gap and
emphasize the parallels and differences between the real and financial-sector FDI.
Conceptually, in each case a foreign producer of goods or services makes a twofold decision. First, he decides whether to service a particular market; second, he
determines whether this market should be served through exports or through setting up
local production. While manufacturers use the language of exports or production by
multinationals, there is a direct financial services (and in particular banking) analogue to
this two-step decision: first, the bank decides whether to provide lending, deposit-taking
and other services to a market; second, if so, the bank determines whether to service this
market via cross-border activities (arms-length transactions) or foreign direct investment
in the form of setting up branches or subsidiaries followed by local lending.
FDI is an activity that occurs as part of a multinational’s broader strategic plan.
Flows can respond to both microeconomic stimuli, such as tax incentives,1 and
macroeconomic stimuli, such as fluctuations in exchange rates and business cycles. The
sometimes lumpy reallocation of capital across borders may occur when governments
reduce their protection of inefficient or corrupt local industries.2 Opportunities to gain
local market share and exploit sales or production networks also trigger entry. These
features are common to manufacturing industries, extractive resource industries, and
financial services.
A well-established literature explores the causes and consequences of FDI in
productive services, generally interpreted as manufacturing but sometimes extending to
mining and natural resource extractive services. This research often uses data from
1

See the edited volume by Feldstein, Hines, and Hubbard (1995) for a range of analyses of tax and FDI
questions.

1

individual countries or industries within countries, as opposed to taking the form of
sweeping multi-country studies. Consequently, the resulting stylized are usually based on
theoretical arguments supplemented by selective case studies.3 Mainly due to data
limitations, distinctions are seldom made between FDI conducted in the form of mergers
and acquisitions, versus those done as greenfield (de novo) investments.
A distinct and more recent literature has been addressing themes related to crossborder flows of products or ownership in the financial services industry. This literature
generally focuses on the implications of foreign entry into local banking systems, either
from the perspective of risk management by the investing firms and parents, or from the
perspective of host markets that sometimes are skeptical about foreign entry.4 Events of
the early 1990s accelerated interest in this financial-sector FDI. Following the breakup of
the Soviet Union, foreign bank entry into Central and Eastern European countries led to
foreign ownership in local banking system often in excess of 80 percent of local banking
system assets. Liberalizations in Latin America also may have been partially prompted
by these events, especially where there were concerns about potential competitiveness
losses relative to the East. Financial crises of the mid-to late1990s prompted further
openings as countries sought to recapitalize and spur efficiency improvements in their
financial systems.
Observers of these changes in financial sector ownership have appropriately
begun to analyze the implications of this financial sector FDI on the host countries. In
this paper, I argue that many of the lessons from the general FDI research (which has a
manufacturing sector and extractive resource industry focus) directly pertain to financialsector FDI (FSFDI). I review – without attempting to be exhaustive -- some of the main
findings and policy themes, taking as a primary focus the host country implications of
FDI, especially for emerging markets. I emphasize evidence on technology transfers,
productivity spillovers, wage effects, macroeconomic growth, institutional development,
and fiscal and tax concerns. Throughout the paper, I cite the applicable parallel results
2

Dixit and Kyle (1985) provide an elegant conceptual exposition.
The case studies employ distinct “definitions” of FDI – sometimes using a flow definition (for example,
covering the foreign investment that took place within a particular period of time) or a stock definition,
which is meant to represent the total cumulative value of all foreign investment up until some point in time.
Data availability often drives the type of analysis conducted.
3

2

that have independently been reached in studies of financial sector FDI. While the
language of these orthogonal research areas may have subtle differences, I emphasize that
many of the conclusions from such research are similar. In cases where parallel results
are not available, I discuss which host country implications of general FDI are likely to
extend to financial services.
I conclude that both types of FDI can induce limited technology transfers and
productivity and wage gains in the host country. Both types of FDI can also induce
increased integration of the host country into world business cycles. Yet, FDI in banking
and finance raises distinct concerns and benefits for the host country, including in the
areas of institutional development and crisis avoidance. These differences, more so than
the similarities, warrant further study. In particular, the balance of such evidence may
provoke an examination of the question of whether emerging market governments should
encourage financial-sector FDI even to the extent of providing explicit incentives for
inflows.

II. Does FDI lead to technology transfer and productivity spillovers?
Development economists argue that multinationals, through FDI, can help to fill
an “idea gap” between developed and developing countries and provide enhanced
opportunities for developing country growth (Romer 1993). According to this view,
foreign direct investors in a country presumably have access to productive knowledge
that is not otherwise readily available to producers in the host country. However potent,
such productive knowledge may be intangible, taking the form of technological knowhow, marketing and managing skills, export contacts, coordinated relationships with
suppliers and customers, and reputation (Markusen 1995). Technology transfer from FDI
is posited to stimulate developing country growth.
This concept of technology transfer between countries has a long and rich
research history.5 Nonetheless, formal evidence is mixed on the extent that technology
transfers and productivity spillovers have occurred as a result of foreign direct
4

The insurance industry has also received significant foreign investment flows, but less research attention.
For example, see Skipper (2001).

3

investment. Some studies conclude that domestic firms in sectors with more foreign
ownership are more productive than firms in sectors with less foreign participation.6
Other studies dispute the spillover benefits of FDI into local markets7. Part of the
disagreement among researchers stems from the extent to which the studies properly
control for the conditions in a country or sector prior to the advent of FDI. Sometimes
foreign investment enters sectors where firms are ex ante more productive. Observations
of ex post high productivity are not, therefore, proof that foreign entry contributed to
enhanced productivity via technology transfer or some other channel.
On balance, FDI researchers conclude that positive productivity and technology
spillovers exist, but depend on the structure of host country production activity.8 Small
plants may have the largest productivity gains from foreign entry. Some local plants may
lose workers and experience productivity declines. In some cases the gains from foreign
investment appeared to be entirely captured by the joint ventures.9 Overall, while the
theoretical point of technology transfer from FDI is compelling, empirically the strength
of technology transfer and aggregate productivity effects remains debated in the context
of “manufacturing” FDI.

Difficulty in quantifying the strength of this channel has

complicated the proof of the idea that growth in developing countries is unambiguously
spurred by the closing of idea gaps.
Another positive effect from FDI could arise if non-recipient-industries
experience positive spillovers from the recipient industry. The view that a new plant will
stimulate the local development of services and attract related producers is sometimes
offered as a justification for (possibly excessive) incentive packages offered to foreign
investors.10 There is emerging support for a view of positive spillovers. Using data on
Lithuanian firms, Smarzynska (2004) finds evidence of productivity spillovers from FDI
taking place through contacts between foreign affiliates and their local suppliers in

5

See Horstmann and Markusen 1989 for an early discussion and formalization of this concept.
For example, Blomstrom 1989 on Mexico.
7
See Germidis 1977 for an early discussion of spillovers in the OECD.
8
Gorg and Greenaway (2003) provide a rich and more exhaustive review of the evidence on this point.
They are more skeptical that the balance of evidence is positive, but also emphasize that methodological
issues need to be better addressed.
9
Aitken and Harrison 1993, 1999 provide evidence for Venezuela and preliminary results for Indonesia.
10
Such themes were developed in the elegant theoretical analysis of Markusen and Venables (1999) and in
Rodriguez-Clare (1996).
6

4

upstream sectors (i.e. vertical linkages). This careful study finds no support for a claim of
spillovers taking place within the same industry (i.e. horizontal linkages).
These technology transfer and productivity themes have close counterparts in the
financial-sector FDI literature. Instead of using the language of productivity, recent
research in this area asks whether foreign bank entry alters the efficiency of foreignowned and domestically-owned banks. Efficiency calculations are done by using data on
overhead costs (the ratio of bank overhead costs to bank total assets) and bank net interest
margin (bank interest income minus interest expense over bank total assets). Foreign
banks operating in developing countries appear to be more efficient than their domestic
counterparts, whether privately-owned or government owned. Domestic banks are forced
to become more efficient after foreign entry, especially in the business lines in which
foreign banks choose to compete. Relevant research studies rely on either cross-country
or case study approaches, and also are “within industry”. For example, Claessens,
Demiriguc-Kunt and Huizinga (2000) use data from a sample of 80 countries to show that
foreign entry reduces the profitability of domestic banks and enhances their efficiency.
Country studies that mainly using bank balance sheet data reach similar types of
conclusions for the Philippines (Unite and Sullivan 2001), Colombia (Barajas, Steiner
and Salazar 2000), and Argentina (Clarke, Cull, D’Amato and Molinari 2000).
This financial-sector FDI research, to my knowledge, does not directly distinguish
between within-sector productivity enhancements due to changes in the market structure
of the industries versus those due to technology transfers between foreign banks and
domestic banks. Despite anecdotal accounts, direct evidence for technology transfer has
not been formalized in relation to financial-sector FDI. Most of the discussion in the area
of financial-sector FDI argues that these efficiency gains are induced by changes in
industry competitive structure: foreign entry reduces the monopolistic excesses of
domestic banks. Bank exit or mergers and acquisitions have changed local competitive
structures in ways largely unparalleled in other sectors that have received FDI. The
significant amount of bank consolidation during the past decade has been fostered by
technological change and foreign entrants into emerging markets. Interestingly, Gelos
and Roldos (2002) show convincingly that while this consolidation has been associated

5

with efficiency improvements, as previously noted, consolidation has not reduced
competition in local financial markets.

III.

Do FDI inflows change host country wages?
The productivity and technology transfer arguments lead directly to the question

of whether local workers benefit (in terms of wages) from foreign entry. When the
foreign firm possesses some intangible productive knowledge, technology transfer and
other training after foreign entry should spur expanded human capital by the host-country
employees of the foreign firm. This accumulation of human capital should manifest itself
in greater worker productivity and be rewarded by higher wages.
Empirical studies of manufacturing industries have tied higher levels of foreign
direct investment to higher wages. In Mexico and Venezuela, this wage growth was
experienced only for the workers in foreign-owned firms without broader spillovers
through the host country labor markets. In the United States, there have been smaller
wage effects from foreign investment, but these wage gains have spilled over more into
local labor markets (Aitken, Harrison and Lipsey 1996). In Indonesian industries, wages
paid in domestically-owned manufacturing plants taken over by foreign firms increased
sharply relative to wages paid in those plants that remained in domestic hands. These
results persisted even after controlling for the initial characteristics of the plants that were
taken over by foreign investors (Lipsey and Sjoholm 2002). On balance, some workers
directly benefit from FDI through higher wages. Whether due to the accumulated capital
being firm-specific, or foreign firm efforts to limit out-mobility of productive workers,
analogous growth in wages and productivity are not generally observed outside the sector
which receives FDI.
The same arguments for wage effects of FDI should apply to workers in emerging
market financial services industries. However, the data on this issue has not yet been
parsed out. There is evidence from bank balance sheet data that foreign bank operating
costs are lower and domestic bank costs are pushed down by foreign entry. In some
cases the wage expenditures decline for banks. More analysis is needed to decompose
these cost reductions into components of reduced numbers of workers (often a result of

6

acquisitions and consolidations of banks) versus higher wages paid to the remaining
workers.
A related theme is the employment effects of FDI. The overall employment
implications for the host economy, summing across the jobs of the entrant firms and
surrounding economy, most likely depend on whether the FDI takes the form of
greenfield investment (referred to as de novo in the financial services industry) or occurs
via mergers and acquisitions of pre-existing plants (or banking networks). Greenfield
investments, like the construction of a new production plant, are expected to generate
increased host country employment. This job growth might be strongest if the new plant
does not directly compete with other local production facilities, especially in serving thin
host country markets. The net employment effects also could be strong if there are
agglomeration externalities, so that the infrastructural improvements have spillovers on
other firms locally and all local producers gain.11 These points are relevant for studies of
general FDI, which do not typically distinguish between types of FDI, and would be
expected to also be quite relevant for financial FDI.
The net employment effects of merger and acquisition FDI are less transparent. If
the M&As imply that consolidation occurs over an inherited bloated infrastructure, there
may be job loss. There may be fewer individuals employed at higher wages in a plant or
banking system that ultimately is operating more efficiently. Financial-sector FDI is
often done through acquisitions of host country banks. Evidence on branch closures and
reduced wage bills post-acquisition are suggestive of within industry job loss with this
form of FDI.

IV.

Do FDI inflows accelerate macroeconomic growth?
Studies of the aggregate implications of FDI sometimes using data from larger

groups of countries and taking the form of growth regressions. One level of motivation is
drawn from the question of whether an idea gap had held back EME growth, with FDI
11

Job creation by a single plant is generally not an appropriate welfare metric for employment calculations.
The foreign plant employs workers and pays higher wages, drawing some workers from other local plants.
In a situation where the foreign investor takes over a local plant, restructuring could lead to job loss, with

7

inducing a catch-up process (Romer 1993). Indeed, the most robust evidence on FDI and
aggregate growth is found in studies of developing countries.12 Some researchers
conclude that inward investments to Greece, Taiwan, Indonesia, and Mexico have
contributed significantly to their growth. However, research that uses detailed industrylevel data also finds that growth spillovers across industries may be driven by the
industries into which FDI is targeted. Spillovers are not expected to occur across all
industries. The spillovers and growth ramifications are expected to be strongest when
foreign affiliates and local firms compete most directly with each other, as may be the
case in previously protected industries.13 Borensztein, DeGregorio, and Lee (1998) find
positive threshold effects between FDI and growth, with human capital accumulation
needing to be large enough before countries can absorb the beneficial effects of the
foreign inflows.
Two strands of research specifically tie into the question of whether financialsector FDI stimulates emerging market growth.14 Cross-country growth regressions reach
a broader finding that financial development is both positively and causally related to
economic growth.15 Beck, Demirguc-Kunt and Maksimovic (2001), however, find not
evidence that distinguishing countries by financial structure (i.e. bank-based versus
market-based) explain country differences in economic growth performance. None of the
related studies have identified whether foreign bank entry per se is a growth driver.
A second relevant literature is more suggestive of positive growth effects from
financial-sector FDI since it provides evidence of more efficient credit allocation within
economies that receive financial-sector FDI. Prior to financial sector liberalization and
only the remaining employees getting higher wages. The producer potentially generates larger income and
tax revenues for local governments.
12
See Lipsey 2000 for an informative overview.
13
Markusen (1995) was an early advocate of the view that the competitive structure of an industry is a key
driver behind FDI implications.
14
A related strand of research looks broader than only financial-sector FDI and considers the growth
implications of overall financial liberalization. The issue of financial FDI, as opposed to portfolio
investments or other forms of capital inflows, is not explicitly addressed. In this literature, financial
liberalization events are usually defined in terms of regulatory changes such as the relaxation of capital
controls or lifting of interest rate ceilings. Despite considerable research output, the extent of long term
growth benefits of capital account liberalizations is hotly debated and a consensus view has not developed.
Sharply contrasting results have been generated by researchers due to differences in country coverage,
sample periods, inclusion of crisis controls, and indicators of financial liberalization used in research. For
recent examples and surveys, see Edison, Klein, Ricci, and Slok 2002; Eichengreen and Leblang 2002.
15
For example, see Levine, Loayza and Beck (2000) and Rajan and Zingales (1998).
8

reform, some governments use the local banking system as a tool for providing directed
credit to politically favored constituents or favored but loss-making sectors of the
economy. The banks implicitly play a role in patronage, “development finance”, and
subsidize levels of activities that might not be viable on market terms. Suggestive
evidence of the costliness of such strategies is found in work by LaPorta, Lopez-deSilances, Shleifer (2002). Using data from around the world, they argue that higher levels
of government ownership of banks is associated with lower growth of per capita income
and productivity. Sapienza (2002), in a fascinating study of state-owned banks in Italy,
shows that public bank lending has a pattern of rewarding political supporters.
While serving as a means of fiscal stimulus, this type of directed lending crowds
out intermediation to worthy private borrowers. If banks are better regulated and subject
to parent bank oversight, foreign banks operating in emerging markets may be better able
to resist local suasion. As such, they may better discipline host country fiscal or monetary
“irresponsibility” and be less amenable to forced purchases of government bonds or
forced lending to favored political constituents.
Galindo and Schiantarelli (2002) document that financial liberalization tends to
relax financing constraints on producers in developing countries, and make them less
adversely influenced by financial crises. Foreign banks sometimes enter as a component
of a larger scale financial liberalization and banking privatization effort, and sometimes
enter as local governments seek to recapitalize their financial systems in the wake of
crises. Outside of crisis periods, foreign banks might be expected to contribute to growth
by providing capital to worthy but previously credit-constrained borrowers, and by not
crowding out credit provision to worthy borrowers who are outside the scope of their
business model. During crises, if foreign-owned banks are the destinations for local flight
capital, instead of this capital leaving the country there are greater opportunities for these
funds to continue to be intermediated locally.
Further evidence supportive of financial-sector FDI as a stimulus to growth is
from research on lending comparisons across banks differentiated by owner types. U.S.
bank credit provision to Latin American countries grew faster and was less sensitive to
local cycles than credit provision by domestically-owned banks (Dages, Crystal and
Goldberg 2002). The composition of credit provision also is important for long-term

9

growth, raising the concern that small businesses that rely on bank credit might have
constrained access with foreign bank entry. In Latin America, foreign-owned banks
operating have been providing credit to local constituents in similar patterns as healthy
domestically-owned banks (Dages, Goldberg, and Kinney 2000). Other than possible
biases in borrower orientation that often are linked to bank size (large banks lend
relatively less to small and medium-sized enterprises), detailed evidence for Latin
American countries shows that there has not been a systematic bias in orientation
specifically associated with foreignness (Clarke, Cull, and Martinez Peria 2002). In
Eastern Europe (specifically Hungary), on aggregate, foreign entry may even have been
associated with expanded SME credits when the domestic banks had to more
aggressively search for a broader clientele for lending (Bonin and Abel 2000).
Overall, these observations from research on credit provision in country and bank
studies are supportive of the more general growth regression results. Namely, financialsector FDI appears to support more rapid economic growth rates within economies.
V. FDI, Business Cycles, and Institutional Development
FDI can also be important the importance for the multiplier on foreign and
domestically generated business cycles, crisis contagion, and institutional development.16
Recently, researchers engaged in analyses of business cycle comovements across
countries have looked for explanations for changes in synchronization. Kose, Prasad, and
Terrones (2003) explore the changes in global linkages across different types of
developing countries in recent decades.

They divide developing countries into two

coarse groups – more financially integrated economies (MFI) and less financially
integrated countries (LFI). Both groups have low correlations with “world
macroeconomic aggregates, with these correlations not statistically higher in recent
decades compared, for example, with the 1960s and the 1970s.17
16

I do not delve substantively into the other important range of issues surrounding the alternative modes of
entry into a country (de novo versus merger and/or acquisitions with local banks) or the alternative
organizational forms for bank entrants (branch, subsidiary, or as a representative agent of the parent bank).
17
Prasad, Rogoff, Wei, and Kose (2003) provide an extensive review of this evidence, noting the broad
group of papers that look at financial integration and growth. The role of FDI within financial integration
is less well documented. Imbs (2003) finds that financial integration raises correlations among a sample of
industrialized countries. Kose and Yi (2003) argue that the increased vertical integration of production in
10

The independent role of general FDI, and specifically multinational firms in
business cycle integration, is less well explored. While Hanson and Slaughter (2003)
posit a role for multinationals that relies on profit sharing between parent and affiliate
firms, especially through wages, the strength of this channel has not been tested
empirically or assessed relative to other channels.18 As a general point, the specific
contribution of FDI to business cycle linkages, as opposed to financial integration more
broadly defined, remains a largely open question. Likewise, the relative importance of
general FDI versus financial-sector FDI in changing the nature of local business cycles
has not been determined.
Empirical analyses show that financial-sector FDI clearly has consequences for
local business cycles. This type of research typically uses bank-level data to relate
lending activities to shock transmission within and across national borders. In principle,
bank lending activity can either be procyclical or countercyclical with respect to local
business cycles and other shocks. On the loan supply side, the availability of loanable
funds via the deposit base contributes to procyclicality. To the extent that foreign bank
entrants are less reliant on host country funding sources, and more reliant on foreign
sources of funds, the procyclicality of their supply of loanable funds may be reduced.
Loan demand can either be procyclical or countercyclical. Procyclicality can arise as
individuals or businesses borrow more to expand their holdings in good times, or
countercyclical as individuals try to intertemporally smooth consumption.
Researchers typically find strong evidence of procyclicality in bank lending. In
addition to the aforementioned points, other arguments for procyclicality rely on
information asymmetries between borrowers and lenders, as within a financial accelerator
view of credit cycles.19 Or, as Borio, Furfine, and Lowe (2001) contend, procyclicality
may be the result of inappropriate responses by financial market participants to changes
in risk over time. These inappropriate responses can be caused by under-estimating risk
world trade poses a powerful channel for business cycle transmission. Such vertical production linkages are
frequently supported by patterns of general FDI, and would be suggestive of FDI in manufacturing and
extractive resource industries as stimulating business cycle comovements.
18
The arguments draw from Budd and Slaughter (2003) on international rent sharing.
19
The “financial accelerator” argument maintains that information asymmetries between lenders and
borrowers contribute to the procyclicality of lending. When economic conditions are subject to an adverse
shock, and collateral values decline, even those borrowers with profitable projects have difficulty obtaining
funding.
11

in good times and over-overestimating risk in bad times. Inappropriate credit cycles can
also derive from market participants having incentives to react to risk, even if correctly
measured, in ways that are socially suboptimal. Related arguments for procyclicality
stem from bank provisioning practices and their links to rules on regulatory capital
(Cavallo and Majnoni 2001).
These cyclical lending responses could potentially differ between foreign-owned
and domestically owned banks. Goldberg, Dages, and Crystal (2002) find that while
foreign banks are procyclical lenders, they do not appear to magnify the boom-bust
cycles in emerging markets. Analysis of individual bank data from Chile, Colombia, and
Argentina supports broad similarities between the lending patterns of private
domestically-owned domestic banks and longer-established foreign banks. The
similarities with newer established foreign banks are less systematic. While foreign banks
had higher average loan growth, they did not add significant volatility to local financial
systems or act as relatively destabilizing lenders.20
Financial-sector FDI can reduce the magnitude of host country cycles if foreign
bank involvement reduces the incidence of crises. The boom / bust cycles in international
capital flows are often derided as wreaking havoc on economies, with lending booms
contributing to financial crises. Financial liberalization, by giving banks and other
intermediaries more freedom of action and allowing them to take greater risks, is
sometimes argued to increase the financial fragility in an emerging market. Studies by
Demirguc-Kunt and Detragiache (1998, 2001), as well as work by Rojas-Suarez (2001),
find that find financial liberalization (defined as interest rate liberalization) has costs in
terms of increased financial fragility, especially in developing countries where the
institutions needed to support a well-functioning financial system are generally not wellestablished.
Yet institutions in developing countries can respond positively to FDFDI. Crystal,
Dages, and Goldberg (2002) show that foreign owned banks appear to contribute to the
overall soundness of local banking systems via more aggressive screening and treatment
of problem loans. If foreign entry spurs additional regulatory improvements, financial
crisis risk declines. Demiriguc-Kunt, Levine, and Min (1998) relate foreign bank entry
20

See also Goldberg (2002), Dages, Kinney and Goldberg (2000), and Horvath (2002).
12

per se to the probability that a banking crisis will occur. The foreign bank presence was
found to have a negative and statistically significant coefficient, leading the authors to
conclude that (controlling for other factors likely to produce banking crises) greater
foreign bank participation had a stabilizing effect.
The transmission of shocks across borders is another issue that bears on financial
crises. Foreign banks may contribute to contagion through common lender effects, as
documented in Van Rijckeghem and Weder (2000). Foreign banks could also be subject
to foreign cyclical flows. However, any private bank with access to foreign loanable
funds can be similarly effected: foreign cycles have been shown to effect the lending and
deposit bases of both domestically and foreign owned private banks in emerging markets
(Crystal, Dages, and Goldberg 2002). More evidence is needed on the question of
whether foreign banks have access to – and receive – additional capital from their head
offices in times of stress. Anecdotal evidence suggests that there is not a systematic
relationship, but this warrants more rigorous study.
On the issue of crises it is worth noting that foreign banks may contribute to
domestic financial stability by being within a country’s borders, rather than abroad. If
flight to quality occurs under stress periods, it may be better to have domestic depositors
keep their money within the domestic financial system (to be reintermediated locally)
rather than leave the country through capital flight.

Martinez-Peria and Schmukler

(1999) document that depositors recognize differences in health and efficiency of banks,
moving their assets to better functioning banks or demanding higher deposit rates.
Locally generated claims from foreign-owned banks substitute, in part, for cross border
flows, with the latter sometimes more volatile.21

21

More evidence is needed on the extent to which there is substitutability between cross border flows and
locally-generated claims by foreign branches and subsidiaries. There are direct parallels between these
types of questions in financial FDI and questions long raised in the area of real-side FDI. In manufacturing
industries, there is no clear pattern of substitutability versus complementarity in bilateral flows between
Latin American countries and the United States. But, manufacturers in different countries may engage in
distinct FDI strategies. Research has shown that for Southeast Asian countries, FDI from Japan enhanced
Japanese exports to those countries (consistent with intermediate input trade) while FDI from the United
States substituted for exports from the United States to Southeast Asia. FDI from these two sources did not
systematically influence exports from the U.S. or Japan to Latin American countries. (Goldberg and Klein
1998, 2001).
13

Host country institutional development
In theory, general and financial-sector FDI can play a causal role in host country
institutional development. The direct role of general FDI in host country institutional
reform is not well-documented by researchers. Financial-sector FDI has been more
closely linked to institutional reforms, but systematic analysis of this institutional
response is warranted. The recent availability of rich institutional databases, such as the
World Bank database on Bank Regulation and Supervision, may facilitate this type of
testing.22
Numerous studies assert the financial-sector FDI spurs improvements in bank
supervision, with regulatory spillovers. The entry into emerging markets of foreign banks
that are healthier than domestic banks implicitly allows a country to import stronger
prudential regulation and increase the soundness of the local banking sector. In the cases
of Argentina, Chile, and Colombia, for example, foreign banks have contributed to
enhanced domestic financial stability by engaging in more aggressive risk management
techniques (Crystal, Dages and Goldberg 2002). Calomiris and Powell (2001) argued
that Argentina’s bank regulatory system in the late 1990s was one of the most successful
among emerging market economies. Reliance on market discipline was viewed as playing
an important role in prudential regulation by strengthening risk management among
banks.
The transitions to improved local supervision might be bumpy. Major
international banks may try to build market share by offering a variety of new financial
products, including OTC derivatives, structured notes, and equity swaps. These new
derivative products can provide improved opportunities for hedging a variety of risks.
Yet, some new products may also be used to evade prudential regulations and take on
excess risks, especially in countries with weak financial systems with under-prepared
supervisors (Garber 2000). One clear implication is that local supervisors in emerging
markets may need to make early investments in upgrading their skills in order to better
evaluate the use and effects of new products. Other challenges for supervisors arise in the

22

See Barth, Caprio, and Levine (2002).
14

context of relationships with parent banks, and may depend on whether the foreign entry
is accomplished through branches or subsidiaries.23
Foreign bank entry also raises issues of competition policy within host country
banking systems. While the actual experiences of host countries have been extensively
elaborated elsewhere (see the collection of articles in BIS 2001, and its overview by
Hawkins and Mihaljek), on average consolidation has occurred without deterioration of
the competitiveness of the financial services industry within a country (Gelos and Roldos
2002).
Another challenge arises in the case where the financial services industry
becomes highly concentrated with monopolistic pricing tendencies exerted by banks (for
example). If foreign banks are among the few surviving banks, local regulators may be
tempted to conclude that foreign banks bear specific responsibility for adverse outcomes.
Yet in many cases, foreign bank entry occurs as part of a process of larger scale
restructuring and recapitalization of the EME financial system. More concentrated market
power may have occurred regardless of whether owners were foreign or domestic. Even
with monopolistic pricing, there may be other benefits through scale economies and
improved services that are the by-products of consolidation. These issues challenge
regulators to engage in careful cost-benefit analyses and policy reactions.

VI. Fiscal and tax questions raised by FDI
Public finance decisions concerning multinationals24 and host country
governments have received considerable analytical attention, particularly in the area of
general FDI. One pertinent and very important issue is that of incentives offered to
foreign investors in order to attract them to a country (or locality within a country). Such
efforts to attract multinationals and foreign investment capital have been extensive. As
reported in UNCTAD (2001:6-7), nearly 95 percent of the almost 1200 changes in
23

One recent study considers the stability of cross border versus FDI flows in banking for Central and
Eastern European countries (Buch, Kleinert, and Zajc 2003). In preliminary work, the authors argue that
FDI should have an additional stabilizing feature since it should allow banks in CEECs to draw on the
liquidity buffer of their headquarters abroad. Branches and subsidiaries are not distinguished in the
conceptual presentation.
24
See The Effects of Taxation on Multinational Corporations, edited by Martin Feldstein, James Hines, Jr.
and R. Glenn Hubbard (NBER and U. Chicago Press, 1995).
15

national FDI legislation during 1991 through 2000 were favorable to foreign investors --sometimes taking the form of special incentives to foreign enterprises, including lower
income taxes, income tax holidays, import duty exemptions, and subsidies for
infrastructure.
Researchers and policymakers correctly ask whether (quantitatively) there is
reason to believe that the benefits from FDI justify the costs. When governments compete
actively against each other for FDI, profits from the investments are shifted from the host
country to multinational enterprises (Oman 2000).25 While debate over this point
remains, Blomstrom and Kokko (2003) provide a compelling argument that the types of
long-term benefits that are generated by FDI may not justify the short-term costs. These
benefits include the positive spillovers between firms and across sectors that researchers
continue to try to identify. Governments may make excessive long-term financial
commitments for the employment and political gains that are received in the short term.
“strong promotion efforts show that the government is actively doing something to
strengthen employment, productivity, growth, or some other policy objective …
Another reason is that some of the perceived benefits (in particular, the jobs created
by FDI) are easily observable while some of the costs (particularly related to tax
breaks and fiscal incentives) are distributed over long periods of time and hard to
measure.”
Blomstrom and Kokko 2003.
The same questions, to date applied almost exclusively in the area of general FDI,
also are pertinent in the area of financial-sector FDI. We have suggested a number of
important dimensions along which financial-sector FDI is expected to have distinct
implications from the more general forms of FDI. These areas include changes in crisis
incidence, business cycle magnitudes, and institutional development. Clearly, given the
welfare consequences of business cycles and crises, the calculus of costs and benefits of
actively promoting and subsidizing such foreign entry is a topic worthy of further
analysis. The quantities that have been implicitly or explicitly put on the table for
attracting financial FDI have not been, to my knowledge, systematically studied.

25

Similar arguments apply to states within countries that compete against each other to attract new
production facilities.
16

VII. Concluding Remarks.
This paper has argued that multinationals and FDI into emerging markets
generally have a number of important effects on host countries, with some of these
effects specific to FDI in financial services. Some effects are associated with changes in
allocative efficiency, technology transfer and diffusion, wage spillovers, institution
building, macroeconomic cycles, and overall economic stability.
In brief, research concludes that FDI is typically associated with improved
allocative efficiency. This improvement can occur when foreign investors enter into
industries with high entry barriers and then reduce local monopolistic distortions. The
presence of foreign producers may also induce higher technical efficiency: the increased
competitive pressure or some demonstration effect may spur local firms to more efficient
use of existing resources.
FDI also is associated with higher rates of technology transfer and diffusion, and
higher wages. While there is evidence of technological improvements from FDI, and a
presumption that FDI will consequently stimulate economic growth, the strength of these
effects is disputed. Higher wages also are induced by FDI into host countries, although
sometimes these wage effects are limited to the foreign-owned production facilities and
do not spillover more broadly.
Institutional change is another potential implication of FDI.

At least in the

context of FDI in financial services, the outcome is in the direction of improved
regulation and supervision. Sometimes these improvements occur with a lag, as
supervisors in host countries may be initially unprepared for evaluating the new products
and processes introduced by foreign entrants.
FDI can also play a role in non-crisis and crisis macroeconomic conditions.
Foreign banks are procyclical lenders in emerging markets. Domestic privately-owned
banks also are procyclical lenders, so the presence of foreign banks does not aggravate
the boom-bust cycle in lending and international capital flows. Foreign entrants may
introduce a more diversified supply of funds, in principle leading loan supply to be less
procyclical but also more sensitive to foreign fluctuations. Foreign bank entry into
emerging markets reduces the incidence of crises, but enhances the potential for greater

17

contagion through common lender effects. The contagion issue is reduced when foreign
banks have a stronger subsidiary presence, as opposed to supporting local markets
through cross-border flows.
A debate actively rages on the issue of whether governments should actively
pursue FDI through subsidies and other incentive programs. In the literature on FDI (real
side) there is some skepticism about whether the real benefits from FDI to the host
country justify the sometimes large incentives offered to attract foreign investors. These
investment incentives may be off-budget items in developing countries – for example as
tax holidays that do not require payment of scare public funds.
The special features of financial FDI add other dimensions to this debate, and
warrant further exploration. There are some broad similarities, but also some differences,
between the effects of manufacturing FDI and financial FDI. . The employment effects of
financial FDI are more subtle,26 depending in part on whether the investment is greenfield
or merger and acquisition. In the latter case, the effects also depend on whether the
acquired institution was financially sound or needing restructuring, regardless of the
nationality of the new owners.
The institutional effects are clearer. Financial FDI from well-regulated and
supervised source countries can support emerging market institutional development and
governance, improve the mix of financial services and risk management tools of a host
country,

and

potentially

reduce

the

sharp

crises

associated

with

financial

underdevelopment in emerging markets. This type of financial FDI can initially pose
strong regulatory challenges to local supervisors, who need to develop expertise in the
practices and products introduced into their local economies. A range of analytical and
policy questions arise. The most basic decision point is whether developing countries
should open up to foreign financial-sector entrants. Many emerging markets have
responded with strong affirmative statements in the past decade. A second question, goes
beyond the decision point of whether or not to open to financial foreign investment, and
asks whether the benefits of this financial sector FDI are such that a country should

26

If manufacturing FDI evidence is a guide to where spillovers are likely, Kokko (1994) shows that the
incidence of spillovers is related to a host country’s ability to absorb them.
18

actively encourage and support entry. Careful discussion and further rigorous analyses
would better inform this important issue.

References:
Aitken, Brian and Ann Harrison. 1999. “Do Domestic Firms Benefit from Direct Foreign
Investment? Evidence from Venezuela” American Economic Review vol.89 no.3 (June)
pp.606-618.
Aitken, Brian, Ann Harrison, and Robert E. Lipsey. 1996. “Wages and Foreign
Ownership: A Comparative Study of Mexico, Venezuela, and the United States”, Journal
of International Economics, Vol. 40, No. 3/4, (May), pp. 345-371.
Bank for International Settlements, 2001. The banking industry in the emerging market
economies: competition, consolidation, and systemic stability. BIS papers no. 4 Monetary
and Economics Department (August).
Barajas, Adolfo, Roberto Steiner, and Natalia Salazar. 2000. “The Impact of
Liberalization and Foreign Investment in Colombia’s Financial Sector.” Journal of
Development Economics 63 (1): 157-96.
Barth, James, Gerard Caprio, and Ross Levine. 2001. “Banking Systems Around the
Globe: Do Regulation and Ownership Affect Performance and Stability?” in Frederic
Mishkin, ed., Prudential Regulation and Supervision: What Works and What Doesn’t.
(Boston Ma: National Bureau of Economic Research).
Barth, James, Gerard Caprio, and Ross Levine. 2002. “Bank Regulation and Supervision:
What Works Best?” NBER working paper 9323 (November).
Blomstrom, Magnus. 1989. Foreign Investment and Spillovers. London: Routledge.
Blomstrom, Magnus, and Ari Kokko. 2003. “The Economics of Foreign Direct
Investment Incentives” NBER 9489. http://papers.nber.org/papers/W9489
Bonin, John and I. Abel. 2000. “Retail Banking in Hungary: A Foreign Affair?” William
Davidson Institute working paper no. 356.
Borensztein, Eduardo, Jose de Gregorio, and J.W. Lee. 1998. “How does foreign direct
investment affect economic growth?” Journal of International Economics vol. 45, pp.
115-135.
Borio, C., C. Furfine, and P. Lowe. 2001. Procyclicality of the financial system and
financial stability: Issues and Policy options. BIS working paper.

19

Buch, Claudia, Jorn Kleinert, and Peter Zajc. January 2003. “Financial Integration and
Stability in Transition Economies: Does the Mode of Entry Matter?” manuscript, Kiel
Institute for World Economics.
Budd, John, and Matthew Slaughter. forthcoming. “Are Profits Shared Across Borders?
Evidence on International Rent Sharing," Journal of Labor Economics.
Burdisso, Tamaro, Laura D’Amato, and Andrea Molinari. 1998. “The Bank Privatization
Process in Argentina: Toward a More Efficient Banking System?” Unpublished paper,
Banco Central de la República Argentina (October).
Calomiris, Charles and Andrew Powell. 2001. “Can Emerging Market Bank Regulators
Establish Credible Discipline? The Case of Argentina, 1992-1999.” In Prudential
Supervision: What Works and What Doesn’t, edited by Frederic Mishkin (NBER and
University of Chicago Press).
Cavallo, Michele and Giovanni Majnoni. 2001. “Do Banks Provision for Bad Loans in
Good Times?” World Bank Policy Research working paper no. 2619.
Claessens, Stijn, Asli Demiriguc-Kunt, and Harry Huizinga. 2000. “The Role of Foreign
Banks in Domestic Banking Systems.” In Stijn Claessens and Marion Jansen, eds. The
Internationalization of Financial Services: Issues and Lessons for Developing Countries.
(Boston MA: Kluwer Academic Press)
Claessens, Stijn, Asli Demiriguc-Kunt, and Harry Huizinga. 2001. “How does foreign
entry affect domestic banking markets?” Journal of Banking and Finance, 25, pp.891911.
Clarke, George, Robert Cull, Laura D’Amato, and Andrea Molinari. 1999. “The Effect of
Foreign Entry on Argentina’s Banking System.” In The Internationalization of Financial
Services: Issues and Lessons for Developing Countries, edited by Stijn Claessens and
Marion Jansen. (Doredrecht, The Netherlands: Kluwer Academic).
Clarke, George, Robert Cull and Maria Soledad Martinez Peria. 2002. Does Foreign
Bank Penetration Reduce Access to Credit in Developing Countries? Evidence from
Asking Borrowers. Manuscript.
Clarke, George, Robert Cull and Maria Soledad Martinez Peria. 2002. “Foreign Bank
Entry: Experience, Implications for Developing Countries, and Agenda for Further
Research”. Manuscript (June).
Crystal, Jennifer, B. Gerard Dages, and Linda Goldberg. 2001. “Does Foreign Ownership
Contribute to Sounder Banks? The Latin American Experience.” In Open Doors: Foreign
Participation in Financial Systems in Developing Countries, edited by Robert Litan, Paul

20

Masson, and Michael Pomerleano (Washington DC: Brookings Institution and the World
Bank): 217-266.
Dages, B. Gerard, Daniel Kinney, and Linda Goldberg. 2000. “Foreign and Domestic
Bank Participation in Emerging Markets: Lessons from Mexico and Argentina” in
Federal Reserve Bank of New York, Economic Policy Review 6(3): 17-36.
Demirgic-Kunt, Asli and Enrica Detragiache. 1998. “The Determinants of Banking
Crises: Evidence from Industrial and Developing Countries.” IMF Staff Papers 45(1): 81109.
Demirgic-Kunt, Asli and Enrica Detragiache. 2001. “Financial Liberalization and
Financial Fragility” in Financial Liberalization: How Far, How Fast? Edited by Gerard
Caprio, Patrick Honohan, and Joseph Stiglitz (New York: Cambridge University Press).
Demirguc-Kunt, Asli, Ross Levine, and Hong-Ghi Min. 1998. “Opening to Foreign
Banks: Issues of Stability, Efficiency, and Growth.” In Seongtae Lee, ed., The
Implications of Globalization of World Financial Markets. (Seoul: Bank of Korea).
Detragaiche, Enrica and Poonam Gupta. 2002. “Foreign Bank in Emerging Market
Crises: Malaysia, 1996-98” International Monetary Fund, Washington DC.
Dixit, Avinash and A.S. Kyle. 1985. “The Use of Protection and Subsidies for Entry
Promotion and Deterrence.” American Economic Review 75: 139-152.
Edison, Hali, Michael Klein, Luca Ricci, and Torsten Slok. 2002. Capital Account
Liberalization and Economic Performance: Survey and Synthesis. IMF working paper
(May).
Eichengreen, Barry and David Leblang. 2002. Capital Account Liberalization and
Growth: Was Mr. Mahathir Right? NBER working paper no. 9427 (December).
Feldstein, Martin, James R. Hines, and R. Glenn Hubbard. The Effects of Taxation on
Multinational Corporations. (Chicago: NBER and University of Chicago Press).
Focarelli, Daio and Alberto Franco Pozzolo. “Where do Banks Expand Abroad? An
Empirical Analysis.” Manuscript.
Fosfuri, A., M. Motta, and T. Ronde. 2001. “Foreign Direct Investment and Spillovers
through Worker’s Mobility”. Journal of International Economics vol. 53, pp. 205-222.
Galindo, Arturo, Alejandro Micco, and Serra, “Better the Devil that You Know: Evidence
on Entry Costs Faced by Foreign Banks” IADB September 2002.
Galindo, Arturo, and Fabio Schiantarelli, “Credit Contraints on Firms in Latin America:
An Overview of the Micro Evidence” IADB 2002.

21

Garber, Peter. 2000. “What you see vs. what you get: Derivatives in International Capital
Flows” in Managing Financial and Corporate Distress: Lessons from Asia, edited by
Charles Adams, Robert E. Litan, Michael Pomerleano (Brookings).
http://brookings.nap.edu/books/0815701039/html/362.html#pagetop

Gelos, Gaston and Jorge Roldos. 2002. Consolidation and Market Structure in Emerging
Market Banking Systems. Manuscript.
Germidis, Dimitri. Transfers of technology by multinational corporations. Paris. OECD
1977.
Goldberg, Linda. 2002. “When Is Foreign Bank Lending to Emerging Markets Volatile?”
in Preventing Currency Crises in Emerging Markets, edited by Sebastian Edwards and
Jeffrey Frankel (NBER and University of Chicago Press).
Goldberg, Linda, B. Gerard Dages, and Jennifer Crystal. 2002. “The Lending Cycles of
Banks in Emerging Markets: Foreign and Domestic Owners Compared”. Manuscript,
Federal Reserve Bank of New York.
Goldberg, Linda and Michael Klein. 1998. "Foreign Direct Investment, Trade and Real
Exchange Rate Linkages in Developing Countries", 1998, in Managing Capital Flows
and Exchange Rates: Perspectives from the Pacific Basin, edited by Reuven Glick.
(Cambridge University Press).
Goldberg, Linda and Michael Klein. 2001. "International Trade and Factor Mobility: An
Empirical Investigation", in Money, Capital Mobility and Trade: Essays in Honor of
Robert Mundell, edited by G. Calvo, R. Dornbusch, and M. Obstfeld. (M.I.T. Press).
Gorg, Holger and David Greenaway. 2003. “Much Ado About Nothing? Do Domestic
Firms Really Benefit from Foreign Direct Investment?” World Bank Research Observer
(forthcoming).
Hanson, Gordon and Matthew Slaughter. 2003. “The Role of Multinational Corporations
in International Business Cycle Transmission.” Manuscript.
Hawkins, John and Dubravko Mihaljek. 2001. “The banking industry in the emerging
market economies: competition, consolidation and systemic stability: an overview”. In
The banking industry in the emerging market economies: competition, consolidation and
systemic stability Bank for International Settlements papers no. 4 (August).
Horstmann, Ignatius and James Markusen. “Firm-specific Assets and the Gains from
Direct Foreign Investment”. Economica, February 1989, 56 (221) pp.41-48.
Horvath, E. 2002. Lending booms, credit risk and the dynamic provisioning system, in
Studies on the Procyclical Behaviour of Banks, National Bank of Hungary Occasional
Papers #10. http://www.mnb.hu/english/
22

Imbs, Jean. 2003. “Trade, Finance, Specialization, and Synchronization” Review of
Economics and Statistics. August.
Kiraly, Julia, Bea Majer, Lazlo Matyas, Bela Ocsi, Andras Sugar and Eva Varhegyi.
2000. “Experience with Internationalization of Financial Services Providers – Case
Study: Hungary.” In Stijn Claessens and Marion Jansen, eds The Internationalization of
Financial Services: Issues and Lessons for Developing Countries. (Boston, Mass.:
Kluwer Academic Press.)
Kokko, Ari, 1994. “Technology, Market Characteristics, and Spillovers,” Journal of
Development Economics vol. 43 pp.279-293.
Kose, M. Ayhan, Eswar S. Prasad, and Marco E. Terrones. 2003. “Volatility and
Comovement in a Globalized World Economy: An Empirical Exploration.” International
Monetary Fund, working paper wp/03/246.
LaPorta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silances, and Andrei Shleifer. 2002. “Government
Ownership of Banks” Journal of Finance, forthcoming.
Levine, Ross. 1999. “Foreign Bank Entry and Capital Control Liberalization: Effects on
Growth and Stability.” Manuscript, University of Minnesota.
Levine, Ross, Norman Loayza, and Thorsten Beck. 2000. “Financial Intermediation and
Growth: Causality and Causes”. Journal of Monetary Economics, vol. 46 (1): 31-77.
Lipsey. 2000. “Inward FDI and Economic Growth in Developing Countries,”
Transnational Corporations, Vol. 9, No. 1, (April), Geneva, United Nations Conference
on Trade and Development, pp. 67-96.
Lipsey, Robert E. and Frederik Sjoholm. 2002. “Foreign Firms and Indonesian
Manufacturing Wages: An Analysis with Panel Data”. NBER working paper no. 9417
(December).
Markusen, James R. 1995. “The Boundaries of Multinational Enterprises and the Theory
of International Trade.” Journal of Economic Perspectives vol. 9, pp. 169-189.
Markusen, James R. and Anthony J. Venables. 1999. “Foreign Direct Investment as a
Catalyst for Industrial Development.” European Economic Review, vol. 43, pp.335-356.
Mathieson, Donald J. and Jorge Roldas, 2001. “Foreign Banks in Emerging Markets”. In
Robert E. Litan, Paul Masson, and Michael Pomerleano, eds. Open Doors: Foreign
Participation in Financial Systems in Developing Countries. (Washington DC: Brookings
Institute Press.)

23

Martinez Peria, Maria Soledad, and Sergio Schmukler. 1999. “Do Depositors Punish
Banks for ‘Bad’ Behavior? Market Discipline in Argentina, Chile, and Mexico.” World
Bank Policy Research Working Paper no. 2058 (February).
Novaes and Sergio Werlang. “Political Risk and capital Structure choice of foreign
subsidiaries: An Empirical Analysis” November 2001
http://www.bis.org/pub/joint04.pdf

Oman, C. 2000. Policy Competition for Foreign Direct Investment: A Study of
Competition Among Governments to Attract FDI. (Paris OECD).
Peek, Joe, and Eric Rosengren. 1997. “The International Transmission of Financial
Shocks: The Case of Japan.” American Economic Review 87, no. 4 (September): 495505.
Peek, Joe, and Eric Rosengren. 2000. “The Role of Foreign Banks in Latin America.”
Manuscript.
Prasad, Eswar, Kenneth Rogoff, Shang-Jin Wei, and M. Ayhan Kose. 2003. “Effects of
Financial Globalization on Developing Countries: Some Empirical Evidence.”
International Monetary Fund Occasional Paper #220 (Washington D.C.).
Rajan, Raghuram G. and Luigi Zingales. “Financial Dependence and Growth.” American
Economic Review vol. 88 (3). June. Pp. 559-586.
Rodriguez-Clare, Andres. 1996. “Multinational Linkages and Economic Development.”
American Economic Review vol. 86 pp. 852-873.
Rojas-Suarez, Liliana. 2001. “Rating banks in emerging markets: What credit rating
agencies should learn from financial indicators.” Institute for International Economics
working paper 01-6.
Romer, Paul. 1993. “Idea gaps and object gaps in economic development” Journal of
Monetary Economics 32 pp. 543-573.
Sapienza, Paola. “Lending Incentives of State-Owned Banks” Northwestern University
working paper. 2002.
Seth, Rama, Daniel E. Nolle, and Sunil K. Mohanty. 1998. “Do Banks Follow Their
Customers Abroad?” Financial Markets, Institutions, and Instruments 7 (4): 1-25.
Skipper, Harold, Jr.. 2001. “Liberalization of Insurance Markets: Issues and Concerns”.
In Open Doors: Foreign Participation in Financial Systems in Developing Countries,
edited by Robert Litan, Paul Masson, and Michael Pomerleano (Washington DC:
Brookings Institution and the World Bank): 105-156.

24

Smarzynska, Beata. 2004. “Does Foreign Direct Investment Increase the Productivity of
Domestic Firms? In Search of Spillovers through Backward Linkages.” American
Economic Review, forthcoming.
Stallings, Barbara and Rogerio Studart. 2001. “Financial Regulation and Supervision in
Emerging Markets: The Experience of Latin America since the Tequila Crisis”. CEPAL.
Ter Wengel. 1995. “International Trade in Banking Services,” Journal of International
Money and Finance, 14, 47-64.
UNCTAD. 2001. World Investment Report 2001. Promoting Linkages. (Switzerland: The
United Nations)
Unite, Angelo and Michael Sullivan. 2001. “The Impact of Liberalization of Foreign
Bank Entry on the Philippine Domestic Banking Market.” Philippine Institute PASCN
discussion paper 2001-08.
Van Rijckeghem, Caroline and Beatrice Weder. 2000. “Spillovers through Banking
Centers: A Panel Data Analysis of Bank Flows” Journal of International Money and
Finance (forthcoming).
Weller (2001) “The Supply of Credit by Multinational Banks in Developing and
Transition Economies: Determinants and Effects”. United Nations DESA Discussion
Paper no. 16 http://www.un.org/esa/esa01dp16.pdf
Zhang, Kevin Honglin and James Markusen. 1999. “Vertical Multinational and HostCountry Characteristics”. Journal of Development Economics 59: 233-252.

25

