                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          A MODEL OF HOUSING IN THE
                        PRESENCE OF ADJUSTMENT COSTS:
               A STRUCTURAL INTERPRETATION OF HABIT PERSISTENCE

                                           Marjorie Flavin
                                          Shinobu Nakagawa

                                         Working Paper 10458
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w10458


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       April 2004




For helpful comments we thank Elena Bisagni, James Hamilton, Bruce Lehmann, and especially Takashi
Yamashita. This is a revised version of the October, 2001 paper circulated under the title “Owner-Occupied
Housing in the Presence of Adjustment Costs: Implications for Asset Pricing and Nondurable Consumption”.
The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

©2004 by Marjorie Flavin and Shinobu Nakagawa. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.
A Model of Housing in the Presence of Adjustment Costs:
A Structural Interpretation of Habit Persistence
Marjorie Flavin and Shinobu Nakagawa
NBER Working Paper No. 10458
April 2004
JEL No. E21, G12, G11
                                           ABSTRACT

       The paper generalizes the Grossman and Laroque (1990) model of optimal consumption and

portfolio allocation in the context in which a durable good (or house) subject to adjustment costs is

both an argument of the utility function and a component of wealth. Because the Grossman and

Laroque model abstracts completely from nondurable consumption, their analysis cannot address

either a) the potential spillover effects of the adjustment costs of the durable good on the dynamics

of nondurable consumption, or b) the implications for portfolio allocation of housing risk arising

from variation in the relative price of housing.

       By introducing an endogenously determined but infrequently adjusted state variable, the

housing model generates many of the implications of the habit persistence model, such as smooth

nondurable consumption, state-dependent risk aversion, and a small elasticity of intertemporal

substitution despite moderate risk aversion. Using a specification of the utility function which nests

both the housing model and habit persistence, the Euler equation for nondurable consumption is

estimated with household level data on food consumption and housing from the PSID. The habit

persistence model (without housing effects) can be decisively rejected, while the housing model

(without habit effects) is not rejected.

Marjorie Flavin                                Shinobu Nakagawa
Economics Department                           Associate Director
UCSD                                           Bank Examination and Surveillance Department
9500 Gilman Drive                              The Bank of Japan
La Jolla, CA 92093-0508                        Tokyo, Japan
and NBER                                       shinobu.nakagawa@boj.or.jp
mflavin@ucsd.edu
                                                                                                                             1




         The paper generalizes the Grossman and Laroque (1990) model of optimal consumption and

portfolio allocation in the context in which a durable good (or house) subject to adjustment costs is

both an argument of the utility function and a component of wealth. Because the Grossman and

Laroque version of the model considers a utility function in which the durable good is the sole

argument, and thus abstracts completely from nondurable consumption, their analysis cannot address

either a) the potential spillover effects of the adjustment costs of the durable good on the dynamics of

nondurable consumption, or b) the implications for portfolio allocation of housing risk arising from

variation in the relative price of housing. By incorporating a utility function that includes nondurable

consumption goods as well as the durable good as arguments, the model nests both the Grossman and

Laroque model and the standard consumption-beta model.1

         Like Grossman and Laroque, we assume that the household incurs an adjustment cost when

altering the holding of the durable good (or house), although financial assets can be bought and sold

costlessly. Consumption of the nondurable good can also be adjusted costlessly. When choosing a

new house, the consumer takes into account the fact that the consumption of housing services will be

constant at the new level until the subsequent stopping time, when it is again worthwhile to incur the

adjustment cost. Thus the home purchase decision is endogenous and fully rational, but, because of

the adjustment cost, infrequent. In this continuous time setting, the household’s decision process has a


1
  Beaulieu (1993) also develops a generalization of Grossman and Laroque (1990) in which the utility function depends on
nondurable goods as well as a house. In Beaulieu’s model, the relative price of the house in terms of the nondurable good
is fixed. Due to the simplifying assumption that the relative price of the two goods is constant, housing is “risky” only
because the household may be confronted with paying the adjustment cost; his approach does not allow for housing risk in
the form of appreciation or depreciation of the value of the house relative to nondurable goods. Nevertheless, Beaulieu’s
analysis makes several of the points discussed below; in particular, he points out that adding the durable good (subject to
costly adjustment) to the standard consumption-beta model drives a wedge between the elasticity of intertemporal
substitution and the reciprocal of the coefficient of relative risk aversion. He also points out that while the Euler equation
for nondurable consumption holds in the more general model, the fact that the marginal utility of nondurable consumption
depends, at the household level, on the holding of the durable good, aggregation issues will preclude empirical applications
of the model based on representative agent specifications.
                                                                                                            2

recursive structure; at each instant, the household first decides whether it is optimal to sell the house

immediately. On those rare occasions that it is optimal to incur the adjustment cost, the household

sells the old house and buys a new one instantaneously. If the household decides that it is not optimal

to sell the house immediately, it then determines its optimal holdings of financial assets and optimal

level of nondurable consumption conditional on the current housing stock. In essence, because of the

adjustment costs associated with the durable good, the current house stock becomes a state variable

that affects both the nondurable consumption choice and portfolio allocation.

       The analytical model shows that if the covariance matrix of asset returns is block diagonal in

the sense that the return to housing is uncorrelated with the returns to financial assets, all households

will hold a single optimal portfolio of risky financial assets, despite differences among households in

terms of preferences or in terms of the state variables faced. The paper provides some empirical

evidence, and cites other evidence, that the block diagonality assumption required by the model is

consistent with the data. While the state variables do not affect the composition of the optimal risky

portfolio, they do affect the household’s degree of risk aversion and therefore the allocation of the

portfolio between the optimal risky portfolio and the riskless asset. Further, in the absence of

nonnegativity constraints on the holdings of financial assets, asset pricing is consistent with the

standard Capital Asset Pricing Model (CAPM).

       Unlike the standard model in which utility is a function of a single, nondurable consumption

good, the model does not imply an exact inverse relationship between the curvature of the utility

function and the elasticity of intertemporal substitution. Depending on the degree of substitutability of

the two goods, the elasticity of intertemporal substitution can in theory be greater than, equal to, or less

than, the reciprocal of the curvature parameter. Under the plausible assumption of imperfect

intratemporal substitutability between the two goods, the model can generate a low elasticity of
                                                                                                             3

intertemporal substitution of nondurable consumption without assuming a high value of the curvature

parameter.

       Along many dimensions, the housing model looks a lot like the habit persistence model. Both

models explain the smoothness of nondurable consumption by introducing an additional state variable

to the household’s optimization problem. Because the state variable moves slowly (when the state

variable is interpreted as the habitual level of consumption) or is unchanged for substantial periods of

time (when the state variable is interpreted as the house), both models can generate a low elasticity of

intertemporal substitution without requiring a high degree of curvature of the utility function.

However, since the two models differ in their specification of the crucial state variable, it is possible to

discriminate between the models empirically. In the final section of the paper, we consider a general

utility function which nests the restricted utility functions consistent with the habit persistence model,

the housing model, and the standard model. Using data from the PSID and the American Housing

Survey, estimates of the parameters of the utility function are obtained by estimating the Euler

equation for nondurable consumption. The empirical results confirm the finding of Dynan (2000) that

very little evidence of habit persistence is found at the household level. Further, the parameter

restrictions implied by the habit persistence model and the standard model are rejected decisively,

while the parameter restrictions imposed by the housing model are not rejected. The parameter

estimates imply that 1) the utility function exhibits only a modest degree of curvature and 2)

intratemporal substitutability between housing and nondurable consumption is substantially less than

perfect.
                                                                                                             4

Section 1: Analytical model

       In an important paper, Grossman and Laroque (l990) analyze optimal consumption and

portfolio allocation in a context in which utility is derived solely from an illiquid durable good. They

show that even modest transactions costs associated with adjustment of the quantity of the durable

good will prevent the household from continuously equating the marginal utility of consumption with

the marginal utility of wealth and therefore cause the consumption based CAPM to fail. Consumption

(that is, consumption of the flow of services from the durable good) and marginal utility are constant

for significant periods of time, despite fluctuations in the marginal utility of wealth, because the

transactions costs preclude continuous, or even frequent, adjustment of the stock of the durable good.

       Flavin and Yamashita (1999) consider a generalization of the Grossman and Laroque model in

which current utility is a function of both a durable good, that is, a house, H, and a nondurable good, C.

The nondurable good, C, has the ideal attributes of being infinitely divisible and costlessly adjustable.

As in Grossman and Laroque, once the household purchases a particular house, no adjustments to the

size (or any other attribute such as location) can be made without selling the existing house and

incurring an adjustment cost proportional to the value of the house, then purchasing a new house.

       The household maximizes expected lifetime utility:

                 ∞
(1)     U = E 0 ∫ e −δt u( H t , C t )dt
                 0

The instantaneous utility function, u( H t , C t ) , depends on the flow of housing services, which in turn is

assumed proportional to the housing stock, H. By choice of units, the factor of proportionality relating

housing services to the housing stock is normalized to unity, so that the utility function can be written

as a function of the housing stock. The household’s rate of time preference is denoted by δ .
                                                                                                              5

          Much of Grossman and Laroque (l990) is devoted to analytical and numerical characterization

of the optimal stopping times, τ 1 , τ 2 , τ 3 ,..., at which the household optimally incurs the adjustment

cost and reoptimizes over H. In Grossman and Laroque, the stopping times are endogenous in the

sense that the household adjusts its holding of the durable good when the stochastic evolution of

wealth creates too great a disparity between the existing stock of the durable and the frictionless

optimal stock. In addition to the endogenous stopping times modeled by Grossman and Laroque, our

version of the model permits “exogenous stopping” in the sense that the adjustment of H may be

caused by some event which is exogenous with respect to the evolution of wealth. Examples of

exogenous events which might induce stopping are: a) death, in which the house is sold and the

proceeds transferred to the heirs, b) change in job location, c) retirement, d) change in marital status,

and e) acquisition or emancipation of children.

          Each house is a distinct good, differing from every other house (at a minimum) in terms of its

exact location. For the purposes of the analytical model, we assume that the house is not subject to

physical depreciation.2 Using the nondurable good as numeraire, define:

       Pt = house price (per square foot) in the household’s current market
(2)
       Pt' =house price (per square foot) in the region to which the household relocates in the next move

As in Grossman and Laroque, we abstract from labor income or human wealth, and assume that wealth

is held only in the form of financial assets and the durable good. The household can invest in a riskless

asset and in any of n risky financial assets. Unlike the durable good, holdings of the financial assets

can be adjusted with zero transaction cost.

      Thus wealth is given by:

(3)       Wt = Pt H t + Bt + X t l
                                                                                                                          6


where X t = (1xn) vector of amounts (expressed in terms of the nondurable good) held of the risky

assets and l = (nx1) vector of ones. B t is the amount held in the form of the riskless asset.

All financial assets, including the riskless asset, may be held in positive or negative amounts.3

         Assuming that dividends or interest payments are reinvested so that all returns are received in

the form of appreciation of the value of the asset, let b it = the value (per share) of the ith risky asset,

and assume that asset prices follow an n-dimensional Brownian motion process:

(4)         db it = b it ( (µ i + rf )dt + dωit )

The vector ω Ft ≡ (ω1t , ω2 t ,..., ω nt ) follows an n-dimensional Brownian motion with zero drift and

with instantaneous covariance matrix Σ , the corresponding vector of expected excess returns on risky

financial assets is µ ≡ (µ1 , µ 2 ,..., µ n ) , and rf is the riskless rate. The ith element of X t is given by

X it ≡ N it bit where N it is the number of shares held of asset i. The household takes asset prices, bit ,

as exogenous, and determines X it by its choice of N it . To simplify the notation, the model is

expressed using X it rather than N it as the choice variable representing the portfolio decision.

         House prices also follow a Brownian motion:

            dPt = Pt ( (µ H + rf )dt + dω Ht )
(5)
            dPt' = Pt' ( (µ H ' + rf )dt + dω H ' t )

where ω Ht and ω H ' t are Brownian motions with zero drift, instantaneous variance σ2P and σ2P' ,

respectively, and instantaneous covariance σH .

         Stacking equations (4) and (5), and defining the ((n+2)x1) vector dω t as:


2
  Generalizing the model to allow for a constant rate of depreciation is straightforward. By assuming a depreciation rate of
zero, the model is simplified slightly without changing the basic implications of interest.
3
  Flavin and Yamashita (1999) considers the model under the alternative assumption that the household must hold
nonnegative amounts of all financial assets other than mortgages. Since the household can borrow only in the form of a
mortgage, and only up to the value of the house, the house becomes collateral in that model. Lustig and Van Nieuwerburgh
                                                                                                                           7


                     dω1t 
                     M 
                           
                     dω nt 
(6)          dω t =
                     dω 
                         Ht
                           
                      dω
                     H' t 
                           

The vector dϖ t has instantaneous ((n+2)x(n+2)) covariance matrix Ω:

                Σ 0           0 
                                   
(7)         Ω =  0 σ2P       σH 
                 0 σH       σ2P' 

Note that, in order to simplify the optimization problem, the covariance matrix Ω is assumed to be

block diagonal. The block diagonality of Ω implies that housing prices both in the current market and

in the next market are uncorrelated with the returns to financial assets. It is important to note that the

block diagonality does not require an absence of correlation in regional house prices; the covariance

matrix Ω allows for an arbitrary σ H ≡ cov( Pt , P' t ). Because the covariance matrix does not place any

restrictions on the correlation of regional housing prices, the model is sufficiently general to

incorporate the role of housing investment in providing a hedge against the risk arising from variability

in future housing costs. For given σ 2P and σ 2P' , the extent to which homeownership provides a hedge

against future housing costs will be increasing in σ H .

         Flavin and Yamashita (2002) present empirical evidence that the block diagonality assumed in

equation (7) is consistent with data on US house prices and asset returns. Table 1 reports an estimate

of the covariance matrix using data from Case and Shiller (1989) based on repeat sales transactions




(2002) also studies the role of housing collateral and provides empirical evidence based on aggregate data that a decrease in
the ratio of housing collateral to human wealth increases the market price of risk.
                                                                                                                                8

 prices for four cities – Atlanta, Chicago, Dallas, and San Francisco – and returns to four financial

 assets – T-bills, Treasury bonds, a stock index, and fixed-rate mortgages.4 The correlation

                 Table 1: Expected Returns and Covariance Matrix – Case-Shiller Price Indices


                               T-Bills        Bonds         Stocks         Atlanta       Chicago         Dallas                SF
Mean Return                     -0.0038         0.0060         0.0824       0.05356        0.05363        0.07196        0.09787
Standard Deviation               0.0435         0.0840         0.2415       0.04200        0.06079        0.04872        0.06540

                                                         Covariance Matrix
                T-Bills        0.001892
                 Bonds         0.002505      0.007061
                 Stocks        0.000201      0.004038       0.058329
                Atlanta        0.000525      0.002038       0.003202       0.001764
               Chicago         0.000277      0.002859       0.002211       0.001006       0.003696
                 Dallas       -0.000127     -0.000769      -0.000825       0.000851       0.001327      0.002373
          San Francisco       -0.000580      0.000415      -0.000223      -0.000159       0.001931      0.000796       0.004277

                                                         Correlation Matrix
                  T- Bills     1.0000
                   Bonds       0.68533        1.0000
                              (0.09103)
                   Stocks      0.01912        0.19897       1.0000
                              (0.12498)      (0.12251)
                  Atlanta      0.41871        0.38527       0.42041        1.0000
                              (0.24271)      (0.24663)     (0.23970)
                 Chicago       0.15244        0.37332       0.20051        0.39412        1.0000
                              (0.26414)      (0.24794)     (0.26001)      (0.24563)
                   Dallas     -0.08701       -0.12527      -0.09341        0.41585        0.44796        1.0000
                              (0.26625)      (0.26516)     (0.26632)      (0.24306)      (0.23895)
          San Francisco       -0.29702        0.05041      -0.01879       -0.05794        0.48567        0.24987       1.0000
                              (0.25520)      (0.26692)     (0.26721)      (0.26681)      (0.23362)      (0.25878)

 Standard errors are in parentheses.

 Source: Flavin and Yamashita (2002).
 4
  Case and Shiller (1989) used data from the Society of Real Estate Appraisers to construct a Weighted Repeated Sales
 Index for each of the four cities by extracting the date and sales price of houses that sold twice during the sample period
 (1970-1986). Using weighted least squares, the change in the log of the individual house price is regressed on a set of
 dummy variables to obtain an index for average house appreciation in each city.
                                                                                                                               9




between the housing returns and financial asset returns is not statistically significantly different from

zero for any of the four cities.5 Flavin and Yamashita (2002) also use house price data from the Panel

Study of Income Dynamics to check the assumption of zero correlation between returns to financial

assets and housing returns. With the much larger sample size of the PSID, the estimates of the

correlation between housing returns and financial asset returns are essentially zero, in terms of

numerical magnitude as well as statistical significance.

         Let V( H , W, P, P') denote the supremum of household expected utility, conditional on the

current values of the state variables ( H , W, P, P') . At every moment, the household considers whether

the disparity between the current size house and the frictionlessly optimal size house is sufficiently

large to justify paying the transactions cost and reoptimizing over the house. House sales of this type

are referred to as “endogenous” sales because they are triggered by the evolution of wealth, and

therefore endogenous to the model. At time t=0, the Bellman equation is:

                                                               τ                                                         
(8)            V( H 0 , W0 , P0 , P0' ) =       sup        E 0  ∫ e −δt u (H 0 , C t )dt + e −δτ V( H τ , Wτ , Pτ , Pτ' )
                                            {C t },{X t },τ  0                                                          

where τ denotes the next stopping time.

         Since the quantity of housing will change discontinuously at a stopping time, the notation H τ−

is used to distinguish the quantity of housing immediately prior to the sale from the quantity of

housing immediately after the sale, H τ . At the instant the house is sold, the household pays a

transactions cost proportional to the value of the house sold, so that wealth also changes



5
  With the partial exception of San Francisco, the correlation between housing returns in two different cities is positive and
approaching statistical significance at the 5% level. For all city pairs, the correlation of housing returns is statistically
significantly different from unity, and for most pairs is about 0.4. Note, however, that the assumption of block diagonality
does not require the absence of correlation of housing returns in different regions (i.e., does not require σ H = 0 ).
                                                                                                             10


discontinuously. Wealth is denoted Wτ− immediately prior to a sale, and denoted Wτ immediately

after a sale. Thus at a stopping time, τ , wealth evolves according to:

(9)    Wτ = Wτ− − λPτ H τ−

where λ is the proportional transaction cost. The household faces a “no bankruptcy constraint”,

Wt > λPt H t , which says that wealth must always be at least sufficient to pay the transactions cost to

sell the current house. If wealth ever drops to a level just equal to the transactions cost on the current

house, the house is sold and consumption of both housing and the nondurable good drop to zero.

        Consider the time t=0. If the house were sold at t=0, the value of the program is

       ~
sup V( H , W0− − λP0 H 0− , P0 , P0' ) . At each instant, the household first decides whether it is optimal to
 ~
 H

sell the house immediately by comparing the value of the program conditional on selling to the value

of the program conditional on not selling. That is, if

               ~
(10)    sup V( H, W0− − λP0 H 0− , P0 , P0' ) < V( H 0− , W0− , P0 , P0' )
         ~
         H

it is not optimal to sell the house at t=0. If, on the other hand, the values on each side of equation (10)

are equal, then it is optimal to sell the house; that is, t=0 is a stopping time. For the version of the

model studied by Grossman and Laroque, a conservative estimate of transactions costs equal to 5% of

the value of the house implies that the average time between house purchases is 20 to 30 years. Thus

the home purchase decision is endogenous and fully rational, but, because of the transactions cost,

infrequent.

        Suppose that at time t=0, the household decides that it is not optimal to sell the house

immediately (i.e., τ ≠ 0 ), so that the value function V( H 0 , W0 , P0 , P0' ) strictly exceeds the maximum

value attainable if the house were sold immediately. By continuity, there must be a time interval (0,s)
                                                                                                                      11

sufficiently small that the possibility of stopping within that small interval can be ignored.6 During

such a time interval, wealth evolves according to:

(11)                  [                                                       ]
           dWt = Pt H 0 (µ H + rf ) + X t (µ + rf ) + rf B t − C t dt + X t dω Ft + Pt H 0 dω Ht

or, rewriting in order to eliminate the term representing risk-free bonds,

(12)                  [                                        ]
           dWt = rf Wt + Pt H 0 µ H + X t µ − C t dt + X t dω Ft + Pt H 0 dω Ht

and the Bellman equation is:

                                                      s                                                    
(13)       V( H 0 , W0 , P0 , P0' )    = sup E  ∫ e −δt u( H 0 , C t ) dt + e −δs V( H 0 , Ws , Ps , Ps' ) 
                                        { X },{C t }  0
                                             t
                                                                                                            


subject to the budget constraint (12), and the process for house prices (5) and the “no bankruptcy

constraint”. Subtracting V( H 0 , W0 , P0 , P0' ) , dividing by s and taking the limit as s → 0 gives:

                                 1 s                                                                            
(14)
                                                      1
                                                                         (                                       )
           0 = lim sup E  ∫ e −δt u( H 0 , C t ) dt + e −δs V( H 0 , Ws , Ps , Ps' ) − V( H 0 , W0 , P0 , P0' ) 
               s→ 0
                    { X }{C t }  s 0
                             t
                                                      s                                                          


Evaluating the integral and using Ito’s lemma, equation (14) can be rewritten as:

                                                                         ∂V
       0 = sup        {   u( H 0 , C 0 ) − δV( H 0 , W0 , P0 , P0' ) +      ( r W + P0 H 0 µ H + X 0 µ − C 0 )
                                                                         ∂W f 0
           X 0 ,C 0

             ∂V       ∂V '     1 ∂2 V                    1 ∂ 2 V 2 2 1 ∂ 2 V '2 2
(15)       +    P µ +   P µ +             T   2 2 2
                                      X ΣX + P0 H 0 σP +
             ∂P 0 H ∂P ' 0 H ' 2 ∂W 2 0 0
                                                           (    P σ +       P σ
                                                         2 ∂P 2 0 P 2 ∂P ' 2 0 P '
                                                                                     )
                ∂2 V 2           ∂2 V                ∂2 V
           +
               ∂W∂P
                    P0 H 0σ2P +       '
                                        P P '
                                              H
                                         0 0 0 Hσ +       '
                                                            P0 P0' σH                    }
                                ∂W∂P                ∂P∂P

       Nondurable consumption satisfies the usual first order condition:

           ∂u ∂V
(16)         =
           ∂C ∂W

       The vector of holdings of risky financial assets, X 0 , is chosen according to:


6
    See Grossman and Laroque (1990), page 31.
                                                                                                               12


                       ∂V                                1 ∂2 V 2 2 2
(17)    0=constant+
                       ∂W
                          ( rf W0 + P0 H 0 µ H − C 0 ) +       P H σ
                                                         2 ∂W 2 0 0 P

                     ∂V        1 ∂2 V
            + sup{      X0 µ +        X 0 ΣX 0T      }
              X0     ∂W        2 ∂W 2


Thus from the first order condition for X 0 , the optimal holding of risky financial assets, stated as

shares of wealth, is given by:

                               ∂V 
             1  T  − ∂W  −1
(18)             X 0 =  2        Σ µ
              W0         ∂ VW 
                            ∂W 2 0 

and the amount held of the riskless asset is:

(19)    B0 = W0 − P0 H 0 − X 0 l

In equation (18), the expression in square brackets is the reciprocal of the coefficient of relative risk

aversion:

                ∂ 2 V( Wt ,H t , Pt , Pt' )
                        ∂Wt2
(20)    RRA ≡ −                             Wt > 0
                ∂V( Wt , H t , Pt , Pt' )
                        ∂Wt

        Note that, because the household’s degree of risk version depends on the curvature of the value

function, behavior toward risk will depend not only on the curvature of the instantaneous utility

function, u( H t , C t ) but also on all of the state variables. The property that risk aversion varies with

the state is also a feature of the version of the model considered by Grossman and Laroque (1990). In

particular, they find that the household is less risk averse (in terms of the allocation of its portfolio
                                                                                                           13

between the risky and risk-free asset) shortly before purchasing a new house, and relatively more risk

averse immediately after purchasing a new house.7



Section 2: Implications for asset pricing: CAPM vs. consumption-beta

          From equation (18), all consumers hold risky assets in exactly the same proportion, despite

differences among households in terms of preferences (i.e., in the specification of u(H,C)) or in terms

of the state variables faced. The result that there is a single optimal portfolio of risky financial assets

held by all consumers is consistent with the more restricted version of the model considered by

Grossman and Laroque (1990). Like the corresponding result in Grossman and Laroque, the result

does not require a specific assumption, such as constant relative risk aversion, on the instantaneous

utility function. Further, the result does not require a specific assumption about the degree of

substitutability between H and C; all that is required is a general instantaneous utility function

u( H t , C t ) . Note, however, that the derivation of equation (18) required the assumption that the

covariance matrix is block diagonal as specified in equation (7); in the absence of this restriction the

Grossman and Laroque result that all consumers hold risky assets in the same proportion would not

survive in the more general model. Under a completely general covariance matrix (i.e., one that is not

block diagonal), risky financial assets could be used to hedge the risk associated with the current

house, or to hedge the risk associated with the variability of future house prices. However, under the

assumption of block diagonality, returns to financial assets are uncorrelated with both current house

prices and with future house prices. In this case, even though the risk averse household will dislike the

risk created by variability in P or P’, the household is unable to hedge either of these types of risk with

the portfolio of financial assets. Since, under block diagonality, there is no scope for using financial

assets to hedge the risk from current or future house prices, the presence of the (risky) housing asset

7
    See Grossman and Laroque (1990), pages 38-40.
                                                                                                          14

does not create any “distortion” of the optimal portfolio of risky financial assets as compared to the

risky portfolio implied by the standard model which abstracts from housing altogether. While the

composition of the optimal risky portfolio does not depend on the values of the state variables, the

household’s degree of risk aversion in general will depend on the values of the state variables. As in

the standard model, the allocation of the overall portfolio between the optimal risky portfolio and the

riskless asset will depend on the household’s risk aversion.

       In general equilibrium, the fact that all consumers hold risky assets in the same proportion

implies that risk premia are determined by the standard CAPM. To see this, note that in equation (18),

the expression in square brackets is a positive scalar that, for each household j, depends on preferences

and on the household’s vector of state variables. For household j, denote this scalar as s(j); denote the

sum of s(j) across households as S ≡ ∑ s( j) . Denote the total market value of risky asset i as M i ,
                                                j

and define the (nx1) vector M ≡ ( M1 , M 2 ,..., M n ). Market clearing requires:

(21)    M = S Σ −1 µ

which implies

            1
       µ=     ΣM
            S
(22)
            M T ΣM
       S=
             MT µ

Eliminating S, (22) implies:

          MT µ 
(23)   µ= T      Σ M
          M ΣM 

    Expressed in more familiar notation, equation (23) can be restated as:

                        cov (ri − rf , rm − rf )
(24)    E(ri ) − rf =                            [E(rm ) − rf ]
                           var (rm − rf )
                                                                                                             15

since the matrix products in equation (23) have the following interpretations:

        M T µ= expected excess return on the market portfolio = µ m − rf

(25)    M T ΣM = variance of return on the market portfolio = var( rm − rf )

        ΣM = vector whose ith element represents the covariance of the return to risky asset i with the
                 return to the market portfolio, i.e., ith element = cov( ri − rf , rm − rf )

        Asset prices are also consistent with the consumption-beta model; the implications of the

traditional CAPM and consumption-beta model exactly coincide in this setting. Because nondurable

consumption is costlessly adjustable, households continuously equate the marginal utility of

nondurable consumption with the marginal utility of wealth, and satisfy an Euler equation for each of

the financial assets. Denoting the marginal utility of nondurable consumption of household j in period

t as:

                 ∂u( H t , C t )
(26)    λ jt =
                     ∂C t

the set of Euler equations for the time interval (t, t+s) imply:

                              − cov(rit + s − rf , λ jt + s )
        E( rit + s ) − rf =
                                       E(λ jt + s )
(27)
                               − cov(rmt + s − rf , λ jt + s )
        E( rmt + s ) − rf =
                                         E(λ jt + s )

        Even if households are identical in the sense that they have the same preferences (i.e., the same

utility function u( H t , C t ) ), differences across households in the values of the state variables (including

H t and Wt ) will create cross-sectional dispersion in the marginal utility of nondurable consumption,

λ jt . Nevertheless, since all households are satisfying the Euler equations for nondurable consumption,

equation (27) will hold for all households. Rewriting equation (27) to express the risk premium on an

individual risky asset in terms of the risk premium on the market portfolio gives:
                                                                                                          16


                              cov(rit + s − rf , λ jt + s )
(28)    E( rit + s ) − rf =                                   [E( rmt + s ) − rf ]
                              cov(rmt + s − rf , λ jt + s )

Comparing equations (24) and (28), the model implies that

               cov(rit +s − rf , λ jt +s )        cov(rit +s − rf , rmt +s − rf )
(29)   βi ≡                                   =
              cov(rmt +s − rf , λ jt +s )              var( rmt +s − rf )

       Thus the basic implication of the model is that risk premia on individual assets will be

proportional to the risk premium on the market portfolio, and that an asset’s beta can be expressed

either in terms of the covariance of the asset’s return with the marginal utility of consumption or in

terms of the covariance of the asset’s return with the market portfolio; in theory, equation (29)

provides two alternative ways of obtaining empirical estimates of a unique vector of betas. In practice,

of course, either approach to estimating the betas is compromised by serious measurement issues. In

terms of the traditional CAPM approach, we do not observe the return on the complete market

portfolio and consequently rely on a proxy (such as the return to a broad stock index). In terms of the

consumption-beta approach, we do not directly observe the marginal utility of nondurable consumption

at the household level, λ jt . To estimate the risk premia using the consumption-beta approach in (29),

we would need a) to make an assumption about the functional form of the utility function u( H t , C t )

and b) to have data on the state variable H t as well as data on nondurable consumption at the

household level. Thus it is not necessary to conclude that the consumption-beta model should be

rejected on the basis of the extensive empirical evidence that the traditional CAPM outperforms the

consumption-based CAPM in terms of predicting asset premia. In this setting, households behave in

exactly the manner prescribed by the consumption-beta model. Instead, one can interpret the poor

empirical performance of the consumption-beta model as an indication that, in practice, we cannot
                                                                                                            17

infer the marginal utility of nondurable consumption with sufficient accuracy to exploit the empirical

implications of the model.

    None of the preceding analytical results depend on any specific assumptions on the functional form

of the utility function. In order to study the relationship between risk aversion and intertemporal

substitution, we now assume that the instantaneous utility function is of the CES form:

                                       1−ρ

(30)    u( H t , C t ) =
                           [
                           γH α
                              t
                                     α α
                                  + Ct   ]        α ≤ 1,   0≤γ,    1≠ ρ> 0
                                  1− ρ

    The parameter α governs the degree of intratemporal substitutability between housing and

nondurable consumption goods. If α=1 the two goods are perfect substitutes. The limiting case of

α → −∞ implies Leontief preferences, i.e., no substitutability between goods:


(31)    u( H t , C t   )=
                          [min( γH t , C t ]1−ρ
                                  1− ρ

    The parameter ρ determines the degree of curvature of the utility function with respect to the

composite good. The coefficient of relative risk aversion does not, in general, coincide with the

parameter governing the curvature of the instantaneous utility function. For this reason, the parameter

ρ will be referred to as “the curvature parameter” rather than “the risk aversion parameter”. There are,

however, two special cases in which the coefficient of relative risk aversion will be equal to the

curvature parameter. The obvious special case arises when we assume that γ = 0 , i.e., nondurable

consumption is the sole argument of the utility function. In this case the utility function reduces to

u (C) = (1 − ρ) −1 C1−ρ and the curvature of the value function immediately inherits the curvature of the

utility function, which yields the familiar result that the coefficient of relative risk aversion is equal to

the curvature parameter, ρ .
                                                                                                           18

   For the second special case, consider the general CES utility function given in equation (30), but

assume that the housing stock is costlessly adjustable ( λ = 0 ). The result that the value function

V( H t , Wt , Pt , Pt' ) is homogeneous of degree (1-ρ) in H and W can be established by an argument

parallel to that in Theorem 2.1 of Grossman and Laroque (1990). However, if the stock of housing is

costlessly adjustable, the value function at t depends on Ht only to the extent that Ht is a component


of wealth; Ht does not appear in the value function as a separate state variable. Thus, in the absence of

adjustment costs, the value function can be written in the form:

                                                    1− ρ
(32)    V( H t , Wt , Pt , Pt' ) = k ( Pt , Pt' )Wt

where k ( Pt , Pt' ) is a function of house prices which does not depend on Wt , which implies

                     ∂ 2 V( Wt ,H t , Pt , Pt' )
                               ∂Wt2
(33)    RRA ≡ −                                    Wt = ρ
                      ∂V( Wt , H t , Pt , Pt' )
                            ∂Wt

To summarize, it is the curvature of the value function that reflects preferences toward risk and

determines the composition of the optimal portfolio. If we assume that the instantaneous utility

function has curvature with respect to the composite good as defined by the parameter ρ in equation

(31), the coefficient of relative risk aversion coincides exactly with ρ if we consider special cases in

which the stock of housing is not a state variable (i.e. the utility function does not depend on housing,

or housing is costlessly adjustable). In the general case, however, the curvature of the value function

and therefore the coefficient of risk aversion will depend on the values of the state variables as well as

parameters such as ρ. The state-dependence of preferences toward risk and portfolio composition is

examined through numerical simulation by Grossman and Laroque (1990) in the context of their
                                                                                                                          19

simplified version of the model. Empirical evidence that the average share of housing in consumption

expenditure helps to forecast excess stock returns is provided in Piazzesi, Schneider, and Tuzel (2002).



Section III: The elasticity of intertemporal substitution of nondurable consumption

         In the standard version of the consumption-beta model, it is assumed that 1) the lifetime utility

function is determined within an expected utility framework, 2) the one-period utility function is time-

separable, and 3) the utility function depends solely on a single, costlessly adjustable nondurable

good.8 Under these assumptions, the curvature of the utility function immediately determines both risk

aversion and the elasticity of intertemporal substitution. Further, it is an implication of the standard

version of the model that the elasticity of intertemporal substitution is the reciprocal of the coefficient

of relative risk aversion. In response to the large body of empirical work that demonstrated consistent

rejection of this implication of the standard model, various authors have considered more general

versions of the model by 1) relaxing the assumption of expected utility or by 2) relaxing the

assumption of time-separable preferences. In both of these more general specifications, the model no

longer has the implication that the elasticity of intertemporal substitution is equal to the reciprocal of

the coefficient of relative risk aversion. In our model, we maintain assumptions 1) and 2) by using a

standard time-separable expected utility framework, and consider the implications for the elasticity of

intertemporal substitution after relaxing assumption 3) by making the utility function depend on the

durable good subject to adjustment costs as well as nondurable consumption.9


8
  Ogaki and Reinhart (1998) estimate the elasticity of intertemporal substitution in a model in which utility is a
nonseparable function of durable and nondurable consumption. In their empirical work, durable goods are interpreted as
durable goods in the NIPA sense (automobiles, furniture, appliances, etc), rather than as the house. Because they assume
that both durables and nondurables are costlessly adjustable, their model does not exhibit the dynamics associated with the
adjustment cost.
9
  The point that an adjustment cost associated with durable goods will in general effect the dynamics of nondurable
consumption was made in Bernanke (1985). In the context of the Permanent Income model based on quadratic preferences,
Bernanke allows utility to depend on durable goods as well as nondurable goods in a potentially nonseparable way. For
tractability, he models the adjustment costs associated with durable goods as a quadratic function of the change in the stock
                                                                                                                          20

         Consider a time t=0 such that, due to the transactions costs, it is not optimal for the household

to sell the house immediately and reoptimize over H. Having decided, for the moment, to maintain the

level of housing services at H 0 , the elasticity of intertemporal substitution (EIS) of nondurable

consumption is:

                      ∂u( H 0 , C t )
                  −
                          ∂C t                                  −1
(34)     EIS ≡                           =
                                                           Cα         Cα
                        2                                                           
                      ∂ u( H 0 , C t )                       t                t
                 Ct                          ( α − 1)1 −            − ρ
                            ∂C 2t                          α     α          α     α
                                                      γH 0 + C t   γH 0 + C t 

                                    Cα
                                     t
Using the notation ϖ t ≡                        , note that
                                 γH 0α + C α
                                           t


                            Cα
                             t
(35)     0 ≤ ϖt =                   ≤1
                      γH 0α + C α
                                t

so that the EIS takes the form:

                             1
(36)     EIS =
                 (1 − ϖ t )(1 − α) + ϖ t ρ

    In the special case in which the instantaneous utility function depends on nondurable consumption

                       1− ρ
                  C
alone ( ~
        u (C t ) = t   ), the EIS is ρ−1, that is, we get the implication that the elasticity of
                  1− ρ

intertemporal substitution is simply the inverse of the coefficient of relative risk aversion. In the more


of durables; given the quadratic specification of preferences and adjustment costs, he is able to derive and estimate closed
form solutions for the behavior of durable and nondurable consumption goods. Quadratic adjustment costs will induce
adjustment dynamics very different from the specification of adjustment costs used by Grossman and Laroque, in which the
adjustment cost is proportional to the entire stock of the durable — under the quadratic specification the adjustment will
take the form of a series of small adjustments over a number of periods, while under proportional adjustment costs, the
household will maintain a given stock of the durable over a long period and ultimately make a single, large adjustment.
When the durable good is interpreted as a house, as in the current paper, modeling the adjustment cost as proportional to the
stock seems more plausible than the quadratic function of the change in the stock. However, in Bernanke’s paper, “durable
goods” refers to durable goods as defined in the NIPA classification; that is, vehicles, furniture, clothing, etc. Since
“durable goods” in his model refers to a collection of smaller individual goods, as opposed to a single indivisible good, the
specification of adjustment costs as quadratic in the change in the total stock of durable goods is more plausible. While
                                                                                                                     21

general case in which housing appears as an argument of the utility function, the elasticity of

intertemporal substitution will equal the inverse of the curvature parameter ρ only if α, which reflects

the intratemporal substitutability of the two goods, happens to obey the restriction α=1-ρ.

    Consider a household with preferences characterized by modest curvature of the utility function

with respect to the composite good; for example, assume ρ=2. Because the EIS is the reciprocal of a

weighted average of ρ and (1-α), a low value of ρ does not necessarily imply a high elasticity of

intertemporal substitution. As an extreme example, consider the EIS as α → −∞ (that is, the limiting

cases in which the intratemporal substitutability of the two goods approaches zero). In this case, the

EIS of nondurable consumption approaches zero, regardless of the value of ρ. In the opposing extreme

case of perfect intratemporal substitutability between the two goods ( α = 1 ) , the EIS will generally

exceed the inverse of the curvature parameter. Thus, depending on the parameter governing

intratemporal substitution, the two good model implies the following relationship between the

elasticity of intertemporal substitution and the curvature of the utility function:

         EIS → 0       for α → −∞
         EIS < ρ −1 for α < 1 − ρ
(37)
         EIS = ρ −1 for α = 1 − ρ
         EIS ≥ ρ −1 for α = 1

        Thus even if the curvature of the utility function with respect to the composite good is modest

(i.e., ρ is small), the plausible assumption of imperfect intratemporal substitutability between the two

goods can easily generate a low elasticity of intertemporal substitution of nondurable consumption.




Bernanke’s model allows for nonseparability between durable goods (as defined by the NIPA) and nondurable goods and
services, empirical estimation of the model indicates that the restriction implied by separability cannot be rejected.
                                                                                                               22

Section IV: Comparison with the recursive utility framework of Epstein and Zin

           In an important series of papers, Epstein and Zin (l989, l991) show that the tight link between

risk aversion and intertemporal substitution which characterizes the standard model can be broken by

replacing the time-additive expected utility preference model with a generalized model of preferences

based on Kreps and Porteus (1978). In this approach, preferences toward risk are embodied in the

                               (             )
function µ ( µ t + 1 = µ U t + 1 I t + 1 ) which relates the conditional distribution of next period’s value

function ( U t + 1) to its certainty equivalent, µ t + 1 . Lifetime utility, U t , is then defined with an

aggregator function, θ :

(38)         U t = θ ( C t , µ t +1 )

as a function of current consumption and the certainty equivalent of lifetime utility in t+1. Preferences

regarding intertemporal substitution are embodied in the aggregator function and may be varied

independently of preferences toward risk. For example, the functional form for the aggregator function

suggested in Epstein and Zin (1991) is:


                  [                     ]
                                      1
                          α0     α0 α
(39)       U t = (1 − β)C t + βµ t +1 0            0 ≠ α0 < 1

The specification in (39) implies that, when future consumption is deterministic, the elasticity of

intertemporal substitution is constant and equal to:10

                         1
(40)       EIS =
                      1 − α0

       After estimating Euler equations generated by their model under a general parameterization of risk

aversion, Epstein and Zin conclude that “Risk preferences do not differ statistically from the




10
     See Epstein and Zin (1991), page 266.
                                                                                                            23

logarithmic specification.”11 Under the log specification for risk aversion, their recursive utility model

implies12

                                   1
(41)        E t ∆ ln C t +1 =          [ln β + E t ln(1 + R t +1 )]
                                1 − α0

       The expected utility model can be obtained as a special case of Epstein and Zin’s generalized

preference model if (for the case of logarithmic risk preferences), α0 = 0 . However, their empirical

work suggests that α0 < 0 , so that the expected utility model is rejected. Depending on the value of

α0 the recursive utility framework implies that consumers favor early resolution of uncertainty

( α0 > 0 ), favor late resolution of uncertainty ( α0 < 0 ) or are indifferent to the timing of the resolution

of uncertainty ( α0 = 0 ). Thus the estimates of the EIS reported by Epstein and Zin (1991) are

interpreted as evidence that the expected utility framework can be rejected as too restrictive, and,

further, that consumers prefer late resolution of uncertainty.

       In essence, Epstein and Zin maintain the assumption of a single, nondurable good, and dispense

with expected utility, then interpret the small empirical estimates of the elasticity of intertemporal

substitution as evidence that preferences are inconsistent with the expected utility framework. In the

housing model, the expected utility framework is maintained, and the estimates of a low elasticity of

intertemporal substitution are interpreted as a consequence of imperfect substitutability between

housing and the nondurable consumption good. To take a particularly simple case, consider the special

case in which the curvature of the utility function with respect to the composite good is given by the

log specification. In this case, the utility function (30) becomes:

(42)        u( H t , C t ) =
                               1
                               α
                                   [
                                 ln γH α    α
                                       t + Ct   ]
11
     ibid, page 282.
12
     ibid, page 269.
                                                                                                        24

and the elasticity of intertemporal substitution is:

                      1
(43)    EIS =
                1 − α(1 − ϖ t )

In this approach, one can maintain both the expected utility framework and the log specification of the

utility function and interpret small empirical estimates of the EIS as an indication that housing and

nondurable consumption goods are imperfect substitutes (i.e., α < 0 ).



Section V: Comparison with models of habit persistence

        Models of habit persistence provide another approach for breaking the tight relationship

between the elasticity of intertemporal substitution and risk aversion. In particular, papers by Abel

(1990), Campbell and Cochrane (1998, 1999), Constantinides (1990), Ferson and Constantinides

(1991), Heaton (1995) and Sundarson (1989) examine the macroeconomic and asset pricing

implications of a variety of models incorporating preferences which exhibit habit persistence. Of the

many models of habit persistence contained in the literature, the model posed by Constantinides (1990)

provides a convenient comparison to the housing model, as Constantinides considers the effects of

habit persistence in an infinite horizon, continuous time model that, like the housing model,

incorporates a portfolio decision and abstracts from labor income. That is, Constantinides considers

the lifetime utility function:

                    ∞
(44)    U = E 0 ∫ e −δt u (c t , h t )dt
                   0

where h t is the state variable representing the “habit”.

        In particular, Constantinides parameterizes the instantaneous utility function as:

                          (c t − h t )1−ρ
(45)    u(c t , h t ) =
                              1− ρ
                                                                                                                25

and models “habit” as an exponentially weighted distributed lag of past consumption:

                                 t
(46)        h t = e −at h 0 + b ∫ e a (s− t ) c s ds
                                  0

In this specification, the consumption habit, h t , can be interpreted as the subsistence level of

consumption in the sense that marginal utility becomes infinite at c t = h t . For the parameter values

h 0 = b = 0 , the model specializes to the standard time-separable case.

           In the general case, the value function depends on the state variable representing habit, h t , as

well as wealth, Wt :

                                        ∞              (cs − h s )1−ρ
(47)        V( Wt , h t ) = max E t e −δs     ∫                         ds
                           α(s ),c(s ) t                   1− ρ

where α(s) denotes the fraction of the portfolio invested in the risky asset. Defining relative risk

aversion as in equation (20) as the curvature of the value function, Constantinides shows that risk

aversion is not constant across time, as in the time-separable case, but instead varies with the ratio of

                                  ht
the two state variables,             . That is, the degree of relative risk aversion at time t is given by:
                                  Wt

                         ∂ 2 V( W t , h t )
                            ∂Wt2                        ρ
(48)        RRA = −                      Wt =
                          ∂V( Wt , h t )                 ht       
                                              1−                  
                            ∂Wt                   Wt ( r + a − b) 

where a and b are the parameters which govern the strength of habit persistence and r denotes the

risk-free rate of return.13 Thus in contrast to the time-separable case, in which relative risk aversion is

constant and completely determined by the curvature of the utility function, ρ, in the presence of habit

persistence the household’s degree of relative risk aversion depends on the ratio of habit to wealth. For


13
     The model imposes the restriction that 0<b<r+a so that the expression in square brackets is nonnegative.
                                                                                                             26


a given value of ρ, relative risk aversion is an increasing function of the ratio of habit (or subsistence)

to wealth.

        Like the degree of relative risk aversion, Constantinides shows that the elasticity of

intertemporal substitution will be time-varying and a function of the state variable, h t , in addition to

the curvature parameter, ρ. In the habit persistence model, the elasticity of intertemporal substitution

is:

                   − ∂u(c t , h t )   h
                                   1− t
                       ∂c t           ct
(49)    EIS ≡                    =
                  2
                 ∂ u(c t , h t )     ρ
              ct
                    ∂c t

Because h t is the subsistence level of consumption, the specification of the utility function in equation

                       ht
(45) implies that         < 1 and therefore that habit persistence reduces the elasticity of intertemporal
                       ct

substitution.

        To underscore the common elements of the housing model and the habit persistence approach,

it is useful to consider a slightly more general CES utility function that nests the utility functions used

in both models (i.e., equations (30) and (45)). That is, consider the utility function

                                           1−ρ

(50)    u( x t , c t ) =
                           [
                           θ1x α
                               t   + θ2c t]
                                         α α
                                                 α ≤ 1, 1 ≠ ρ > 0
                                   1− ρ

where x t is an unspecified state variable and c t is nondurable consumption. When the state variable

is identified as the house ( x t = H t ), the assumption that utility is increasing in both goods implies the

restriction 0 < θi . If, instead, the state variable is interpreted as the habitual level of consumption

( x t = h t ), the plausible parameter restriction would be θ1 < 0 and θ2 > 0 , since the partial derivative
                                                                                                        27

of utility with respect to habit is negative. For the utility function in (50), the elasticity of

intertemporal substitution is:

                     ∂u( x t , c t )
                 −
                        ∂c t                                        −1
(51)    EIS ≡                             =
                     ∂ 2 u( x t , c t )                     θ2c α
                                                                 t
                                                                               θ2 c α
                                                                                      t
                                                                                            
                ct                            ( α − 1)1 −   α       α   − ρ   α       α
                          ∂c 2t                        θ1x t + θ2c t   θ1x t + θ2c t 

Constantinides assumes that utility depends on the difference between current consumption and habit,

and therefore sets θ1 = −1 , θ2 = 1 , and α = 1 to get equation (49). For a given value of ρ, the implied

EIS is a decreasing function of the ratio of habit to current consumption. However, as Constantinides

points out, under this specification, the degree of habit persistence required to explain the equity

premium puzzle is extremely high; that is, to fit the data, the habitual, or subsistence level, of

consumption, h t , is, on average, equal to 80% of the level of consumption, c t . When the state

variable is interpreted as the house, the parameter assignment α = 1 implies, implausibly, that housing

and nondurable goods are perfect substitutes. Under the interpretation of equation (50) provided by the

housing model, a high degree of curvature of the utility function with respect to nondurable

consumption is the result of imperfect substitutability between the two goods (i.e., α < 0 ). In light of

the parallel implications of the two models in terms of household behavior toward risk, and in terms of

the dynamics of nondurable consumption, the housing model might be thought of as a “structural”14

model of behavior that looks like habit persistence at the aggregate level.

        In summary, it is evident that the restriction that households’ relative risk aversion and

elasticity of intertemporal substitution are simply and exactly reciprocals of one another is not a robust

implication of the basic consumption-beta framework, but instead requires three assumptions:

expected utility preferences, time-separability of preferences, and an instantaneous utility function
                                                                                                         28

which depends only on a single, costlessly adjustable, consumption good. Relaxing any one of these

three assumptions – by introducing recursive preference, habit persistence, or a durable good subject to

adjustment costs – relaxes the tight link between these two crucial aspects of household behavior.

While any of the three generalized models can be used to reconcile empirical evidence that households,

while not highly risk averse, are nevertheless strongly averse to intertemporal substitution of

consumption, the models generate different implications on other aspects of household behavior. For

example, the habit persistence model and the housing model both generate consumption smoothness by

introducing a state variable. In contrast to the model based on recursive preferences, the habit

persistence and housing models both imply that the household’s current choices (with respect to

nondurable consumption and portfolio composition) will depend not only on current wealth, but also

on the path of wealth. That is, in a comparison of two households that are identical in terms of their

preferences and current wealth but differ in terms of the historical path of wealth, the two households

may differ in terms of their optimal level of nondurable consumption and their optimal portfolio

composition because the households may face different values of the state variables (habit or current

housing stock). In contrast, the generalized model based on recursive preferences implies that optimal

consumption and portfolio composition will depend on current wealth, but not on the path of wealth.

           The habit persistence model and the housing model have a long list of common features: both

retain the expected utility framework, both explain the smoothness of consumption of nondurable

goods by introducing an additional state variable, and both imply that a household with stable

preferences will nevertheless display variation over time in the degree of relative risk aversion and the

elasticity of intertemporal substitution. However, the two approaches have important differences. To

generate smooth consumption and a low elasticity of intertemporal substitution, the habit persistence

model locates the “rigidity”, or the cause of sluggish adjustment, in household preferences by

14
     Pun intended.
                                                                                                            29

assuming that utility depends on the level of current consumption relative to habitual consumption. In

contrast, the housing model identifies costs of adjustment of the house as the source of the “rigidity”.

The testable implications of the two models are examined in the next section.



Section VI: Empirical tests of habit persistence vs. the housing model

       In order to estimate the parameters of the utility function, and test the housing model against

the habit persistence model, we consider a utility function which nests both models. Generalized to

allow for habit persistence in nondurable consumption, the CES utility function for household i

becomes:

                                                                    1−ρ

(52)    u (C it,C it −1 , H it ) =
                                     [(Cit − bCit−1 )   α
                                                            + γH it]
                                                                 α α
                                                                          α ≤ 1, 1 ≠ ρ > 0 , γ ≥ 0
                                                 1− ρ

If γ=0 and α=1, the utility function in (52) is a simple habit persistence specification, with the stock of

habit represented by last period’s nondurable consumption. Conceptually, the parameter b could be

positive, negative, or zero. A positive value of b indicates habit persistence in the sense that the

utility associated with a given level of current nondurable consumption is decreasing in the previous

level of consumption. A negative value of b indicates that the consumption good, although physically

nondurable, exhibits durability in the utility flow in the sense that consumption of the nondurable good

generates utility in both the current and subsequent periods.

       Under the assumption that the nondurable consumption good is costlessly adjustable, the Euler

equation for nondurable consumption holds. Since there is no reason, a priori, to rule out a role for

both state variables, Cit −1 and H it , we estimate the Euler equation implied by the utility function in

(52), then test the restrictions imposed by the various nested models: housing, habit persistence, or the
                                                                                                                     30

standard model with neither habit persistence nor habit. The Euler equation for nondurable

consumption is:

                  (C    − bCit )α−1 Q it +1 + βb(Cit + 2 − bCit +1 )α−1 Q it + 2              
(53)    1 = βE t  it +1                                                          (1 + rit +1 )
                  (Cit − bCit −1 ) Q it + βb(Cit +1 − bCit ) Q it +1
                                    α−1                           α−1
                                                                                               

                                                             1−( α+ρ )
where                     [
                  Q it = (C it − bC it −1 )   α
                                                  + γH itα   ]   α       ,

β is the discount factor, and rit +1 is the real after-tax asset return from t to t+1.15

        The Euler equation is estimated with data from the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID),

which contains data on housing in addition to the food consumption data used by many authors as a

proxy for nondurable consumption.16 That is, data on household food expenditure, defined as the sum

of food expenditure at home and the value of food stamps (deflated by the CPI for food at home) plus

food eaten out (deflated by the CPI for food away from home), was used to represent nondurable

consumption, Cit . The after-tax real interest rate, rit , is defined as:

(54)     rit = (1 − τit ) R t − π t

where R it is the nominal interest rate on one-year Treasury bills, τ it is the household’s marginal tax

rate, and π it is the inflation rate as measured by the CPI.

        The PSID provides data on the value of owner-occupied houses and annual rents paid by

renters. However, as an argument of the utility function, the housing variable, H it , reflects some

measure of the physical quantity of housing consumed, rather than the value of housing consumed. In

principle, one could start with the PSID data on the value of the house (as reported by the respondent)


15
  Because of differences in marginal tax rates, rit +1 varies across households.
16
  Based on National Income and Product Accounts data for 1930-2002, the annual growth rate of total nondurable
consumption expenditures and the growth rate of food consumption have a correlation coefficient of 0.9. Thus even though
food consumption represents slightly less than half of total nondurable consumption expenditures, it seems to be a
reasonable proxy for nondurable consumption.
                                                                                                                       31

and attempt to deflate the house value with an index of housing prices. In practice, there is substantial

cross-sectional variation in housing prices within regions or cities, as well as across regions or cities.

Since the region-wide price index provides only a crude approximation to the house price inflation

within a particular neighborhood, deflating by the region-wide index would produce data that

(inaccurately) indicates that even families who reside in the same physical house nevertheless are

consuming different quantities of housing in different years. For this reason, we use a measure of

housing consumption that is based on physical characteristics of the house, rather than attempting to

deflate the reported house value by a price index. Of the many different metrics one could use to

measure the quantity of housing, we start with the simplest quantity measure: square footage.17

        While the PSID does not provide data on the square footage of homes, it does report, for both

homeowners and renters, the number of rooms. To impute the square footage of the homes of PSID

respondents, we first used data from the American Housing Survey (AHS) to estimate a model of

square footage as a function of number of rooms and other housing variables common to both the AHS

and the PSID. That is, AHS data was used to regress square footage on dummy variables representing

whether the household was a) located in a suburb, b) located in a non-SMA region, c) a renter, d)

living in a mobile home, and on a third order polynomial in the number of rooms. Separate models

were estimated for each of the four regions (Northeast, Midwest, South, and West). The regional

models estimated from the AHS data, reported in the data appendix, were then used to generate

estimated square footage data for each PSID household.



17
  If the objective were to construct a measure of the quantity of housing at a single point in time, we recognize that the
approach of deflating the house value by a regional price index would provide a better measure of real housing
consumption because the house value will reflect many attributes other than square footage, such as location and
construction materials. However, for this application, we are particularly interested in comparing the behavior of
nondurable consumption across two periods in which housing consumption did not change against the behavior of
nondurable consumption across two periods in which housing consumption did change. A simple physical measure of
housing consumption like square footage has the important property that measured housing consumption is constant as long
as the family stays in the same house.
                                                                                                                          32

        Estimation was by GMM, for the 1975-1985 sample period.18 To address the measurement

error in Cit and H it , as well as the expectation error in the Euler equation, the following instruments

were used: the growth rate in real household income, the change in total annual hours worked by all

family members, and the growth rate of housing square footage. The instruments were lagged two

periods relative to the Euler equation; that is, the instruments reflected changes from t-2 to t-1 for the

Euler equation linking marginal utility in t to t+1.



              Table 2: Comparison of Housing, Habit Persistence, and Standard Models

                                          Unrestricted                     Restricted Forms
                                             Form      Housing                    Habit            Standard
Subjective discount factor (β)                0.98        0.98                     0.98              0.98
Total number of observations                25,421       25,421                  25,421             25,431
Parameters:
 Intratemporal Substitution (α)              -6.485            -6.668                 1                 1
                                             (1.751)           (1.689)
              Habit Formation (b)             0.007               0                0.009                0
                                             (0.006)                              (0.007)
                      Curvature (ρ)           1.846              1.799             7.520             7.778
                                             (0.267)            (0.244)           (2.804)           (2.301)
           Weight on Housing (γ)               1.039             1.015               0                 0
                                              (0.310)           (0.287)

               Implied EIS of C                0.133             0.131             0.132             0.129
     Hypothesis Tests [p-values]:
                             α=1               [0.00]            [0.00]
                             ρ=1               [0.00]            [0.00]            [0.00]            [0.00]
                                               [0.00]            [0.00]
                          α=1-ρ
                                               [0.38]            [0.42]           [0.13]            [0.06]
     Overidentifying restrictions
                                                                 0.880            13.771            14.760
                LR Test Statistic
                                                                 [0.35]           [0.00]            [0.00]
Asymptotic standard errors are in parentheses. Probability values for hypothesis tests are in brackets.
Sample period is 1975 to 1985. The EIS is calculated using the point estimates of the parameters and
the 1974-87 sample averages of the variables. The subjective discount factor of .98 was imposed, not
estimated.


18
   Because the food questions were not asked in 1973, or in 1988-89, the food data is only available for 1974-87. After
allowing for required leads and lags, this left a sample period of 1975-85.
                                                                                                              33

        Table 2 reports parameter estimates for four versions of the model. The most general version

(labeled “unrestricted”), allows for effects from both housing and habit persistence. In addition to

restricted specifications for the housing model and the habit persistence model, Table 2 reports results

for a restricted version of the model with neither housing nor habit persistence (labeled “standard”). For

each version of the model, the elasticity of intertemporal substitution is calculated from the point

estimates of the parameters and sample averages of the data. The various versions of the model all

generate essentially the same value of the EIS of about .13, but differ in the mapping between the EIS

and the underlying preference parameters. In the standard model, of course, a low EIS of .13 is

interpreted as an implication of a fairly high value of the curvature parameter ( ρ = 7.8 ). In the habit

persistence model, the estimate of the parameter b, which reflects the importance of habit in the utility

function, is indistinguishable from zero, both in terms of its magnitude (b=0.009), and in terms of

statistical significance. Since the data do not attribute a quantitatively significant role to habit

persistence, the estimate of the curvature parameter of 7.5 is essentially the same as in the standard

model. In the specification for the housing model, the estimate of the intertemporal substitution

parameter, α , is –6.7, and reasonably precisely estimated. The null hypothesis of perfect intratemporal

substitutability between the two goods ( H 0 : α = 1 ) is rejected at high confidence levels. The estimate

of the curvature parameter, ρ , is 1.8 . While the estimated value of the curvature parameter is only

modestly greater than unity, it is sufficiently precisely estimated to reject the log specification of the

utility function (i.e., the null hypothesis that ρ = 1 ). In the housing model, the reciprocal relationship

between the EIS and the curvature parameter does not hold in general, but will hold in the special case

that α = 1 − ρ . However, the parameter restriction α = 1 − ρ is also rejected at high confidence levels.

Further, the finding that the estimated value of α (-6.7) is smaller than the estimate of 1 − ρ (-0.8)

attributes the low EIS of nondurable consumption to the substantially imperfect substitutability between

the two goods, rather than to a high degree of curvature of the utility function with respect to the

composite good.
                                                                                                              34

          The last two rows of Table 2 report the likelihood ratio test statistic, and the associated

probability value, of each of the three restricted models against the general model. Both the standard

model and the habit persistence model are decisively rejected, while the housing model survives with a

probability value of only .35 .

          Renters as well as homeowners incur a substantial transactions cost when adjusting their

consumption of housing services. The adjustment costs for renters presumably are lower than for

homeowners, since renters pay the pecuniary and nonpecuniary costs of moving but not the

commissions and closing costs associated with real estate transactions. However, as long as nondurable

consumption is costlessly adjustable, the Euler equation should hold for renters as well as homeowners

despite likely differences between the two groups in terms of the magnitude of the adjustment cost and

the frequency of moves.

          The decision to own rather than rent will depend on the household’s constraints (for example,

on income, wealth, and the ability to borrow), on lifestyle and demographic considerations, and on

preferences. Since the subset of the population which chooses to become homeowners may differ

systematically from non-homeowners in terms their preferences over housing and nondurable

consumption, we estimate a specification in which the preference parameters α, ρ, and γ are assumed

to differ for renters as opposed to homeowners. The Euler equation for the housing model is:

                                                                             1−( α j +ρ j ) 
                                               α −1  α j          αj           αj         
                                   Cij,t +1  j  Cij,t +1 + γ jH ij,t +1                 
(55)      1 = βE t (1 + rij,t +1 )                
                                    Cij,t               αj        αj                      
                                                   Cij,t + γ jH ij,t                    
                                                                           
                                                                                           

where i is the household index, and j indicates whether the household owns or rents. The preference

parameters are assumed to be the same within the group (homeowners or renters), but differ across

groups.

          As reported in Table 3, the estimated value of γ , the weight on housing, is essentially the same

for the two groups (1.023 for homeowners and 0.988 for renters). The estimates of the curvature
                                                                                                             35

parameter, ρ , are also very similar (1.795 for homeowners and 1.998 for renters). The point estimate of

the intratemporal substitution parameter, α , is somewhat lower for homeowners (-7.383) for

homeowners that for renters (-5.032). However, the likelihood ratio test of the joint restriction that the

three preference parameters have common values across the two groups, reported at the bottom of Table

3, cannot be rejected.




                     Table 3: Housing model estimates: Homeowners vs. Renters

                                        Restricted          Unrestricted Forms
                                          Form          Homeowners       Renters
Subjective discount factor (β)             0.98          0.98                0.98
Total number of observations             23,299          13,966             9,333

Average values (1974-87):
        C ($, per capita)                  1,190          1,250                  967
        H (square feet)                    1,499          1,624                 1,178
        Number of rooms                     5.4            6.1                   4.3

Estimated parameters:
  Intratemporal Substitution              -6.576          -7.383                -5.032
(α)                                       (1.768)         (2.069)              (1.341)
                                           1.701           1.795                1.998
                     Curvature (ρ)        (0.228)         (0.199)              (0.239)
                                            1.009          1.023                0.988
          Weight on Housing (γ)            (0.278)        (0.256)              (0.231)

                                            0.132         0.120                 0.153
              Implied EIS of C
    Hypothesis Tests [p-values]:            [0.00]        [0.00]                [0.00]
                            α=1             [0.00]        [0.00]                [0.00]
                            ρ=1             [0.00]        [0.00]                [0.00]
                                            [0.39]                   [0.31]
                         α=1-ρ
                                            4.111
    Overidentifying restrictions
                                            [0.25]
               LR Test Statistic

Notes: Asymptotic standard errors are in parentheses. Probability values for hypothesis tests are in
brackets. Sample period is 1974 to 1986. The EIS is calculated using the point estimates of the
parameters and the 1974-87 sample averages of the variables.
                                                                                                                36

   Whether we look at homeowners alone, renters alone, or the pooled sample of homeowners and

renters, we can reject at very high levels of confidence the parameter restrictions which imply a) perfect

substitutability between the two goods ( α = 1 ), b) the curvature of the utility function is consistent with

the log specification ( ρ = 1 ), and c) the reciprocal relationship between the EIS and the curvature

parameter ( α = 1 − ρ ) .



Conclusions

   Despite the quantitative importance of housing as a component of the household budget, and of the

household portfolio, the dominant models in macro and in finance typically ignore housing entirely, and

build their optimization problems on a utility function which takes as its argument a single, costlessly

adjustable, nondurable good. This simplifying assumption, though drastic, would be reasonable if 1)

abstracting from housing did not appreciably alter the implications of the model, and 2) the more

plausible specification in which housing is treated as a separate good, imperfectly substitutable with

nondurable consumption, were intractable. The paper provides a generalization of the important, but

highly stylized, model of Grossman and Laroque (1990), and identifies the conditions under which the

model remains tractable in a setting sufficiently general to incorporate variation in the price of housing

relative to the nondurable good. The required assumption seems to be reasonably consistent with the

data.

        The housing model differs substantially from the standard model, but delivers many of the same

implications as the habit persistence model, because the assumption that housing is subject to a

nonconvex adjustment cost causes the current house to become one of the state variables which affect

the household’s optimal level of nondurable consumption and optimal portfolio allocation. While the

housing model and the habit persistence model are both theoretically capable of explaining why

nondurable consumption is “smooth”, without invoking an implausibly large degree of risk aversion,

empirical tests using household level data strongly favor the housing model.
                                                                                                              37

Data Appendix

        Food consumption data from the Survey Research Center (SRC) sample of the Panel Study of

Income Dynamics (PSID) is used as a proxy for nondurable consumption. Since the food questions

were not asked in the 1973, 1988, and 1989 waves, the sample period runs from 1974 to 1987.

Observations were excluded from the sample if the household contained more than one family unit, if

the household resided outside the US during the time of the interview, or if there was a change relative

to the previous year in either the head or the spouse. Real food expenditures, C it , represents the sum of

1) expenditures on food at home plus the value of food stamps, deflated by the CPI for food at home,

and 2) expenditures on food eaten out, deflated by the CPI for food away from home. Since most of the

PSID interviews are conducted between January and June, the CPI deflator for a given survey year is

calculated as the average of the monthly values of the index for the first six months of the year.

Observations were excluded if the data value fell in the top-coded range (“$9,999 or more” for either

component), or if total household consumption was reported as zero. Total household food

consumption was then converted to a per capita measure by dividing by the number of people in the

family unit in order to control for changes in family composition.

         The PSID provides data on the value of the home, as reported by the homeowner, the number

or rooms (not counting bathrooms), and the annual rent paid by renters. Since the housing variable

which appears as an argument of the utility function represents the physical quantity rather than the

market value of the housing services consumed, we impute the square footage of the house of each

PSID respondent using a model estimated from the American Housing Survey (AHS), which provides

an extensive dataset on housing characteristics from 1975 through the present (annually prior to 1983

and biennially thereafter).

        Table A1 reports the parameter estimates obtained from the 1993 AHS by regressing the house

size in square feet on the following variables: dummy variables which indicate whether the house is

located in a central city, suburb, or rural area (denoted “non-Metropolitan Statistical Areas”), dummy
                                                                                                       38

variables for rented homes and for mobile homes, and a third degree polynomial in the number of

rooms. Separate models are estimated for four regions: North, Midwest, South and West. All of the

explanatory variables used in the regressions are reported in the PSID as well as the AHS. Using the

parameter estimates obtained from the AHS and the corresponding data on the explanatory variables

form the PSID, we then impute the square footage of the house occupied by each PSID household, both

renters and homeowners. Unlike the data on food consumption, the imputed house size is not converted

to “per capita” terms by dividing by household size.

             Table A1: Relationship between House Size and Housing Characteristics
                          Dependent variable: House size in square feet

                               Northeast               Midwest          South             West
Dependent variable:
  House size in square feet
                     Median 1700.000               1650.000         1386.000          1344.000
                       Mean 1831.580               1792.499         1574.084          1495.667
          Standard Deviation 1038.022               923.669          829.836           793.820

Independent variables:
Constant                         455.937            644.271         1113.713           639.543
                                  (71.18)          (101.87)           (81.97)           (57.21)
Suburbs                            81.051             63.775           68.910            21.794
                                  (23.48)            (18.42)          (12.46)           (12.86)
Non-MSA                          153.706              14.452           37.151            30.938
                                  (33.70)            (20.29)          (14.67)           (19.86)
Renter                          -405.376           -351.076          -236.472         -231.220
                                  (26.07)            (19.66)          (12.18)           (14.52)
Mobile Home                     -638.203           -596.653          -356.816         -282.514
                                  (35.76)            (23.98)          (15.35)           (19.37)
# rooms                          114.379              42.360         -170.826            -2.264
                                  (26.61)            (33.82)          (30.06)          (22.05)
(# rooms)2                         10.151             16.933           35.299           17.928
                                    (3.18)            (3.65)           (3.45)            (2.70)
(# rooms)3                          -0.427            -0.644           -1.033            -0.531
                                    (0.12)            (0.12)           (0.12)            (0.10)

Adjusted R2                         0.425             0.378            0.446             0.512
Log likelihood                   -58282.33         -76536.98        -109678.80        -68869.75
AIC                                16.176            16.020           15.691            15.475
SBIC                               16.184            16.026           15.695            15.481
Number of Observations              7,207             9,556           13,981             8,902


Notes: Data is from the 1993 wave of the AHS. Standard errors, reported in parentheses, are
estimated using White’s heteroskedasticity consistent covariance matrix.
                                                                                                         39


                                                References

Abel, Andrew B. “Asset Prices under Habit Formation and Catching Up with the Joneses.” A.E.R. Papers and
        Proceedings, 80 (May 1990): 38-42.
Beaulieu, Joseph J. “Optimal Durable and Nondurable Consumption with Transactions Costs.” Working
        paper #93-12, Finance and Economics Discussion Series, Division of Research and Statistics, Federal
        Reserve Board, Washington, D.C., April 1993.
Bernanke, Ben S., “Adjustment Costs, Durables, and Aggregate Consumption.” Journal of Monetary
        Economics, 1985, 15, pp. 41-68.
Brueckner, Jan K. “Consumption and Investment Motives and the Portfolio Choices of Homeowners.”
        Journal of Real Estate Finance and Economics, 1997, 15(2), pp. 159-80.
Caballero, Ricardo J. “Durable Goods: An Explanation for their Slow Adjustment.” Journal of Political
        Economy, 1993, 101(2), 205-251.
Campbell, John Y. and Cochrane, John H. “By Force of Habit: A Consumption-Based Explanation of
        Aggregate Stock Market Behavior.” Journal of Political Economy, April 1999, 107(2), pp. 205-251.
Campbell, John Y. and Cochrane, John H. “Explaining the Poor Performance of Consumption-Based Asset
        Pricing Models.” Manuscript. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard Univ.; Chicago: Univ. of Chicago, 1998.
Canner, Niko, Mankiw, N. Gregory and Weil, David N. “An Asset Allocation Puzzle.” American Economic
        Review, March l997, 87(1), pp. 181-191.
Case, Karl E. and Shiller, Robert J. “The Efficiency of the Market for Single-Family Homes.” American
        Economic Review, March l989, 79(1), pp. 125-137.
Constantinides, George M. “Habit Formation: A Resolution of the Equity Premium Puzzle.” Journal of
        Political Economy, June 1990, 98(3), pp. 519-543.
Deaton, Angus S. “Life-cycle Models of Consumption: Is the Evidence Consistent with the Theory?” in T.F.
        Bewley, ed., Advances in Econometrics, Fifth World Congress, 1987, Cambridge: Cambridge
        University Press, Chapter 14, 121-148.
Dynan, Karen E. “Habit Formation in Consumer Preferences: Evidence from Panel Data.” American
        Economic Review, 2000, 90(3), 391-406.
Eichenbaum, Martin S., Lars P. Hansen, and Kenneth J. Singleton. “A Time Series Analysis of
        Representative Agent Models of Consumption and Leisure Choice under Uncertainty.” Quarterly
        Journal of Economics, 1988, 103(1), 51-78.
Epstein, Larry G. and Zin, Stanley E. “Substitution, Risk Aversion, and the Temporal Behavior of
        Consumption and Asset Returns: A Theoretical Framework.” Econometrica, July 1989, 57(4), pp. 937-
        969.
Epstein, Larry G. and Zin, Stanley E. “Substitution, Risk Aversion and the Temporal Behavior of
        Consumption and Asset Returns: An Empirical Analysis.” Journal of Political Economy, 99 (April
        1991): 263-86.
Ferson, Wayne E., and Constantinides, George M. “Habit Persistence and Durability in Aggregate
        Consumption: Empirical Tests.” Journal of Financial Economics 29 (October 1991): 199-240.
Flavin, Marjorie. “Owner-Occupied Housing in the Presence of Adjustment Costs: Implications for
        Assset Pricing and Nondurable Consumption”, unpublished manuscript, UCSD, 2001.
Flavin, Marjorie and Yamashita, Takashi. “Owner-Occupied Housing and the Composition of the
        Household Portfolio.” unpublished manuscript, UCSD, 1999.
Flavin, Marjorie and Yamashita, Takashi. “Owner-Occupied Housing and the Composition of the
        Household Portfolio.” American Economic Review, 2002, 92(1), 345-362.
Goetzmann, William N. “The Single Family Home in the Investment Portfolio.” Journal of Real Estate
        Finance and Economics, May 1993, 6(3), pp. 201-22.
Goetzmann, William N., and Ibbotson, Roger. “The Performance of Real Estate as an Asset Class.” Journal
        of Applied Corporate Finance, Spring 1990, 3(1), pp. 65-76.
                                                                                                          40

Goodman, John L., and Ittner, John B. “The Accuracy of Home Owners’ Estimates of House Value.”
        Economic Activity Section Working Paper No. 131, Washington, D.C.: Board of Governors of the
        Federal Reserve System, 1993.
Grossman, Sanford J., and Laroque, Guy. “Asset Pricing and Optimal Portfolio Choice in the Presence of
        Illiquid Durable Consumption Goods.” Econometrica, January l990, 58(1), pp. 25-51.
Hall, Robert E. “Intertemporal Substitution in Consumption.” Journal of Political Economy, 1988, 96(2), 339-
        357.
Heaton, John C. “An Empirical Investigation of Asset Pricing with Temporally Dependent Preference
        Specification.” Econometrica 63 (May 1995): 681-717.
Heaton, John C., and Lucas, Deborah. “Portfolio Choice in the Presence of Background Risk.” Economic
        Journal, January 2000, 110(460), pp. 1-26.
Henderson, J. V. and Ioannides, Y.M. “A Model of Housing Tenure Choice.” American Economic Review,
        March 1983, 73(1), pp. 98-111.
Ioannides, Yannis M. “Dynamics of the Composition of Household Asset Portfolios and the Life Cycle.”
        Applied Financial Economics, September 1992, 2(3), pp. 145-59.
Lucas, Robert E., Jr., “Asset Prices in an Exchange Economy.” Econometrica, November 1978, 46(6), pp.
        1429-1445.
Lustig, Hanno, and Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh. “Housing Collateral, Consumption Insurance and Risk
        Premia.” 2002, unpublished manuscript, U. of Chicago.
Mehra, Rajnish, and Prescott, Edward C. “The Equity Premium: A Puzzle.” Journal of Monetary
        Economics, 15 (March 1985): 145-61.
Ogaki, M. and C. M. Reinhart. “Measuring Intertemporal Substitution: The Role of Durable Goods.” Journal
        of Political Economy, 1998, 106(5), 1078-1098.
Piazzesi, Monika, Martin Schneider, and Selale Tuzel. “Housing, Consumption, and Asset Pricing”, 2002,
        unpublished manuscript, UCLA.
Ross, Stephen A. and Zisler, Randall C. “Risk and Return in Real Estate.” Journal of Real Estate Finance
        and Economics, June 1991, 4(2), pp. 175-90.
Sundarson, Suresh M. “Intertemporally Dependent Preferences and the Volatility of Consumption and
        Wealth.” Review of Financial Studies 2(2) (1989): 73-89.
Survey Research Center. A Panel Study of Income Dynamics, Procedures and Tape Codes: 1973
        Interviewing Year, Wave VI, A Supplement, Ann Arbor, MI: Institute for Social Research, University of
        Michigan, 1973.
Yamashita, Takashi. “Owner-Occupied Housing and Investment in Stocks: An Empirical Test”, Journal of
        Urban Economics, March 2003, 53(2), pp 220-237.
