                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         THE SHAPE OF PRODUCTION FUNCTIONS
                       AND THE DIRECTION OF TECHNICAL CHANGE

                                             Charles I. Jones

                                         Working Paper 10457
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w10457


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       April 2004




I am grateful to Susanto Basu, Francesco Caselli, Hal Cole, Xavier Gabaix, Doug Gollin, Pete Klenow,
Robert Solow, Alwyn Young, and seminar participants at Arizona State University, the Chicago GSB, the
San Francisco Fed, Stanford, U.C. Berkeley, UCLA, U.C. Davis, and U.C. Santa Cruz for comments. Sam
Kortum provided especially useful insights, for which I am most appreciative. Dean Scrimgeour supplied
excellent research assistance. This research is supported by NSF grant SES-0242000. The views expressed
herein are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2004 by Charles I. Jones. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Shape of Production Functions and the Direction of Technical Change
Charles I. Jones
NBER Working Paper No. 10457
April 2004
JEL No. O40, E10
                                        ABSTRACT

This paper views the standard production function in macroeconomics as a reduced form and derives

its properties from microfoundations. The shape of this production function is governed by the

distribution of ideas. If that distribution is Pareto, then two results obtain: the global production

function is Cobb-Douglas, and technical change in the long run is labor-augmenting. Kortum (1997)

showed that Pareto distributions are necessary if search-based idea models are to exhibit steady-state

growth. Here we show that this same assumption delivers the additional results about the shape of

the production function and the direction of technical change.

Charles I. Jones
Department of Economics
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and NBER
chad@econ.berkeley.edu
2                                      CHARLES I. JONES


                                    1. INTRODUCTION
    Where do production functions come from? To take a common example,
our models frequently specify a relation y = f (k, ·) that determines how
much output per worker y can be produced with any quantity of capital per
worker k. We typically assume the economy is endowed with this function,
but what microfoundations can be provided to tell us more about it?
    Suppose production techniques are discovered, i.e. they are ideas. One
example of such an idea would be a Leontief technology that says, “for each
unit of labor, take k ∗ units of capital. Follow these instructions [omitted],
and you will get out y ∗ units of output.” The values k ∗ and y ∗ are parameters
of this production technique.
    If one wants to produce with a very different capital-labor ratio from
k ∗ , the Leontief technique is not particularly helpful, and one needs to
discover a new idea “appropriate” to the higher capital-labor ratio. 1 Notice
that one can replace the Leontief structure with a production technology that
exhibits a low elasticity of substitution, and this statement remains true: to
take advantage of a substantially higher capital-labor ratio, one really needs
a new technique targetted at that capital-labor ratio. One needs a new idea.
    According to this view, the standard production function that we write
down, mapping the entire range of capital-labor ratios into output per
worker, is a reduced form. It is not a single technology, but rather rep-
resents the substitution possibilities across different production techniques.
The elasticity of substitution for this global production function depends on
the extent to which new techniques that are appropriate at higher capital-
labor ratios have been discovered. That is, it depends on the distribution of
ideas.
    But from what distribution are ideas drawn? Kortum (1997) examined
a search model of growth in which ideas are productivity levels that are
    1
        This use of appropriate technologies is related to Basu and Weil (1998).
            PRODUCTION FUNCTIONS AND TECHNICAL CHANGE                       3

drawn from a distribution. He showed that the only way to get exponential
growth in such a model is if ideas are drawn from a Pareto distribution, at
least in the upper tail.
  This same basic assumption, that ideas are drawn from a Pareto distribu-
tion, yields two additional results in the framework considered here. First,
the global production function is Cobb-Douglas. Second, technological
change is purely labor-augmenting in the long run. In other words, an
assumption Kortum (1997) suggests we make if we want a model to ex-
hibit steady-state growth leads to important predictions about the shape of
production functions and the direction of technical change.
  Section 2 of this paper presents a simple baseline model that illustrates
all of the main results of this paper. In particular, that section shows how a
specific shape for the technology frontier produces a Cobb-Douglas produc-
tion function and labor-augmenting technical change. Section 3 develops
the full model with richer microfoundations and derives the Cobb-Douglas
result, while Section 4 discusses the underlying assumptions and the re-
lationship between this model and Houthakker (1955–1956). Section 5
develops the implications for the direction of technical change. Section 6
provides a numerical example of the model, and Section 7 concludes.


                           2. A BASELINE MODEL
                               2.1. Preliminaries
  Let a particular production technique — call it technique i — be defined
by two parameters, ai and bi . With this technique, output Y can be produced
with capital K and labor L according to a (local) production function

                              Y = F̃ (bi K, ai L).                         (1)

We assume that F̃ (·, ·) exhibits an elasticity of substitution less than one
between its inputs and constant returns to scale in K and L. In addition,
4                                CHARLES I. JONES


we make the usual neoclassical assumption that F̃ possesses positive but
diminishing marginal products and satisfies the Inada conditions.
    This production function can be rearranged to give
                                                 bi K
                                                         
                              Y = ai LF̃              ,1 ,                           (2)
                                                 ai L
so that in per worker terms we have
                                                 bi
                                                      
                                y = ai F̃           k, 1 ,                           (3)
                                                 ai
where y ≡ Y /L and k ≡ K/L. Now, define yi ≡ ai and ki ≡ ai /bi . Then
the production technique can be written as
                                                 k
                                                     
                                 y = yi F̃          ,1 .                             (4)
                                                 ki

If we choose our units so that F̃ (1, 1) = 1, then we have the nice property
that k = ki implies that y = yi . Therefore, we can think of technique i as
being indexed by ai and bi , or, equivalently, by ki and yi .
    The shape of the global production function is driven by the distribu-
tion of alternative production techniques rather than by the shape of the
local production function that applies for a single technique. 2 To illustrate
this, consider the example given in Figure 1. The circles in this figure de-
note different production techniques that are available — the set of (k i , yi )
pairs. For a subset of these, we also plot the local production function
y = F̃ (bi k, ai ). Finally, the heavy solid line shows the global production
function, given by the convex hull of the local production techniques. For
any given level of k, the global production function shows the maximum
amount of output per worker that can be produced using the set of ideas
that are available.
    2
   Other models in the literature feature a difference between the short-run and long-run
elasticities of substitution, as opposed to the local-global distinction made here. These
include the putty-clay models of Caballero and Hammour (1998) and Gilchrist and Williams
(2000).
           PRODUCTION FUNCTIONS AND TECHNICAL CHANGE                                5

       FIGURE 1. An Example of the Global Production Function

           y




                                                                           k
      Circles identify distinct production techniques; for some of these, the lo-
      cal production function associated with the technique has been drawn as
      a dashed line. The heavy solid line shows the convex hull of the local
      production functions, i.e. the global production function.




  The key question we’d like to answer is this: What is the shape of the
global production function? To make progress, we now turn to a simple
baseline model.

                          2.2. The Baseline Model
  We begin with a simple model, really not much more than an example.
However this baseline model turns out to be very useful: it is easy to analyze
and captures the essence of the model with more detailed microfoundations
that is presented in Section 3.
  At any given point in time, a firm (or the economy) has a stock of ideas
from which to choose. To characterize the global production function,
6                              CHARLES I. JONES


notice that for each point in the input space, the economy will choose to
produce with the idea that yields the largest amount of output.
    To make this problem more precise, suppose N is the cumulative amount
of research the firm has undertaken, and suppose this research has generated
a menu of technology choices given by

                                 b = H(a, N )                                 (5)

where Ha < 0 and HN > 0. From its research effort, N , the firm discovers
a set of ideas. The frontier of this set is a technology menu that involves a
tradeoff between ideas with a high level of a and ideas with a high level of
b. As more research is conducted, N rises, the firm discovers more ideas,
and this menu shifts out.
    The firm’s problem then is to choose a and b from the technology menu
to maximize the level of production for any given set of inputs, and this
defines the global production function:

                    Y = F (K, L; N ) ≡ max F̃ (bK, aL)                        (6)
                                            b,a

subject to (5), assuming K, L, and N are given. As discussed above, we
assume that F̃ (·, ·) has an elasticity of substitution less than one and exhibits
constant returns to scale in K and L.
    Notice that the problem here is to choose the levels of a and b. Related
problems appear in the literature on the direction of technical change; see
Acemoglu (2003a), Kennedy (1964), Samuelson (1965) and Drandakis and
Phelps (1966). However, in these problems the choice variables and the
constraints are typically expressed in terms of the growth rates of a and b
rather than the levels, resulting in a conceptually different problem. There,
the notion is that one can choose whether to discover ideas with a high a or
a high b. Here, the notion is that one discovers ideas in undirected search,
and that each idea is an (a, b) pair.
               PRODUCTION FUNCTIONS AND TECHNICAL CHANGE                                    7

                    FIGURE 2. Direction of Technical Change

           b




               b*
                                                                  Y = Y*



                                                                     b = H(a, N)

                                            a*                                     a


  The solution to this problem is straightforward. Graphically, it is shown
in Figure 2. Algebraically, an interior solution equates the ratio of the labor
and capital shares to the elasticity of the H curve:

                             1 − θK    ∂H a
                                    =−      ≡ ηHa ,                                        (7)
                               θK      ∂a H

where θK (a, b; K, L) ≡ F̃1 bK/Y .
  In Figure 2, we drew the technology menu as convex to the origin. Of
course, this is just for illustrative purposes; we could have drawn the curve as
concave or linear. However, it turns out that the constant elasticity version of
the convex curve delivers a particularly nice result.3 In particular, suppose
the constraint is given by

                                  b = N a−η , η > 0.                                       (8)
  3
   In this case, the assumption that F̃ has an elasticity of substitution less than one guaran-
tees that the iso-output curves are more sharply curved than the technology menu, producing
an interior solution.
8                                 CHARLES I. JONES


In this case, the elasticity ηHa = η is constant, so the choice of the technol-
ogy levels leads to a first-order condition that sets the capital share equal to
the constant 1/1 + η.
    The constancy of the capital share then leads to two useful and interesting
results. First, the global production function takes a Cobb-Douglas form:
for any levels of the inputs K and L, and any location of the technology
frontier, N , the choice of technology leads the elasticity of output with
respect to capital and labor to be constant.
    In fact, it is easy to derive the exact form of the global production function
by combining the local-global insights of Section 2.1 with the technology
menu. For some technique i, recall the equivalent ways we have of describ-
ing the technique:

                                        yi ≡ a i                                       (9)
                                               ai
                                        ki ≡                                         (10)
                                               bi
From the technology frontier in equation (8), we know that b i and ai are
related by bi = N a−η
                   i . Simple algebra shows that yi and ki are therefore
related by

                                  yi = (N ki )1/1+η .                                (11)

That is, given the constant elasticity form of the technology frontier, a plot
of the techniques in (k, y) space like that in Figure 1 yields a Cobb-Douglas
production function. With this continuous formulation for the frontier, the
global production function is exactly equal to the technology frontier in
(k, y) space.4 Multiplying by L to get back to the standard form, the global
  4
    For this to be true, we need the local production techniques to paste up smoothly with
the global production function. For example, if F̃ is a CES function with a capital share
parameter λ (see, for example, equation (33) below), the global production function is
actually proportional to that in equation (12). To make the factor of proportionality equal
to one, we need λ = 1/1 + η, so that the factor share at k = ki is exactly 1/1 + η.
              PRODUCTION FUNCTIONS AND TECHNICAL CHANGE                                     9

production function is given by

                                   Y = N θ K θ L1−θ ,                                    (12)

where θ ≡ 1/1 + η.
  The second key result is related to the direction of technical change. To
see this, consider embedding this production setup in a standard neoclassical
growth model.5 The fact that the global production function is Cobb-
Douglas implies immediately that such a model will exhibit a balanced
growth path with positive growth provided N grows exponentially.
  The balanced growth path result turns out to have a strong implication
for the direction of technical change. This is just an application of the
Steady-State Growth Theorem: If a neoclassical growth model exhibits
steady-state growth with a nonzero capital share, then either the production
function is Cobb-Douglas or technical change is labor augmenting. 6 Since
the local production function is not Cobb-Douglas and since production
always occurs with some local production technique, this must mean that in
the long run, technical change is purely labor augmenting and b is constant.
Moreover, the fact that the capital share equals 1/1 + η implies that the
level of b is chosen so that the capital share is invariant to the capital-output
ratio, one of the key results in Acemoglu (2003b).7
  5
     By this we mean the usual Ramsey-Cass-Koopmans model with isoelastic utility, con-
stant population growth, and constant growth in N .
   6
     For a discussion and proof of this theorem, see Barro and Sala-i-Martin (1995), Chapter
2. The nonzero capital share qualification is important. For example, a neoclassical growth
model with a CES production function Y = F (BK, AL) with an elasticity of substitution
less than one and with exponential growth in A and B does have a balanced growth path.
Asymptotically, production behaves as if there were an infinite amount of effective capital
so that Y = AL.
   7
     As an example, if the local production function takes the CES form given in equation (33),
it is straightforward to show that the level of b is chosen as
                                                  1/ρ
                                          1   1           Y
                                 b=         ·               .
                                          λ 1+η           K
10                                 CHARLES I. JONES


  What is the intuition for the result that technical change is purely labor
augmenting? Notice that in steady state K/Y must be constant. To have
a positive capital share, then, the marginal product of capital must also be
positive and constant. An increase in b has two effects: first, it raises the
marginal product of capital directly. But second, it increases the amount of
effective capital, driving down the marginal product. In the Cobb-Douglas
case, these two effects cancel, but otherwise one or the other dominates,
imparting a trend to the marginal product unless b is constant. 8
  The insight from this simple example is that if the technology frontier —
i.e. the way in which the levels of a and b trade off — exhibits a constant
elasticity, then the global production function will be Cobb-Douglas and
technological change will be labor-augmenting in the long run. But is there
any reason to think that the technology frontier takes this particular shape?


       3. MICROFOUNDATIONS: PARETO DISTRIBUTIONS
  The baseline model is straightforward and yields strong predictions.
However, it involves a very particular specification of the technology menu.
It turns out that this specification can be derived from a model of ideas with
substantially richer microfoundations. This is the subject of the current
section.9

The fact that Y /K is constant along a balanced growth path then delivers the constancy of
b.
   8
     Another intuition is the following. Notice that Y = F̃ (bK, aL) has an elasticity of
substitution between effective capital and effective labor that is less than one. Therefore,
K and a are relative complements while b and K are relative substitutes (the elasticity of
substitution between b and K is equal to one). Capital accumulation substitutes for growth
in b while it complements and reinforces growth in a.
   9
     I owe a large debt to Sam Kortum in this section. A previous version of this paper
contained a much more cumbersome derivation of the Cobb-Douglas result that applied
asymptotically as research effort gets large. Kortum, in discussing this earlier version at a
conference, offered a number of useful comments that simplified the presentation, including
the Poisson approach that follows. The asymptotic approach gets by without making the
Poisson assumption, while the Poisson approach is more tractable and delivers a result that
             PRODUCTION FUNCTIONS AND TECHNICAL CHANGE                                 11

                                      3.1. Setup
  Let i = 0, 1, . . . index the production techniques — the ideas — that
are available at a given point in time. The production technique associated
with idea i is F̃ (bi K, ai L). Because it results in a more tractable problem
that yields analytic results, we make the extreme assumption that this local
production technology is Leontief:

                      Y = F̃ (bi K, ai L) = min{bi K, ai L}.                         (13)

Of course, the intuition regarding the global production function suggests
that it is determined by the distribution of ideas, not by the shape of the
local production function. In later simulation results, we confirm that the
Leontief assumption can be relaxed.
  New ideas for production are discovered through research. A single re-
search endeavor yields a number of ideas drawn from a Poisson distribution
with a parameter normalized to one. In expectation, then, each research
endeavor yields one idea. Let N denote the cumulative number of research
endeavors that have been undertaken. Then the number of ideas, n that
have been discovered as a result of these N attempts is a random variable
drawn from a Poisson distribution with parameter N .
  The discovery of an idea results in a new production technique, de-
scribed by its labor-augmenting and capital-augmenting parameters a i and
bi . These parameters are drawn from a joint distribution given by

                         Prob [bi > b, ai > a] = G(b, a),                            (14)

where the support for this distribution is ai ≥ γa > 0 and bi ≥ γb > 0. We
specify this distribution in its complementary form because this simplifies
some of the equations that follow.
applies for finite research effort. The asymptotic result that drops the Poisson assumption
is developed in the Appendix.
12                                  CHARLES I. JONES


                     3.2. Deriving the Production Function
     The global production function describes, as a function of inputs, the
maximum amount of output that can be produced using any combination of
existing production techniques. We have already made one simplification
in our setup by limiting consideration to Leontief techniques. Now we
make another by ignoring combinations of techniques and allowing only a
single technique to be used at each point in time. Again, this is a simplifying
assumption that allows for an analytic result, but it will be relaxed later in
the numerical simulations.
     Definition 3.1.         The global production function F (K, L; n) is given
as

                       F (K, L; n) ≡         max         F̃ (bi K, ai L)               (15)
                                         i∈{0,...,n−1}




     We build up to characterizing this object through several steps. First, con-
sider particular levels of the inputs, K and L. Let Yi (K, L) ≡ F̃ (bi K, ai L)
denote output using technique i. Then, since F̃ is Leontief, the distribution
of Yi is given by10

                    Prob [Yi > ỹ] = Prob [bi K > ỹ, ai L > ỹ]
                                       = G(ỹ/K, ỹ/L).                                (16)



     Next, suppose there are n ideas that have been discovered. In this case,
the output level associated with the global production function is distributed
as

                   Prob [max{Yi } ≤ ỹ] = (1 − G(ỹ/K, ỹ/L))n                         (17)
                            i

 10
      Since bi ≥ γb and ai ≥ γa , the support for this distribution is ỹ ≥ max{γb K, γa L}.
             PRODUCTION FUNCTIONS AND TECHNICAL CHANGE                                    13

  At this point, we can use the nice properties of the Poisson distribution
to make further progress. Recall that n ∼ P oisson(N ), so as a function
of the total number of research attempts, N , we have

             Prob [max{ Yi } ≤ ỹ]
                                   ∞ −N n
                                     e N
                                                       (1 − G(ỹ/K, ỹ/L))n
                                   X
                              =
                                   n=0
                                            n!
                                         ∞
                                           (N (1 − G(ỹ/K, ỹ/L)))n
                              = e−N
                                         X

                                         n=0
                                                                n!
                                    −N     N (1−G(·))
                              = e        ·e
                              = e−N G(ỹ/K,ỹ/L) .                                      (18)

For a general joint distribution function G, this last equation describes the
distribution of the global production function when cumulative research
effort is N .11
  To go further, we now make a key assumption about the distribution of
ideas:

  Assumption 3.1. Ideas are drawn from independent Pareto distribu-
tions:
                                                       −α
                                                  a
                                              
                  Prob [ai ≤ a] = 1 −                        , a ≥ γa > 0               (19)
                                                  γa
                                                       −β
                                                  b
                                              
                   Prob [bi ≤ b] = 1 −                       , b ≥ γb > 0,              (20)
                                                  γb
where α > 0, β > 0, and α + β > 1.12
  11
     See Proposition 2.1 in Kortum (1997) for this style of reasoning, i.e. for an approach
that uses a Poisson process to get an exact extreme value distribution that is easy to work
with rather than an asymptotic result. See also Johnson, Kotz and Balakrishnan (1994),
pages 11 and 91–92.
  12
     This last condition that the sum of the two parameters be greater than one is needed so
that the mean of the Fréchet distribution below exists. On a related point, recall that for a
Pareto distribution, the kth moment exists only if the shape parameter (e.g. α or β) is larger
than k.
14                                CHARLES I. JONES




  With this assumption, the joint distribution of ai and bi satisfies

                                                                −β            −α
                                                           b            a
                                                       
            Prob [bi > b, ai > a] = G(b, a) =                                         .   (21)
                                                           γb           γa

And therefore,


              Prob [Yi > ỹ] = G(ỹ/K, ỹ/L) = γK β Lα ỹ −(α+β)                          (22)


where γ ≡ γaα γbβ . That is, the distribution of Yi is itself Pareto.
  The final step is to combine the Pareto assumption with the global produc-
tion function result derived in equation (18). It is straightforward to show
that the distribution of the output that can be produced with the global
production function, given inputs of K and L, is

                                                           β Lα ỹ −(α+β)
                   Prob [max{Yi } ≤ ỹ] = e−γN K                            .             (23)


This distribution is known as a Fréchet distribution.13
  Finally, taking expectations over this distribution, one sees that expected
output, given N cumulative research draws and inputs K and L, is given
by

                                                                     1
                   E[Y ] ≡ E[max Yi ] = µ γN K β Lα                   α+β
                                                                                          (24)


where µ ≡ Γ(1 − 1/(α + β)) is a constant that depends on Euler’s factorial
function.14
 13
    See Kortum (1997), Galambos (1978), and Castillo (1988) for more.
 14
    Surprisingly few of the reference books on extreme value theory actually report the mean
of the Fréchet distribution. For a distribution function F (x) = exp(−((x − λ)/δ) −β ),
Castillo (1988) reports that the mean is λ + δΓ(1 − 1/β) for β > 1.
                PRODUCTION FUNCTIONS AND TECHNICAL CHANGE                   15

  One can also use the distribution in equation (23) to write the level of
output as a random variable:15
                                                        1
                                   Y = γN K β Lα         α+β
                                                                          (25)

where  is a random variable drawn from a Fréchet distribution with shape
parameter α + β and a scale parameter equal to unity.
  The Poisson structure for the arrival of ideas is a convenient device for
simplifying the presentation of the Cobb-Douglas result, but it is not nec-
essary. The Appendix derives the Cobb-Douglas production function as an
asymptotic result when the number of ideas gets large.


                                     4. DISCUSSION
  The result given in equation (25) is one of the main results in the paper.
If ideas are drawn from Pareto distributions, then the global production
function takes, at least in expectation, the Cobb-Douglas form. For any
given production technique, a firm may find it difficult to substitute capital
for labor and vice versa, leading the curvature of the production technique
to set in quickly. However, when firms are allowed to switch between
production technologies, the global production function depends on the
distribution of ideas. If that distribution happens to be a Pareto distribution,
then the production function is Cobb-Douglas.
  We can now make a number of remarks. First, the exponent in the Cobb-
Douglas function depends directly on the parameters of the Pareto search
distributions. The easier it is to find ideas that augment a particular factor,
the lower is the relevant Pareto parameter (e.g. α or β), and the lower
is the exponent on that factor. Intuitively, better ideas on average reduce
 15
      In particular, notice that
                              Prob [Y /z ≤ ỹ] = exp(−ỹ −(α+β) )
where z ≡ (γK β Lα )1/α+β .
16                           CHARLES I. JONES


factor shares because the elasticity of substitution is less than one. Some
additional remarks follow.

               4.1. Relationship to the Baseline Model
  The simple baseline model given at the beginning of this paper postulated
a technology menu and showed that if this menu exhibited a constant elas-
ticity, then one could derive a Cobb-Douglas global production function.
The model with microfoundations based on Pareto distributions turns out
to deliver a stochastic version of this technology menu.
  In the model, the stochastic version of this menu can be seen by con-
sidering an iso-probability curve Prob [bi > b, ai > a] ≡ G(b, a) = C,
where C > 0 is some constant. With the joint Pareto distribution, this
iso-probability curve is given by
                                          1/β
                                      γ
                                  
                             b=                  a−α/β .                (26)
                                      C
This iso-curve has a constant elasticity equal to −α/β and shifts up as the
probability C is lowered, analogous to an increase in N in the baseline
model.
  In terms of the baseline model, the Pareto distribution therefore delivers
ηHa = α/β. The first-order condition in equation (7) then implies that
technologies will be chosen so that the capital share is equal to β/(α +
β), which is exactly the exponent in the global Cobb-Douglas production
function of the Pareto model, as shown in equation (25).

                     4.2. Houthakker (1955–1956)
  The notion that Pareto distributions, appropriately “kicked,” can deliver a
Cobb-Douglas production function is a classic result by Houthakker (1955–
1956). Houthakker considers a world of production units (e.g. firms)
that produce with Leontief technologies where the Leontief coefficients are
distributed across firms according to a Pareto distribution. Importantly,
              PRODUCTION FUNCTIONS AND TECHNICAL CHANGE                                     17

each firm has limited capacity, so that the only way to expand output is to
use additional firms. Houthakker then shows that the aggregate production
function across these units is Cobb-Douglas.
  The result here obviously builds directly on Houthakker’s insight that
Pareto distributions can generate Cobb-Douglas production functions. The
result differs from Houthakker’s in several ways, however. First, Houthakker’s
result is an aggregation result. Here, in contrast, the result applies at the
level of a single production unit (be it a firm, industry, or country). Second,
the Leontief restriction in Houthakker’s paper is important for the result;
it allows the aggregation to be a function only of the Pareto distributions.
Here, in contrast, the result is really about the shape of the global produc-
tion function, looking across techniques. The local shape of the production
function does not really matter. This was apparent in the simple baseline
model given earlier, and it will be confirmed numerically in Section 6.
  Finally, Houthakker’s result relies on the presence of capacity constraints.
If one wants to expand output, one has to add additional production units,
essentially of lower “quality.” Because of these capacity constraints, his
aggregate production function is characterized by decreasing returns to
scale. In the context of an idea model, such constraints are undesirable:
one would like to allow the firm to take its best idea and use it for every unit
of production. That is, one would like the setup to respect the nonrivalry
of ideas and the replication argument for constant returns, as is true in the
formulation here.16



  16
     Lagos (2004) embeds the Houthakker formulation in a Mortenson-Pissarides search
model to provide a theory of total factor productivity differences. In his setup, firms (capital)
match with labor and have a match quality that is drawn from a Pareto distribution. Capital
is the quasi-fixed factor so that the setup generates constant returns to scale in capital and
labor. Nevertheless, because each unit of capital gets its own Pareto draw, a firm cannot
expand production by increasing its size at its best match quality.
18                            CHARLES I. JONES


                4.3. Evidence for Pareto Distributions?
  The next main comment is that Pareto distributions are crucial to the
result. Is it plausible that the distributions for ideas are Pareto?
  In terms of direct evidence, there are a number of references related to
patents, profitability, and citations. First, it is worth noting that many of
the tests in this literature are about whether or not the relevant variable
obeys a Pareto distribution. That is, Pareto serves as a benchmark. In
terms of findings, this literature either supports the Pareto distribution or
finds that it is difficult to distinguish between the Pareto and the lognormal
distributions. For example, Harhoff, Scherer and Vopel (1997) examine
the distribution of the value of patents in Germany and the United States.
For patents worth more than $500,000 or more than 100,000 Deutsche
Marks, a Pareto distribution accurately describes patent values, although
for the entire range of patent values a lognormal seems to fit better. Bertran
(2003) finds evidence of a Pareto distribution for ideas by using patent
citation data to value patents. Grabowski (2002) produces a graph of the
present discounted value of profits for new chemical entities by decile in
the pharmaceutical industry for 1990–1994 that supports a highly-skewed
distribution. Sornette and Zajdenweber (2000) interpret earlier similar work
by Grabowski and Vernon as evidence in favor of a Pareto distribution.
  Lotka (1926), a classic reference on scientific productivity, shows that
the distribution of scientific publications per author is Pareto. This result
appears to have stood the test of time across a range of disciplines, even in
economics, as shown by Cox and Chung (1991). Huber (1998) looks for
this result among inventors and finds some evidence that the distribution of
patents per inventor is also Pareto, although the sample is small. Somewhat
further removed but still related, evidence of Pareto distributions is found
by Sornette and Zajdenweber (1999) for world movie revenues and by
Chevalier and Goolsbee (2004) for book sales.
             PRODUCTION FUNCTIONS AND TECHNICAL CHANGE                              19

  In addition to the direct evidence, there are also conceptual reasons to
think ideas might come from Pareto distributions. To begin, consider a
simple example. Imagine drawing social security numbers for the U.S.
population at random, and for each person drawn, record their income
and their height. Also keep track of the largest draw to date: let y zmax
denote the maximum income and let hmax
                                   z   denote the maximum height
after z draws have been made. Now consider the following conditional
probability: Prob [X ≥ γxmax | X ≥ xmax ] for γ > 1, where x stands
for either income or height. This probability answers the question: “Given
that the tallest person observed so far is 6 feet 6 inches tall and given that
we just found someone even taller, what is the probability that this new
person is more than 5 percent taller than our 6 foot 6 inch person?” Clearly
as hmax gets larger and larger, this conditional probability gets smaller and
smaller — there is no one in the world taller than ten feet.
  In contrast, consider the income draws. Now, the probability answers
the question: “Given that the highest-earning person observed so far has an
annual income of $240,000 and given that we just found someone who earns
even more, what is the probability that this new person’s earnings exceed
the previous maximum by more than 5 percent?” It turns out empirically
that in the case of incomes, this probability does not depend on the level of
y max being considered. Indeed, it was exactly this observation on incomes
that led Pareto to formulate the distribution that bears his name: the defining
characteristic of the Pareto distribution is that the conditional probability
given above is invariant to xmax .17
  In applying this example to growth models, one is led to ask whether the
distribution of ideas is more like the distribution of heights or the distribution
of incomes. An important insight into this question was developed by

 17
    Saez (2001) shows this invariance for the United States in 1992 and 1993 for incomes
between $100,000 and $30 million.
20                                  CHARLES I. JONES


Kortum (1997). Kortum formulates a growth model where productivity
levels (ideas) are draws from a distribution. He shows that this model
generates steady-state growth only if the distribution has Pareto tails. That
is, what the model requires is that the probability of finding an idea that
is 5 percent better than the current best idea is invariant to the level of
productivity embodied in the current best idea. Of course, this is almost the
very definition of a steady state: the probability of improving economy-
wide productivity by 5 percent can’t depend on the level of productivity.
This requirement is satisfied only if the upper tail of the distribution is a
power function, i.e. only if the upper tail is Pareto.18
  A literature in physics on “scale invariance” suggests that if a stochastic
process is to be invariant to scale, it must involve Pareto distributions.
Steady-state growth is simply a growth rate that is invariant to scale (defined
in this context as the initial level of productivity). Whether incomes are at
100 or 1000, steady-state growth requires the growth rate to be the same in
both cases.
  Additional insight into this issue emerges from Gabaix (1999). Whereas
Kortum shows that Pareto distributions lead to steady-state growth, Gabaix
essentially shows the reverse in his explanation of Zipf’s Law for the size
of cities. He assumes that city sizes grow at a common exponential rate
plus an idiosynchratic shock. He then shows that this exponential growth
generates a Pareto distribution for city sizes.19


  18
     Kortum also shows that if the tails of the distribution are thinner than Pareto, as is the
case for the log normal or exponential distributions, then exponential growth rates decline
to zero. If the tails are thicker, then presumably growth rates rise over time, but this case is
not analyzed by Kortum.
  19
     An important additional requirement in the Gabaix paper is that there be some positive
lower bound to city sizes that functions as a reflecting barrier. Otherwise, for example,
normally distributed random shocks results in a log-normal distribution of city cizes. Al-
ternatively, if the length of time that has passed since each city was created is a random
variable with an exponential distribution, then no lower bound is needed and one recovers
             PRODUCTION FUNCTIONS AND TECHNICAL CHANGE                                  21

  These papers by Kortum and Gabaix suggest that Pareto distributions and
exponential growth are really just two sides of the same coin. The result
in the present paper draws out this connection further and highlights the
additional implication for the shape of production functions. Not only are
Pareto distributions necessary for exponential growth, but they also imply
that the global production function takes a Cobb-Douglas form.


           5. THE DIRECTION OF TECHNICAL CHANGE
  The second main result of the paper is related to the direction of techni-
cal change. It turns out that this same setup, when embedded in a standard
neoclassical growth model, delivers the result that technological change is
purely labor augmenting in the long run. That is, even though the largest
value of bi associated with any idea goes to infinity, this Pareto-based growth
model delivers the result that ai (t) grows on average while bi (t) is station-
ary.
  To see this result, we first embed our existing setup in a standard neo-
classical growth model. The production side of the model is exactly as
specified in Section 3. Capital accumulates in the usual way, and we as-
sume the investment rate s is a constant:


                    Kt+1 = (1 − δ)Kt + sYt , δ, s ∈ (0, 1).                           (27)


  Finally, we assume that the cumulative number of research endeavors as
of date t, Nt , grows exogenously at rate g > 0:


                                      Nt = N0 egt .                                   (28)

the Pareto result. See Mitzenmacher (2003) for a direct discussion of these alternatives, as
well as Cordoba (2003) and Rossi-Hansberg and Wright (2004).
22                                  CHARLES I. JONES


As in Jones (1995) and Kortum (1997), one natural interpretation of this
assumption is that research endeavors are undertaken by researchers, and
g is proportional to population growth.20
  For this model, we have already shown that the global production function
is given by
                                                        1
                              Yt = γNt Ktβ Lαt           α+β
                                                               t .                      (29)

It is then straightforward to show that the average growth rate of output per
worker y in the model in a stationary steady state is given by 21
                                          yt+1
                                  E[log        ] ≈ g/α.                                  (31)
                                           yt
The growth rate of output per worker is proportional to the rate of growth
of research effort. The factor of proportionality depends only on the search
parameter of the Pareto distribution for the labor-augmenting ideas. In
particular, the easier it is to find higher ai , the faster is the average rate of
economic growth.
  The fact that this growth rate depends on α but not on β is the first
clue that there is something further to explore here: if it is easier to find
better labor-augmenting ideas, the average growth rate is higher, but if it
is easier to find better capital-augmenting ideas, the average growth rate is
unaffected.
  20
     For example, one could have ∆Nt+1 = Rtλ Ntφ , where Rt represents the number of
researchers working in period t. In this case, if the number of researchers grows at a constant
exponential rate, then the growth rate of N converges to a constant that is proportional to
this population growth rate. Of course, one logical case to consider is where λ = 1 and
φ = 0, so that the number of research endeavors in a period is just proportional to the
number of researchers.
  21
     Rewriting the production function in per worker terms, one has
                    yt+1    1      Nt+1    β      kt+1       t+1
              log        =     log      +     log      + log      .                       (30)
                     yt    α+β      Nt    α+β      kt         t
Taking expectations of this equation and equating the growth rates of y and k yields the
desired result.
             PRODUCTION FUNCTIONS AND TECHNICAL CHANGE                                   23

  To understand this fact, it is helpful to look back at the local production
function. Even though the global production function is Cobb-Douglas,
production at some date t always occurs with some technique i(t):

                              Yt = F̃ (bi(t) Kt , ai(t) Lt ).                          (32)

Now recall the Steady-State Growth Theorem discussed earlier: If a neo-
classical growth model exhibits steady-state growth with a nonzero capital
share, then either the production function is Cobb-Douglas or technical
change is labor augmenting. In this case, the (local) production function
is not Cobb-Douglas and we do have a (stationary) steady state. The im-
plication is that technical change must be labor-augmenting in the model.
That is, despite the fact that maxi bi → ∞ as t → ∞, the time path for bi(t)
— i.e. the time path of the bi ’s associated with the ideas that are actually
used — must have an average growth rate equal to zero in the limit. The
intuition is the same as in the simple baseline model: K and b are relative
substitutes, while K and a are relative complements in production. This
means that capital accumulation leads the economy to increase a at the
expense of a stable b.22


                           6. SIMULATION RESULTS
  We now turn to a full simulation based on the Pareto model. In addition to
providing an illustration of the results, we take this opportunity to relax the
Leontief assumption on the local production function. Instead, we assume
the local production function takes the CES form:

          Yt = F̃ (bi Kt , ai Lt ) = (λ(bi Kt )ρ + (1 − λ)(ai Lt )ρ )1/ρ ,             (33)
  22
    This result leads to an important observation related to extending the model. Recall that
with the Pareto assumption, γb is the smallest value of b that can be drawn, and similarly
γa is the smallest value of a that can be drawn. Now consider allowing these distributions
to shift. There seems to be no obstacle to allowing for exponential shifts in γ a over time.
However, increases in γb turn out to lower the capital share in the model. If γb were to rise
exponentially, the capital share would be driven toward zero, on average.
24                                 CHARLES I. JONES

                                                                           1
where ρ < 0 so that the elasticity of substitution is σ ≡                 1−ρ   < 1. We
also allow production units to use two production techniques at a time in
order to convexify the production set, analogous to the picture given at the
beginning of the paper in Figure 1.
  The remainder of the model is as specified before. Apart from the change
to the CES function, the production setup is the same as that given in
Section 3 and the rest of the model follows the constant saving setup of
Section 5.
  We begin by showing that the CES setup still delivers a Cobb-Douglas
global production function, at least on average. For this result, we repeat
the following set of steps to obtain 1000 capital-output pairs: We first set
cumulative research effort N to 500, so that on average there are 500 ideas in
each iteration. We compute the convex hull of the CES functions associated
with these ideas to get a global production function.23 Next, we choose a
level of capital per worker k randomly from a uniform distribution between
the smallest value of ki and the largest value of ki for the iteration. Finally,
we record the output of the global production function associated with this
input.
  Following this procedure yields a graph like that shown in Figure 3. The
key parameter values in this simulation are α = 5 and β = 2.5, so that
the theory suggests we should expect a Cobb-Douglas production function
with a capital exponent of β/α + β = 1/3.24 As the figure shows, the

  23
     Computing the convex hull of the overlapping CES production functions is a compu-
tationally intensive problem, especially when the number of ideas gets large. To simplify,
we first compute the convex hull of the (ki , yi ) points. Then, we compute the convex hull
of the CES functions associated with this limited set of points. To approximate the CES
curve, we divide the capital interval into 100 equally-spaced points.
  24
     The standard capital share pins down the ratio of α/β, but it does not tell us the basic
scale of these parameters. The studies cited earlier related to patent values and scientific
productivity typically find Pareto parameters that are in the range of 0.5 to 1.5. We have
chosen higher values here for illustration. The following exercise is helpful in thinking
about this: What is the median value of a productivity draw, conditional on that draw being
              PRODUCTION FUNCTIONS AND TECHNICAL CHANGE                                                                                                                                               25

                            FIGURE 3. The Cobb-Douglas Result
              log y
                       3
                            OLS Slope = 0.325                                                                                                                                             o

                            Std. Err. = 0.006
                                    2
                      2.5       R               =         0.73
                                                                                                                                  o                                          o
                                                                                                                                                                o
                                                                                                                                              o
                                                                                                                                                                       o          o
                       2                                                                                                            o
                                                                                                                                                  o o
                                                                                                                                                   o
                                                                                                                                                                oo
                                                                                                                                                                    o
                                                                                                                                                                               o oo
                                                                                                                                                                  o         oo
                                                                                                        o                                                             o oooooo
                                                                                                                                          o o o oo                          o
                                                                                                           o                    o o                                   oo o
                                                                                                                                                            o oo ooo oo o
                                                                                                                                                   o o ooo oooo
                                                                                                                                 ooo ooo oooo oooo oo ooo
                                                                                                                                                            o
                      1.5                                                       o                                 oo     o
                                                                                                                         o
                                                                                                                                 oooo oo ooooooooo ooooo ooo ooo
                                                                                                                             o ooo oooooooooooooooooooooooooo
                                                                                                               oo o oo oooo ooooo ooo oo oo                     o
                                                                                   o o                                                              oo             oo o
                                                                                                                   o o
                                                                              o                o        o ooo ooo oooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooo oo
                                                                      o                                       o o                       oooo oo ooo ooooooo
                                                                               oo o o oo ooooo oooooooooooooooooooooo oooooooo           oooooooooooooooooooooooo
                                                                                o oo o o o o oooooo ooooo               oooooooooo o oooooooooooooooo
                                                                                                                                                    o oo  oo o
                                                      o         o
                                                                                     o  o     o oooo ooooooo oooooooooooooooooooooooooooooo  ooooooo ooooooo ooo
                                                                           o oo   o   o          oo oo o o     o    oo   o    oo  oo oo    o    oo o
                                                                      o o oooo o ooo ooo oooooo ooooooooooooooooooo ooooooooooooooooooooooooooooo o
                       1                                                     oo
                                                                       oo o oo o o oooo
                                                                                          oo ooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooo ooo o o o
                                                                                                      o ooooooooooo o oo oooo
                                                                                           ooooooooooooooooo oooo oooo oo o
                                                                            o
                                                                    o o o ooo ooo ooooooo ooooooooooooo oo o
                                             o                    o     oo     o   oooo o ooooooo oo
                                                                           o    o
                                                                  o oo o oo ooooooo oo  o
                                          o                    o     oo oooooo ooooooooo o oo o
                                                        o ooo         o o oooooo o oo o
                                                            o o oooo oo o oo oo oo               o
                                                           o o o oo ooo o o ooo
                                                           o o ooooooo o ooo
                      0.5             o o o    o  o o o oo o oo oooooo oo
                                                         o o ooo o o o
                                                   o   o          o
                                                                  o
                                o        oo         o oo o
                                    o                o ooooo oo o
                                         o o oo
                                  oo    oo o      o
                                  o              o
                       0

                        −2               −1                               0                           1                           2                            3                      4
                                                                                                                                                                                              log k

    Note: The figure shows 1000 capital-output combinations from the global pro-
    duction function. The parameter values used in the simulation are N = 500,
    α = 5, β = 2.5, γa = 1, γb = 0.2, and ρ = −1.




relation between log y and log k is linear, with a slope that is very close to
this value.
  We next consider a simulation run for the full dynamic time path of the
Pareto model. Continuing with the parameter choices already made, we
additionally assume g = .10, which implies an annual growth rate of 2
percent for output per worker in the steady state. We simulate this model
for 100 years and plot the results in several figures.25 Figure 4 shows a
subset of the more than 1 million techniques that are discovered over these

larger than some value, x? If α is the Pareto parameter, then the answer to this question
turns out to be 21/α x ≈ (1 + 0.7/α)x. For example, if α = 2, then the median value,
conditional on a draw being higher than x, is about 1.4x. This says that the average idea
that exceeds the frontier exceeds it by 40 percent. This implies very large jumps, which
might be plausible at the micro level but seem too large at the macro level. A value of
α = 5 instead gives an average jump of about 14 percent, which is still somewhat large.
Aggregation would, one suspects, smooth these jumps out.
  25
     Additional parameter values used in the simulation are listed in the notes to Figure 4.
26                                  CHARLES I. JONES


              FIGURE 4. Production in the Simulated Economy
             Output per
             Worker, y

                      16

                      14

                      12

                      10

                          8

                          6

                          4

                          2

                          0
                           0   10     20     30      40     50       60        70
                                                            Capital per Worker, k

     Note: Circles indicate ideas, plus signs indicate capital-output combinations that
     are actually used. The model is simulated for 100 periods with N0 = 50, α = 5,
     β = 2.5, g = .10, γa = 1, γb = 0.2, k0 = 2.5, s = 0.2, δ = .05, and ρ = −1.




100 periods. In particular, we plot only the 300 points with the highest
values of y (these are shown with circles “o”). Without this truncation, the
lower triangle in the figure that is currently blank but for the plus signs is
filled in as solid black. In addition, the capital-output combinations that
are actually used in each period are plotted with a plus sign (“+”). When a
single technique is used for a large number of periods, the points trace out the
CES production function. Alternatively, if the economy is convexifying by
using two techniques, the points trace out a line. Finally, when the economy
switches to a new technique, the capital-output combinations jump upward.
  Figure 5 shows output per worker over time, plotted on a log scale. The
average growth rate of output per worker in this particular simulation is
               PRODUCTION FUNCTIONS AND TECHNICAL CHANGE                                   27

                       FIGURE 5. Output per Worker over Time

              Output per
               Worker
              (log scale)
                       20


                       12



                        7



                        4

                        3


                        2

                            0    20          40          60         80          100
                                                                         Time


       Note: See notes to Figure 4.




1.48 percent, as compared to the theoretical value of 2 percent implied by
the parameter values, given by g/α.26
  Figure 6 plots the capital share FK K/Y over time. Even though the
economy grows at a stable average rate, the capital share exhibits fairly large
movements. When the economy is using a single production technique, the
accumulation of capital leads the capital share to decline. Alternatively,
when the economy is using two techniques to convexify the production
set, the marginal product of capital is constant, so the capital share rises
smoothly.
  It is interesting to compare the behavior of the capital share in the Pareto
model with the behavior that occurs in the simple baseline model. In the
  26
     We compute the average growth rate by dropping the first 20 observations (to minimize
the effect of initial conditions) and then regressing the log of output per worker on a constant
and a time trend.
28                               CHARLES I. JONES


                     FIGURE 6. The Capital Share over Time

          Capital
          Share
               0.7

               0.6

               0.5

               0.4

               0.3

               0.2

               0.1

                    0
                     0      20          40    60       80          100
                                                            Time


         Note: See notes to Figure 4.



simple model, the economy equates the capital share to a function of the
elasticity of the technology menu. If this elasticity is constant, then the
capital share would be constant over time. Here, the technology menu
exhibits a constant elasticity on average, but the menu is not a smooth,
continuous function. Quite the opposite: the extreme value nature of this
problem means the frontier is sparse, as the example back in Figure 1
suggests. This means the capital share will be stationary, but that it can
move around, both as the economy accumulates capital and as it switches
techniques.
  Figure 7 shows the technology choices that occur in this simulation. As
in Figure 4, the 300 ideas with the highest level of yi = ai are plotted. This
time, however, the (ai , bi ) pair corresponding to each idea is plotted. The
graph therefore shows the stochastic version of the technology menu. In
addition, the figure plots with a “+” the idea combinations that are actually
      PRODUCTION FUNCTIONS AND TECHNICAL CHANGE                                      29




                    FIGURE 7. Technology Choices

    Capital−Aug.
    Technology, b

              3


            2.5


              2


            1.5


              1


            0.5


              0
               2        4       6        8       10      12       14      16
                                              Labor−Augmenting Technology, a

Note: From more than 1 million ideas generated, the 300 with the highest
level of a are plotted as circles. The figure also plots with a “+” the (ai , bi )
combinations that are used at each date and links them with a line. When
two ideas are used simultaneously, the idea with the higher level of output
is plotted. See also notes to Figure 4.
30                             CHARLES I. JONES


used as the economy grows over time. Corresponding to the theoretical
finding earlier, one sees that the level of b∗i appears stationary, while the level
of a∗i trends upward. On average, technological change is labor augmenting.


                              7. CONCLUSION
  This paper provides microfoundations for the standard production func-
tion that serves as a building block for many economic models. An idea
is a set of instructions that tells how to produce with a given collection of
inputs. It can be used with a different mix of inputs, but it is not especially
effective with the different mix; the elasticity of substitution in production
is low for a given production technique. Instead, producing with a different
input mix typically leads the production unit to switch to a new technique.
This suggests that the shape of the global production function hinges on the
distribution of available techniques.
  Kortum (1997) examined a model in which productivity levels are draws
from a distribution and showed that only distributions in which the upper
tail is a power function are consistent with exponential growth. If one wants
a model in which steady-state growth occurs, then one needs to build in a
Pareto distribution for ideas. We show here that this assumption delivers two
additional results. Pareto distributions lead the global production function
to take a Cobb-Douglas form and produce a setup where technological
change, in the long run, is entirely labor augmenting.
  There are several additional directions for research suggested by this ap-
proach. First, our standard ways of introducing skilled and unskilled labor
into production involve production functions with an elasticity of substitu-
tion bigger than one, consistent with the observation that unskilled labor’s
              PRODUCTION FUNCTIONS AND TECHNICAL CHANGE                                      31

share of income seems to be falling.27 How can this view be reconciled
with the reasoning here?
   Second, the large declines in the prices of durable investment goods are
often interpreted as investment-specific technological change. That is, they
are thought of as increases in b rather than increases in a. 28 This is the case
in Greenwood, Hercowitz and Krusell (1997) and Whelan (2001), and it
is also implicitly the way the hedonic pricing of computers works in the
National Income and Product Accounts: better computers are interpreted
as more computers. The model in this paper suggests instead that b might
be stationary, so there is a tension with this other work. Of course, it is
not at all obvious that better computers are equivalent to more computers.
Perhaps a better computer is like having two people working with a single
computer (as in extreme programming). In this case, better computers might
be thought of as increases in a instead. This remains an open question.
Alternatively, it might be desirable to have microfoundations for a Cobb-
Douglas production function that permits capital-augmenting technological
change to occur in the steady state.
   Finally, one might ask how the model relates to recent discussions about
the behavior of capital shares. The literature is in something of a flux.
For a long time, of course, the stylized fact has been that capital’s share
is relatively stable. This turns out to be true at the aggregate level for
the United States and Great Britain, but it is not true at the disaggregated
level in the U.S. or in the aggregate for many other countries. Rather,
the more accurate version of the fact appears to be that capital’s share can
exhibit large medium term movements and even trends over periods longer

  27
     See Katz and Murphy (1992) and Krusell, Ohanian, Rios-Rull and Violante (2000), for
example.
  28
     This is loose. In fact, they are thought of as increases in a term that multiplies investment
in the capital accumulation equation. Of course, for many purposes this is like an increase
in b.
32                                 CHARLES I. JONES


than 20 years in some countries and industries.29 This paper is somewhat
agnostic about factor shares. As shown in Figure 6, the Pareto model
predicts the capital share may vary over time, while of course the baseline
model implied a constant capital share. However, there are many other
determinants of capital shares left out of this model, including aggregation
issues and wedges between marginal products and prices, so care should
be taken in interpreting the model along this particular dimension.

       APPENDIX: AN ALTERNATIVE DERIVATION OF THE
                  COBB-DOUGLAS RESULT

  Here we drop the assumption that ideas arrive as a Poisson process and
show that one still recovers the Cobb-Douglas result (and therefore the
labor-augmenting technical change). The difference is that the result now
holds asymptotically, as the number of ideas goes to infinity, and the proof
involves the use of extreme value theory.
  Let N now denote the total number of ideas that have been discovered
and drop the Poisson process. This is the only change to the model in
Section 3. As before, let Yi denote production using technique i with a
given amount of capital and labor. Then


              H(ỹ) ≡ Prob [Yi > ỹ] = Prob [bi K > ỹ, ai L > ỹ]
                                           ỹ ỹ
                                                 
                                     = G      ,
                                           K L
                                          β α −(α+β)
                                     = γK L ỹ           .                             (A.1)


That is, the distribution of Yi is Pareto.1
  29
     The recent papers by Blanchard (1997), Bentolila and Saint-Paul (2003), and Harrison
(2003) discuss in detail the facts about capital and labor shares and how they vary. Gollin
(2002) is also related; that paper argues that in the cross-section of countries, labor shares
are more similar than rough data on employee compensation as a share of GDP suggests
because of the very high levels of self-employment in many poor countries.
  1
    Since bi ≥ γb and ai ≥ γa , the support for this distribution is ỹ ≥ max{γb K, γa L}.
            PRODUCTION FUNCTIONS AND TECHNICAL CHANGE                                   33

  The global production function is the maximum amount of output that
can be produced with a single technique. Formally, it is defined as

                        Y = F (K, L, N ) = max Yi .                                   (A.2)
                                                      i=1,...,N

  Since the N draws are independent,

                  Prob [Y ≤ ỹ] = (1 − H(ỹ))N .
                                                                       N
                                  =           1 − γK β Lα ỹ −(α+β)          .        (A.3)

Of course, as the number of ideas N gets large, this probability for any
given level of ỹ goes to zero. So to get a stable distribution, we need to
normalize our random variable somehow, in a manner analogous to that
used in the Central Limit Theorem.
  In this case, the right normalization turns out to involve zN , where
                                                         1
                             zN ≡ γN K β Lα               α+β
                                                                .                     (A.4)

In particular, consider
                                                                                N
               Prob [Y ≤ zN ỹ] =         1 − γK β Lα (zN ỹ)−(α+β)
                                                            !N
                                             ỹ −(α+β)
                                  =       1−                        .                 (A.5)
                                                 N

Then using the standard result that limN →∞ (1 − x/N )N = exp(−x) for
any fixed value of x, we have

                    lim Prob [Y ≤ zN ỹ] = exp(−ỹ −(α+β) )                           (A.6)
                   N →∞

for ỹ > 0.2
  Therefore
                              Y
                                                 ∼ Fréchet(α + β).                   (A.7)
                                                 a
                     (γN K β Lα )1/α+β
 2
   This is a special case of the much more general theory of extreme values. For a more
general theorem relevant to this case, see Theorem 2.1.1 of Galambos (1978).
34                            CHARLES I. JONES


The global production function, appropriately normalized, converges asymp-
totically to a Fréchet distribution. We can think of the production function,
asymptotically, as
                                                1
                           Y ≈ γN K β Lα         α+β
                                                                        (A.8)

where  is a random variable drawn from a Fréchet distribution with param-
eter α + β. This result can be compared to that in equation (25): we get
the same result, asymptotically, that we obtained when we used the Poisson
process for research.


                              REFERENCES
Acemoglu, Daron, “Factor Prices and Technical Change: From Induced Innovation
   to Recent Debates,” in P. Aghion, R. Frydman, J. Stiglitz, and M. Woodford,
   eds., Knowledge, Information, and Expectations in Modern Macroeconomics,
   Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 2003.
     , “Labor- and Capital-Augmenting Technical Change,” Journal of European
     Economic Association, March 2003, 1, 1–37.
Barro, Robert J. and Xavier Sala-i-Martin, Economic Growth, McGraw-Hill, 1995.
Basu, Susanto and David N. Weil, “Appropriate Technology and Growth,” Quar-
   terly Journal of Economics, November 1998, 113 (4), 1025–1054.
Bentolila, Samuel and Gilles Saint-Paul, “Explaining Movements in the Labor
   Share,” 2003. CEMFI mimeo.
Bertran, Fernando Leiva, “Pricing Patents through Citations,” November 2003.
   University of Rochester mimeo.
Blanchard, Olivier J., “The Medium Run,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,
    1997, 1997 (2), 89–141.
Caballero, Ricardo J. and Mohamad L. Hammour, “Jobless Growth: Appropriabil-
   ity, Factor Substitution, and Unemployment,” Carnegie Rochester Conference
   Series on Public Policy, 1998, 48, 51–94.
Castillo, Enrique, Extreme Value Theory in Engineering, London: Academic Press,
    1988.
Chevalier, Judith and Austan Goolsbee, “Price Competition Online: Amazon Ver-
   sus Barnes And Noble,” Quantitative Marketing and Economics, forthcoming
   2004.
            PRODUCTION FUNCTIONS AND TECHNICAL CHANGE                        35

Cordoba, Juan Carlos, “On the Distribution of City Sizes,” 2003. Rice University
   mimeo.
Cox, Raymond and Kee H. Chung, “A Stochastic Model of Superstardom: an appli-
   cation of the Yule distribution,” Review of Economics and Statistics, November
   1991, 73 (4), 740–747.
Drandakis, E.M. and Edmund S. Phelps, “A Model of Induced Invention, Growth,
   and Distribution,” Economic Journal, December 1966, 76 (304), 823–840.
Gabaix, Xavier, “Zipf’s Law for Cities: An Explanation,” Quarterly Journal of
   Economics, August 1999, 114 (3), 739–767.
Galambos, Janos, The Asymptotic Theory of Extreme Order Statistics, New York:
   John Wiley & Sons, 1978.
Gilchrist, Simon and John C. Williams, “Putty Clay and Investment: A Business
    Cycle Analysis,” Journal of Political Economy, October 2000, 108 (5), 928–
    960.
Gollin, Douglas, “Getting Income Shares Right,” Journal of Political Economy,
   April 2002, 110 (2), 458–474.
Grabowski, Henry, “Patents and New Product Development in the Pharmaceutical
   and Biotechnology Industries,” July 2002. Duke University mimeo.
Greenwood, Jeremy, Zvi Hercowitz, and Per Krusell, “Long-Run Implications
   of Investment-Specific Technological Change,” American Economic Review,
   June 1997, 87 (3), 342–362.
Harhoff, Dietmar, Frederic M. Scherer, and Katrin Vopel, “Exploring the Tail of
   Patented Invention Value Distributions,” 1997. WZB Working Paper 97-27.
Harrison, Ann E., “Has Globalization Eroded Labor’s Share? Some Cross-Country
    Evidence,” May 2003. U.C. Berkeley mimeo.
Houthakker, Henrik S., “The Pareto Distribution and the Cobb-Douglas Production
   Function in Activity Analysis,” Review of Economic Studies, 1955–1956, 23
   (1), 27–31.
Huber, John C., “Cumulative Advantage and Success–Breeds–Sucess: the Value
   of Time Pattern Analysis,” Journal of the American Society for Information
   Science, 1998, 49 (5), 471–476.
Johnson, Norman L., Samuel Kotz, and N. Balakrishnan, Continuous Univariate
   Distributions, Volume 2, Wiley Interscience, 1994.
Jones, Charles I., “R&D-Based Models of Economic Growth,” Journal of Political
    Economy, August 1995, 103 (4), 759–784.
36                              CHARLES I. JONES


Katz, Lawrence and Kevin Murphy, “Changes in Relative Wages, 1963–1987:
   Supply and Demand Factors,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, February 1992,
   107 (1), 35–78.
Kennedy, Charles M., “Induced Bias in Innovation and the Theory of Distribution,”
   Economic Journal, September 1964, 74 (295), 541–547.
Kortum, Samuel S., “Research, Patenting, and Technological Change,” Economet-
    rica, 1997, 65 (6), 1389–1419.
Krusell, Per, Lee Ohanian, Jose-Victor Rios-Rull, and Giovanni Violante, “Capital-
   Skill Complementarity and Inequality: A Macroeconomic Analysis,” Econo-
   metrica, September 2000, 68 (5), 1029–1053.
Lagos, Ricardo, “A Model of TFP,” January 2004. NYU working paper.
Lotka, A.J., “The Frequency Distribution of Scientific Productivity,” Journal of the
    Washington Academy of Sciences, 1926, 16, 317–323.
Mitzenmacher, Michael, “A Brief History of Generative Models for Power Law
   and Lognormal Distributions,” Internet Mathematics, forthcoming 2003, 1 (2).
Rossi-Hansberg, Esteban and Mark L. J. Wright, “Urban Structure and Growth,”
   2004. Stanford University mimeo.
Saez, Emmanuel, “Using Elasticities to Derive Optimal Tax Rates,” Review of
   Economic Studies, 2001, 68, 205–229.
Samuelson, Paul A., “A Theory of Induced Innovations Along Kennedy-Weisacker
   Lines,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 1965, 47, 343–356.
Sornette, Didier and Daniel Zajdenweber, “The economic return of research: the
   Pareto law and its implications,” European Physical Journal B, 1999, 8 (4),
   653–664. http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/cond-mat/9809366.
     and   , “Economy of Scales in R&D with Block-busters,” January 2000.
     UCLA mimeo.
Whelan, Karl, “Balance Growth Revisited: A Two-Sector Model of Economic
  Growth,” 2001. Federal Reserve Board of Governors mimeo.
