                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




             CONSUMPTION-WEALTH COMOVEMENT OF THE WRONG SIGN

                                              James J. Choi
                                             David Laibson
                                           Brigitte C. Madrian
                                            Andrew Metrick

                                         Working Paper 10454
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w10454


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       April 2004




We thank Hewitt Associates for their help in providing the data. We are particularly grateful to Lori Lucas,
Jim McGhee, Scott Peterson, and Yan Xu, some of our many contacts at Hewitt. Outside of Hewitt, we have
benefited from conversations with Thomas Knox, Matthew Shapiro, Bill Zame, and from the comments of
seminar participants at Berkeley, Harvard, the NBER Monetary Economics Program Meeting, UCLA and
RAND. We are also indebted to John Beshears, Fuad Faridi, John Friedman, Parag Pathak, Nelson Uhan,
Kenneth Weinstein, and Lucia Wu for their excellent research assistance. Financial support from the National
Institute on Aging (grants R01-AG021640 and R01-AG16605) is gratefully acknowledged. Choi
acknowledges financial support from a National Science Foundation Graduate Research Fellowship, National
Institute on Aging Grant T32-AG00186, and the Mustard Seed Foundation. Laibson acknowledges financial
support from the Sloan Foundation. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and not necessarily
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2004 by James J. Choi, David Laibson, Brigitte C. Madrian, and Andrew Metrick. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Consumption-Wealth Comovement of the Wrong Sign
James J. Choi, David Laibson, Brigitte C. Madrian, and Andrew Metrick
NBER Working Paper No. 10454
April 2004, Revised June 2006
JEL No. E2, G1
                                          ABSTRACT

Economic theory predicts that an unexpected wealth windfall should increase consumption shortly

after the windfall is received. We test this prediction using administrative records on over 40,000

401(k) accounts. Contrary to theory, we estimate a negative short-run marginal propensity to

consume out of idiosyncratic 401(k) capital gains shocks. These results cannot be interpreted as

standard intertemporal substitution, since the idiosyncratic returns that we study do not predict future

returns. Instead, our findings imply that many investors are influenced by a positive feedback effect,

through which higher recent returns encourage higher short-run saving. Like any other animal,

401(k) participants appear to increase behaviors that have been associated with high rewards in the

past.

James J. Choi                                          Brigitte C. Madrian
Department of Economics                                Department of Business and Public Policy
Harvard University                                     University of Pennsylvania, Wharton School
Littauer Center                                        3620 Locust Walk, Suite 1400
Cambridge, MA 02138                                    Philadelphia, PA 19104
james_choi@post.harvard.edu                            and NBER
                                                       bmadrian@wharton.upenn.edu
David Laibson
Department of Economics                                Andrew Metrick
Harvard University                                     Department of Finance
Littauer Center                                        University of Pennsylvania, Wharton School
Cambridge, MA 02138                                    3620 Locust Walk, Suite 2300
and NBER                                               Philadelphia, PA 19104
dlaibson@harvard.edu                                   and NBER
                                                       metrick@wharton.upenn.edu
         1. Introduction
         Economic theory predicts that an unexpected wealth windfall should immediately and
permanently increase consumption, which is an income effect. For example, in an infinite-
horizon model with complete markets, the marginal propensity to consume (MPC) out of a
windfall roughly equals the discount rate.1 If markets are not complete, economic theory predicts
that the MPC may considerably exceed the discount rate (Carroll 1992, 1997).
         In this paper, we present empirical evidence that contradicts these predictions. We find
that the short-run MPC with respect to 401(k) capital gain windfalls is negative. At year-end
2001, 401(k) accounts contained $1.75 trillion owned by 45 million workers (Holden and
Vanderhei 2003). Using administrative data on 40,000 401(k) accounts, we calculate
idiosyncratic capital gains in the cross-section that do not forecast future returns. Standard theory
predicts that a cross-sectional regression of consumption growth on these orthogonal capital
gains shocks will identify only a positive income effect, since the standard substitution effect
should be inoperative. Contrary to theory, we estimate a negative short-run MPC. These results
are robust to a wide variety of alternative specifications motivated by theory and by the special
institutional features of 401(k) plans.
         At first glance, this result appears to be quite perverse. However, our results represent a
natural extension of an old idea: investors chase returns. Several authors have shown that return-
chasing influences asset allocation (e.g., Patel, Hendricks and Zeckhauser 1994, Benartzi 2001,
Goetzmann and Massa 2002, Huberman and Sengmuller 2004). We are the first to show that
return-chasing also plays a role in consumption decisions.2 High transitory past investment
returns encourage naïve households to invest more in the short run and therefore consume less.
         Although the main thrust of our paper is empirical, we also show that combining
reinforcement learning with the standard economic model can reconcile our results with the
positive MPC estimates found in prior consumption studies. Reinforcement learning models have


1
  In a continuous-time model with isoelastic preferences the MPC is given by (1-θ)[r + (θπ²)/(2σ²)] + θρ, where θ is
the elasticity of intertemporal substitution, r is the risk free real interest rate, π is the equity premium, σ is the
standard deviation of stock returns, and ρ is the discount rate. When the elasticity of intertemporal substitution is one
(log utility), this formula collapses to the discount rate.
2
  The first suggestions of such an effect can be found in work by Starr-McCluer (2002), who analyzes household
surveys in which 11.6% of stockholders report that the 1990s bull market caused them to save more, while only
3.4% say they saved less. Our identification strategy differs from that of Starr-McCluer, since we identify wealth
shocks cross-sectionally.



                                                           2
had success in predicting subject choices in experiments (Roth and Erev 1995, Erev and Roth
1998, Charness and Levin 2005). In our context, reinforcement learning encourages saving in
response to high returns and discourages saving in response to low returns. Even though the
standard income effect is operative, it is more than offset by the reinforcement effect in this
particular case, yielding a negative MPC.
           Section 2 describes our data set, which is comprised of detailed information for
approximately 40,000 participants in five company-sponsored 401(k) plans. While ours is the
first study to use these specific records, other papers have exploited different sets of individual-
level 401(k) data to study savings rates (Huberman et al., 2004), asset allocation (Benartzi and
Thaler, 2001, Agnew et al, 2003, Huberman and Jiang, 2006), trading (Choi et al., 2002, Agnew
et al, 2003), and investment in employer stock (Huberman and Sengmuller, 2004, Choi et al.,
2004). Section 3 lays out our empirical methodology and explains our methods for measuring
wealth shocks. Section 4 presents our main results and reconciles them with the previous
literature. Section 5 considers objections to our results, most of which fall into two categories.
The first is that people adjust their consumption along margins that our consumption measure
does not capture. The second is that our results are driven by wealth shocks outside of the 401(k)
that we do not observe. We find no evidence to support these objections. Section 6 concludes.


2. Data description
           Our data come from a large benefits administration and consulting firm. We have panel
data for five companies that start when our data provider became the plan administrator at each
firm and end at year-end 2000. These data contain the date, amount, and type of every
transaction made in the 401(k) plans by every participant. In addition, we have cross-sectional
snapshots of age, annual salary, date of hire, gender, marital status, 401(k) asset allocations, and
401(k) contribution rates in effect on the last pay period3 of 1998, 1999, and 2000 for those
actively employed at the companies on those dates.
           Table 1 gives summary statistics as of year-end 2000 for our companies, which we code-
name Company A through E. Our sample consists of large firms that span a wide range of
industries. The employees are on average 42.9 years old and earn $55,292 a year. By
comparison, the March 2001 Current Population Survey reports an average age of 40.8 years and

3
    The pay period is typically two weeks in our sample.


                                                           3
average salary of $45,656 among full-time workers in companies employing over 1,000 workers
and offering some kind of retirement plan. The average 401(k) participation rate across the firms
is 79%, which is close to the 2000 national participation rate of 80% found by the Profit
Sharing/401(k) Council of America (2001), and the average balance of participants is $65,964,
which is similar to Holden and Vanderhei’s (2001) reported average year-end 2000 balance of
$61,207 among plans with more than 10,000 participants.
        All of our companies offer matching contributions ranging from 25 cents to a full dollar
for each dollar contributed to the 401(k) by the employee up to a threshold, although Company C
did not introduce its match until 2000. All of the plans allow participants to take hardship
withdrawals from and loans against their 401(k) plan balances, and two allow non-hardship
withdrawals from current contributions. These provisions make 401(k) savings in the companies
we study more liquid than for the 401(k) participant population at large.4 Finally, all of the plans
allow changes to the elected contribution rate and asset allocation on a daily basis. Changes can
be made by talking to a benefits center representative on the phone during business hours, or by
using a touch-tone phone system or the Internet 24 hours a day. The direct transaction costs
involved in changing one’s savings rate in these plans are therefore minimal.


3. Empirical methodology
        Our empirical objective is to estimate the relationship between consumption growth and
wealth shocks orthogonal to innovations in expected (under the rational probability measure)
returns. The key assumption in our analysis is that consumption adjustments are observable
through changes in the 401(k) contribution rate. This assumption is plausible: most households
should be doing nearly all of their saving in the 401(k) because the employer match (for the
plans in our data) and tax benefits make the 401(k) plan the most attractive savings vehicle
available. Consistent with this normative view, among 401(k)-holding households earning
between $20,000 and $70,000 a year in the 2001 Survey of Consumer Finances—a sample
roughly comparable to the one we will use in our analysis—the median household has less than



4
  The U.S. Department of Labor (2003) reports that in 2000, 40% of full-time employees with savings and thrift
plans in private industry were not allowed to take early in-service withdrawals for any reason, and an additional 29%
could only take hardship withdrawals. The Profit Sharing/401(k) Council of America (2001) reports that 14% of
plans did not permit loans in 2000.


                                                         4
one month’s income in net financial assets outside the 401(k).5 It is only at the 80th percentile
that households have one year’s income outside the 401(k), and this probably overstates outside
asset holdings in our sample; the generosity of our 401(k) plans’ early withdrawal and loan
provisions substantially mitigates the need for a precautionary wealth stock outside the 401(k).
We will, however, explore the possibility that the 401(k) contribution rate is not the savings
adjustment margin in section 5.
         Our reduced-form expression for individual i’s consumption growth from year-end t – 1
to year-end t, normalized by income, is
          Ci.t − Ci ,t −1                Shocki ,t          Shocki ,t −1
                            = α i + β1               + β2                     + γXi ,t -1 + ∑∑ ( Dτ × Fj ) + ε i ,t ,   (1)
              Yi ,t −1                    Yi ,t −1             Yi ,t −1                    τ   j


where Ci,t is annualized consumption flow during the last pay period of year t, Yi,t–1 is annualized
salary flow during the last pay period of year t – 1, αi is the individual’s fixed effect, Shocki,t is
the wealth shock in dollars accrued from the beginning to the end of year t, Xi,t–1 is a vector of
demographic variables that change non-linearly with time (age squared, log of salary in 1998
dollars, and log of tenure at the company), Dτ are year dummies equal to 1 if t = τ, Fj are firm
dummies equal to 1 if i works in firm j, and εi,t is the disturbance term. The coefficients of
interest are β1 and β2. Under the approximation that a wealth shock changes consumption by a
constant fraction of that shock each subsequent period, we can interpret β1 as the one-year
marginal propensity to consume out of wealth. β2 should equal zero if consumption responds to
wealth innovations without a lag, as is commonly assumed in theory. However, there is some
empirical evidence that stock market return effects on consumption growth are long-lived (e.g.
Dynan and Maki (2000), Gabaix and Laibson (2002)).
         We transform this expression in order to make the dependent variable identifiable from
our data. Let Si,t be i’s 401(k) savings/contribution rate during the last pay period of year t. We
assume that




5
  On the assets side, we include CDs, bonds, savings bonds, publicly traded stock, mutual funds, cash value life
insurance, other managed accounts, transactions accounts, non-401(k) pension accounts, and miscellaneous assets.
For liabilities, we subtract credit card debt, non-home-equity lines of credit, business loans, education loans, other
consumer loans, margin loans, loans against life insurance policies, loans against non-401(k) pension accounts, and
car loans.


                                                                          5
                                                Ci ,t = Yi ,t (1 − Si ,t ) + ki ,                                          (2)

where ki is a constant that represents consumption funded by income earned outside the company
or savings outside the 401(k). Substituting this expression into (1) and simplifying yields
                       ⎛ Y       ⎞                   Shocki ,t      Shocki ,t −1
    Si ,t −1 − Si ,t + ⎜ i ,t − 1⎟ (1 − Si ,t ) = β1           + β2              + γXi ,t −1 + ∑∑ ( Dτ × Fj ) + ε i ,t .   (3)
                       ⎜Y        ⎟                    Yi ,t −1        Yi ,t −1
                       ⎝ i ,t −1 ⎠                                                             τ j


            We add the before-tax and (if the plan offers the option) after-tax 401(k) contribution
rates in effect for the last pay period of 1998, 1999, or 2000 to calculate Si,t in each of these
years. Note that there are at most three consumption observations per individual, which translates
into a maximum of two consumption growth observations. Because we are allowing for an
individual fixed effect in consumption growth, we will require that all employees in our
regressions have two consumption growth observations. Yi,t is set to annualized salary in the last
pay cycle of year t in January 1998 dollars, assuming that salary during a calendar year is paid in
nominally equal amounts each pay cycle and deflating by the monthly CPI series.
            Constructing our key independent variable, the 401(k) wealth shock, is more
complicated. Simply calculating the annual change in 401(k) balances would not generate a valid
measure of the type of wealth shock that we are trying to identify. Much of the annual change in
account balances is generated by payroll contributions to the plan, and these contributions should
not be counted as wealth shocks because they are merely transfers from human wealth to
financial wealth.6 We could subtract annual 401(k) contributions from the change in 401(k)
balances to isolate the change in balances that is due to capital gains (or losses). But a portion of
these capital gains is expected and thus, in theory, should not affect consumption growth. We
must therefore isolate the unexpected component of capital gains. With these considerations in
mind, we define the wealth shock accrued over a year as the difference between the realized and
expected dollar-denominated real capital gain in each asset, summed over all assets.
            We calculate capital gains in the standard manner: for each asset, we multiply monthly
percent returns by the participant’s dollar holdings at the end of the prior month, and then add up
across months and assets.7 In order to compute expected capital gains, we must measure

6
  More explicitly, human wealth can be seen as the present value of all future labor income. Each paycheck is a
dividend that diminishes human wealth by the same amount it increases financial wealth. The employee can choose
to consume this dividend and diminish total wealth, or save it and keep total wealth unchanged.
7
  Assets are defined at the level of individual mutual funds and employer stock holdings. Dollar holdings are
deflated by the same monthly CPI series used to deflate income, Yt.


                                                                     6
expected percent returns. We use two different proxies. The first measure, the “adaptive expected
return,” is motivated by empirical evidence that the typical investor’s stock market return
expectations comove positively with recent returns (Graham and Harvey (2003), Vissing-
Jorgensen (2003), Benartzi (2001), Huberman and Sengmuller (2004), Choi et al. (2004)). We
define the adaptive expected return as the lagged ten-year real return on an investment option’s
asset class. Table 2 lists the eleven asset classes and the indexes used to measure their lagged
returns.
        The “constant expected return” is the average real return on the investment option’s asset
class from January 1926 to December 1997. This measure of expected return does not change
with asset return realizations during 1998 and 2000. We consider this to be the rational expected
return, motivated by the evidence of Goyal and Welch (2006) that the historical average equity
premium is the best out-of-sample predictor of future equity returns. We use the same indices to
compute the constant expected returns and the adaptive expected returns, except that the constant
expected returns use the S&P 500 historical return to form the employer stock expected return
rather than the employer stock’s historical return because the latter contains a large idiosyncratic
component and does not exist all the way back to 1926.8
        To illustrate how our wealth shocks are calculated, suppose that there are only two funds
available to investors. Fund A’s expected return is 1% this month, and Fund B’s expected return
is 2%. Fund A actually returns 3%, and Fund B actually returns –3%. Investor 1 had $3,000 in
Fund A and $1,000 in Fund B at the end of the prior month; Investor 2 had $1,000 in Fund A and
$1,000 in Fund B. Then Investor 1 receives a $3,000 × (3 – 1)% + $1,000 × (–3 – 2)% = $10
wealth shock this month, while Investor 2 receives a $1,000 × (3 – 1)% + $1,000 × (–3 – 2)% =
–$30 wealth shock this month. We sum monthly wealth shocks to form the annual wealth shock
for each investor.
        We take two econometric approaches to estimating equation (4), both of which rely upon
differences in differences. First, we use a least-squares dummy variable estimator, which does
not take into account the fact that 401(k) contribution rates cannot be negative or exceed the
plan-imposed maximum. Second, we use the semiparametric Honoré (1992) estimator, which
allows for individual fixed effects while correcting for censored observations. The fact that our


8
 We use the S&P 500 for the international and emerging market return indices before January 1988 because the
MSCI indices were not calculated before then.


                                                     7
data are censored at both the left and the right necessitates the use of the least absolute deviations
version of Honoré’s estimator.9 If Si,t is the plan’s maximum contribution rate or Si,t–1 is zero, the
observation is considered left-censored; if Si,t is zero or Si,t–1 is the maximum contribution rate,
the observation is considered right-censored. Following Chay and Honoré (1998), we bootstrap
the standard errors by drawing 1,000 samples of 1,000 individuals’ consumption growth pairs
with replacement from the data and computing the estimator for each sample. The standard error
for an estimated coefficient βˆj is

                                    ⎛ 1000 ⎞⎟ ⎛ 1 ⎞ 1000 b
                                                      ⎟⎟ ∑ (βˆj − βˆj ) ,
                                                                       2
                                    ⎜⎜         ⎟⎟ ⎜⎜                                                            (4)
                                     ⎜⎝ N / 2 ⎠⎟⎝1000 ⎠ b =1

where N is the total consumption growth observations in the real data and βˆbj is the bth bootstrap

estimate.
        Variation in our wealth shocks comes from variation in unexpected fund returns and the
dollar amounts individuals invested in each asset. Because of the individual fixed effects in our
econometric specification, our identifying variation is cross-sectional variation in the difference
between an individual’s 1999 wealth shock and 2000 wealth shock. Cross-sectional variation in
the size of the wealth shocks individuals experienced in those years normatively should not have
induced cross-sectional variation in their beliefs about expected returns. In the previous example,
a rational Investor 1 would make no inference about future returns from the fact that his wealth
shock is $40 higher than Investor 2’s wealth shock. Therefore, differences between the two
investors’ contemporaneous consumption responses should arise solely from income effects if
investors are rational.10
        Our sample is limited to workers who have been actively employed at a sample firm and
continuously enrolled in the 401(k) plan from January 1, 1998 to December 31, 2000. We
include employees whose contribution rate or plan balances are zero, provided that they had
positive balances at some time in the past. We also require that individuals have salaries greater
than $20,000 in 1998 because a large fraction of those with salaries under $20,000 are part-time

9
  The least squared deviation version of the two-sided Honoré estimator does not necessarily have a unique solution.
10
   Alternatively, heterogeneous preferences can cause the strength of the substitution effect to vary across
individuals, so that contemporaneous substitution responses to the same aggregate return news covary negatively
enough with the income effect to generate our empirical result. Although such utility functions could probably be
constructed, we doubt that the range of preference variation required to replicate our empirical results would be
economically reasonable.


                                                         8
employees.11 In addition, we trim workers who have a one-year income growth observation
above 30% or below –20%, which roughly corresponds to removing the top 2% and bottom 2%
of the income growth distribution. These deleted outliers are likely caused by transitions between
part-time and full-time work status.
        Finally, we drop individuals if their salary is high enough in 1998 that they could exceed
the $10,000 annual limit on before-tax 401(k) contributions by contributing at the plan’s
maximum before-tax contribution rate. The reason we impose this selection rule can be
illustrated by the following example. Suppose a highly-paid employee contributes enough that he
hits the before-tax dollar limit midway through the year. If his company only allows before-tax
contributions (Companies B, C, and E), then his 401(k) contribution rate is frozen at 0 for the
remainder of the year and does not reflect any changes in his consumption rate. If the company
allows additional after-tax contributions to the 401(k) (Companies A and D) or before-tax
contributions to a non-401(k) deferred compensation plan (Company A), consumption changes
may still not be reflected in the contribution rate because these alternative savings vehicles are
not as attractive and therefore may not attract the marginal savings dollar.12
        These selection criteria leave us with 54,054 observations on 27,027 employees.


4. Main results
4.1. Regression estimates
        Table 3 reports summary statistics for our consumption growth and normalized wealth
shock measures. Normalized consumption growth has a median of 1.4% of income, exhibits
slight positive serial correlation, and is right-skewed. Both normalized wealth shock measures
have a median close to zero and a relatively narrow distribution. The 10th percentile of the
normalized adaptive wealth shock is a loss of 39.4% of a year’s income, and the 90th percentile
is a gain of 22.7% of a year’s income. The distribution is similar for the normalized constant
returns wealth shock; the 10th percentile is a loss of 31.9% of a year’s income and the 90th




11
   In the March 2001 Current Population Survey, 29.9% of workers who earned less than $20,000 a year worked less
than 35 hours a week or fewer than 40 weeks per year. Only 5.6% of workers earning between $20,000 and $30,000
a year satisfied this definition of part-time work.
12
   If an employer declares bankruptcy, employees in the deferred compensation plan can lose their entire deferred
compensation balance. We eliminate participants in Company A’s deferred compensation plan from our sample.


                                                       9
percentile is a gain of 25.9% of a year’s income.13 Both normalized wealth shocks are ex post
negatively serially correlated. This serial correlation is sample-specific and arises from the
persistence of individual asset allocations and the fact that the stock market did well in the first
half of our sample and poorly in the second half. It should not be interpreted as evidence that
current wealth shocks are informative about future wealth shocks.14
        Table 4 presents the coefficients from estimating equation (3). The first row shows that
all four MPC estimates are negative and statistically significant. The point estimates range from
–0.44% to –1.79%, which means that a positive wealth shock equal to one year of income will
contemporaneously decrease annualized consumption flow by 0.44% to 1.79% of yearly income.
In addition, there appears to be a significant lagged consumption response as well. In the year
following a positive wealth shock of one year’s income, annualized consumption flow drops by
0.55% to 2.10% of yearly income.
        The certainty-equivalence permanent income hypothesis predicts that the MPC is higher
(more positive) for the old than the young, since the young have a longer remaining lifespan over
which to spread consumption of a windfall. This motivates our estimating separate MPCs for
those who are under 30 years old, between 30 and 39, between 40 and 49, between 50 and 59,
and 60 or above, while constraining the other regression coefficients to be equal across age
groups. The results are in Table 5, where we have omitted coefficient estimates for the non-
shock variables.
        We find that the MPC does increase almost monotonically with age, but even the oldest
workers do not exhibit a positive MPC. For example, the first column of Table 5 reports the
results for a least-squares dummy variable regression using the adaptive wealth shock as the
wealth shock variable. Our contemporaneous MPC estimate is –9.49% for employees under 30
and –0.50% for employees over 60. The lagged MPC also shows a nearly monotonically
increasing pattern, from –11.77% for employees under 30 to –0.44% for employees over 60.
These patterns are qualitatively robust across estimators and wealth shock definitions.
        Overall, there is no compelling evidence that anomalous MPCs are restricted to a
particular subset of the population. If our results simply reflected reallocation between outside

13
   The extremes of the wealth shock distributions come from middle-income individuals close to retirement who had
large 401(k) balances.




                                                       10
assets and the 401(k), or if outside wealth shocks were contaminating our estimates, then we
would expect to find positive MPC estimates among the young, who are the least likely to own
non-401(k) assets. Instead, the young have the most negative MPCs. If negative MPCs were
simply a pathology of inexperienced investors that eventually disappears, we would expect to see
positive MPC estimates among the old. But in our data, even the oldest employees have negative
MPCs.
        In the long run, consumption and wealth are tied together by the budget constraint. If in
the short run, 401(k) investors’ consumption growth comoves negatively with wealth shocks,
when does consumption catch up to wealth? A plausible answer is that consumption moves
towards wealth in retirement, either through a higher consumption rate during retirement or an
earlier retirement date. Table 5 presents weak evidence that the latter is happening. We take
employees who were at least 60 years old at year-end 1999 and estimate a probit on the
probability that these employees left the company in 2000. (Overall, 50.4% of this population
left in 2000.) The dependent variables are normalized wealth shock in 1999 and 1998, company
dummies, and age, log of salary, and log of tenure at year-end 1999. We estimate positive effects
for all the shock variables, and the effects are economically large; a positive wealth shock in year
t equal to one year’s income increases the probability of retirement by over 2 percentage points
in year t and over 11 percentage points in year t + 1. However, none of the coefficients are
statistically significant.
        These retirement results are not inconsistent with the existing literature on the
relationship between wealth shocks and retirement, which has come to conflicting conclusions.
(See Hurd and Boskin (1984), Burtless (1984), Krueger and Pischke (1992), Holtz-Eakin,
Joulfaian and Rosen (1993), and Imbens et al. (2001).)


4.2. Interpretation and Reconciliation with Past MPC Estimates
        Our estimates stand in sharp contrast to past empirical research that has found positive
MPCs out of cash windfalls and aggregate stock market movements. We square our results with
these previous findings by interpreting negative MPCs as the consequence of reinforcement
learning working in opposition to the standard income effect. Roth and Erev (1995) identify two

14
  If participants who held large amounts of equity in the first half of the sample and hence had high measured
wealth shocks foresaw that equity returns would be low in the second half of the sample, they could have easily



                                                      11
key features of reinforcement learning models. The first is the Law of Effect: agents are more
likely to repeat actions that have yielded favorable outcomes in the past. The second is the Power
Law of Practice: learning curves are steep initially and then level out as the stock of
reinforcement increases.
         Reinforcement learning reconciles all of the evidence on MPCs:
         •   The Law of Effect predicts that if a consumer experiences a gratifyingly high return
             from her savings activity, she will allocate more resources to savings and less to
             consumption. This behavior is a generalization of the phenomenon commonly
             referred to as returns-chasing, where investors reallocate money to assets that have
             recently experienced high returns while holding total savings fixed. The Law of
             Effect is offset by the income effect, which pushes the investor to cut her savings. In
             our data, the reinforcement effect appears to dominate the income effect, causing the
             MPC to be negative even though variation in the returns from which the MPC is
             identified conveys no information about future returns.
         •   The Power Law of Practice is consistent with our finding that the young—whose
             stock of past reinforcements is the smallest—have the most negative MPCs, since
             they are the most swayed by the Law of Effect and have the smallest income effect.
         •   When financial investment does not causally precede windfalls, there is no
             reinforcement to invest more and only the income effect is operative. Hence, the
             MPC out of war veteran payments and Holocaust reparations range from 17% to 97%
             (Bodkin 1959, Kreinin 1961, Landsberger 1966).
         •   The income effect increases proportionally with the size of the windfall, whereas the
             reinforcement effect levels off due to the Power Law of Practice. Therefore, the MPC
             out of large lottery prizes (Imbens et al. 2001) is 86%.15
         •   Reinforcement learning—and hence negative MPCs—should be less prevalent among
             agents who are more sophisticated than the 401(k) investors in our sample. We also
             expect that the sophisticated are, on average, richer than the unsophisticated.
             Therefore, aggregate consumption growth comoves positively with aggregate stock
             market movements because sophisticates do most of the consuming in the economy.

traded out of equities and thus avoided the negative serial correlation in wealth shock.




                                                          12
            Consistent with this hypothesis, Starr-McCluer (2002) finds that households with
            more than $250,000 in stockholdings were much more likely than poorer stockholders
            to report that the 1990s bull market caused them to decrease their saving or increase
            their spending.


5. Robustness checks
        In this section, we further consider possible objections to our results. Subsection 5.1
examines whether the consumption responses we estimate reflect active choices made by
employees. Subsections 5.2 through 5.5 test the possibility that the 401(k) contribution rate is not
the relevant consumption adjustment margin for the people in our data. Subsection 5.6 discusses
and tests the effect of non-401(k) wealth shocks on our results. We find no evidence that
weakens the force of our main result. Of the 30 MPC estimates presented in this section, all are
negative, and 26 of these are statistically significant.


5.1. Negative consumption responses do not reflect active savings choices
        The passivity of 401(k) investors has been extensively documented (Samuelson and
Zeckhauser (1988), Madrian and Shea (2001), Choi et al. (2002, 2004)). Therefore, the
consumption “responses” we estimate may be due to a coincidental in-sample relationship
between employee income growth and capital gains, rather than the result of active savings
choices.
        To address this concern, we estimate the main regression setting the income adjustment
term in the dependent variable to zero, so that we are only measuring active contribution rate
changes, St–1 – St. The results are in the first row of Table 7. Because contribution rate changes
are constrained to integer percentages of income (that is, they can be no smaller than 1 percent of
income), the median contribution rate change is zero for almost all subsamples of the data.
Therefore, the Honoré estimator is not meaningful in this context, since it is a median estimator,
but we report its coefficients for completeness.
        For both definitions of wealth shock, the least-squares estimate indicates that a positive
wealth shock of one year’s income causes the average employee to actively decrease his


15
  Kearney and Liao (2004) do not find evidence of a negative same-day MPC out of small lottery prizes. However,
they do not measure the effect of prizes on lottery purchases on subsequent days.


                                                      13
contribution rate by 0.27% to 0.29% of income. These coefficients are statistically significant at
the 1% level. The lagged wealth effects are also negative and of similar magnitude, although the
statistical significance is somewhat weaker.
        We conclude that the anomalous consumption responses in our sample are due to active
employee choices.


5.2. The 401(k) is not the relevant margin for consumption adjustment
        Our MPC estimate hinges on the assumption that the 401(k) contribution rate is the
margin at which participants adjust their savings rate. If participants find it worthwhile to adjust
savings through contributions to other asset accounts, then the 401(k) contribution rate response
to retirement wealth shocks may be offset by activity elsewhere.
        We test this alternative explanation by restricting our sample to participants who at year-
end 1998 were contributing less than the threshold to which their employer would provide
matching contributions. These participants face instantaneous risk-free marginal returns to
saving in their 401(k) of 25% to 100%. It is difficult to imagine that there are alternative
investment vehicles that offer comparable risk-adjusted returns. Therefore, these employees have
especially strong incentives to adjust their consumption expenditures exclusively through their
401(k) contribution rate.16 Because Company C did not have a match until 2000, its participants
are excluded from this analysis.
        The results of this regression are found in the second row of Table 7. The least-squares
estimates of the contemporaneous MPC remain statistically significant, and their magnitudes
increase slightly to –1.95% and –1.89%. The Honoré estimates are negative, but their
magnitudes are about half those of the baseline regressions and statistically insignificant.
However, the standard errors are over five times as large as the baseline regressions’, due in
large part to our retaining only 16% of our baseline observations, a disproportionate number of
which are censored. If our standard errors had remained what they were in the baseline
regressions, the Honoré MPC estimates for those interior to the match would be strongly
statistically significant. In contrast, the evidence for a lagged MPC effect is weaker for this

16
   One might be concerned that the bulk of the participants who are contributing less than the match threshold are
new employees whose employer matches will not vest for a long time. If such employees have a high probability of
leaving the firm before their vesting begins, this restricted sample would not face significantly higher marginal




                                                       14
subsample. The lagged least squares estimates are considerably attenuated and statistically
insignificant, and the Honoré point estimates are nearly zero.
         Participants may also respond to positive wealth shocks by purchasing a home. Because
mortgage payments cover both the rental flow of housing services and the purchase of home
equity, the home becomes a savings vehicle. The amount of money that goes towards home
equity could come out of the 401(k) contribution rate, thus creating a spurious negative MPC
estimate. In order to check for this possibility, we restrict our sample to those whose zip code
didn’t change between year-end 1998 and year-end 2000. The results in the third row of Table 7
show that all eight MPC estimates are negative and statistically significant, with little coefficient
attenuation.


5.3. Consumption adjustment is occurring through spouse’s 401(k)
         401(k) accounts may be the most attractive savings vehicles available to the employees in
our data, but the 401(k) accounts we see in our data may not be the only ones available to them.
The employee’s spouse’s 401(k) may be more attractive and hence the one that attracts the
marginal dollar. Alternatively, the consumption changes we measure may only reflect reshuffling
of assets between the two 401(k) accounts. We test this story by restricting the sample to
participants who were unmarried at year-end 1998. Because we do not have marital status data
on employees at Company D, they are excluded from this analysis. The regression results are
presented in the fourth row of Table 7. We find that our MPC point estimates become more
negative, and all are statistically significant at the 1% level.


5.4. Consumption adjustment is occurring through in-service withdrawals
         We have been identifying changes in consumption through changes in the contribution
rate and salary. However, participants may be making their consumption expenditure
adjustments through in-service withdrawals from their 401(k) instead. In practice, this is unlikely
to be a significant factor, given that only 5% of our sample made any in-service withdrawals
from the beginning of 1998 to the end of 2000. The main complication with a withdrawals
analysis is the difficulty of assigning a time period to the consumption stream. At one extreme,


incentives to save in the 401(k). However, it turns out that only 9% of those in the restricted sample are not vested at
all at year-end 1998, while 79% are fully vested and 12% are partially vested.


                                                          15
one can assume that withdrawals are rolled over into another tax-deferred account and not
consumed until the future, in which case withdrawals don’t matter at all for our analysis. At the
other extreme, one can assume that the entire withdrawal is consumed immediately. An
intermediate case is to assume that the withdrawal is annuitized and consumed slowly over time.
        We estimate regressions with two different assumptions about the timing of withdrawal
consumption. Because withdrawals are infrequent events, we do not use a two-week measure of
consumption as we did in the main analysis. Instead, we use yearly consumption, defined as the
year’s total income plus withdrawals consumed minus 401(k) contributions. We assume either
that all withdrawals net of rollovers into other accounts are consumed in the year of the
withdrawal, or that 5% of a withdrawal net of rollovers is consumed each year starting in the
year of the withdrawal.17 Withdrawals before age 59½ are assessed a 10% early withdrawal
penalty. The dependent variable in our regressions is the year-over-year change in consumption
normalized by prior year salary. The explanatory variables remain the same as in the previous
regressions, as do the income, income growth, and plan enrollment restrictions.
        In the Honoré regressions, we consider an observation left-censored if in year
t, in-service withdrawals net of rollovers equals zero and the individual contributed the
maximum allowable given his or her salary and plan contribution rate limits. In other words, the
individual could not have saved any more in the 401(k) plan during the year. Conversely, an
observation is considered right-censored if the above criteria are satisfied for year t – 1. An
observation is also considered right-censored if total balances in the plan at the end of year t plus
rollovers in year t equals zero. That is, the individual could not have funded any more
consumption from the 401(k). If these conditions are satisfied in the lagged year, the observation
is considered left-censored.
        Assuming that the entire net withdrawal is consumed in the year of the withdrawal
generates implausibly large outliers in consumption growth. These are caused by large
withdrawals that were not directly rolled over into another asset account by the 401(k)
administrator. It is unlikely that such large sums were entirely consumed in one year. Therefore,
we trim the top 1% and bottom 1% of measured consumption growth, which corresponds to


17
   Our rollover measure is not comprehensive, however. We observe a withdrawal being rolled over into an IRA
only when the employee asks that a check be sent directly from the employer to the IRA custodian. If an employee
receives the withdrawal check him or herself and subsequently deposits some of the proceeds into an IRA, we do not
observe this second transaction.


                                                       16
constraining consumption growth to lie between –18.5% and 34.7%. We do not trim the
dependent variable in the regressions that assume that the withdrawals are annuitized.
       The fifth row of Table 7 contains the results when we assume that net withdrawals are
consumed immediately, and the sixth row contains the results when we assume that net
withdrawals are annuitized. All MPC estimates remain negative and statistically significant, and
the point estimates do not change much. We conclude that accounting for in-service withdrawals
cannot generate a positive MPC out of 401(k) wealth shocks.


5.5. Consumption adjustment is occurring through 401(k) loans
       Withdrawals are not the only way to access money from one’s 401(k) account; one can
also take out a 401(k) loan for up to 50% of vested plan balances or $50,000, whichever is lower.
401(k) loans are typically repaid through payroll deductions, with interest accruing to the
individual’s own 401(k) account. The maximum term of a 401(k) loan varies with its purpose.
Legally, a primary residence loan can have a term of up to 30 years, while a general purpose loan
can have a term of no longer than 5 years. In practice, many companies further restrict the term
of the loans that they offer their 401(k) participants. Early repayment is possible with no
penalties. While many companies charge loan origination fees, none of the companies in our data
choose to do so. Loans are common in our sample: 51% of the sample had a loan outstanding at
some point between year-ends 1998 and 2000.
       Although a significant fraction of our population has a 401(k) loan, we do not believe that
accounting for loans would capture significant consumption flow changes that are not already
being measured by the contribution rate. Sundén and Surette (2000) find that only 8.5% of loans
are used to finance non-durable consumption. 54.5% are used for durable expenditures on
housing or cars, 21.6% are used for “bill consolidation” that is simply a reshuffling of liabilities,
and 9.6% are used for education expenses. If durables are the most important consumption outlet
for loans, then the consumption flow from durable purchases is approximately matched by the
repayment schedule for the loan. If participants have only minimal liquid assets outside of their
401(k) (why would they need a loan otherwise?) and spend the entire amount of the loan (it is
costly to withdraw more than one plans on spending because of the foregone tax benefits), then
these repayments must be coming from either reducing the 401(k) contribution rate and hence
increasing measured consumption, or from reducing other consumption flows by the amount of



                                                 17
the loan repayments, leaving total consumption unchanged. Although the coordination between
loan repayments and consumption from the loan is unlikely to be perfect—for example, the
purchased durable could completely depreciate in three years, while the loan is paid off over five
years—we believe that the measurement error from disregarding loan activity is of second order.
Moreover, the error induced by timing mismatches distorts the magnitude of MPC estimates, but
it cannot explain why all of our MPC estimates are negative. To see this, suppose that a positive
wealth shock induces an employee to take out a loan and purchase a durable that yields a
constant consumption flow for three years and then ceases to exist. The loan is paid off over five
years, and this repayment is funded by a decrease in the 401(k) contribution rate. Then in the
year after the inception of the loan, the increase in consumption is underestimated by the change
in the contribution rate. However, we would not measure an actual decrease in consumption
through the contribution rate. Similar logic applies if the durable lasts for longer than the term of
the loan; the consumption change is overestimated but does not take the wrong sign.


5.6. Outside wealth shocks
       The measures of wealth shock presented above are calculated only within the 401(k), but
theory calls for a comprehensive wealth shock measure. Most participants—particularly the
young, for whom we estimate the most negative MPCs—do not have significant financial wealth
outside the 401(k). For those who do have significant outside financial assets, to the extent that
outside assets’ return shocks are uncorrelated or positively correlated with the shocks within the
401(k), our MPC estimates will be unbiased or positively biased. This condition is satisfied if
outside assets load positively on beta risk.
       Even though 401(k) participants generally have few financial assets outside of their
401(k), many of them have a significant non-financial asset—owner-occupied housing—whose
return we do not observe. In order for housing wealth shocks to qualitatively affect our results,
the surprise component of any real wealth innovation that occurs through housing must be
negatively correlated with the surprise component of 401(k) wealth innovations. This seems
unlikely to be true.
       Nevertheless, to mitigate the possible effect of housing price changes, we conduct two
tests. In the sixth row of Table 7, we present regression results where we have added dummy
variables for the employee’s state of residence interacted with year dummies to the baseline



                                                 18
specification in equation (3). This allows us to control for state-level variation in real estate price
appreciation. In the seventh row of Table 7, we present regression results using only the one-
third of our sample which are least likely to own a home, judging by the proportion of housing
units that are owner-occupied in their residential zip code, as measured by the 2000 U.S.
Census.18
        All of our MPC point estimates remain negative and significant. Including state-year
interactions slightly attenuates the coefficients, but restricting to zip codes with low home
ownership slightly increases the coefficients. Our ability to control for housing wealth is limited
because of the nature of our data. However, in those tests that we are able to conduct, we find no
evidence that would call our central result into doubt.


6. Conclusion
        We have presented evidence that the short-run MPC out of orthogonal 401(k) capital
gains shocks is negative, in violation of standard theory. Moreover, the magnitudes of some of
these negative estimates are quite large, especially for the young. Our results suggest that many
investors are influenced by a reinforcement learning heuristic that leads high capital gains to
encourage saving and discourage consumption, even when those capital gains are not useful for
predicting future returns. This reinforcement learning framework reconciles our results with past
work that has estimated positive MPCs out of cash windfalls and aggregate stock market
movements.




18
  The average owner-occupied housing fraction (weighted by employees living in the zip code) in the lower third of
the sample is 61.1%, versus 74.8% for the entire sample.


                                                       19
References
Angeletos, George-Marios, David Laibson, Andrea Repetto, Jeremy Tobacman, and Stephen
    Weinberg. “The Hyperbolic Consumption Model: Calibration, Simulation, and Empirical
    Evaluation.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 15, pp. 47-68.

Agnew, Julie, Pierluigi Balduzzi, and Annika Sundén, 2003, “Portfolio Choice and Trading in a
    Large 401(k) Plan”, American Economic Review 93(1), pp. 193 – 215.

Benartzi, Shlomo, 2001. “Excessive Extrapolation and the Allocation of 401(k) Accounts to
     Company Stock.” Journal of Finance 56, pp. 1747-1764.

Benartzi, Shlomo, and Richard Thaler, 2001, “Naïve Diversification Strategies in Retirement
     Savings Plans”, American Economic Review, 91(1), pp.79-98.

Bodkin, Ronald, 1959. “Windfall Income and Consumption.” American Economic Review 49,
    pp. 602-614.

Burtless, Gary, 1986. “Social Security, Unanticipated Benefit Increases, and the Timing of
     Retirement.” Review of Economic Studies 53, pp. 781-805.

Carroll, Christopher D., 1992. “The Buffer Stock Theory of Saving: Some Macroeconomic
     Evidence.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1992(2), pp. 61-156.

Carroll, Christopher D., 1997. “Buffer-Stock Saving and the Life Cycle/Permanent Income
     Hypothesis.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 112, pp. 1-57.

Charness, Gary, and Dan Levin, 2005. “When Optimal Choices Feel Wrong: A Laboratory Study
     of Bayesian Updating, Complexity, and Affect.” American Economic Review 95, pp. 1300-
     1309.

Chay, Kenneth, and Bo Honoré, 1998. “Estimation of Semiparametric Censored Regression
     Models: An Application to Changes in Black-White Earnings Inequality During the
     1960s.” Journal of Human Resources 33, pp. 1-38

Choi, James J., David Laibson, Brigitte C. Madrian, and Andrew Metrick, 2002. “Defined
     Contribution Pensions: Plan Rules, Participant Choices, and the Path of Least Resistance.”
     In James M. Poterba, editor, Tax Policy and the Economy, Volume 16. Cambridge, MA:
     MIT Press, pp. 67-113.

Choi, James J., David Laibson, Brigitte C. Madrian, and Andrew Metrick, 2004. “Employees’
     Investment Decisions About Company Stock.” In Olivia S. Mitchell and Stephen P. Utkus,
     editors, Pension Design and Structure: New Lessons from Behavioral Finance. Oxford:
     Oxford University Press, pp. 121-137.




                                              20
Choi, James, David Laibson, Brigitte C. Madrian, and Andrew Metrick, 2004. “For Better or For
     Worse: Default Effects and 401(k) Savings Behavior.” In David A. Wise, editor,
     Perspectives in the Economics of Aging. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, pp. 81-
     121.

Choi, James, David Laibson, and Andrew Metrick, 2002, “How Does the Internet Affect
     Trading? Evidence from Investor Behavior in 401(k) Plans”, Journal of Financial
     Economics 64(3), pp. 397-421.

Dynan, Karen, and Dean M. Maki, 2001. “Does Stock Market Wealth Matter for Consumption?”
    Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2001-23. Washington: Board of Governors of
    the Federal Reserve System.

Erev, Ido, and Alvin E. Roth, 1998. “Predicting How People Play Games: Reinforcement
     Learning in Experimental Games with Unique, Mixed Strategy Equilibria.” American
     Economic Review 88, pp. 848-881.

Gabaix, Xavier, and David Laibson, 2002. “The 6D Bias and the Equity-Premium Puzzle.” In
    Ben S. Bernanke and Ken Rogoff, editors, NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2001, Volume
    16. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, pp. 257-312.

Goetzmann, William, and Massimo Massa, 2002. “Daily Momentum and Contrarian Behavior of
     Index Fund Investors,” Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 37, pp. 375-390.

Goyal, Amit, and Ivo Welch, 2006. “A Comprehensive Look at the Empirical Performance of
    Equity Premium Prediction.” Mimeo, Emory University.

Graham, John R., and Campbell R. Harvey, 2003. “Expectations of Equity Risk Premia,
     Volatility, and Asymmetry.” Mimeo, Duke University.

Holden, Sarah and Jack VanDerhei, 2001. “401(k) plan asset allocation, account balances, and
     loan activity in 2000.” Investment Company Institute Perspective 7(5), pp. 1-27.

Holden, Sarah and Jack VanDerhei, 2003. “401(k) plan asset allocation, account balances, and
     loan activity in 2001.” Investment Company Institute Perspective 9(2), pp. 1-15.

Holtz-Eakin, Douglas, David Joulfaian, and Harvey S. Rosen, 1993. “The Carnegie Conjecture:
     Some Empirical Evidence.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 108, pp. 413-435.

Honoré, Bo E, 1992. “Trimmed LAD and Least Squares Estimation of Truncated and Censored
    Regression Models with Fixed Effects.” Econometrica 60, pp. 533-565.

Huberman, Gur, Sheena Iyengar and Wei Jiang, 2004, “Defined Contribution Pension Plans:
    Determinants of Participation and Contribution Rates”, working paper, Columbia
    University.

Huberman, Gur, and Wei Jiang, 2006, “Offering vs. Choice by 401(k) Plan Participants: Equity
    Exposure and Number of Funds”, Journal of Finance 61(2), pp. 763-801.


                                             21
Huberman, Gur, and Paul Sengmuller, 2004, “Performance and Employer Stock in 401(k)
    Plans”, Review of Finance 8(3), pp. 403-443.

Hurd, Michael D. and Michael J. Boskin, 1984. “The Effect of Social Security on Retirement in
     the Early 1970s.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 99, pp. 767-790.

Imbens, Guido W., Donald B. Rubin, and Bruce I. Sacerdote, 2001. “Estimating the Effect of
    Unearned Income on Labor Earnings, Savings, and Consumption: Evidence from a Survey
    of Lottery Players.” American Economic Review 91, pp. 778-794.

Kearney, Melissa S. and Jenny Liao, 2004. “Lottery Players: What Are They Thinking?” Mimeo,
     Wellesley College.

Kreinin, Mordecai E., 1961. “Windfall Income and Consumption: Additional Evidence.”
     American Economic Review 51, pp. 388-390.

Krueger, Alan B. and Jorn-Steffen Pischke, 1992. “The Effect of Social Security on Labor
     Supply: A Cohort Analysis of the Notch Generation.” Journal of Labor Economics 10, pp.
     412-437.

Landsberger, Michael, 1966. “Windfall Income and Consumption: Comment.” American
    Economic Review 56, pp. 534-540.

Madrian, Brigitte C. and Dennis F. Shea, 2001. “The Power of Suggestion: Inertia in 401(k)
    Participation and Savings Behavior.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 116, pp. 1149-1187.

Patel, Jayendu, Darryll Hendricks, and Richard Zeckhauser, 1994. “Investment Flows and
      Performance: Evidence from Mutual Funds, Cross-Border Investments, and New Issues.”
      In Ryuzo Sato, Richard M. Levich, and Rama Ramachandran, editors, Japan, Europe, and
      International Financial Markets: Analytical and Empirical Perspectives. New York:
      Cambridge University Press, pp. 51-72.

Profit Sharing/401(k) Council of America, 2001. 44th Annual Survey of Profit Sharing and
      401(k) Plans. Chicago, IL: The Council.

Roth, Alvin E., and Ido Erev, 1995. “Learning in Extensive-Form Games: Experimental Data
     and Simple Dynamic Models in the Intermediate Term.” Games and Economic Behavior 8,
     pp. 164-212.

Samuelson, William, and Richard Zeckhauser, 1988. “Status Quo Bias in Decision-Making.”
    Journal of Risk and Uncertainty 1, 7-59.

Starr-McCluer, Martha, 2002. “Stock Market Wealth and Consumer Spending.” Economic
      Inquiry 40, pp. 69-79.

Sundén, Annika, and Brian Surette, 2000. “Borrowing from 401(k) Plans: Implications for
    Retirement Wealth.” Just the Facts 1.



                                             22
U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics, 2003. National Compensation Survey:
     Employee Benefits in Private Industry in the United States, 2000. Washington, DC: U.S.
     Government Printing Office.

Vissing-Jorgensen, Annette, 2003. “Perspectives on Behavioral Finance: Does ‘Irrationality’
     Disappear With Wealth? Evidence From Expectations and Actions.” NBER Macro-
     economics Annual 2003, forthcoming.




                                            23
                                                         Table 1. Company Descriptions
Characteristic              Company A                    Company B                Company C                  Company D                Company E
Industry                    Manufacturing                Healthcare               Manufacturing              Utility                  Electronics
Number of employees         Over 20,000                  Over 50,000              Over 20,000                Over 10,000              Over 10,000
Average age                 44.1                         42.7                     44.6                       43.5                     39.5
Average salary              $51,835                      $33,156                  $66,700                    $70,069                  $54,702
% male                      80%                          19%                      *                          83%                      65%
% married                   56%                          55%                      75%                        *                        50%
401(k) participation rate   80%                          61%                      86%                        85%                      83%
Average 401(k) balance      $80,740                      $19,501                  $81,122                    $88,033                  $60,426
Maximum contribution rate   10% before-tax, 14% after- 15% before-tax             20% before-tax             25% before-tax and after- 1998-99: 14% before-tax
(% of salary)               tax, 14% combined                                                                tax combined              2000: 16% before-tax
Employer match              25% to 100% (varies by       25% of first 3%          None until 2000, then    50% of first 7% or 8% of 100% of first 3% of pay,
                            location) of first 6% of pay of pay                   100% of first 1% of pay, pay (depends on union 50% of next 3% of pay
                                                                                  50% of next 4% of pay membership)
Investment funds            1998: 3 bond, 3 large-cap,   1 cash, 1 bond, 3 pre-   1 cash, 3 bond, 4 pre-     1998: 1 cash, 1 bond, 3 1 bond, 3 pre-mix, 5
                            1 mid-cap, 1 small-cap, 3    mix, 2 large-cap, 1      mix, 8 large-cap, 5 mid-   pre-mix, 1 large-cap, 1 large-cap, 1 small-cap, 1
                            overseas, company stock.     small-cap, 1 overseas,   cap, 3 small-cap, 8        mid-cap, 1 overseas,     overseas
                            1999: Added 1 bond, 1        company stock            overseas, 3 sector,        company stock
                            large-cap, 1 overseas.                                company stock              1999: Added 1 small cap,
                            2000: Added 1 overseas                                                           self-directed window
                            and self-directed window.
Number of outstanding       1 home loan, 1 general       1                        2                          2                        2
loans allowed               purpose loan
Hardship withdrawals allowed Yes                         Yes                      Yes                        Yes                      Yes
Non-hardship withdrawal     1 withdrawal allowed per     After-tax and vested     Not allowed                After-tax and vested    After-tax and rollover
rules before age 59½        month from after-tax,        employer contribution                               employer match money balances can be
                            rollover, vested company     money from                                          can be withdrawn at any withdrawn at any time
                            match, and profit-share      grandfathered plans can                             time
                            balances                     be withdrawn at any time
* Data unavailable
                       Table 2. Indices Used to Calculate Expected Returns

This table presents the indices used to calculate investors’ expected return measures. All index returns
assume that distributions are reinvested. Data are from Ibbotson Associates

Asset class                     Index
Money Market                    1-month Treasury Bill return
GIC/Stable Value                1-month Treasury Bill return
Bond                            Ibbotson long-term corporate bond index
Balanced                        (mixed according to particular plan's funds)
Lifestyle/Pre-mix               (mixed according to particular plan's funds)
Large US Equity                 S&P 500
Mid US Equity                   NYSE/AMEX/Nasdaq stocks in NYSE market cap deciles 3 to 5
Small US Equity                 Ibbotson small stock index
International                   MSCI AC World except U.S. (starting with Jan. 1988 index inception)
                                S&P 500 (before January 1988)
Emerging Markets                MSCI Emerging Markets (starting with Jan. 1988 index inception)
                                S&P 500 (before January 1988)
Employer Stock                  Employer stock (for adaptive expected returns)
                                S&P 500 (for constant expected return)
            Table 3. Consumption Growth and Normalized Wealth Shock Distributions

This table presents summary statistics on consumption growth and the two wealth shock measures.
Consumption growth is defined as the year-over-year change in real consumption during the last pay
cycle of December, normalized by real income in the last pay cycle of the prior year (see equation (3)).
The normalized adaptive wealth shock is the difference between the real capital gain actually realized
by the participant during the year and what he would have realized had the real returns on his funds
equaled the ten-year lagged average real returns of the funds’ respective asset classes (Table 2),
normalized by prior-year real annual income. The normalized constant return wealth shock is the
difference between the real capital gain actually realized by the participant during the year and what he
would have realized had the real returns on his funds equaled the average real returns of the funds’
respective asset classes from 1926 to 1997, normalized by prior-year real annual income. The
distributions shown are for yearly consumption growth from year-end 1998 through year-end 2000,
and wealth shocks from 1997 to 2000.

                         Normalized            Normalized adaptive         Normalized constant
                     consumption growth           wealth shock             return wealth shock
Maximum                    0.4251                     7.5043                      7.9207
      th
99 percentile              0.2463                     1.2734                      1.4029
      th
90 percentile              0.1362                     0.2272                      0.2591
      th
75 percentile              0.0704                     0.0397                      0.0547
      th
50 percentile              0.0136                     -0.0082                     0.0002
      th
25 percentile              -0.0133                    -0.1426                    -0.1073
10th percentile            -0.0449                    -0.3942                    -0.3191
 st
1 percentile               -0.1447                    -1.3260                    -1.1380
Minimum                    -0.2801                    -8.9672                    -8.7353


Mean                       0.0310                     -0.0460                    -0.0075
Std. Dev.                  0.0760                     0.4238                      0.4146
Serial correlation         0.1027                     -0.4232                    -0.3672
              Table 4. Regression of Consumption Growth on Normalized Wealth Shock

The dependent variable is the year-over-year change in real consumption in the last pay cycle of
December, normalized by real salary in the last pay cycle of the prior year. Coefficients are shown for
two estimators: a least squares estimator and the Honoré (1992) estimator. Shockt is defined in two
ways. The normalized adaptive wealth shock is the difference between the real capital gain actually
realized by the participant during the year and what he would have realized had the real returns on his
funds equaled the ten-year lagged average real returns of the funds’ respective asset classes (Table 2).
The constant return wealth shock is the difference between the real capital gain actually realized by the
participant during the year and what he would have realized had the real returns on his funds equaled
the average real returns of the funds’ respective asset classes from 1926 to 1997. Yt–1 is inflation-
adjusted salary paid in year t – 1. Aget–1 is the participant’s age at the end of t – 1. Tenuret–1 is the
number of years since original hire at the end of t – 1. Coefficients for company-year dummies are
omitted. Standard errors are in parentheses below the point estimates.

                                     Adaptive wealth shock             Constant return wealth shock
                                 Least squares       Honoré           Least squares       Honoré
Shockt/Yt–1                        -0.0179**        -0.0050**           -0.0174**        -0.0044**
                                   (0.0018)         (0.0012)            (0.0019)         (0.0014)
Shockt–1/Yt–1                      -0.0210**        -0.0070**           -0.0183**        -0.0055**
                                   (0.0033)         (0.0019)            (0.0031)         (0.0020)
Age2t–1/1000                       -0.1911**        -0.0802*            -0.1897**        -0.0883**
                                   (0.0371)         (0.0313)            (0.0371)         (0.0318)
Log(Tenuret–1)                     -0.0203**        -0.0093*            -0.0209**        -0.0094
                                   (0.0068)         (0.0044)            (0.0068)         (0.0050)
Company-year dummies                  Yes              Yes                 Yes              Yes
N                                   54,054           54,054              54,054           54,054
* Significant at the 5% level
** Significant at the1% level
                                Table 5. Regression of Consumption Growth
                              on Normalized Wealth Shock Interacted with Age

The dependent variable is the year-over-year change in real consumption in the last pay cycle of
December, normalized by real salary in the last pay cycle of the prior year. Coefficients are shown for
two estimators: a least squares estimator and the Honoré (1992) estimator. Shockt is defined in two
ways. The normalized adaptive wealth shock is the difference between the real capital gain actually
realized by the participant during the year and what he would have realized had the real returns on his
funds equaled the ten-year lagged average real returns of the funds’ respective asset classes (Table 2).
The constant return wealth shock is the difference between the real capital gain actually realized by the
participant during the year and what he would have realized had the real returns on his funds equaled
the average real returns of the funds’ respective asset classes from 1926 to 1997. The dummy variables
(n1 ≤ Age < n2) are equal to 1 if age at year-end 1998 falls in the specified range. Yt–1 is inflation-
adjusted salary paid in year t – 1. Coefficients for age, age-squared, log of tenure, log of salary, and
company-year dummies are omitted. Standard errors are in parentheses below the point estimates.

                                          Adaptive wealth shock       Constant return wealth shock
                                      Least squares      Honoré      Least squares      Honoré
Shockt × (Age < 30) /Yt–1               -0.0949**        -0.0862**     -0.0926**        -0.0846**
                                        (0.0169)         (0.0220)      (0.0180)         (0.0234)
Shockt × (30 ≤ Age < 40) /Yt–1          -0.0368**        -0.0241**     -0.0350**        -0.0239**
                                        (0.0044)         (0.0046)      (0.0046)         (0.0047)
Shockt × (40 ≤ Age < 50) /Yt–1          -0.0184**        -0.0040       -0.0179**        -0.0044
                                        (0.0024)         (0.0023)      (0.0025)         (0.0024)
Shockt × (50 ≤ Age < 60) /Yt–1          -0.0105**        -0.0007       -0.0102**        -0.0010
                                        (0.0029)         (0.0023)      (0.0030)         (0.0025)
Shockt × (Age ≥ 60) /Yt–1               -0.0050          -0.0038       -0.0045          -0.0038
                                        (0.0112)         (0.0195)      (0.0121)         (0.0234)
Shockt–1 × (Age < 30) /Yt–1             -0.1177**        -0.1214**     -0.1009**        -0.1048*
                                        (0.0350)         (0.0461)      (0.0336)         (0.0439)
Shockt–1 × (30 ≤ Age < 40) /Yt–1        -0.0390**        -0.0393**     -0.0320**        -0.0329**
                                        (0.0090)         (0.0086)      (0.0087)         (0.0082)
Shockt–1 × (40 ≤ Age < 50) /Yt–1        -0.0197**        -0.0055       -0.0173**        -0.0054
                                        (0.0045)         (0.0037)      (0.0043)         (0.0035)
Shockt–1 × (50 ≤ Age < 60) /Yt–1        -0.0131*         -0.0006       -0.0115*         -0.0012
                                        (0.0051)         (0.0038)      (0.0049)         (0.0037)
Shockt–1 × (Age ≥ 60) /Yt–1             -0.0044          -0.0063       -0.0029          -0.0043
                                        (0.0174)         (0.0388)      (0.0169)         (0.0395)
Company-year dummies                      Yes              Yes           Yes              Yes
N                                        54,054           54,054        54,054           54,054
* Significant at the 5% level
** Significant at the 1% level
                  Table 6. Probit Regression of Older Workers Leaving the Company
                                     on Normalized Wealth Shock

The dependent variable equals 1 if the participant has left the company during 2000, and 0 otherwise.
Individuals included in these regressions were active participants in their company’s 401(k) plan for all
of calendar years 1998 and 1999 and were at least 60 years old and not yet retired at year-end 1999.
Shockt is defined in two ways. The normalized adaptive wealth shock is the difference between the real
capital gain actually realized by the participant during year t and what he would have realized had the
real returns on his funds equaled the ten-year lagged average real returns of the funds’ respective asset
classes (Table 2). The constant return wealth shock is the difference between the real capital gain
actually realized by the participant during the year and what he would have realized had the real
returns on his funds equaled the average real returns of the funds’ respective asset classes from 1926 to
1997. Y1999 is inflation-adjusted salary paid in 1999. Age1999 is the participant’s age at the end of 1999.
Tenure1999 is the number of years since original hire at the end of 1999. Estimates for company
dummies are omitted. The columns labeled “Coefficient” present coefficient estimates from the probit.
The columns labeled “Slope” present marginal effects evaluated at the means of the explanatory
variables. Standard errors are in parentheses below the point estimates.

                                   Adaptive wealth shock           Constant return wealth shock
                                 Coefficient       Slope          Coefficient          Slope
Shock1999/Y1999                     0.0672          0.0268          0.0562            0.0224
                                   (0.0905)        (0.0361)        (0.0864)          (0.0345)
Shock1998/Y1999                     0.2910          0.1160          0.3006            0.1199
                                   (0.2470)        (0.0985)        (0.2016)          (0.0804)
Age1999                             0.0129          0.0051          0.0126            0.0050
                                   (0.0141)        (0.0056)        (0.0141)          (0.0056)
Log(Y1999)                         -0.3317**      -0.1323**        -0.3382*          -0.1349*
                                   (0.1210)        (0.0483)        (0.1215)          (0.0485)
Log(Tenure1999)                     0.1510*         0.0602*         0.1466*           0.0585*
                                   (0.0667)        (0.0267)        (0.0669)          (0.0267)
Company dummies                      Yes            Yes                Yes              Yes
N                                           1,457                              1,457
* Significant at the 5% level
** Significant at the 1% level
                                      Table 7. Robustness Checks
This table presents variants of the regressions in Table 4. The aspect of the specification that has been
modified is given in the first column. Coefficients for age, age-squared, log of tenure, log of salary,
company-year dummies, and state-year dummies (where applicable) are omitted. Standard errors are in
parentheses below the point estimates.

                                              Adaptive wealth shock         Constant return wealth shock
Specification            Variable          Least squares      Honoré       Least squares       Honoré
Dependent variable is Shockt/Yt–1          -0.0027**         0.0000        -0.0029**          0.0000
negative of change in                      (0.0007)         (0.0009)       (0.0007)          (0.0009)
401(k) contribution rate Shockt–1/Yt–1     -0.0023           0.0000        -0.0024*           0.0000
                                           (0.0013)         (0.0012)       (0.0012)          (0.0011)
Sample restricted to       Shockt/Yt–1     -0.0195**        -0.0028        -0.0189**         -0.0030
participants interior to                   (0.0057)         (0.0068)       (0.0059)          (0.0073)
match threshold            Shockt–1/Yt–1   -0.0068          -0.0001        -0.0044           -0.0002
                                           (0.0102)         (0.0108)       (0.0100)          (0.0103)
Sample restricted to    Shockt/Yt–1        -0.0178**        -0.0038**      -0.0174**         -0.0044**
participants who remain                    (0.0019)         (0.0012)       (0.0020)          (0.0013)
in the same zip code    Shockt–1/Yt–1      -0.0211**        -0.0053**      -0.0187**         -0.0054**
                                           (0.0033)         (0.0019)       (0.0032)          (0.0018)
Sample restricted to       Shockt/Yt–1     -0.0228**        -0.0134**      -0.0223**         -0.0131**
unmarried participants                     (0.0035)         (0.0032)       (0.0037)          (0.0034)
                           Shockt–1/Yt–1   -0.0252**        -0.0177**      -0.0223**         -0.0152**
                                           (0.0066)         (0.0032)       (0.0064)          (0.0047)
Assume immediate           Shockt/Yt–1     -0.0187**        -0.0052**      -0.0180**         -0.0052**
consumption of in-                         (0.0021)         (0.0014)       (0.0021)          (0.0014)
service withdrawals        Shockt–1/Yt–1   -0.0230**        -0.0071**      -0.0197**         -0.0062**
                                           (0.0037)         (0.0022)       (0.0036)          (0.0021)
Assume in-service          Shockt/Yt–1     -0.0145**        -0.0042**       -0.0140**        -0.0040**
withdrawals are                            (0.0017)         (0.0010)        (0.0018)         (0.0011)
annuitized
                           Shockt–1/Yt–1   -0.0164**        -0.0057**       -0.0141**        -0.0049**
                                           (0.0031)         (0.0017)        (0.0030)         (0.0016)
Include state × year       Shockt/Yt–1     -0.0153**        -0.0036**       -0.0146**        -0.0036**
effects                                    (0.0018)         (0.0013)        (0.0019)         (0.0014)
                           Shockt–1/Yt–1   -0.0166**        -0.0046*        -0.0141**        -0.0041*
                                           (0.0033)         (0.0021)        (0.0031)         (0.0019)
Sample restricted to      Shockt/Yt–1      -0.0196**        -0.0076**       -0.0188**        -0.0067*
those in the lowest third                  (0.0033)         (0.0025)        (0.0034)         (0.0026)
of the home ownership
                          Shockt–1/Yt–1    -0.0210**        -0.0124**       -0.0179**        -0.0087*
distribution
                                           (0.0058)         (0.0041)        (0.0056)         (0.0038)
* Significant at the 5% level
** Significant at the 1% level
