                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                           DOES PREKINDERGARTEN IMPROVE
                        SCHOOL PREPARATION AND PERFORMANCE?

                                        Katherine A. Magnuson
                                         Christopher J. Ruhm
                                            Jane Waldfogel

                                         Working Paper 10452
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w10452


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       April 2004




This research was supported by a grant from the Russell Sage Foundation’s Social Inequality program. We
are grateful to Eric Wanner and participants at the May 2003 Social Inequality conference for helpful
comments. We would also like to thank Marcia Meyers and Dan Rosenbaum for many helpful discussions.
Additional funding support was provided by the John D. and Catherine T. MacArthur Foundation, NICHD,
and NSF. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

©2004 by Katherine A. Magnusun, Christopher J. Ruhm, and Jane Waldfogel. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Does Prekindergarten Improve School Preparation and Performance?
Katherine A. Magnusun, Christopher J. Ruhm, and Jane Waldfogel
NBER Working Paper No. 10452
April 2004
JEL No. J13, I20, I28
                                       ABSTRACT

Prekindergarten programs are expanding rapidly, but to date, evidence on their effects is quite

limited. Using rich data from Early Childhood Longitudinal Study, we estimate the effects of

prekindergarten on children's school readiness. We find that prekindergarten increases reading and

mathematics skills at school entry, but also increases behavioral problems and reduces self-control.

Furthermore, the effects of prekindergarten on skills largely dissipate by the spring of first grade,

although the behavioral effects do not. Finally, effects differ depending on children's family

background and subsequent schooling, with the largest and most lasting academic gains for

disadvantaged children and those attending schools with low levels of academic instruction.

Katherine A. Magnuson
Columbia University School of Social Work
622 W. 113th Street
New York, NY 10025
kam2101@columbia.edu

Christopher J. Ruhm
Department of Economics
University of North Carolina at Greensboro
P.O. Box 26165
Greensboro, NC 27402-6165
c-ruhm@uncg.edu

Jane Waldfogel
Columbia University School of Social Work
622 W. 113th Street
New York, NY 10025
jw205@columbia.edu
                                                                                                       3



           Does Prekindergarten Improve School Preparation and Performance?



1. Introduction

       The share of U.S. children attending early education programs has risen dramatically in

recent years -- 66% of four-year olds were enrolled in a center or school-based preschool

program in 2001, up from 23% thirty years earlier (U.S. Bureau of the Census, 1970; US

Department of Education, 2003). Particularly striking is the increase in prekindergarten

programs, early education programs sponsored by school districts, which now serve one in seven

four-year olds (U. S. General Accounting Office, 2000a, 2000b; Gilliam and Zigler, 2001).

Expansion of prekindergarten is partly motivated by concerns that many children are

insufficiently prepared at the time of school entry, with particularly large academic skill deficits

for disadvantaged groups. For example, in 1990, governmental leaders endorsed as the first of

eight national educational goals that: “By the year 2000, all children should enter school ready to

learn.” One of the three objectives under this goal was that all children should have access to

high-quality and developmentally appropriate preschool programs that help prepare children for

school (Committee for Economic Development, 2002).

       Despite these goals, the enrollment of disadvantaged children in early education

programs remains relatively low. Children whose mothers did not complete high school are half

as likely to be in center-based care arrangements as those whose mothers have a college degree

(US Department of Education, 2003). Similar gaps exist between children from low and high

income families (Bainbridge et al., 2002). To equalize access to high quality early education

opportunities, there have been numerous calls for expanded public support of prekindergarten

(Bowman, Donovan and Burns, 2001; Committee on Economic Development, 2002; Wolfe and
                                                                                                                    4



Scrivner, 2003). Since 1990, overall state funding for prekindergarten has increased 250% to

approximately $1.9 million (Education Week, 2002). In 2000, a total of 39 states had

prekindergarten initiatives, although fewer -- Connecticut, Georgia, Illinois, Kentucky,

Massachusetts, Ohio, and Oklahoma – had made substantial per capita investments (Schulman et

al., 1999; Ripple et al., 1999; Education Week, 2002).1 Local school districts also invest in

prekindergarten programs independently, although the bulk of this money comes from federal

funding streams (Smith et al., 2003).

        Evidence of effects of prekindergarten on school readiness and subsequent educational

performance is quite limited. We know that model early education programs promote academic

skills, but know much less about typical programs. Data are particularly lacking for

prekindergarten programs. This paper begins to fill this gap by addressing three specific

questions. First, does prekindergarten increase school readiness at kindergarten entry, as

assessed by reading and mathematics skills, and behavioral problems? Second, do any effects of

prekindergarten attendance at the time of school entry persist over time, or do they quickly

dissipate? Third, do the effects differ depending on children’s family background or

characteristics of subsequent schooling?

        We use data from the newly available Early Childhood Longitudinal Study –

Kindergarten Class of 1998-99 (ECLS-K), a large, nationally representative sample of children

who entered kindergarten in the fall of 1998. The ECLS-K collects data on school performance

and a rich array of family background, school, and other control variables, including early

education and child care experiences. Data are available currently through the spring of 2000,

when most children are completing first grade. The outcomes we examine are reading and math


1
 The Education Commission of the United States (2003) provides an up to date summary of state activities in early
education.
                                                                                                     5



skills, and classroom self-control and aggression. We assess school readiness using data from

the fall of kindergarten, and the persistence of effects with information from the spring of first

grade.

         A significant challenge is to adequately control for differential selection into early

education programs. For example, favorable selection, whereby parents whose children attend

prekindergarten possess characteristics resulting in high levels of school performance, would

result in a spurious positive correlation between preschool enrollment and later outcomes. Our

primary econometric strategy is to use the detailed information available in the ECLS-K to

measure many potential confounding factors. We also estimate models that instrument

prekindergarten attendance with state expenditures on these programs.

         Our main results are as follows. 1) Prekindergarten significantly increases math and

reading performance at school entry – effect sizes range from 0.10 to 0.13 in the preferred

models. 2) Prekindergarten attendance increases aggression and decreases self-control (with

effect sizes of 0.09-0.12). 3) Other types of center-based child care have positive effects on

academic outcomes and negative effects on behavior, although in both cases these are smaller

than for prekindergarten. 4) For most children, the cognitive benefits of prekindergarten quickly

fade, but the behavioral effects persist. 5) However, there are more lasting cognitive gains for

disadvantaged children and for those experiencing minimal levels of instruction in the early

school years. This last finding suggests that further expansions of prekindergarten should be

mainly focused on children who are disadvantaged or who will go on to attend low instruction

schools.
                                                                                                                        6



2. Prior Research

         The benefits from high-quality intensive early education interventions are well

documented and include short-term improvements in cognitive and language development as

well as long-term increases in academic achievement and reductions in special education

placement and grade retention (see Barnett, 1995; Currie, 2000; Karoly et al., 1998; Brooks-

Gunn, 2000; Farran, 2000; Ramey and Ramey, 2000; Vandell and Wolfe 2000; Waldfogel,

2002). However, we know much less about the effects of more typical preschool or

prekindergarten programs (Gilliam and Zigler, 2001). Lacking experiments, researchers have

used naturally occurring variation in families’ use of child care arrangements to assess the

effects. Unfortunately, these analyses often include only a few controls for potential selection

factors, raising the possibility that the resulting associations are spurious rather than causal

(Blau, 2001; Currie, in press). Methodological concerns notwithstanding, the bulk of evidence

suggests that center-based care during the third and fourth year of life promotes academic

outcomes at school entry (Barnett, 1995; Gilliam and Zigler, 2001; NICHD ECCRN, 2002b;

NICHD ECCRN and Duncan, 2003).2

         Many of the advantages bestowed by early education fade by the time children are in

their second or third year of formal schooling (Barnett, 1995), as children not attending early

education programs catch up to those who did. In response, some researchers suggest that

subsequent schooling experiences are key to understanding whether early education program

effects persist, but exactly how later schooling matters is unclear (Takinishi and DeLeon, 1994).

One possibility is that children without early education who experience high levels of academic

2
  The Head Start program has also been extensively studied with non-experimental research designs. However,
selection bias is a major problem, given the disadvantaged nature of the Head Start population. Studies most
successfully addressing this issue tend to find the most positive and long-lasting academic benefits (e.g. Currie and
Thomas, 1995; Garces et. al. 2001).
                                                                                                                      7



instruction in the first years of school catch up to their peers more quickly than those who

experience lower levels of instruction. However, other scholars speculate that “skills beget

skills” and therefore children entering elementary school with a higher level of academic skills

may be uniquely poised to gain from subsequent instruction (Carneiro and Heckman, in press).

        Although cognitive outcomes have tended to receive most attention in the economics

literature, school readiness and later school success also depend on behavior adjustment (Rimm-

Kaufman et al., 1998; Shonkoff and Phillips, 2000). When teachers are asked to describe the key

components of school readiness, positive behavior including enthusiasm, cooperation, following

directions, and not disrupting the class are rated as more important than knowing specific skills

such as letters of the alphabet or counting numbers (Lewit and Baker, 1995). Furthermore, high

levels of aggressive behavior and low-levels of self-control predict lower academic achievement,

although whether these associations are causal remains controversial (Alexander, Entwisle, and

Dauber, 1993; Hinshaw, 1992).

        Non-experimental evidence indicates that early and extensive non-maternal child care,

particularly center-based care, is associated with higher levels of behavior problems in school

(see review in Belsky, 2001; NICHD ECCRN, 2003). However, evidence is mixed as to whether

attending center-based care or early education programs during the year or two prior to school

entry has detrimental effects on behavior.3

        Particular types of early education programs may contribute to behavior problems. Stipek

and colleagues (1998) found that early education programs with teacher-directed basic skill

instruction had negative social climates, measured by teachers’ warmth and nurturance and


3
 For example, an experimental evaluation of the Perry Preschool program, a model program serving 3 and 4 year
olds, indicated that the program had no effect on school misbehavior (Schweinhart, Barnes, and Weikart, 1993).
However, non-experimental studies have found that children in center-based care for a larger proportion of the year
prior to kindergarten had higher levels of problem behavior in kindergarten (Bates et al., 1994).
                                                                                                    8



frequency of rewarding positive behavior rather than disciplining negative behavior.

Furthermore, attending a preschool or kindergarten with a basic-skills emphasis was associated

with having higher levels of problem behavior, compared to attending programs with lower

levels of basic skill instruction and more child-directed learning approaches. Because this study

relied on naturally occurring variation in early education experiences, it was unable to determine

whether classrooms that combined basic skills instruction with a positive social climate are

associated with behavior problems. However, Stipek and colleagues (1998) suggest that model

programs, such as Perry Preschool, may not have detrimental effects because the caregivers are

able to provide basic skills education while fostering positive social environments.

       Taken together, the prior literature suggests that early education may increase children’s

academic skills but also children’s misbehavior. However, prior research has been limited

because most experimental studies have been based on model programs serving small non-

representative samples. In contrast, larger and more representative studies have generally used

naturally occurring variation in children’s experiences, but have typically included only a few

covariates in analyses, and consequently have not adequately addressed the selection biases that

may pervade non-experimental designs (Duncan and Gibson, 2000).

       Moreover, nearly all studies have combined all types of early education programs into

one category even though the effects may differ depending on the quality and emphasis of the

programs. With the exception of Head Start, few studies have considered whether specific types

of preschool programs are more or less beneficial than other early education programs. Child-

staff ratios, class sizes, and caregiver education and pay are important determinants of the quality

of care (NICHD, 2002a; Phillips, Mekos, Scarr, McCartney, and Abbott-Shim, 2001), and data
                                                                                                                    9



on these indicators suggest that school-based prekindergarten provides relatively high quality

care (Ripple et al., 1999; Smith et al., 2003).4

        Only one previous study has analyzed prekindergarten programs as distinct from other

types of preschool or center-based care. Using data from the ECLS-K, Magnuson and colleagues

(in press) provide evidence that prekindergarten programs may confer larger academic benefits

than other center-based programs, with particularly large gains for disadvantaged children.

However, the effects on behavioral outcomes were not considered, and concerns about bias due

to the differential selection of children into prekindergarten programs were not thoroughly

addressed.

        This study addresses five limitations of prior research. First, we examine the effects of

different types of early education programs using a large and nationally representative sample.

Second, we consider the impacts on behavior problems as well as academic skills. Third, we are

able to better deal with selection effects due to the extensive array of child, family background,

school, and classroom characteristics included in our data set, and by using IV methods to test

the robustness of the findings. Fourth, we analyze whether the differences observed at school

entry persist over time or fade out. Fifth, we evaluate whether the impacts differ as a result of

the child’s family background or the type of academic instruction received during kindergarten

and first grade.

3. Data

        Data are from the Early Childhood Longitudinal Study, Kindergarten Cohort of 1998-99

(ECLS-K), a nationally representative sample of children attending kindergarten in the fall of

1998. Designed and carried out by the U.S. Department of Education, the ECLS-K collected

4
  For example, 86% of school-based prekindergarten teachers have a four-year college degree (Smith et al., 2003),
which is more than twice the rate among center-based care program workers (Blau, 2001). Existing data do not
indicate whether prekindergarten classrooms have positive social climates.
                                                                                                                 10



data over children’s first two years of school. We use information from the fall of 1998

(kindergarten) and spring of 2000 (for most children, first grade). The ECLS-K includes

academic assessments, child, parent, teachers and school administrator surveys, and

observational ratings of school environments. Our sample consists of 9,547 children entering

kindergarten (for the first time) in the fall of 1998.5 This sample size reflects the exclusion of

3,555 children in the fall of kindergarten for whom information on child care/early education or

one of the outcomes was missing.6 Similarly, 4,651 children for whom data was not collected in

the spring of first grade were dropped from the sample. This large number of exclusions

partially reflects planned attrition (only half the children changing schools after the fall of

kindergarten were retained in the study), as well as lower completion rates among children

followed after changing schools (64 % compared with 95 % for non-movers).7

3.1 Outcomes

         During the fall of kindergarten and the spring of first grade, children’s math and reading

skills were assessed during one-on-one testing sessions.8 The assessments were created

especially for the ECLS-K by a team of experts, with some items adapted from existing

instruments. The reading test assessed knowledge of letters and word recognition, beginning and

5
  The ECLS-K had high completion rates with close to 90% of children and teachers, and 85% of parents
participating in the study in the fall of kindergarten, and non-response did not differ by child or family
characteristics, with the exception that parents of Asian children were slightly less likely to complete parent
interviews, due to language barriers (National Center for Education Statistics, 2001).
6
  About 30% of those who were excluded in the fall of kindergarten were non-English speaking, and therefore were
not administered reading assessments. Just over 50% were missing parent report data and an additional 676 were
excluded because they were repeating kindergarten in 1998, or because data for this measure was missing. We also
excluded children with missing outcome data in the spring of kindergarten (N=268) and 44 children because the
sizes of missing data cells were too small to be included in our first stage IV analyses. Robustness checks
performed by adding these children back to the sample did not substantively change any of the results.
7
  Overall completion rates were high among those children who were followed through the spring of first grade, with
92% of child assessments, 86% of parent interviews, and 83% teacher interviews completed (National Center for
Education Statistics, 2002).
8
  As noted above, children were also assessed during the spring of kindergarten but we do not use those data here. A
brief language screener was given to children who were identified as having a non-English background by teachers
or school records. If they failed the screener, children received a reduced version of the assessments, and were not
included in our sample.
                                                                                                                  11



ending sounds, vocabulary, and passage comprehension. The math test evaluated understanding

of numbers, geometry, and spatial relations. Reported reliabilities for the tests were quite high

for all assessments (National Center for Education Statistics, 2001).

         The math and reading outcomes are transformations of latent ability scores into

standardized t-scores that have a mean of 50 and standard deviation of 10 (based on the full

sample distribution).9 Consequently, the scores should be interpreted as children’s ability relative

to their peers, and can be translated into effect sizes by dividing regression coefficients by 10.

The sample analyzed scored slightly above the full sample mean at school entry and during first

grade, with average reading and math scores around 52.10 The 3 percent of children still in

kindergarten in the spring of 2000 were classified as having repeated kindergarten (since they

should have progressed to first grade by the fall of 1999).

         Teacher reports of children’s externalizing behavior and self-control are included to

measure children’s classroom behavior.11 Externalizing problem behavior refers to aggressive

behavior as indicated by a five-item scale providing information on how frequently the child

fights, argues, gets angry, acts impulsively, or disturbs ongoing activities. Self-control is

comprised of four items about how frequently the child respects the property of others, controls

their temper, accepts peer ideas for group activities, and appropriately responds to peer




9
  The skills tests were conducted in two-steps. Children were first given common questions as a routing section. The
second set of questions differed in difficulty, depending on performance in the first step. Because children did not
answer the same questions, the resulting score was calculated using Item Response Theory (IRT), which uses
patterns of right, wrong, and missing answers and the difficulty of questions asked to place each child on a
continuous ability scale. The resulting latent score is an estimate of the number of questions that child would have
been correctly answered had the child been asked all available questions.
10
   This partially reflects our exclusion of children who are repeating kindergarten, are not proficient in English or
who transferred schools.
11
   These are adapted from the Social Rating System (SRS, Gresham and Elliot, 1990).
                                                                                                                  12



pressure.12 The final scores were standardized (for the full sample), to have a mean of 0 and a

standard deviation of 10. As with academic skills, these scores can be translated into effect sizes

by dividing regression coefficients by 10, allowing us to compare behavior and academic

outcomes using a similar metric.

3.2 Early Child Care and Education

         Using parental responses to questions asked about child care in the year prior to

kindergarten, children were classified as having attended a prekindergarten program, other types

of center-based care (subsequently referred to as preschool), Head Start, or other non-parental

care (care by a relative or non-relative, e.g., nanny or babysitter). To simplify interpretation of

the regression coefficients and isolate the effects of prekindergarten, we constructed mutually

exclusive groups.13 Using these categories, 46% of child care was preschool, 17%

prekindergarten, 16% exclusively parental care, 12% other types of non-parental care, and 10%

Head Start.

         A potential concern is that we are not able to determine how parents distinguish between

different types of programs, with misclassification seeming most likely for preschool and

prekindergarten. Our presumption is that programs that parents identify as prekindergarten

correspond to either school-based programs or publicly funded state prekindergarten initiatives,




12
   Externalizing behavior is highly negatively correlated with self-control (-0.70, p<.01). At school entry, reported
frequencies of externalizing behavior were relatively low, with unstandardized means of 1.5, and rates of self-
control were high, with unstandardized scores of 3.12.
13
   Children experiencing prekindergarten and other non-parental care were placed in the prekindergarten category.
Those with preschool and other non-parental care were put in the preschool group. Children in Head Start and other
non-parental care were coded as having attended Head Start. Those with both Head Start and other center-based care
(preschool or prekindergarten) were categorized according to the type of care where they spent the greatest number
of hours per week. Approximately 34% of children in prekindergarten, 35 % in preschool, and 41% in Head Start
were also in other non-parental care arrangements. Overlap between preschool or prekindergarten and Head Start
was much lower. Only 7% of children who attended prekindergarten and 5% in preschool were also in Head Start.
The results of models estimated with non-exclusive child care categories were nearly identical to those reported..
                                                                                                                13



and are thus more explicitly educational than other types of center-based care.14 One reassuring

piece of evidence is that the 17% prekindergarten enrollment rate for this sample is close to the

14% national estimate recently obtained by Smith et al. (2003). Any classification errors seem

likely to attenuate the parameter estimates, such that the regression results probably understate

the true effects.

3.3 Additional Explanatory Variables

        Most of the regressions contain exhaustive controls for child, family background, and

neighborhood characteristics, exploiting the rich information contained in the ECLS-K. Our goal

is to include covariates that either directly affect child outcomes or proxy unobserved

characteristics. Thus, most models control for demographic and family characteristics such as

race/ethnicity, age, health status at birth, height, weight, and gender, the household income-to-

needs ratio, parental education, region of the country, family structure and size, and language

spoken in the home. Appendix Table 1 provides details on all of the covariates.

        Also incorporated as covariates are measures of the child’s home environment created

from parent survey data collected in the fall and spring of kindergarten.15 These include a diverse

set of home and family resources and parenting practices that may be related to early child care,

education experiences, academic skills, and behaviors. The learning environment is proxied by a

range of activities such as reading books and singing songs, children’s participation in structured

activities outside of the home, their use of home computers, and the number of books in the

home. There are also indicators of the parent’s expectations of the child’s educational attainment

and attitudes about the importance of particular skills, controls for the family members’

14
   Although parents with children in private school kindergarten disproportionately report prekindergarten
attendance, separate analyses of these children yielded similar results for academic outcomes as those reported.
However, for this subsample, preschool did not appear to have any negative effects on children’s behavior problems.
15
   Parent surveys were primarily conducted with mothers. If the child’s mother was unable to complete the
interview, another knowledgeable adult in the household did so.
                                                                                                                       14



involvement in the child’s schooling, parental responses to questions about the warmth and

affection of the relationship with their child, the frequency of physical discipline, a composite

measure of the parent’s depressive symptoms, and several variables measuring the regularity of

the family routines (like eating meals together).16

         To proxy the effects of neighborhood and state characteristics, we included a

neighborhood quality composite index (constructed from parent responses to questions about the

prevalence of crime, abandoned buildings, drugs, and safe places for children to play in the

neighborhood), as well as state level measures of the log of per capita income and public

spending on public welfare and education programs in 1998. Data for these state variables are

taken from US Bureau of the Census (2001).

         Data on one or more background characteristics are lacking for some children.17 To retain

these cases, the relevant regressors are set to zero and dummy variables created to denote the

presence of missing values. For example, for children missing data on parental reports of birth

weight, the two low birthweight variables were recoded to have a value of zero, and a dummy

variable indicating missing data on birthweight was created.

         To measure children’s exposure to academic instruction, we combine two items from

teacher surveys conducted in the fall of kindergarten and spring of first grade about how much

time children spend working on projects or lessons about math and reading. We categorized

classes that spent an hour or less combined on reading and math skills as “minimal” instruction


16
   Because most family characteristics are measured during kindergarten, they could be influenced by
prekindergarten (or other preschool) attendance. In most cases, this problem is likely to be minor (e.g. parents are
unlikely to base meal routines on the availability of prekindergarten). However, some components of the home
learning environment could be shaped by the early education experiences. For instance, parents may be instructed
by prekindergarten teachers to frequently read to their children or receive information about the availability of
structured activities such as art classes. If so, the inclusion of these covariates may absorb a portion of the effect of
prekindergarten (or preschool), resulting in biased estimates. Generally, this seems likely to lead us to understate
any positive effects of prekindergarten, but over estimate any negative effects.
17
   Rates of missing data are quite low, below 2% for most child and family characteristics.
                                                                                                                15



classrooms. About 12% of children were in minimal instruction classrooms in kindergarten and

about 1% in first grade.

        Finally, we estimated a series of instrumental variables (IV) models, using a measure of

access to state prekindergarten as an instrument. To estimate the proportion of poor children

under five with access to a publicly funded prekindergarten, we divided a state’s prekindergarten

spending by the number of poor children under 5 (since most states target prekindergarten

programs to economically disadvantaged children) and calculated this as a fraction of the

average cost of center-based care for four-year-olds.18 This share ranges from 0 to 0.33.

4. Methods

        Conceptually, we can think of outcomes for child i in state j (Oij) as being “produced” by

a series of inputs such as the non-market “leisure” time of parents, purchased inputs like

educational resources provided in the home, and nonparental child care provided prior to school

entry. We do not attempt to determine the structural parameters of this child production

function. Instead, most models estimate the reduced-form association between experiences in the

year prior to kindergarten and early school outcomes, after controlling for a comprehensive set of

explanatory variables.

        The basic regression equation is:

        (1)                                 Oij = PREKijβ + Xijγ + Sjδ + εij,

Outcomes are measured in the fall of kindergarten and spring of the first grade. PRE is a dummy

variable for prekindergarten attendance. X is a set of child, family, and neighborhood

characteristics, and S is vector of state characteristics. Because schools were the primary




18
  Information on state prekindergarten spending and the cost of center-based care was taken from Blank et al.
(1999); estimates of the number of poor children under age 5 were from US Census Bureau (2003).
                                                                                                                   16



sampling unit in the survey, in all analyses we correct the standard errors for non-independence

of observations within schools.

         Because equation 1 does not include controls for types of care other than prekindergarten,

βˆ captures the difference in outcomes between children who attended prekindergarten and those

experiencing any other type of care (including parental care). However, we also estimate models

that add controls for preschool, Head Start, and other non-parental care. These analyses estimate

the effects of prekindergarten and other forms of nonparental care, relative to children

experiencing only parental care.

         One strategy in our analysis is to include a sufficiently rich set of covariates that the error

term in (1) is orthogonal to Oij. However, a potential concern is that even our extensive set of

controls may not fully account for the selection into prekindergarten. For this reason, we also

present results for instrumental variable (IV) estimates, where the level of state spending on

prekindergarten programs (adjusted for the number of children in poverty and the cost of care)

instruments prekindergarten enrollment. The first-stage equations for this analysis is:

         (2)                                 PREKij= STEXPENDjβ + Xijγ + Sjδ + εij.

Because PREKij is dichotomous, (2) is estimated as a probit model. The second stage is then

estimated by OLS, using Huber-White estimation to correct standard errors for the clustering of

data at the school level, and additional corrections for the two-stage estimation process (Murphy

and Topel, 1985). 19 As detailed below, state prekindergarten expenditures predict attendance

quite well and are likely to be a satisfactory instrument.


19
   The IV standard errors are not corrected for the fact that the spending variable takes the same value for all
children in a given state. Doing so would probably increase the standard errors. We have not undertaken this
correction since we are primarily using the IV models to detect the direction of any remaining bias in the OLS
estimates, rather than to estimate the magnitudes of the effects from the IV regressions. Ideally, we would have also
included other types of care in our IV models. However, we did not do so because it is more difficult to find good
instruments for other types of child care (e.g., preschool). We did consider using federal spending on child subsidies
                                                                                                                      17



5. Descriptive Statistics

         Table 1 provides the means and standard errors for all outcomes for the full sample and

for subsamples stratified by the type of care in the year prior to kindergarten. Children who

attended prekindergarten or preschool have the highest test scores, followed by those exclusively

in parental care or receiving other types of non-parental care (e.g., babysitters); Head Start

enrollees have the lowest scores in math and reading. Conversely, children who were in

exclusive parental care have the best behavior (highest levels of self-control and lowest levels of

externalizing behavior). Finally, children who attended prekindergarten were least likely to

repeat kindergarten, followed by those who attended preschool.

         The sample characteristics provided in the bottom panel of Table 1 suggest that differing

family backgrounds may account for at least part of the disparities in the outcomes. For

example, children experiencing prekindergarten or preschool programs typically come from

relatively advantaged families as indicated by their family income. Thus, although states have

primarily targeted funding of prekindergarten programs to disadvantaged children, non-

disadvantaged children also have access to prekindergarten.20

6. Does Prekindergarten Improve School Readiness?

         Table 2 presents results from regressions of children’s academic and behavioral outcomes

in the fall of kindergarten on prekindergarten attendance, with increasing levels of controls for

potential selection effects. As in Table 1, absent other controls, model (1) shows that


as additional instruments. However, child care funding across states is based on a formula that is largely determined
by the number of low-income children within a state (identified by the number of children who qualify for free and
reduced lunch), a state’s prior level of spending on child care for welfare recipients, and their ability to match and
draw down federal funds (Gish, 2002). Consequently, variation across states in the proportion of publicly funded
slots available to low income children is much smaller than for prekindergarten funding, and much more likely to be
driven by error in measuring either the number of poor children or the cost of care per child.
20
  Because family poverty is one criterion for Head Start enrollment, it is no surprise that children attending Head
Start programs had the lowest household income-to-needs ratios.
                                                                                                                     18



prekindergarten is positively and strongly associated with reading and mathematics skills --

children enrolled in prekindergarten have reading scores 3.17 points higher than other children.

As shown in models (2) through (4), the addition of covariates reduces the prekindergarten

effects by 60 percent, most of which is due to the inclusion of demographic characteristics.

         We focus below on the results of the most comprehensive specification (model 4),

because this model includes controls for many family and neighborhood conditions and is likely

to best account for potential selection factors. In this case, prekindergarten attendance predicts a

statistically significant 1.26 higher reading score and 0.93 higher math scores, corresponding to

an effect size of 0.13 and 0.09 respectively. This represents about one more question answered

correctly, and effects of this size would move the average child from the 50th to the 55th

percentile for reading and from the 50th to the 54th percentile for math.21 The large number of

covariates included and small changes in estimated effects observed with the addition of more

controls (beyond the basic demographic variables) increase our confidence that these estimates

may represent causal effects, rather than remaining heterogeneity. We use IV models in the

following section to further test this assumption.

         By contrast, teachers report that children who attended prekindergarten exhibit

statistically significantly more externalizing (aggressive) behavior than their counterparts and

insignificantly lower levels of self-control (Table 2, model 1). The addition of covariates has

virtually no effect on the estimates for externalizing behavior (effect sizes are 0.12 in all four

models) and slightly increases the negative associations with self-control – to an effect size of -

0.09 (Table 4 model 4). Effects of these magnitudes imply that prekindergarten is predicted to



21
  Percentile changes were calculated by converting the standardized scores into percentile scores using the
cumulative distribution function (cdf), determining the corresponding position in the cdf, and then adding the
estimated effect size of prekindergarten. The resulting value was translated back into a percentile using the cdf.
                                                                                                                    19



raise children from the median to the 55th percentile of externalizing behavior, and lower them to

the 46th percentile of self-control.22

7. IV Estimates

         The OLS estimates, discussed above, suggest that prekindergarten has positive effects on

academic outcomes, but negative effects on classroom behavior. We have included an

exceptionally rich set of controls for potential confounding factors, increasing our confidence

that these results may indicate causal relationships. Nevertheless, it is possible that some sources

of selection bias remain, even after including the exhaustive set of covariates. We address this

possibility by conducting a set of instrumental variables (IV) estimates.

         In the late 1990s, spending on prekindergarten varied greatly across states, and we take

advantage of this by using state spending as an instrument for prekindergarten participation.

Figure 1 displays how spending on prekindergarten (per poor child under five years of age)

varied in 1998 for the 39 states in which children in the ECLS-K study reside.23 Some states

(e.g., Connecticut, Georgia, New Jersey, and Massachusetts) were making substantial

investments in prekindergarten, but at least 10 states are not investing any money at all. In

constructing our instrument, we further divide state prekindergarten expenditures (per poor

children under five) by the average cost of center-based care in the state. This provides a

measure of the proportion of poor children with access to publicly funded kindergarten.

         It is plausible that access to state-funded programs will predict prekindergarten

enrollment and have no independent effect on child outcomes (other than through its effect on

22
   One concern about using teacher reported outcomes is that children who attended kindergarten may be selected
into different classrooms than other children. A solution is to estimate teacher-fixed effect regressions, which
compares children who attended prekindergarten with children in their classrooms who did not. Results from such
analyses are somewhat smaller but consistent with the OLS findings – prekindergarten effects from teacher fixed-
effects models are about 0.80 for reading, 0.73 for math, -0.66 for self-control, and 0.88 for externalizing behavior.
Very similar results are obtained from models with school fixed-effects.
23
   We use funding during the 1998-1999 school year because data are unavailable for 1997-1998, the year these
children would have attended prekindergarten programs.
                                                                                                               20



enrollment).24 Results from the first stage indicate that state spending significantly predicts

children’s participation – the probit estimates indicate that a 10 percentage point increase in the

number of available slots in a state increases the probability of prekindergarten attendance by a

highly significant 2.5 percentage points, from the base rate of 17%. The Chi-square statistic for

the test of the instrument’s significance is 25.4, well above the recommended guideline of 10

(Bound, Jaeger, and Baker, 1995).

         Results from the second stage are presented in Table 3. For comparison purposes, the

first row repeats the OLS effects obtained in model 2 of Table 2. The IV estimates are always in

the same direction as but much larger than the corresponding OLS effects. For example, the IV

model suggests an effect size of prekindergarten on reading of 0.73, compared to an OLS effect

size of 0.13. For externalizing behavior, the IV estimates predict a prekindergarten effect size of

.71, whereas the OLS effect size is .12. In all cases, the predicted effects are much larger for the

IV estimates than for the OLS estimates. Our conclusion is that these results provide no

indication that the OLS results are biased upwards.

         A potential concern with using spending as an instrument is that states that invest money

in prekindergarten may also invest in other programs that benefit children. If so, the instrument

could be correlated with the regression error term leading to biased IV estimates. Both the OLS

and IV estimates shown in Table 3 include controls for two state characteristics-- per capita

income and per capita spending on education and public welfare. We tested the sensitivity of our

IV estimates to the inclusion of other state policies and characteristics, by estimating alternative

specifications with additional measures of state level policies and characteristics including

proxies for generosity of the welfare system (TANF benefit levels and rules, Medicaid spending)


24
  State spending for prekindergarten programs is a state policy decision and is unlikely to be linked to the
characteristics of children and families within a state, and so may be exogenous.
                                                                                                                   21



and the state’s political climate (e.g., the percent of representatives in the House and Senate that

are Democrats, percent of state population that is female, elderly, or black). Our findings were

robust to these specification changes.25

8. Prekindergarten Versus Other Preschool Child Care Arrangements

         Like prekindergarten, preschools and many center-based child care programs provide

curriculums designed to promote academic skills and enhance school readiness. However,

because structural indicators, such as levels of teacher education, suggest that prekindergarten

programs are typically of higher quality, we expect that other early education programs will have

positive effects on achievement, but that the benefits may be smaller. It is less clear how the

other types of early child care and education will be related to behavior. Although high quality

care is associated with lower levels of problem behavior (Peisner-Feinberg et al., 2001), there

may be features of prekindergarten, such as teacher directed basic skill instruction, that are

associated with less positive social climates and thus more behavior problems. We expect Head

Start to have less positive effects on academics and more detrimental effects on behavior

outcomes because the quality of Head Start centers varies greatly and is often quite poor, partly

due to low levels of funding.

         The top panel of Table 4 displays the findings of models that include measures of

participation for prekindergarten, preschool, Head Start, and other non-parental care (e.g.,

babysitters or relative care), with children receiving only parental care as the reference group.

The results support a “dose-response” model. For all academic outcomes, prekindergarten is

predicted to yield consistently larger benefits than preschool. For instance, prekindergarten’s




25
  For example, IV estimates in models that controlled for the average level of welfare benefits yielded effect sizes
of 0.73 for reading and 0.79 for externalizing behavior.
                                                                                                                 22



effect size for reading is 0.19 and for math is 0.17. Preschool’s effects are about 0.12 for both

reading and math.

        We also find a dose-response pattern for classroom behavior but, in this case, with

prekindergarten having larger adverse effects than other types of center-based care. The effect

size of prekindergarten is –0.13 for self-control and 0.19 for externalizing behavior as compared

with -0.06 and 0.13 respectively for other types of preschool. 26

        Head Start enrollment is associated with higher levels of externalizing behavior and

possibly lower levels of self-control, but is less strongly related to academic outcomes, whereas

care in non-center-based settings has no effect on academic skills, but may be associated with

lower levels of problem behaviors.

9. Do the Effects of Prekindergarten Persist?

        The OLS and IV results indicate that prekindergarten boosts children’s reading and math

scores, but also increases classroom misbehavior during the fall of kindergarten. However, prior

research has found that early academic advantages associated with preschool fade over time,

lasting only through one or two years of elementary school (Barnett, 1995). The extent to which

the effects fade out over time may have important policy implications since the case for using

public funds to invest in early education is likely to be weakened if the academic gains are only

temporary, rather than lasting.

        We address this issue in the lower panel of Table 4, by presenting estimates for academic

and behavior outcomes measured in the spring of the first grade (2000). Compared to the

kindergarten fall results (displayed in the top panel), the positive effects of prekindergarten on

26
  On average children were attending prekindergarten for longer hours than preschool (23 vs. 20). However, the
predicted effects of prekindergarten remain larger when comparing children in similar hours of care. More
generally, longer hours of prekindergarten were associated with larger positive benefits for academics and negative
effects on behavior. Longer preschool hours were also associated with larger effects on behavior, but not on
academics.
                                                                                                                    23



academic outcomes have largely dissipated – effect sizes are 0.04 for reading and 0.05 for math,

which is only one-third to one-fourth as large as those obtained in the fall of kindergarten. In

contrast, the negative effects of prekindergarten on classroom behavior persist and actually have

increased in size by the spring of first grade – effect sizes are -0.14 for self-control and 0.23 for

externalizing behavior.27

         Children attending early education programs prior to kindergarten are 4 to 6 times more

likely than their counterparts to be in center-based care before or after school in kindergarten and

first grade.28 To test whether this accounts for some of the previously observed negative effects

on behavior, we estimated models that added covariates for attending center based care in

kindergarten and first grade. Doing so reduced the effect size of prekindergarten from 0.23 to

0.20 for externalizing behavior, and from –0.14 to –0.12 for self-control, suggesting that the

adverse effects of early education programs on behavior persist, but do not increase over time.29

         These results --- that prekindergarten raises academic achievement (although possibly

only temporarily) while having persistent negative effects on classroom behavior -- raise the

question as to whether prekindergarten does more harm than good. Although we cannot

definitively answer this question, we do note all three types of formal education are associated

with lower probabilities that the child will be held back in kindergarten, although with such a

small share (3%) of children being retained, the estimates are small and statistically insignificant.

10. Does School Instruction Influence the Persistence of Effects?


27
   Effects of this magnitude would raise the average first-grader’s position in the externalizing distribution from the
50th percentile to the 56th and lower the child from the 50th to the 44th percentile in the self-control distribution.
Negative effects on children’s behavior are still apparent for Head Start.
28
   The rates of center-based care in kindergarten, by type of care children were in the prior year, are as follows:
prekindergarten 29%; preschool 29%; Head Start 5%; Other non-parental care 10%; Parental care 5%. In the spring
of first grade: prekindergarten 25%; preschool 22%; Head Start 9%; Other non-parental care 12%; Parental care 7%.
29
   Coefficients for center-based care in kindergarten and first grade indicate large negative effects on behavior. For
instance, the effect sizes of center-based care on externalizing behavior are 1.40 in kindergarten and 1.65 in first
grade.
                                                                                                                      24



         Researchers have suggested that the effects of preschool fade because children without

prior early educational experiences “catch up” to their peers when they enter formal schooling.30

This suggests that the persistence of prekindergarten effects may vary with the amount of

instruction received in subsequent schooling, with smaller and perhaps less persistent effects of

early education found for children in classrooms with greater amounts of academic instruction.

We consider this possibility by examining a subsample of children who are in minimal

instruction classrooms during the fall of kindergarten and the spring of first grade (n=1,240).31

         The results of this analysis, presented in Table 6, suggest that prekindergarten (and to a

lesser extent preschool) has larger and more persistent effects on academic outcomes for students

in low instruction classrooms than other children. For example, the effect size of

prekindergarten on reading is 0.46 at school entry and 0.25 in the spring of first grade, compared

to 0.19 and 0.04 for all children.32 On average children were scoring at the 50th percentile in

reading in these classrooms, and attending prekindergarten would raise their score to the 68th

percentile at school entry and the 60th percentile by the spring of first grade. Moreover, in

contrast to the full sample, prekindergarten is associated with large reductions in grade retention

in kindergarten, with substantial benefits also observed for preschool and Head Start. However,

given that we have not modeled children’s selection into classrooms, we note that these results

should be interpreted with caution.

         Smaller differences are observed for classroom behavior. Predicted effects of

prekindergarten on externalizing behaviors are larger for children in low instruction classrooms

30
   Consistent with this, we find slightly larger effects of preschool and prekindergarten for children tested earlier in
the school year (e.g. prekindergarten effect sizes for math are 0.19 for children tested in October and 0.15 for those
tested in November). Interestingly, this pattern does not hold for children’s classroom behavior. For example, effect
sizes of prekindergarten on externalizing behavior are 0.20 in both October and November.
31
   Minimal instruction is defined as spending less than an hour a day combined on reading and math instruction.
32
   Analyses with interaction terms for low instruction by prekindergarten indicate that the effects on reading and
math at school entry and reading at spring of first grade are significantly different for children in low instruction
classrooms compared to children in classrooms with greater amounts of academic instruction.
                                                                                                                   25



than for the general population both at school entry (effect sizes of 0.27 vs. 0.19) and in the

spring of first grade (0.28 vs. 0.23) but insignificantly lower for self control in the fall of

kindergarten (-0.10 vs. -0.13) and identical in the spring of first grade (–0.14 vs. -0.14)

        In summary, these results provide some indication that early education may have longer

lasting effects for children provided with little academic instruction in the first years of school.

However, the fact that these effects are larger even in the fall of kindergarten suggests that

selection into these types of classrooms may also be a factor.

11. Disadvantaged Children

        Prior studies have suggested that early education programs have larger effects for

economically disadvantaged populations, primarily because these children come from homes

with lower quality learning environments (Karoly et al., 1998; Peisner-Feinberg et al., 2001;

Waldfogel, 2002). Next, we consider this issue, employing two definitions of economic

disadvantage. The first defines disadvantage broadly, including children in poverty (income-to-

needs ratio of less than one) or whose mother or father who did not complete high school. The

second definition is more narrow, children whose parent reported receiving welfare during the

fall or spring of kindergarten.33 Table 6 summarizes the results of analyses with these

subsamples.

        As expected, the estimated effects of prekindergarten and preschool on academic

outcomes are slightly larger for disadvantaged children than the general population. For

example, the effect size of prekindergarten on reading scores at school entry is 0.28 for

disadvantaged children (see Table 6), compared to 0.19 for the full sample (Table 2). To put this

in perspective, the average disadvantaged child (in poverty or with an uneducated parent) scored

33
  Using other specifications of disadvantage (e.g., living in a single parent family) yield similar results.
Surprisingly, only 9% of disadvantaged children (using either definition) were in minimal instruction classrooms
compared to about 13% of non-disadvantaged children.
                                                                                                                  26



at the 33rd percentile in reading; attending prekindergarten would raise their predicted

performance to the 44th percentile. The effects of prekindergarten on disadvantaged children’s

academic outcomes also last longer. By spring of the first grade, the effect sizes for the two

disadvantaged groups are 0.20 and 0.23 for math, and 0.09 and 0.21 for reading; these compare

with small and non-significant effect sizes for the general population (Table 5).34

         Prekindergarten does not have consistently larger negative behavioral effects at school

entry for disadvantaged children than for the full sample – effect sizes on externalizing behavior

are 0.25 for children in poverty or with less-educated parents and 0.15 for children of welfare

recipients, compared with 0.19 for the general population. However, prekindergarten’s

detrimental effects on externalizing behavior increase over time, for both groups of

disadvantaged children, such that the effect sizes range from 0.36 to 0.42 by the spring of the

first grade, as compared with 0.23 for all children (Table 5).35 On average, children in poverty or

with less-educated parents are in the 55th percentile of the externalizing behavior distribution;

attending prekindergarten is predicted to raise their score to the 69th percentile. Once again,

however, prekindergarten does not appear to increase the probability that a child will repeat

kindergarten, and in one case reduces this probability.

12. Discussion & Policy Implications

         Using new data from the ECLS-K, this analysis suggests that prekindergarten increases

school readiness, as measured by math and reading skills at kindergarten entry, but is also

associated with an increase in classroom behavior problems. The effect sizes for the academic



34
   Analyses with an interaction term for disadvantage by prekindergarten attendance indicate that the effects were
significantly larger for both groups of disadvantaged children for one outcome—math in first grade spring. In
addition, prekindergarten’s beneficial effects on being held back were significantly larger for children from welfare
families.
35
   The effect sizes for prekindergarten fall modestly when controls are added for subsequent center-based care in the
fall of kindergarten and spring of first grade.
                                                                                                      27



outcomes, compared to children cared for only by parents prior to kindergarten, are 0.19 for

reading and 0.17 for math, which would move the average child from the 50th to the 55th and 54th

percentiles respectively. Attending (a nonprekindergarten) preschool has similar, but smaller

effects (effect sizes of about 0.12 for both outcomes). Conversely, prekindergarten and other

preschool attendance are predicted to raise externalizing behavior problems (the effect sizes are

0.19 and 0.13) and reduce self-control (effect sizes are -0.13 and -0.06). We tested for potential

bias in the OLS estimates by conducting a series of IV models using state spending on

prekindergarten to instrument attendance. The results suggest that, if anything, the OLS models

understate the positive effects on academic skills and negative impact on behavior.

       The second major finding is that, for most children, 70 to 80 percent of the cognitive

gains associated with attending prekindergarten have faded out by the spring of the first grade

(leaving effect sizes of 0.04 and 0.05 for reading and math). In contrast, the correlation with

problem behaviors persists over time, suggesting that the early socialization of aggressive

behavior and self control may uniquely influence children’s later behavior, and that exposure to

subsequent formal schooling does not lead to the same levels of aggressive behavior. By the

spring of first grade, prekindergarten’s effect sizes are about -0.14 for self-control and 0.23 for

externalizing behavior. Children attending preschool or prekindergarten are also more likely to

attend center-based care during the first two years of formal schooling, which has additional

negative effects on children’s behavior. Analyses that control for children’s experiences of

center-based care during kindergarten and first grade indicate that prekindergarten’s and

preschool’s negative behavioral effects persist, but do not increase over time.

       Two qualifications are important to understanding the observed negative effects on

children’s behavior. First, classroom behavior is not necessarily indicative of behavior in other
                                                                                                    28



settings, so children attending prekindergarten might not exhibit higher levels of aggression at

home. Second, in this study, absolute levels of aggressive behavior were typically quite low, and

levels of self-control quite high, even for children who attended prekindergarten.

        Why might prekindergarten have larger effects on academic outcomes, but also behavior

problems, than other forms of child care? As noted, prekindergarten programs usually have

relatively high quality, as indicated by structural characteristics of the classrooms such as teacher

education and pay, and probably are more academically oriented, which bodes well for

children’s reading and math skills. However, structured instruction may also cause greater levels

of behavior problems if the emphasis on basic skills leads to a less positive social climate in

which children receive less individual attention and more punitive discipline (Stipek et al., 1998).

       The average effects of prekindergarten and preschool mask considerable heterogeneity

among subgroups of children. First, the impacts tend to be larger and longer lasting for children

receiving minimal amounts of instruction in kindergarten or first grade. When children who did

not attend early education programs are exposed to academic instruction in kindergarten,

generally they quickly “catch up” to those who did. However, when children are exposed to only

minimal levels of instruction in kindergarten or first grade, the gap between children who have

and have not attended early education programs is larger, and persists through the spring of first

grade. Classrooms with low levels of academic instruction appear to be slightly more prevalent

in schools that serve advantaged children. For example, in this study, classrooms with minimal

instruction have lower than average proportions of minority and poor children. If schools with

relatively high shares of disadvantaged children provide high levels of basic skills instruction,

this may explain why some studies have noted that effects are more likely to fade among

disadvantaged children (Currie and Thomas, 1995, 2000).
                                                                                                       29



          Second, the initial benefits of prekindergarten and preschool are much larger for

disadvantaged children (with effect sizes of 0.27 for reading and 0.19 to 0.36 for math in the fall

of kindergarten). These effects also decline less over time than for the full sample, with the

result that effect sizes by the spring of first grade were still substantial, in the range of 0.08-0.21

for reading and 0.20-0.24 for math. However, the effects of prekindergarten on behavioral

problems initially are not larger for disadvantaged children than for the full sample, but are more

persistent – resulting in effect sizes of 0.36 to 0.46 in the spring of first grade. Yet, we find no

evidence that these behavior problems increase grade retention.

        Why might children from disadvantaged backgrounds benefit the most from participating

in early education programs? One explanation is that they are less likely to experience home

environments that facilitate early learning (Bradley, Corwyn, McAdoo, and Garcia Coll, 2001).

For example, on average they have fewer books at home, spend less time reading with their

parents, and have less stimulating verbal interactions with them than children from middle-class

households (Linver, Brooks-Gunn, and Kohen, 2002). Attending a prekindergarten program that

provides a cognitively stimulating environment may partially compensate for a less stimulating

home environment (Bradley, Burchinal, and Casey, 2001; Caughy, DiPietro, and Strobino, 1994;

Hubbs-Tait et al., 2001).

        Our findings should be interpreted in light of at least two limitations. First, without data

 on long-term outcomes, it is difficult to determine how much weight to put on our findings. In

 particular, it is unclear whether increases in relatively low levels of problem behaviors will be

 consequential for subsequent schooling outcomes. It is reassuring that although children

 attending prekindergarten display more problem behaviors in first grade, they were not more

 likely to be held back. In addition, we need to learn more about happens inside the “black box”
                                                                                                    30



 of prekindergarten. Future research should consider whether these associations are moderated

 by factors such as prekindergarten group sizes, staffing ratios, and curriculums. Second,

 although we have detailed information on child care in the year before kindergarten, we know

 less about experiences in earlier years, and therefore can not precisely model children’s

 outcomes as a function of their cumulative experiences of preschool or center-based care.

       The main conclusion of this analysis is that prekindergarten has few lasting positive

effects on advantaged children’s skills and persisting adverse effects on their behavior, but yields

larger benefits for disadvantaged children. This suggests that the greatest return to public

investments in early education may be obtained by using funds to increase disadvantaged

children’s enrollment in preschool and prekindergarten. Currently, most state funding initiatives

do target at-risk children, but funding falls far short of providing all eligible children with access

to these programs (Ripple et al., 1999). Additional expenditures to increase disadvantaged

children’s early education experiences are likely to improve their academic skills at school entry.

Additional research is needed to determine whether these benefits result in long-term

improvements in human capital.
                                                                                               31



                                             References

Alexander, Karl, Doris R. Entwisle, and Susan L. Dauber. 1993. “First Grade Classroom
       Behavior: Its Short- and Long-term Consequences for School Performance.” Child
       Development, 64, 801-814.
Bainbridge, Jay, Marcia Meyers, SakikoTanako, and Jane Waldfogel. 2002. “Who is Getting
       Early Education? Family Income and the Gaps in Enrollment of 3- to 5-year-olds from
       1968-2000.” Mimeo, Columbia University School of Social Work.
Barnett, W. Steven. 1995. “Long-term Effects of Early Childhood Programs on Cognitive and
       School Outcomes.” The Future of Children, 5, 25-5.
Bates, John E., Denny Marvinney, Timothy Kelly, Kenneth A. Dodge, David S. Bennett, and
        Gregory S. Pettit. “Child Care History and Kindergarten Adjustment.” Developmental
        Psychology, 30, 690-700.
Belsky, Jay. 2001. “Emanuel Miller Lecture: Developmental Risks (Still) Associated with Early
       Child Care.” Journal of Child Psychology & Psychiatry & Allied Disciplines, 42, 845-
       859.
Blank, Helen, Karen Schulman, and Danielle Ewen. 1999. Key Facts: Essential Information
       about Child Care, Early Education, and School-age Care. Washington, DC: Children’s
       Defense Fund.
Blau, David. 2001. The Child Care Problem. NY, NY: Russell Sage Foundation.
Bowman, Barbara T., M. Suzanne Donovan, and M. Susan Burns, Eds. 2001. Eager toLearn:
     Educating our Preschoolers. Washington, DC: National Academy Press.
Bound, J., David A. Jaeger, and Regina Baker. 1995. “Problems with Instrumental Variables
      Estimation when the Correlation Between the Instruments and the Endogeneous
      Explanatory Variable is Weak.” Journal of the American Statistical Association, 90, 443-
      450.
Bradley, Robert H., Margaret Burchinal, and Patrick H. Casey. 2001. “Early Intervention: The
       Moderating Role of the Home Environment.” Applied Developmental Science, 5, 2-8.
Bradley, Robert H., Robert F. Corwyn, Harriet P. McAdoo, and Cynthia Garcia Coll, 2001. “The
       Home Environments of Children in the United States Part I: Variations by Age, Ethnicity,
       and Poverty Status.” Child Development, 72, 1844-1867.
Brooks-Gunn, Jeanne. 2000. “Do You Believe in Magic? What We Can Expect From Early
      Childhood Intervention Programs.” Paper presented at a research briefing on "Early
      Childhood Intervention Programs: Are the Costs Justified?" sponsored by the
      Subcommittee of Human Resources of the U.S. House of Representatives Committee on
      Ways and Means and the Joint Center for Poverty Research, Washington DC, May 20.
Carneiro, Pedro and James J. Heckman. 2002. “Human Capital Policy.” Paper presented at the
       Alvin Hansen Seminar, Harvard University.
Caughy, Margaret O., Janet A. DiPietro, and Donna Strobino. 1994. “Day Care Participation as a
      Protective Factor in the Cognitive Development of Low-income Children.” Child
      Development, 65, 457-471.
                                                                                              32



Comittee for Economic Development. 2002. Preschool for All: Investing in a Productive and
       Just Society. New York: Committee for Economic Development.
Currie, Janet. In press.
Currie, Janet. 2000. “Early Childhood Intervention Programs: What Do We Know?” Paper
        presented at a research briefing on Early Childhood Intervention Programs: Are the Costs
        Justified? sponsored by the Subcommittee of Human Resources of the U.S. House of
        Representatives Committee on Ways and Means and the Joint Center for Poverty
        Research, Washington DC, May 20.
Currie, Janet, and Duncan Thomas. 1995. “Does Head Start Make a Difference?” American
        Economic Review, 85, 341-364.
Currie, Janet, and Duncan Thomas. 2000. “School Quality and the Longer-term Effects of Head
        Start.” Journal of Human Resources, 35, 755-774.
Duncan, Greg, and Christina Gibson. 2000. “Selection and Attrition in the NICHD Child Care
      Study’s Analyses of the Impacts of Child Care Quality on Child Outcomes.” Mimeo,
      Northwestern University.
Education Commission of the United States. 2003. State funded Prekindergarten Programs.
       Retrieved December 19, 2003, from
       http://www.ecs.org/dbsearches/EarlyLearning_Reports.htm
Education Week. 2002. “Quality Counts 2002: Building Blocks for Success.” Education Week,
       2117, January 10. Retrieved on June 27, 2003 from,
       http://www.edweek.org/sreports/qc02/templates/article.cfm?slug=17exec.h21
Farran, Dale C. 2000. “Another decade of intervention for children who are low-income or
        disabled: What do we know now?” In Jack Shonkoff and Samuel Meisels (Eds).,
        Handbook of Early Childhood Intervention, Second edition (pp. 510-548). New York:
        Cambridge University Press.
Garces, Eliana, Duncan Thomas, and Janet Currie. 2002. “Longer-term Effects of Head Start.”
       American Economic Review, 92, 999-1012.
Gilliam, William S. and Edward Zigler. 2001. “A Critical Meta-Analysis of All Evaluations of
       State-funded Preschool From 1977 to 1998: Implications for Policy, Service Delivery and
       Program Evaluation.” Early Childhood Research Quarterly, 15, 441-473.
Gish, Melinda . 2002. Child Care: Funding and Spending Under Federal Block Grants.
       Washington, DC: Congressional Research Service, The Library of Congress.
Gresham, Frank M. and Stephen N. Eliot (1990). Elementary Scale A (“How Often?”). Circle
      Pines, MN: American Guidance Service, Inc.
Hinshaw, Stephen P. 1992. “Externalizing Behavior Problems and Academic Underachievement in
      Childhood and Adolescence: Causal Relationships and Underlying Mechanisms.”
      Psychological Bulletin, 111, 127-125.
Hubbs-Tait, Laura, Anne M. Culp, Erron Huey, Rex Culp, Huei-Juang Starost and Charles Hare.
      2002. “Relation of Head Start Attendance to Children’s Cognitive and Social Outcomes:
      Moderation by Family Risk.” Early Childhood Research Quarterly, 17, 539-558.
                                                                                             33



Karoly, Lynn A., Peter W. Greenwood, Susan S. Everingham, Jill Houbé, M. Rebecca Kilburn,
       C. Peter Rydell, Mathew Sanders, and James Chiesa. 1998. Investing In Our Children:
       What We Do and Don’t Know About the Costs and Benefits of Early Childhood
       Interventions. Santa Monica, CA: RAND.
Lewit, Eugene M., and Linda S. Baker. 1995. “School Readiness.” The Future of Children, 2,
       128-139.
Linver, Miriam R., Jeanne Brooks-Gunn., and Dafna E. Kohen. 2002. “Family Processes as
       Pathways from Income to Young Children’s Development.” Developmental Psychology,
       5, 719-734.
Magnuson, Katherine A., Marcia Meyers, Christopher Ruhm, and Jane Waldfogel. (In press).
     “Inequality in Preschool Education and School Readiness.” American Educational
     Research Journal.
Murphy, Kevin M., and Robert H. Topel. 1985. Estimation and Inference in Two-Step
      Econometric Models. Journal of Business & Economic Statistics, 3, 370-379.
National Center for Education Statistics (2001). User’s Manual for the ECLS-K Base Year
       Public-Use User’s Manual. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Education , Office of
       Educational Research and Improvement.
National Center for Education Statistics (2002). User’s Manual for the ECLS-K First Grade
       Public Use Data Files and Electronic Code Book. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of
       Education , Office of Educational Research and Improvement.
NICHD Early Child Care Research Network. 2002a. “Child Care Structure> Process> Outcome:
     Direct and Indirect Effects of Child-Care Quality on Young Children’s Development.”
     Psychological Science, 13,199-206.
NICHD Early Child Care Research Network. 2003. “Does Amount of Time Spent in Child Care
     Predict Socioemotional Adjustment during the Transition to Kindergarten?” Child
     Development, 74, 976-1005.
NICHD Early Child Care Research Network. 2002b. “Early Child Care and Children’s
     Development Prior to School Entry: Results from NICHD study of Early Child Care.”
     American Educational Research Journal, 39, 133-164.
NICHD Early Child Care Research Network, and Greg Duncan. 2003. “Modeling the Impacts of
     Child Care Quality on Children’s Preschool Cognitive Development.” Child
     Development, 74, 1454-1475.
Peisner-Feinberg, Ellen S., Margaret R. Burchinal, Richard M. Clifford, Mary L. Culkin,
       Carollee Howes, Sharon Lynn Kagan, and Noreen Yazejian. 2001. “The Relation of
       Preschool Child-care Quality to Children’s Cognitive and Social Development
       Trajectories Through Second Grade. Child Development, 723, 1534-1553.
Phillips, Deborah, Debra Mekos, Sandra Scarr, Kathleen McCartney, and Martha Abott-Shim.
        (2001). Within and Beyond the Classroom Door: Assessing Quality in Child Care
        Centers. Early Childhood Research Quarterly, 15, 475-496.
Ramey, Sharon L., and Craig T. Ramey. 2000. “The Effects of Early Childhood Experiences on
      Developmental Competence.” In Sheldon Danziger and Jane Waldfogel (Eds.) Securing
                                                                                               34



       the future: Investing in children from birth to college pp 122-150. New York: Russell
       Sage Foundation.
Rimm-Kaufman, Sara E., Robert C. Pianta, and Martha J. Cox. 2000. “Teachers’ Judgements of
     Problems in the Transition to Kindergarten.” Early Childhood Research Quarterly, 15,
     147-166.
Ripple, Carol H., William S. Gilliam, Chanana, N., and Edward Zigler 1999. “Will Fifty Cooks
       Spoil the Broth?” American Psychologist, 54, 327-343.
       Schweinhart, Lawrence J., Helen V. Barnes, and David Weikart. 1993. Significant
             Benefits: The High/Scope Perry Preschool Study Through Age 27. Ypsilanti, MI:
             High/Scope Press.
Schweinhart, Lawrence J., and David Weikart. 1997. “The High/Scope Preschool Curriculum
      Comparison Study Through Age 23.” Early Childhood Research Quarterly, 12, 117-143,
Schulman, Karen, Helen Blank, and Danielle Ewen. 1999. Seeds of Success: State
      Prekindergarten Initiatives 1998-1999. Washington, DC: Children’s Defense Fund.
Shonkoff, Jack P., and Deborah A. Phillips. Eds.2000. From Neurons to Neighborhoods: The
      Science of Early Childhood Development. Washington, DC: National Academy Press.
Smith, Timothy, Anne Kleiner, Basmat Parsad, Elizabeth Farris, and Bernard Green. 2003.
       Prekindergarten in U.S. Public Schools. U.S. Department of Education, National Center
       for Education Statistics: Washington, DC.
Stipek, Deborah J., Rachelle Feiler, Patricia Byler, Rosaleen Ryan, Sharon Milburn, and Julie M.
        Salmon. 1998. “Good Beginnings: What Difference Does the Program Make in Preparing
        Young Children for School?” Journal of Applied Developmental Psychology, 19, 41-66.
Takanishi, Ruby and Patrick H. DeLeon. 1994. “A Head Start for the 21st Century.” American
       Psychologist, 49, 120-122.
U.S. Bureau of the Census 1970. School Enrollment: Social and Economic Characteristics of
       Students, October 1969. Current population reports, P-20 Series. Washington, DC: U.S.
       Bureau of the Census.
US Census Bureau 2001. State estimates for people under age five in Poverty for US: 1998.
      Retrieved January 14, 2003 from
      http://www.census.gov/hhes/www/saipe/stcty/e98_00.htm
U.S. Department of Education, National Center for Education Statistics NCES. 2003. The
       condition of education. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office. Retrieved
       June 27, 2003, from http://nces.ed.gov/programs/coe/2002/pdf/01_2002.pdf
US General Accounting Office. 2000a. Preschool education: Federal investment for low-income
      children significant but effectiveness unclear. Washington, DC: United States General
      Accounting Office. Retrieved June 27, 2003, from,
      http://www.gao.gov/new.items/he00083t.pdf
US General Accounting Office. 2000b. Title I preschool education: More children served, but
      gauging the effect on school readiness difficult. Washington, DC: United States General
      Accounting Office. Retrieved June 27, 2003, from,
      http://www.gao.gov/new.items/he00171.pdf
                                                                                            35



Vandell, Deborah L., and Barbara Wolfe. 2000. “Child Care Quality: Does It Matter and Does It
      Need to be Improved?” Institute for Research on Poverty Special Report, University of
      Wisconsin at Madison, November, 20.
Waldfogel, Jane. 2002. “Child Care, Women’s Employment and Child Outcomes.” Journal of
      Population Economics, 15, 527-548.
Wolfe, Barbara, and Scott Scrivner. 2003. “Providing Universal Preschool for Four-year olds.”
       In Belle Sawhill (Ed.), One-percent for the Kids: New policies, brighter futures for
       America’s children (pp. 113-135). Washington, DC: Brookings.
                                                                                             37



        Table 1: Selected Sample Characteristics, and Mean Child Outcomes, by Child
                     CareArrangements in the Year Prior to Kindergarten
 Characteristic            All     Parental      Other Non-    Head     Prekinder Preschool
                                     Care       parental Care Start      -garten
 Outcomes
 Math Test Score
   Fall Kindergarten      52.20     50.17          50.39       45.90      54.04     53.12
                           (0.10)      (0.10)       (0.27)       (0.28)      (0.23)       (0.14)
    Spring First Grade     51.97      50.93         50.89        46.63      53.28        53.18
                           (0.09)      (0.10)       (0.26)       (0.32)      (0.21)       (0.12)
 Reading Test Score
   Fall Kindergarten       51.40      49.20         49.00        45.25      54.16        53.98
                           (0.10)      (0.11)       (0.28)       (0.26)      (0.24)       (0.14)
    Spring First Grade     52.00      51.01         50.93        47.06      53.01        53.37
                           (0.09)      (0.10)       (0.26)       (0.31)      (0.23)       (0.12)
 Self Control Score
    Fall Kindergarten      0.96        1.78         0.34         -1.70       0.44         1.25
                           (0.10)      (0.11)       (0.26)       (0.33)      (0.25)       (0.15)
    Spring First Grade     0.43        1.31         0.16         -2.72       0.00         0.78
                           (0.10)      (0.11)       (0.28)       (0.35)      (0.25)       (0.15)
 Externalizing Behavior Score
   Fall Kindergarten      -0.64        -2.06        -2.07        1.29        0.39        -0.45
                           (0.10)      (0.11)       (0.28)       (0.33)      (0.25)       (0.15)
    Spring First Grade     -0.24       -1.66        -0.92        2.33        0.77        -0.55
                           (0.10)      (0.11)       (0.29)       (0.35)      (0.23)       (0.13)
 Retained in               3%          4%            5%           4%         2%           3%
 Kindergarten             (0.18)       (0.49)       (0.62)       (0.64)      (0.37)       (0.24)
 Demographic Characteristic
  Black                   13 %         10 %         13 %         38 %        18 %         8%
                           (0.34)      (0.77)       (0.93)       (1.56)      (0.96)       (0.40)
  Hispanic                 11 %        14 %         15 %         14 %        10 %         8%
                           (0.31)      (0.90)       (1.03)       (1.13)      (0.76)       (0.41)
  Asian                    4%          4%            5%           2%         3%           4%
                           (0.20)      (0.48)       (0.63)       (0.48)      (0.43)       (0.31)
  Boy                      50 %        52 %         50 %         47 %        49 %        51 %
                           (0.51)      (1.30)       (1.48)       (1.61)      (1.25)       (0.85)
  Child Age                5.71        5.70         5.70         5.70        5.73         5.73
                           (0.00)      (0.01)       (0.01)       (0.01)      (0.01)       (0.01)
  Income-to-Needs          3.36        2.55         2.99         1.27        4.00         3.92
                           (0.04)      (0.07)       (0.09)       (0.04)      (.103)       (.052)
Notes: Data are for children in the ELCS-K study. Math and reading skills are standardized scores
(mean=50, sd=10). Behavior outcomes are standardized scores (mean=0, sd=10). See Appendix
Table 1 for definitions of sample characteristics.
                                                                                                                         38




  Table 2: OLS Estimates of the Effects of Prekindergarten on Academic Outcomes and Classroom Behavior
                                          in the Fall of Kindergarten

                                                    Reading                             Math
                                      (1)         (2)      (3)        (4)    (1)    (2)      (3)  (4)
 Prekindergarten                    3.17**     1.77** 1.29**        1.26** 2.36** 1.31** 0.96** 0.93**
                                    (0.33)     (0.25)    (0.24)     (0.24) (0.31) (0.23) (0.22) (0.22)

 Demographics                                     X          X         X                   X         X            X
 Home & Family Environment                                   X         X                             X            X
 Neighborhood & State Characteristics                                  X                                          X

 R-squared                             .01       .28       .35    .35    .01              .30      .36           .36
                                                  Self Control                           Externalizing
                                      (1)         (2)      (3)    (4)    (1)              (2)      (3)            (4)
 Prekindergarten                    -0.63      -0.83** -0.88** -0.91** 1.24**           1.21** 1.21**           1.23**
                                    (0.32)     (0.32)    (0.31) (0.31) (0.29)           (0.28) (0.28)           (0.28)

 Demographics                                     X          X         X                   X         X            X
 Home & Family Environment                                   X         X                             X            X
 Neighborhood & State Characteristics                                  X                                          X

 R-squared                            .00        .09        .11        .11      .00       .05        .15       .15
Notes: * p-value<.05; ** p-value<.01. The sample size for all analyses is 9,547. See Appendix Table 1 for
details on the covariates. The coefficients represent the average difference between children in prekindergarten and
those experiencing any other type of care in the year before kindergarten. Models have robust standard errors
clustered at the school level. Dividing the coefficients by 10 gives effect sizes.
                    0
                        500
                              1000
                                     1500
                                                           2000
        A
      Al lask
     Ca abama
     C lifo a
   Co olor rnia
      n n ad
     De ectic o
         la ut
        Floware
       Ge rida
           o
        Ha rgia
            w
           Iowaii
         Ill a
        Indinois
        K ia
     Ke ansana
         n
Ma Loutuck s
    ssa isi y
       c an
     Mahuset a
          ryl ts
         M   an
      Mi aind
     Mi chig e
        n a
      Minesot n
No Mis ssou a
   rth sis ri
            s
   Ne Caroippi
 Ne w J lina
                                                                                            old) in 1998, by State




     w ers
    Ne Mex ey
       w Y ico
             o
     Ok Ohrk
        lah io
  Pe Or oma
 Rh nnsy egon
 So ode lvani
    uth Isl a
             a
     Te Dak nd
       nn ota
           es
          Te see
             x
           U t as
        V
   Wa irg ah
       s i
                                                                  Figure 1: State Prekindergarten Spending (per poor child under five years




     Wihingtnia
        s o
     Wycons n
                                            $ Prekindergarten




          om in
              ing
                                                                                                                                              39
                                                                                                                41




     Table 3: IV and OLS Estimates of the Effect of Prekindergarten on Child Outcomes at
                                     Kindergarten Fall
                       Reading           Math          Self Control     Externalizing
                                            OLS Estimates
Prekindergarten         1.26**           .98**            -.84**            1.18**
                         (.24)            (.22)            (.02)             (.02)

                                                     IV Estimates
Prekindergarten                7.26*               4.01           -3.51                     7.07*
                               (2.92)             (2.54)          (3.76)                    (3.12)

Notes: * p-value<.05; ** p-value<.01. The sample size for all analyses is 9,547. Models include the same covariates
for child and family demographics, the home environment, neighborhood environment, and state characteristics as in
model 4 of Table 2. Models have robust standard errors clustered at the school level. IV standard errors have also
been correct for the two-stage estimation. The IV estimates instrument prekindergarten attendance by state spending
on prekindergarten programs, as detailed in the text. See notes to Table 2. Dividing the coefficients by 10 gives
effect sizes.
                                                                                                     42




   Table 4: OLS Regressions for Child Outcomes in the fall of Kindergarten and
                           Spring of the First Grade
Year Before      Reading      Math         Self      Externalizing       Held
                                         Control                         Back
                                       Kindergarten Fall
Prekindergarten 1.93**       1.69**      -1.25**         1.91**           --
                  (0.31)      (0.30)      (0.40)          (0.36)

Preschool              1.21**       1.18**           -0.62            1.27**               --
                       (0.26)       (0.26)          (0.32)            (0.29)

Head Start             -0.52          -0.24          -0.87             0.99*               --
                       (0.34)        (0.35)         (0.47)             (0.43)
                                                                                           --
Other Non-             -0.11          0.48          0.78         -1.20**
Parental               (0.32)        (0.32)        (0.41)         (0.38)
                                                First Grade Spring
Prekindergarten         0.37          0.48        -1.43**        2.28**                 -0.51
                       (0.29)        (0.28)        (0.40)         (0.38)                (0.71)

Preschool               0.18          0.44         -0.89**            1.29**            -0.62
                       (0.24)        (0.23)         (0.31)            (0.30)            (0.57)

Head Start             -0.56          -0.50        -1.27**            1.19**            -1.02
                       (0.38)        (0.38)         (0.48)            (0.43)            (0.87)

Other Non-             -0.03          0.24           0.61               -0.37            0.77
Parental               (0.31)        (0.31)         (0.39)             (0.37)           (0.91)
Notes: * p-value<.05; ** p-value<.01. See notes on Tables 2 and 3. All models include the full set
of covariates, corresponding to (model 4, Table 2). “Held Back” is a dichotomous variable set to
100 (zero) for individuals who are retained in kindergarten. .
                                                                                                        43



       Table 5: OLS Estimates for Children in Low Instruction Classrooms
                 Reading      Math          Self     Externalizing     Held
                                          Control                      Back
                                   Kindergarten Fall
Prekindergarten 4.62**       3.84**        -1.01         2.65*           --
                  (0.87)      (0.87)      (1.07)         (1.07)

Preschool              2.75**          1.43           -0.87             1.77*                --
                       (0.78)         (0.86)          (0.85)            (0.88)

Head Start              0.11           -0.49          -1.09              1.51                --
                       (1.09)         (1.17)          (1.50)            (1.42)

Other Non-              0.39           -0.53         1.42                -1.65               --
Parental               (0.92)         (0.97)        (1.15)              (0.97)
                                            First Grade Spring
Pre-K                  2.51**         2.14*         -1.40               2.76*            -9.05**
                       (0.93)         (0.92)        (1.06)              (1.06)            (2.50)

Preschool               1.19          1.57*           -0.79             1.86*            -8.07**
                       (0.80)         (0.79)          (0.90)            (0.92)            (2.35)

Head Start              -0.96          -1.27          -2.08              1.16             -6.15
                       (1.17)         (1.21)          (1.61)            (1.44)            (3.41)

Other Non-              0.00           -0.08           0.94              0.38             -1.64
Parental               (0.89)         (0.88)          (1.10)            (1.10)            (3.60)
Notes: * p-value<.05; ** p-value<.01.. “Low instruction” classrooms are those providing less than
one hour per day of math and reading instruction. Sample size for all models is 1,240. All
estimates include a full set of covariates (corresponding to model 4, Table 1). See notes to Tables 2
through 4.
                                                                                                                                                               44



                                        Table 6: OLS Estimates for Disadvantaged Children
      Children of Parents with Low Education or in Poverty (N=2083)                   Children of Welfare Recipients (N=911)
                  Reading      Math        Self      Externalizing Held       Reading       Math        Self    Externalizing                                  Held
                                         Control                    Back                             Control                                                   Back
                                   Kindergarten Fall                                         Kindergarten Fall
Prekindergarten 2.77**        2.30**      -1.74*       2.46**        --       2.78**        1.91*      -1.93        1.47                                        --
                   (0.65)      (0.63)     (0.81)        (0.82)                 (1.00)       (0.93)    (1.24)       (1.45)

Preschool              1.66**        1.97**        -1.47*           1.99**            --          2.00**          1.71*         -0.57           -0.27           --
                       (0.52)        (0.54)        (0.69)           (0.65)                        (0.77)          (0.82)       (0.99)          (1.13)

Head Start              0.34         1.09*         -1.68*           1.53*             --            0.73           0.47         -1.26           -0.59           --
                       (0.51)        (0.55)        (0.69)           (0.64)                         (0.76)         (0.78)       (1.02)          (1.17)

Other Non-              0.61          0.99       0.64                -1.03            --            0.26           0.41       0.17              -0.70           --
Parental               (0.59)        (0.64)     (0.81)              (0.75)                         (0.92)         (0.92)     (1.35)            (1.29)
                                        First Grade Spring                                                         First Grade Spring
Prekindergarten         0.86         2.00**     -1.75*              3.62**          -1.19          2.14*          2.34*      -2.01             4.63**         -7.36**
                       (0.70)        (0.68)     (0.82)              (0.91)          (1.63)         (1.07)         (1.07)     (1.48)            (1.64)          (2.56)

Preschool               0.27          0.86          -1.21           2.25**          -1.14           0.46           1.30        -0.65            0.44          -4.08+
                       (0.59)        (0.54)         (0.68)          (0.66)          (1.18)         (0.97)         (0.98)       (1.10)          (1.11)         (2.40)

Head Start             -0.22          0.46          -1.02           1.72*            0.01          -0.56           0.32        -0.38            0.55          -3.12
                       (0.64)        (0.59)         (0.71)          (0.69)          (1.65)         (1.01)         (0.97)       (1.07)          (1.16)         (2.73)

Other Non-              0.57          1.02           0.71            0.37            2.67          -0.16           0.77         1.36            0.18           2.21
Parental               (0.64)        (0.65)         (0.75)          (0.75)          (2.13)         (1.10)         (1.15)       (1.27)          (1.48)         (3.96)
Notes: * p-value<.05; ** p-value<.01.. All estimates include a full set of covariates (corresponding to model 4, Table 1). See notes to Tables 2 through 4.
                                                                                                                    45




       Appendix Table 1: Definitions, Additional Details, and Notes about Covariates Used in Analyses
Constructs and Variables          Definition, Details, and Notes
                                              Demographic Characteristics
Child characteristics
Child age                           Continuous variable. Child age in months (specific to timing of assessment).
Child gender                        Dummy variable
Birth weight                        2 dummy variables for: < 1500 grams, 1500-2500 grams.
Child weight                        Average of two interviewer assessed measurements in lbs.
Child height                        Average of two interviewer assessed measurements in inches.
Race and ethnicity                  Black, Hispanic, Native American, Asian. (4 dummy variables).
Parental reports of family characteristics
# of children in household          Ordinal variable. Ranges from 1 to 11.
Family structure                    Single parent (one biological parent), blended family (one biological and one
                                       non-biological parent), adopted or foster parents (3 dummy variables).
City vs. Rural residency            Locality is city or town (2 dummy variables).


Region of country                   North, South, Midwest (3 dummy variables).


Early maternal employment           Mother ever employed between child’s birth and entry into kindergarten
                                       (dummy variable) .
Father and mother’s education       Less than high school degree through advanced post-graduate degree (6
                                       dummy variables for each parent).
English only spoken in home         Mother never vs. ever speaks foreign language to child (dummy variable).
Father’s & Mother’s                 Full-time (35 or more hours per week), part-time work (fewer than 35 hours
    employment status                  per week), or no work (2 dummy variables for each parent).


Use of WIC                          Mother or child ever participated in Women, Infants and Children nutritional
                                       supplement program (dummy variable).
Household income-to-needs           Household income vs. federal poverty level (9 dummy variables).
    ratio
                                        Home and Family Environment Variables
Parental reports of educational expectations, kindergarten fall
Educational expectations            Parental Expectations for Child’s education (4 dummy variables)

Importance of skills                Importance of skills: counting, sharing, communication, drawing, knowledge
                                      of letters (5 variables)
                                                                                                                   46



Appendix Table 1 Continued

Parental reports of home learning activities, kindergarten fall
Choice of home location             Parents chose home location for current school (dummy variable).
Home learning activities            Frequency of 7 activities: building things, teaching about nature, playing
                                       sports, doing art, doing chores, singing songs, playing games..
# of children’s books in home       Ordinal variable. Ranges from 0 to 200.
# of music tapes, CDs, or           Ordinal variable. Ranges from 0 to 100.
      records in home
Reading outside of school           Frequency of child looking at picture books/reading outside of school (2
                                       variables).
Family member school involvement, kindergarten fall
Attendance or participation in      Attendance since beginning of school year at PTA meetings, open houses,
      school activities                parent groups, parent advisory meetings; volunteered at school,
                                       participated in school fundraiser (6 dummy variables).
Parental reports of parent-child relationship, kindergarten spring
Parenting stress and depression     Two continuous variables (averages of 8 and 12 items). Higher scores
      composites                       indicate more stress, depression.
Spanking                            Parent spanked child in last week (dummy variable).
Parental reports of family routines, structured activities, and learning opportunities, kindergarten spring
Eating Habits.                       Days per week family usually eats meals together, at regular time (4
                                       variables).
Family has computer                 Dummy variable.
T.V                                 Number of hours child watches TV on weekdays.
Reading, visiting educational       Frequency of child looking at picture books/reading outside of school,
      settings outside of school       visiting zoo, library, museum, concert (6 variables).
Other non-school activities         Child has ever taken lessons or participated in performing arts or organized
                                       clubs outside of school (7 dummy variables).
Parental reports of neighborhood quality, kindergarten spring
Neighborhood quality composite      Mean of 6 items asking about neighborhood problems.
