                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               CONSTITUTIONS, CORPORATIONS, AND CORRUPTION:
            AMERICAN STATES AND CONSTITUTIONAL CHANGE, 1842-1852

                                           John Joseph Wallis

                                         Working Paper 10451
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w10451


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       April 2004




This paper was first presented at the NBER Development of the American Economy Summer Institute. Naomi
Lamoreaux and Lee Alston made several important suggestions at the very beginning and good advice
thereafter, as did Andy Rutten, Chris Hanes, Howard Bodenhorn, Gavin Wright, William Novak, Richard
Johns, Robert Wright, Alan Olmstead, Yoram Barzel, Michael Holt, and Doug North. Comments and
suggestions from participants at seminars at the University of Illinois, Northwestern University, Washington
University, the University of Washington, the University of Virginia, the University of California at Davis,
the University of Mississippi, Stanford University, University of Pennsylvania, Lehigh University, and the
Public Choice Society meetings were very helpful. Barry Weingast improved every part of the paper. The
views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

©2004 by John Joseph Wallis. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Constitutions, Corporations, and Corruption: American States and Constitutional Change
John Joseph Wallis
NBER Working Paper No. 10451
April 2004
JEL No. N0, N4, K0, K2, H1, H3, H6
                                         ABSTRACT

During the 1840s, twelve American states adopted new constitutions. Eleven of the twelve states
adopted new procedures for issuing government debt and for chartering corporations through general
incorporation acts. These institutional innovations were American inventions, and today hard budget
constraints and transparent corporate forms with secure stockholder rights are important institutional
determinants of successful economies. This paper investigates how and why these two important
institutional reforms occurred at precisely the same time. The link is the public finance implications
of chartering corporations and investing in large infrastructure projects in finance and transportation.
States borrowed almost $200 million between 1820 and 1840 to invest in canals, railroads, and
banks. Electoral pressure to provide these important government investments was counter-balanced
by the difficulty of providing geographically specific projects and paying for them with
geographically widespread taxation. States responded with several innovative schemes for financing
canals and banks in the 1820s and 1830s. Some schemes involved "taxless finance:" construction
of canals and banks used borrowed funds and privileges for private corporations so that current taxes
did not rise, but required a contingent commitment by taxpayers to service bonds in case of the
project's failure. Other schemes involved "benefit taxation:" coordinating the tax costs of projects
with the geographic benefits of canal and bank construction through the property tax. When a fiscal
crisis hit states in the early 1840s, they responded by changing their constitutions, and thereby
economic institutions, to eliminate the possibility of taxless finance in the future.

John Joseph Wallis
Department of Economics
University of Maryland
College Park, MD 20742
and NBER
wallis@econ.umd.edu
       Between 1790 and 1860, the United States population moved west over the Appalachians

and across the Gulf plains, creating new states as they went. The states, with some federal

assistance, constructed a system of finance and transportation to tie the nation together. The

states developed a set of economic institutions that allowed free entry into the corporate form,

limited the ability of governments to incur unfunded debts and encouraged generally responsible

public finance, and demonstrated that a democratic republic could deliver on a commitment to

secure private property rights and rule of law. These accomplishments are celebrated parts of

American economic history. How were they related? Did state government’s efforts to provide

the physical and commercial links in the nation’s infrastructure lead to changes in, or follow

from, existing economic and political institutions? The development of two specific economic

institutions that developed first in the United States -- transparent corporate forms with secure

stockholder rights and hard budget constraints for governments -- followed the collapse of state

efforts to promote banks, canals, and railroads in the early 1840s. The institutional changes were

concentrated in a short period of time, between 1842 to 1852, and were easily observable

through explicit changes in state constitutions.

       The simultaneous adoption of new methods for chartering corporations and regulating the

issue of government debt offers a unique opportunity to explain why economic and political

institutions change.1 Between 1842 and 1852, twelve existing states wrote new constitutions and

eleven of the twelve contained provisions mandating that state legislatures pass general

incorporation laws and that legislatures adopt new procedures for authorizing government

borrowing. No existing economic history links the two reforms, except by chronology, yet there

was a strong relationship underlying their simultaneous adoption. The importance of


                                                   1
                                                 2

corporations and debt issue for the public finance of state governments, working through the

alternative ways of financing canal and banks used by states in the 1820s and 1830s, is the link

connecting the two reforms. When state finances collapsed, states looked to their own histories

of borrowing and spending to comprehend how they got into their predicament: in 1842, eight

state and the Territory of Florida were in default on their debts and three other states were in

perilous financial condition. How they interpreted the causes of the crisis in 1842 informed how

they changed their constitutions between 1842 and 1852.

       The uniform adoption of democratic and republican institutions of government and the

widespread adoption of near universal white male suffrage by the 1820s, created political

pressure on state governments to promote economic growth through investments in banks and

canals. These pressures were particularly strong wherever large amounts of undeveloped land

stood to appreciate in value from better transportation and financial infrastructure. But

democracy posed another problem for the building of canals and banks: geographic competition.

When, for example, New York contemplated the Erie canal, the primary opposition came from

farmers along the Hudson and on Long Island who gained nothing from a canal benefitting

upstate land owners. Since tax liabilities for the canal were spread throughout the state, most

counties expected to be worse off if the canal were built: they gained nothing and paid higher

taxes. This scenario played out again and again as states struggled to provide geographically

specific services funded by general taxation, and their solutions shared common characteristics.

It was impossible to spread the benefits around equally, since no state could build a canal to

every county. But it was possible to develop creative ways of financing projects. One of the

methods, “benefit taxation,” tied taxes paid by land owners to the benefits they received from
                                                   3

projects using ad valorem property taxation. Other schemes involved a variety of ways to

finance the construction of projects without raising current taxes; what can be termed “taxless

finance.” Taxless finance usually involved tax payers assuming a contingent liability. As long

as the bank or canal under consideration was a financial success, the tax payers bore no costs.

The economic depression that began in 1839, however, doomed the financial hopes of the states

and realization of the contingent liabilities triggered the state financial crisis of the 1840s.

Constitutional changes after 1842 were specifically designed to eliminate taxless finance: to

prevent states from entering into long term financial commitments without simultaneously

raising current taxes. The lesson state governments thought they learned in the 1840s was that

taxes must be raised when spending is contemplated. If taxes are not raised, taxpayers and

politicians may not adequately factor in the risks of higher taxes in the future. This is equally a

lesson for developing and developed countries at the beginning of the 21st century.

        Since taxless finance arrangements often worked by combining special corporate charters

for businesses with the creation of state debt, eliminating taxless finance required states to

change both the way they issued debt and the way they chartered corporations. This is the link

that ties the two constitutional reforms together, and illuminates what states were trying to

accomplish in the 1840s. The first five sections lay out the constitutional reforms, the public

finance issues, the history of state government investment and borrowing in the 1820s and

1830s, the logic behind eliminating taxless finance, and what politicians in the 1840s actually

said they were doing. The last three sections consider an alternative explanation for the

constitutional changes, extend the implications of the changes through the 19th century, and draw

conclusions for our understanding of the process of institutional change.
                                                  4

I. Constitutional Concepts and Historical Background

       When the United States of America declared its independence, all fourteen governments,

national and state, assumed sovereign powers. First state constitutions, then the Articles of

Confederation, and finally the federal constitution written in 1787 made those powers explicit,

limited them, or expanded them. In 1790, neither the new national constitution nor the thirteen

state constitutions said anything about the creation of corporations, limitations on the amount of

government debt or how to borrow, and placed few limits on taxation.2

       Under British law the power to create corporate privileges was an aspect of sovereignty.

In the United States, the federal and state governments both assumed the power to create

corporations. Initially, all corporations were, in the language of the time, “special:” created by

an act of the legislature that specified the rights and responsibilities of each corporation

individually. Americans immediately began making wider use of the corporate form than their

British cousins. States chartered banks in significant numbers in the 1790s and by the 1810s

incorporated business firms of all types.3 Americans consciously developed new forms of

business association.4 State legislatures intensely debated the creation of new corporations. On

one hand, Americans innately distrusted corporations and their grants of special privilege; they

worried that corporate privileges provided more for the advancement of private interests than the

public good; they worried about the effect of money and business interests on politics and

legislation; in a word, they worried about corruption. There was reason to worry, there were

numerous examples of truly special privileges created in charters approved by state legislatures.

The Camden and Amboy railroad obtained a monopoly of the northeast to southwest rail route in

New Jersey, connecting New York and Philadelphia, in return for giving a substantial block of
                                                  5

stock to the state. In New York, the Albany Regency headed by Martin Van Buren, gave out

bank charters only to its political allies. In Arkansas, the state chartered a bank and capitalized it

by issuing state bonds, and then allowed the bank to be controlled by two powerful families. In

Massachusetts, the Charles River Bridge Company asserted that its charter gave it a monopoly of

all bridges over the Charles River, and took the state all the way to the Supreme Court to protect

its claim (it lost).5

        On the other hand, two powerful positive forces counterbalanced concerns about

corporations. One force was personal interest. Americans tended to distrust corporations in

general, but to favor those corporations that served their specific interests.6 The other force was

aversion to taxation: corporations often contributed handsomely to the state Treasury. Banks

provide the earliest examples: New York, Pennsylvania, Maryland, and Massachusetts all

invested in or owned stock in banks in the early years of the 19th century. In Massachusetts, a

tax on bank capital accounted for over 50 percent of state revenues by the 1830s. In

Pennsylvania, bank charter fees and dividends on state owned bank stock accounted for over 30

percent of state revenues between 1800 and 1830. Alabama and Georgia were able to replace

their state property taxes with dividends from state owned banks in the early 1830s.7 These

corporate charters did not represent cronyism, they were not cases of venal corruption where

public officials used public office for private gain, nor were they remotely illegal. They were an

open exchange of privilege for revenue.

        There were few limits on what states could do to raise revenues. The ability of states to

generate revenues by selling privileges was widely applauded by corporate supporters as a way

to reduce taxes. The ability of states to extract revenues in return for corporate privileges
                                                  6

depended on the value of the privileges. Grants of monopoly or exclusive franchise were more

highly valued than privileges available to all. As long as legislatures granted charters

individually, states faced a constant conflict over how many charters they should issue, and they

had to continuously balance the possibility of creating (and charging for) private rents by

limiting charters against the benefits of wider public access to corporate forms and lines of

business.8     Competition between groups who wanted exclusive charters and the persistent

pressure to charter corporations in general laid legislatures open to charges of corruption. One

way out the conflict was to pass a general incorporation act. General incorporation acts removed

most the rents associated with corporate charters by allowing free entry.9 These laws created an

administrative mechanism to create corporations. Under a general act, all corporations shared

common features with respect to stockholders, internal structures, and liability -- creating more

transparent corporate forms with strong guarantees of shareholder rights.10 Opening entry

reduced the possible revenue that states received from selling charters, but it also eliminated the

political pressure on states to create special privileges for favored groups through special

charters. In the 1840s, state constitutions began to require general incorporation laws.

        The power to incur debt was another aspect of British sovereignty inherited by American

governments. In addition to promoting banks, states were deeply involved in promoting

improvements in transportation. In the 1790s and 1800s this typically involved subsidies and/or

stock purchases in bridge, road, and turnpike companies.11 Rents were problematic in

transportation, as these were rarely profitable investments for state governments.12 But in 1817,

acting on its own after failing to receive federal support, New York embarked on the largest

infrastructure project of its time, the Erie Canal. Fearful that the canal would not pay for itself,
                                                 7

the state endowed the Canal Fund with several sources of revenue. The canal turned out to be a

phenomenally successful investment. Completed in 1825, it soon returned funds to the state

over and above maintenance costs and interest payments. Just as banks proved profitable

investments and sources of tax revenues for states in the 1800s and 1810s, it now appeared

canals could as well. In the late 1820s, Ohio, Pennsylvania, and Maryland started canals, all

with hopes they would pay for themselves and return a handsome dividend to the state treasury.

       In the mid-1830s, spurred by the rapidly expanding economy and the boom in federal

land sales, states throughout the country began, or expanded, their transportation and banking

investments. In 1836 and 1837, Indiana, Illinois, Michigan, and Massachusetts started new

canals and railroads, while New York, Ohio, and Pennsylvania committed to expanding their

systems. Banks dominated southern investments. Louisiana invested $23 million in banks

beginning in 1824. Alabama, Georgia, and Florida made substantial investments in the early

1830s, while Mississippi and Arkansas committed millions to banks in 1837 and 1838. State

debts expanded from a few million in 1820, to $80 million in 1830, and $200 million in 1841.

The total and per capita amounts outstanding in 1841 are given in Table 1, and annual debt

issued each year as well as the total debt outstanding is given in Figure 1. The relative size of

these investments is truly amazing. In 1836, Indiana, with a population of roughly 600,000 and a

state budget of $50,000 a year, authorized a bond issue of $10,000,000 in 5 percent bonds.

Michigan, with a population of no more than 200,000 and state revenues of $17,000 in 1836,

authorized a bond issue of $5,000,000 of 5 percent bonds in 1837.13

       Unfortunately, the boom in canal, railroad, and bank investment came to a rapid and

unhappy end in the depression that began in 1839. By the summer of 1842, eight states and the
                                                 8

Territory of Florida were in default on interest payments. Table 1 also notes whether a state

defaulted. Ultimately, Mississippi and Florida repudiated their debts outright, while Louisiana,

Arkansas, and Michigan repudiated part of their debts. New York, Ohio, and Alabama barely

avoided default.14

       In the 1840s, states constitutions created explicit procedures for authorizing government

borrowing. State and local governments were required to identify the purpose of the debt issue;

raise current taxes by an amount sufficient to service the debt; and hold a public referendum to

authorize the tax increase. Procedural limitations did not cap the amount of debt a state could

issue. They required state and local governments to raise taxes before they borrowed and made

those taxes irrevocable until the debt had been repaid.

       Finally, there were few limits on the power to tax in 1790. The federal constitution

prohibited export duties and required that direct taxes be allocated by population. State

constitutions were typically agnostic with regard to taxation, although a few states did ban the

poll tax.15 Beginning in the 1830s, southern states began adopting constitutional provisions that

contained uniformity clauses requiring all wealth taxes to be levied at uniform rate and

assessment with respect to value.16 After 1842, states adopted uniformity and universality

clauses that produced the general property tax: a tax imposed at a uniform rate on all wealth

within the state. Most property taxes today are no longer general, as they apply only to real

property wealth.17

       Between 1842 and 1852 twelve states replaced their existing constitutions as shown in

Table 2 (Louisiana replaced its constitution twice). In all but Virginia, the new constitutions

placed procedural restrictions on the way state and local governments could issue debt and
                                                    9

required legislatures to enact general incorporation laws. Why did eleven states adopt both

institutions at the same time? No state adopted one and not the other. The answer lies in the

nature of infrastructure investment in democratic republics.

II. Legislative Choice and Infrastructure Investment

        American state governments in the early nineteenth century faced the problem of

promoting economic development through large-scale public investments, such as a canal, that

required a state to spend money unequally across geographic areas. Legislatures are

geographically oriented and their electoral incentives force legislators to be concerned about the

incidence of state policies on their district. Although statewide interests matter, it is primarily

the effects of policies on their district that determine whether a given legislator favors a policy.

        Consider an expenditure policy to provide a public good, π(x) = (P1(x), P2(x), ... , Pn(x))

where n is the number of districts, π(x) is a public policy, and the Pi(x) represent the incidence of

the policy on district i.18 The various functions are written as a function of x, which can be

considered as a scale or scope factor that reflects the size of the policy.

        Pi(x) can be broken into the benefits, bi(x), and costs, ci(x), where Pi(x) = bi(x) - ci(x). We

assume that the benefits are concave and the costs are convex as a function of x; that is, biN> 0,

biO<0, and ciN>0 and ciO > 0 œi.

        The total net social benefits for the state is represented as:

        NB(x) = 3i Pi(x) = 3i (bi(x) - ci(x))

The economically efficient policy, x*, is such that at x*, NBN = 0 and NBO < 0 so that at x* the

marginal net social benefits are zero; i.e., 3i (biN(x) - ciN(x)) = 0.

        The project is financed through taxes. Let C = 3i ci(x) be the total costs of the project,
                                                     10

and let T be the total taxes need to finance the project. We assume a balanced budget constraints,

so that T = C. Further, district i’s tax share is ti, so that its tax cost for a particular project is tiC.

        District i’s legislator’s objective function is Pi(x) = bi(x) - tiC(x).19 Legislators consult

only their own objective function, ignoring the effects of the project on other districts, and hence

the project’s social implications. When choosing between two projects, or between building a

particular project and not, each legislator supports the alternative that provides them higher net

benefits. Moreover, we assume a convention about indifference: if a legislator’s district bears no

costs for a project, she votes in favor even if her district receives no benefits.20 It is clearly

costless for such a legislator to do so.

        Legislatures are constrained in two ways. First, passage of individual legislation is only

possible if a majority of legislators benefit from the proposed legislation.21 This “majority rule”

constraint applies to individual pieces of legislation. Logrolling makes it possible to fund

individual projects (as opposed to legislation) that benefit a minority of legislators, as long as the

project is paired with enough other projects that a majority of legislators receive positive net

benefits from the entire package. For simplicity, the majority rule constraint requires that all of

the necessary logrolls be bundled into one bill.

        The second constraint applies to all of the legislation passed by the legislature. In

aggregate, every individual legislator (district, county, or state) must receive positive net benefits

from the sum of all legislation passed, or that geographic unit will “exit.” The exit constraint

requires, for j projects and i legislative districts that

        'Pij(x) > 0 (summed over j projects, œi )

The exit constraint requires that no district is hurt, on balance, by the aggregate actions of the
                                                  11

government.

       The threat of exit may seem too dramatic for the day to day operation of a legislature.

The constraint certainly did not bind from day to day, however, as it applies to the aggregate of

all legislation. The shortest time period it applied to was a legislative session, and longer periods

are not unreasonable. But the implicit threat of exit in early 19th century America was very real.

New England’s Hartford convention threatened secession during the War of 1812. Andrew

Jackson’s first term ended with the conflict with South Carolina over Nullification hanging in the

balance. Secession was not an idle threat: the south left the Union in 1861. At the state level,

population movement made the exit constraint bind. Early nineteenth century America had a

population on the move, and states adopting unpopular policies with a portion of their citizens

could expect to lose people to out migration. A constant factor in the national debate about

public land policy was out migration from the east to the west, the desire of eastern states to keep

people from moving (and lowering land prices), and the hunger for population in the west (to

raise land prices). In 1842 and 1843, Illinois politicians were unwilling to raise taxes to deal

with their debt problem because, as then Governor Ford later wrote, “To pay immediately was

out of the question. Heavy taxation then would have depopulated the country and the debt

would never be paid.”22 Secession from states was not unknown either. Vermont declared its

independence from New York during the Revolution, Maine split from Massachusetts in 1820,

and West Virginia from Virginia during the Civil War.

       Legislatures face both a majority and an exit constraint. They must make simultaneous

decisions about the size of the project, the allocation of benefits across districts, and the

allocation of tax burdens across districts. Four general solution to the problem can be
                                                   12

characterized: normal taxation, benefit taxation, taxless finance, and something for everyone.

These categories are not mutually exclusive, nor are they exhaustive, but they give us a

framework to discuss the choice set facing state legislatures in the early 19th century.

        A. One large project: Normal taxation. Large projects have several relevant

characteristics. First, they require a very large expenditure relative to the budget, implying that at

most only one or two such projects can be built at once. Second, these projects concentrate the

benefits in a small geographic area while spreading the tax costs across the entire state.

Legislatures considering a large project already possess a tax structure, that is, a set of tax

instruments that allocate tax shares across legislative districts, ti. By normal taxation we mean

an expansion of existing tax revenues using existing tax shares to fund the improvement.23 This

implies that some districts receive large benefits relative to their tax cost: bi(x*) > tiC(x*); but

many districts receive no benefits while bearing their tax cost: Pi(x) < 0 œx>0, since bj(x) = 0

while tjC(x) > 0.

        The concentration of benefits in a few districts implies that most districts receive no

benefits but bear costs. These districts naturally prefer not to build the project. The majority rule

constraint implies that no project is built. The size of the project makes it impossible to find

enough logrolling options to compensate districts that do not gain from the large project. Even

if it is possible to find a project that benefits a majority of districts, a simple majority fails to

meet the exit constraint. In short, it is difficult for government to build a large, expensive,

geographically concentrated project through normal taxation.

        B. One large project: Benefit taxation. The first result assumed that the financial costs

of the project were spread across the state through general taxation. Suppose instead that the
                                                   13

project could be financed by a tax scheme, benefit taxation, whereby district i’s tax share is a

function of the benefits it receives from the project.

        Let B(x) = 3i bi(x) be the project’s total benefits. Define a benefit taxation scheme so that

ti = bi/B. Under this tax scheme, districts that receive no benefits from the project also pay no

taxes regardless of the project’s total cost: bi = 0 implies that ti = 0/B = 0. Districts pay their

share in taxes in proportion to the benefits they receive.24

        As long as the project’s total benefits exceed the total costs (B > C), each district with

positive benefits also has positive net benefits after paying their tax share.25 Thus, assuming that

representatives who are indifferent to the project – including legislators whose districts receive

no benefits but also incur no costs – vote in favor of the project, every legislator (weakly) favors

the project, so it will pass. In contrast to the case where projects are financed out of general

revenue, benefit taxation implies that, even in the case of a large project like the Erie canal, most

districts receive no benefits and incur no costs, and so can costlessly support the project.

        The widespread use of the property tax provided states with a potential mechanism for

creating a benefit tax. If the value of transportation improvements is capitalized in land values,

and property taxes are used to fund construction, it may be possible for every district to, at worst,

be indifferent to the large project. The use of benefit taxation to finance a single large project

simultaneously satisfies the majority and exit constraints. The central problem with a single

large project is the inability to balance off the losses to districts that do not benefit from the

project because the state is unable to afford multiple large projects. Benefit taxation solves that

problem.26

        C. One large project: Taxless finance. There are several alternatives to financing a
                                                  14

project through taxes. We consider three financing schemes that share a common element:

building the project does not entail raising current taxes, thus taxless finance. We might also call

these schemes contingent tax finance, since two variants involve the assumption of a contingent

liability by taxpayers.

       Suppose the canal is expected to generate a stream of toll revenues, but require state

assistance in the form of eminent domain, limited liability, or some other privilege.27 Private

entrepreneurs may be willing to privately finance the project in exchange for a corporate charter.

The value of the charter could be enhanced by granting the owners exclusive rights or other

privileges. In return for the grant of special privilege, the state acquires an ownership interest in

the private company.28 Public grants of monopoly were common in 18th and early 19th century

Britain and the United States, as was state ownership of private company stock. This scheme

requires only that some districts benefit from the charter, as no additional taxes are raised.29

       Of course, the first variant of taxless finance requires that private owners raise capital

themselves. In antebellum America it was difficult to use this mechanism alone to finance large

transportation projects.30 A second variant of taxless finance used the good faith and credit of

the state to secure operating capital by issuing bonds. The state then invested the borrowed

funds in the private corporation by purchasing stock. Expected dividends from the state’s

investment would cover the state’s interests costs. Taxpayer’s liability in this case was

contingent on the success of the project. If it succeeded, the state received a steady flow of

dividends, net of interest costs, and taxpayers paid lower taxes. If it failed, the state and its

taxpayers would assume the debt service.31

       Sometimes projects were so large that private entrepreneurs could not be found. A third
                                                   15

variant of taxless finance was for a state to construct and operate the enterprise itself. The state

borrowed sufficient funds to cover both building the project and the interest charges in the early

years of the project before revenues were expected to materialize. Of course, borrowing funds

left taxpayers with a contingent liability – if ex post the project failed to generate sufficient

revenues to cover the costs of the bonds, taxpayers had to pay the difference in proportion to

their tax share.32

        Taxless finance works politically because of the implicit benefit received by all districts.

Current taxes may not rise, but taxpayers assume a contingent liability:

        CLi = tiC(x)(1-s)

where s is the ex ante probability of project success. If the project fails ex post, CLi will be

positive for all districts. If a proposed improvement only generates benefits to some districts

through improvements in lower transportation costs or better financial services, then Pi(x) is

negative for a the majority of districts who receive no benefits. A taxless finance scheme that

does not provide benefits to all districts, ex ante, will have a negative expected value to a

majority of districts and will not be supported.

        Pi(x) = bi(x) - tiC(x)(1-s) < 0 (œi where bi(x) = 0)

        Taxless finance doesn’t work that way, however. All three variants propose that the

project will return money to the state treasury, either in the form of dividends on the state’s

investment in the private corporation or in the form of toll revenues or profits. If M represents

the potential profit of the enterprise to the state, then the calculation of net benefits for each

district becomes:

        Pi(x) = bi(x) + tiM(s) - tiC(x)(1-s)
                                                   16

That is, each district can expect its taxes to go down by tiM if the project is successful. The

critical issue for districts who do not benefit directly from the canal, districts where bi(x) = 0, is

whether tiM(s) >< tiC(x)(1-s). Taxless finance works if it promises every district that its taxes

will be lower if the project succeeds.33

        As with benefit taxation, taxless finance can simultaneously satisfy the majority

constraint and the exit constraint.

        D. Many projects: Something for Everyone.

        We have placed emphasis on single large projects because of their relevance for state

investments in the 1830s. But it was also possible to promote transportation and financial

investments through small projects. Consider a legislature facing decisions over a range of

projects, each with concentrated local benefits and paid for through general taxation.34 For

simplicity, we assume that each legislator has one possible project; and that each project benefits

her district and her district alone.35 Moreover, assume that each project is small relative to the

budget, so that there is no problem financing many or all at the same time. Suppose that the

benefits to each district from its project are b; that these are identical across districts, as are all

the costs, c; and that each district pays an equal tax share of 1/n of the total costs.36

        Legislators now consider bundles of projects. Given each legislator’s preferences, the

ideal bundle of projects is simple to characterize. Each legislator receives positive benefits only

if the project for her district is built. Building any or all other projects merely raises the district’s

taxes. So each legislator’s ideal policy is to build her project alone. Unfortunately any legislation

of that type will be defeated by a vote of n-1 to 1, with only the legislator benefitting voting in

favor. Legislators therefore have an incentive to create bundles of projects though logrolling.
                                                  17

        When a majority party exists, it might finance expenditures in its districts but not in those

of their opponents. Suppose that the majority party holds m seats in the legislature, where

(n+1)/2 < m < n; and the minority party holds n-m seats. If each legislator has a project to build

in her district and the majority party finances only those in districts they represent, the total

number of projects is m; the net benefits to each district represented by the majority are b -

(m/n)c; and the net benefits to each district represented by the minority party are -(m/n)c. The

problem with partisan coalitions is the exit constraint. A majority party that votes beneficial

projects only to the districts it controls, necessarily imposes net costs on the districts it does not

control, violating the exit constraint.

        As an alternative, the legislature might choose a policy of universalism, or something for

everyone. The legislature builds a project in each district. 37 The intuition is simple. Suppose

that spending is allocated among districts by some formula or rule of thumb (such as equal grants

per capita). Grant share to individual districts are given by gi

        Pi(x) = bi(gix) - tiC(x)

Further suppose that at an arbitrarily small amount of spending, ε, produces net benefits for all

districts:

        Pi(ε) = bi(giε) - tiC(ε) > 0 œi

Now the only problem facing the legislature is how much to spend. If the exit constraint is

binding, expenditures will increase until the first district receives no net benefits. If the exit

constraint can be eased by logrolling, then expenditures can increase further.

        A simple virtue of something for everyone policies is that the same formula can often be

used to allocate taxation and expenditures. For example, states that rely on poll taxes for some
                                                18

share of the revenue could allocate expenditures by the share of poll taxes paid in the state. Or

poll taxes could be raised to finance education and education funds could be divided by counties

according to share of the states’s school age children living in each county. The ti and gi needn’t

be the same. They only need to be known.

        E. Legislative Choices

        States can finance investments in transportation and finance in four ways, and Table 3

shows the predictions of the model about which methods state governments will use. Building a

canal or bank with limited geographic benefits was politically infeasible using normal taxation.

Too many geographic interests obtained nothing except the prospect of higher taxes. Building

financial and transportation infrastructure with something for everyone policies was politically

feasible, but fiscally impossible. New York could not afford to build an Erie Canal to every

county. Something for everyone policies required equal, or close to equal, allocation of funds to

every district.

        A large canal or bank investment could be made with benefit taxation or taxless finance.

Benefit taxation worked very differently from taxless finance, however. Benefit taxation

required that taxes be raised simultaneously with the onset of construction and borrowing.

Taxless finance allowed taxpayers to assume a contingent tax liability, one that would only be

assumed in the event the project failed. Both benefit taxation and taxless finance held out the

promise of significant benefits.38 We turn next to the policies used by states to finance

investment in the 1830s.

III. State Experience with Banks and Internal Improvement Investments

        Although the history of federal banking and transportation policy is better known, in the
                                                   19

early 19th century state investments were more important than the federal investments in both

areas. The federal government chartered the First and Second Banks of the United States (and a

handful of banks in the District of Columbia), the latter with a capital of $35 million dollars. By

1836, the states had chartered over 600 banks, with an authorized capital of $480 million and

paid in capital of almost $250. Federal investment in banks was minimal, while states invested

roughly $80 million.39 Between 1790 and 1860, the federal government spent $54 million on

transportation projects, the lion’s share going to rivers and harbor improvements and aids to

navigation. Over the same period state and local governments spent over $425 million. Federal

government policy was not trivial before the Civil War, but state governments, by any measure,

played a much larger role in the promotion of financial and transportation investment and

development.40

        By 1830, states were able to draw on 40 years of experience with bank investments.

They had reasonable expectations that “M” was large and positive, and that the probability of a

successful investment, “s,” was close to one. Canal investments in New York and Ohio had also

proven profitable. Governor Ford of Illinois, spoke directly to the ex ante expectations of the

Illinois politicians when he explained how the state got itself into difficulties in his message to

the legislature of December 8, 1842 “No scheme was so extravagant as not to appear plausible

to some. The most wild expectations were made of the advantages of a system of internal

improvements, of the resources of the State to meet all expenditures, and of our final ability to

pay all indebtedness without taxation. Mere possibilities appeared to be highly probable, and

probabilities wore the livery of certainty itself.”41

        By 1841, $198 million of state debt issued to finance investments in canals, railroads, and
                                                 20

banks was outstanding. Table 3 breaks down the debt by the method of finance involved in the

project. Normal taxation was rarely used to finance investments in transportation and banking.

No substantial state investments were financed by normal taxation. Of course, normal operations

of state and local governments included the provision of transportation services, constructing,

operating, and maintaining bridges and roads. But none of these activities were large by

comparison to a project like the Erie Canal.

       No substantial state investments were allocated within states on the basis of something

for everyone type formulas. Education was the one area where subsidies were regularly

allocated on the basis of population or enrolled students. Some state road money was allocated

among counties on the basis of population or land area, but the amounts were small. Counties

were capable of building roads, such as they were in the early 19th century, but possessed neither

the fiscal capacity, administrative ability, nor geographic scope to build canals and railroads.

Only state governments had the power to charter banks. It was impractical to allocate internal

improvement funds between counties by formula, despite the pressure to spread spending

throughout the state.

       Several states adopted financial plans implementing benefit taxation. The earliest

example of this was the compromise reached in New York to finance the Erie canal. Opposition

to the canal came, rationally, from farmers on the Hudson and Long Island who faced

competition from new lands in western New York, and somewhat irrationally from New York

City commercial interests, who feared higher state taxation. New York did not expect the Erie

Canal to be as successful as it was, and the bill authorizing the canal set aside three additional

sources of revenue for the canal fund. These were a share of the auction duties collected in New
                                                 21

York City, revenues from the salt tax levied on the production of salt in (primarily) western New

York, and a special property tax surcharge. The surcharge was to be levied on all counties

bordering on the canal (the initial bill only authorized construction on the middle section of the

route). The “canal tax” provision was they key element in the compromise between canal

supporters and opponents.42 As it happened, the canal tax was never levied, because the Erie

returned unexpected revenues to the canal fund and eventually to the general fund of the state.

In fact, New York was able to suspend its state property tax entirely in the 1820s.

       The canal tax coordinated the geographic benefits of the canal with the geographic costs

of financing the canal debt. Similar arrangements were reached in Ohio, Indiana, and Illinois.

As in New York, the chief opposition to canals was geographic, opposition came from those

areas through which the proposed canals would not pass. In each of these states prior to the

authorization of canal construction, land was classified into quality grades and taxed on a per

acre basis equally within each classification. In Ohio in 1828, in Indiana in 1836, and Illinois in

1837 and 1839, the key compromise between canal opponents and supporters was the adoption

of ad valorem taxation. In each state the passage of a canal bill was tied to the restructuring of

state property taxation in order to shift more of the burden of financing canal debt onto those

counties whose land values would, presumably, rise with the construction of the canals.43 Ad

valorem taxation of land only partially mollified geographic interests. In 1828, Ohio built two

canals simultaneously as a concession to geographic interests in the eastern and western parts of

the state. Indiana began work simultaneously on seven projects, while Illinois started work on

six. Expenditures made under these arrangements in New York, Ohio, Indiana, and Illinois

came to $53 million dollars between 1817 and 1841.44
                                                22

       Taxless finance required little or no immediate financial commitment from the states.

Southern states often lent support to banks by purchasing bank stock or by making outright loans

to banks.45 For example, Mississippi chartered a number of banks in the 1830s (prior to that

Mississippi had only one bank in which the state had a financial interest). The state assisted two

of the largest banks, subscribing to $2 million in stock of the Planter’s Bank in 1830, and loaning

$5 million in state bonds to the Union Bank in 1838. The charters for both banks stipulated the

banks would service the bonds.46 While the state was ultimately liable for its debts, Mississippi

anticipated the banks would pay dividends to the state, that other taxes would be lower, and that

the state would never pay a penny to service its bonds. The state had, after all, been receiving

dividends on its bank holdings since the early 1820s.

       Although details varied, similar arrangements were made banks in Florida, Mississippi,

Alabama, Louisiana, and Arkansas. State investments in banks in the five states totaled $53

million in the 1820s and 1830s.47 While there were serious sectional debates within states about

the establishment of banks, there was no sectional debate over the allocation of taxation. The

states expected that the state bonds issued to these banks would never burden the taxpayers and

that bank stock would pay a net dividend. This contributed to the eventual repudiation of debts

in Florida, Mississippi, Louisiana, and Arkansas.

       Taxless finance played an important role in transportation finance as well. The success

of the Erie Canal and the Ohio canals led several states to anticipate that they could finance canal

and bank investment without raising taxes. This involved the costly requirement of meeting

interest payments in the first years of construction out of borrowed funds (or, in some cases,

premiums on bond sales), thus increasing the total amount of debt needed to finance a project.
                                                23

But the policy obviated the politically costly need to raise current taxes. Canal and railroad

investment in New York (in the 1830s), Maryland, Pennsylvania, and Massachusetts all

proceeded without a concurrent increase in state taxation. State expenditures financed in this

manner in these states amounted to $80 million between the late 1820s and the early 1840s.48

       States found other ways to promote investment without raising taxes. In New Jersey, the

Camden and Amboy Railroad gave the state a substantial share of stock in the company in return

for the monopoly right to haul freight and passengers between New York and Philadelphia.

Dividends on Camden and Amboy stock and railroad taxes made up over half of state revenues

from the 1840s to the 1870s. Georgia and Alabama chartered state banks, and profits from their

bank holdings enabled both states to eliminate their property taxes in the early 1830s.

Massachusetts levied a tax on bank capital in the 1820s. The tax provided more than half of state

revenues from the late 1820s up to the Civil War.49

       This brief review of state financial practices encompasses $183 million in state

expenditure for banks, canals, and railroads, of which $13 million was for bonds issued in New

York and Ohio in the 1810s and 1820s that had been repaid by the early 1830s. It accounts for

$170 million of the $198 million of state debt outstanding in 1841.50 States either addressed the

problem of competing geographic interests by tailoring their system of taxation to coordinate

benefits and taxes or they made inter-sectional disputes moot by avoiding the need to raise taxes

at all. Voters and legislators were easily convinced that building canals and banks without

raising taxes was a good idea.

IV. Eliminating Taxless Finance

       In October of 1839 a financial panic swept the country, leading to suspension of specie
                                                 24

payments in banks throughout the south and west, declining prices and land values, and a general

economic depression that lasted into 1843. By mid-1840, southern states that had issued bonds

on behalf of banks – Florida, Alabama, Mississippi, Louisiana, and Arkansas – found themselves

besieged by bond holders who wanted the states to redeem their solemn pledge to honor the

bonds with their full faith and credit. In the northwestern states – Indiana, Illinois, and Michigan

– construction on state canal and railroad projects came to halt in late 1839. With construction at

a stand still, land values began falling. It was clear by mid-1840 that these states could not

service their debts from property taxes. In January of 1841, Indiana and Florida defaulted,

followed shortly by other states, culminating in Pennsylvania’s default in 1842.

       There is no doubt about why states defaulted. As Table 1 shows, nine of the ten states

with the largest per capita debts defaulted, and Alabama, Ohio, and New York narrowly avoided

default. State legislatures throughout the country were asking “how did we get in to this mess?”

and “how can we prevent this from happening again?” Although conditions in every state were

unique, the answers given in the 1840s shared a common theme. States got into trouble because

they pursued taxless finance and the way to prevent this from happening again was to take

taxless finance off the table as an alternative way to finance infrastructure investment. This

section lays out why eliminating taxless finance required procedural debt limitations, general

incorporation, and general property taxation. The following sections examine what voters and

politicians said in the 1840s when they revised their constitutions and examine an alternative

historical explanation.

       Prohibiting government debt altogether might have been the simplest reaction to the

default crisis. Goodrich (1950) termed the 1840s wave of constitutional restrictions on state debt
                                                 25

issue the “revulsion against internal improvements.” But he noted that the apparent revulsion

did not stop states, and certainly not local governments, from continuing to pursue internal

improvements in the 1850s and after the Civil War. Debt restrictions were procedural, not

absolute. States did not close off the possibility of financing internal improvement projects by

benefit taxation, they eliminated taxless finance. To understand why this was, and what the states

were doing, we need to examine the constitutional changes in more detail. Table 4 shows

whether a state adopted a change in its constitution that regulated debt issue, corporation policy,

or taxation. Tables 5, 6, and 7 provide details for debt restrictions, corporation clauses, and

taxation respectively.

       With the exception the ban on the issue of debt for internal improvements in Indiana,

Ohio, and Michigan, states typically adopted procedural restrictions on debt issue. The first

complete clause was Article 4, Section 6, Part 4 of the New Jersey Constitution of 1844:51

                The legislature shall not, in any manner, create any debt or debts, liability or
       liabilities, of the State which shall, singly or in the aggregate with any previous debts or
       liabilities, at any time exceed one hundred thousand dollars, except for purposes of war,
       or to repel invasion, or to suppress insurrection, unless the same shall be authorized by a
       law for some single object or work, to be distinctly specified therein; which law shall
       provide the ways and means, exclusive of loans, to pay the interest of such debt or
       liability as it falls due, and also to pay and discharge the principal of such debt or liability
       within thirty five years from the time of the contracting thereof, and shall be irrepealable
       until such debt or liability, and the interest thereon, are fully paid and discharged; and no
       such law shall take effect until it shall, at a general election, have been submitted to the
       people, and have received the sanction of a majority of all the votes cast for and against
       it, at such election; and all money to be raised by the authority of such law shall be
       applied only to the specific object stated therein, and to the payment of the debt thereby
       created. This section shall not be construed to refer to any money, that has been, or may
       be, deposited with this State by the government of the United States.

       The New Jersey restrictions were repeated, with alterations, in other states. New Jersey

limited “casual” debt to $100,000. Issue of more debt than that required legislation that
                                                 26

specified the purpose of the debt, and the “ways and means,” i.e. the tax revenues, to service the

debt within thirty five years (such legislation was “irrepealable”). The legislation authorizing

the debt issue could not take effect until it was approved by a majority of the voters in a general

election. Limits on casual debt varied from a high of $1,000,000 in New York to a low of

$50,000 in Rhode Island, but the casual debt limit was only a limit on the debt the legislature

could approve without going to the voters. The key element in the procedural restrictions was

the requirement that the “ways and means” shall be provided. Legislation authorizing the bond

issue had to include new taxes sufficient to service the debt, and the new taxes had to be

approved by the voters. In New York and Iowa, “ways and means” was replaced with “direct

annual tax,” i.e. a property tax. In most states the property tax would be the tax used to provide

revenues.

       Only Indiana absolutely prohibited the issue of new debt (Table 5).52 The door was left

open for any state that wanted to borrow money to do so, as long as a tax increase sufficient to

service the debt was approved by the voters before the debt was created. In this way, internal

improvement spending was not prohibited, but it had to be financed by benefit taxation.53

       By themselves, procedural restrictions could and did limit state debt issue (see below).

But procedural restrictions alone could not close the door on taxless finance. To do that required

three additional restrictions on state governments. First, states had to close off indirect ways of

obligating the state or becoming entangled in the affairs of corporations. Constitutions in every

state but Rhode Island and Louisiana required that “nor shall the credit of the State ever be

given, or loaned, in aid of any person, association, or corporation.” (Table 6). The prohibition

was usually matched with “nor shall the State hereafter become a stockholder in any corporation
                                                 27

or association.” (both clauses from Indiana, 1851, Article 11, section 12.) Only New York, New

Jersey, and Kentucky failed to prohibit stock ownership (Table 6).54 These restrictions made it

impossible for states to hold stock in or invest in banks or canals.

       Second, the states had to close off the possibility that a select group would acquire

special corporate privileges in exchange for payments to the state treasury (ala the Camden and

Amboy railroad). Constitutional changes in the 1840s tied the requirement that legislatures pass

general incorporation acts, with a restriction, and in some cases prohibition, on special

incorporation. As Table 6 shows, most, though not all states, required general incorporation and

prohibited special incorporation. In some states special incorporation was prohibited “except for

municipal purposes, and in cases where in the judgment of the Legislature, the objects of the

corporation cannot be attained under general laws.” (Wisconsin, 1848, Article 11, section 1). In

others special incorporation was explicitly prohibited: “The General Assembly shall pass no

special act conferring corporate powers.” (Ohio, 1851, Article 13, section 1) In others the

prohibition on special corporations was implicit.55 Banks were inextricably linked with

corporations in the constitutions. While some states banned banks outright, most states required

that banks be incorporated under general laws approved by the voters (free banking).

       Finally, states had to close off the option of financing internal improvements through

special tax arrangements.56 States began requiring that: “Taxation shall be equal and uniform

throughout the commonwealth, and all property other than slaves shall be taxed in proportion to

its value, which shall be ascertained in such manner as may be prescribed by law.” (Virginia,

1850, Article 4, section 23, of course, slaves were not an issue in northern states). These clauses

required ad valorem taxation for all property (land and whatever wealth was also taxed), with
                                                 28

equal tax rates for all types of property, assessed uniformly throughout the state. The New York

scheme of levying a special canal tax in the canal counties would not have been constitutional

under this type of “general” property tax. The new tax restrictions, in combination with the need

to specify in advance what taxes would be collected for debt service, effectively required a

majority of voters to gain from any proposed investment to obtain majority support.

V. Systematic Corruption and Constitutional Solutions:

       Americans in inherited a strain of political thought about the proper role and structure of

government now called “the republican synthesis.” The main ideas can be traced back through

16th century French historians and continental philosophers to Aristotle and Polybius, but their

particular form took shape in the struggles between Crown and Parliament in early 17th century

England. The economic part of the core argument was the protection of personal liberty as

manifested in the right to hold and enjoy real property (and, by extension, to other aspects of

human behavior that today we would call freedom). The central political argument was that

these rights were best protected by system of mixed government of three estates -- the king, the

aristocracy, and the people -- where political participation was a right and responsibility of those

propertied individuals with an interest in maintaining order and stability. Deviations from this

“constitutional” structure were, by definition, corruption. In the early 18th century, particularly

under the administration of Walpole, the “true Whig” opposition in Britain identified three main

sources of corruption: the influence of the King in the House of Commons through the use of

executive patronage, the existence of a large and rapidly growing national debt that gave

financial creditors and intermediaries undue influence over political decisions, and the pervasive

and corrosive effects of party and faction.57
                                                29

        American perception that British government had become corrupted was not only a

fundamental cause of the American revolution (Bailyn), but fear of corruption verging on

paranoia, became a dominant feature of American politics in the early 19th century. “In the

process, the rhetoric of corruption emerged as the common grammar of politics, so

overwhelming that it became difficult to discuss public questions in any other language. The age

of Jefferson bequeathed to the United States an obsession with corruption that still deeply colors

the way we think about politics.”58 While the 19th conception of corruption contained within it

the venal corruption of politicians that concern economists and political scientists today,

(Shleifer and Vishny define corruption “as the sale by government officials of government

property for personal gain,”)59 corruption was a much larger concept embracing the entire

structure of political relations:

        ‘Corruption’ was a central term in neoclassical discourse, a term that linked a number of
        specific threats into a single process of decay. ‘Corruption’ might refer to bribery,
        embezzlement, or other private use of public office, much as it does today. For
        seventeenth- and eighteenth-century thinkers, though, the word most often brought to
        mind a fuller, more coherent, and more dreadful image of a spreading rot. A frequent
        metaphor compared corruption to organic cancer, eating at the vitals of the body politic
        and working a progressive dissolution.60

        This was the background for Madison, Hamilton, and Jay’s Federalist Papers defense of

the government structure proposed in the national constitution. They were already passing from

an understanding of individual virtue as sacrificing personal interest to the public good towards

individual virtue as the pursuit of individual goals within the social framework.61 Cutting the

classical connection of the virtue of individuals with the virtues of the government, meant

necessarily relying more on the systematic components of government to promote the public

good. As a result, discussions of corruption were often not about individuals, but about systems:
                                                 30

       “Autonomy and virtue, [were assumed to] rest on material as well as moral
       prerequisites,” both of which were thought to be endangered by the instruments of
       oligarchic rule: standing armies, patronage, and public debts. Condemnations of
       corruption were, in largest part, denunciations of this system: condemnations of the
       multiple dependencies that it forged, of its misuse of public treasure, of the degeneration
       of the balanced constitution, of the killing enervation and quiescence fostered by the
       unearned luxury with which it favored some at the expense of the impoverishment of the
       many... the system corrupted the gainers and the losers, both of whom might be
       “demoralized by an exclusive concern with private or group satisfactions.” 62

These ideas were critical in the 1840s. States had to come to grips with whether their current

fiscal crises were the result of systematic decisions made by state governments or whether they

were the result of corrupt individuals manipulating the system for their own benefit. Did the

crises result from bad institutions or from bad individuals? If it was bad institutions, then the

appropriate remedy was to alter the institutions. If it was bad individuals, then the appropriate

response was to vote the rascals out.63

       States, in general, decided that bad institutions were the cause of the crisis. The

conclusion stemmed from the constraints placed on the legislative process by the exit constraint.

Although internal improvement legislation was often very controversial, it tended to pass by

consensus, rather than as the result of partisan majoritarian politics. This foreclosed the option,

ex post, of blaming a party or faction for the failure of a canal or bank.64 Indiana provides an

example. The Indiana legislature authorized the issue of $10,000,000 in 5 percent bonds when

its state budget was only $50,000 a year. Under a binding exit constraint, we should see that

substantial consensus was required before a canal bill could pass. The two main canals in

Indiana, the Whitewater in the southeast corner of the state and the Wabash and Erie which ran

from the southeast corner of the state to the north and then northeast, were the poles around

which the canal interests built their majority. As Indiana historian Logan Esarey points out: “As
                                                 31

finally organized, this [canal] party controlled every county in the State but seven – Harrison,

Posey, Crawford, Switzerland, Hendricks, Perry, and Spencer; and six of these were on the Ohio.

The total voting strength of these [anti-canal] counties was always less than ten out of a body of

eighty members.”65 The internal improvement counties (counties through which a proposed

canal, railroad, or turnpike would pass) possessed a clear majority of the votes in the Senate and

House as early as 1833, yet less than ten of eighty legislators were able to hold up a canal bill for

three years. Why? The reason appears to be the exit constraint. Indiana did not proceed with its

canal system until the legislature reached a rough consensus that included every region. What

brought the southern counties to support the canal system was the adoption of ad valorem

taxation in 1836. That is, the adoption of benefit taxation was critical to reaching the political

consensus necessary to begin construction.66

       Since Indiana had passed internal improvement legislation by consensus, it was difficult,

ex post, for one geographic group to be blamed for the decision to build the canals. Indiana

defaulted in January of 1841, and even though there were calls for a constitutional convention in

the mid-1840s, generally supported by the Democrats and opposed by the Whigs, a constitutional

convention was not called until 1850 when state finances were back on a sound footing. The

voters sent almost equal numbers of Democrat and Whig delegates to the convention.

       The convention regarded its main task as fixing the systematic flaws in Indiana

government that produced the crisis:

        Sir, we have just passed a tremendous crisis. Now is the time for us to look around and
       reflect. If we learn no experience from the past, if we now fail, in this period of
       calmness, to place upon ourselves the restrictions which will in all time to come save us
       from similar wide spread ruin and calamity, I hold that this Convention has been called in
       vain.
        Look, sir, to other States. State after State has called Conventions to reform their
                                                32

       Constitutions. All around us Constitutional Conventions are in sessions, or just about to
       be in session. If there is a single cause more than any other, which has produced this
       general movement, it is the desire, on the part of the people, to cut themselves off from
       themselves and their representatives this power of creating public debt.67

Mr. Read and a majority of his fellow delegates ultimately voted to prohibit internal

improvement borrowing in Indiana completely, the only state to do so.

       Surprisingly, there was little in the way of partisan finger pointing over the origins of the

crisis. Convention delegates clearly regarded the decisions made in 1836 as the result of a

democratic system rather than malign individuals. Delegates from both parties rose and

denounced the policies the state had followed in 1836. So much so that Judge Kilgore, who

spoke against the absolute prohibition on state debt, remarked that “I appear to be the last

survivor of all the members of the Legislature of 1836 who voted for that bill. I know there are

many still living, they seem to have been afflicted – perhaps in judgement for their political sins

– with a loss of their memories. [Laughter].”68 Kilgore went on to articulate not only an

explanation of what happened in 1836, but how it could be prevented in the future:

       If, with the light of the past to guide them, with the heavy burthens of the present to
       remind them of past errors, the people coolly and deliberately decide at the ballot-boxes
       to again borrow money, I shall aid to place no Constitutional barriers in their way to
       prohibit them from carrying out their will; provided, sir, that at the time they give the
       Legislature authority to contract a debt they provide by direct taxation for the payment of
       the interest, and the canceling of the principal, within twenty-five years. Right here, sir,
       and nowhere’s else, was the great error committed by the people and their representatives
       in 1836. Gentlemen may confine themselves to the simple assertion that the people of
       that day were mad; I shall not deny it; they were mad, and very mad; but, Mr. President,
       had a provision been made before the public debt was created that a direct tax must be
       levied, high enough to pay the interest and to wipe out the whole debt in eighteen or
       twenty-five years, all would have been comparatively well. A provision of this kind, sir,
       would have brought the people to their right senses, and my word for it, before State
       Bonds to the amount of four millions of dollars had been sold, they would have risen and
       denounced the whole system as projected.69

       Judge Kilgore called for benefit taxation and castigated the perils of taxless finance, and
                                                33

called for a direct tax, which in 1850 meant ad valorem property taxation, before any future debt

could be issued. Many delegates laid the blame for the mistake of 1836 at the feet of taxless

finance; Mr. Smith of Ripley county: “It was represented to the people of that day [1836], by the

political leaders, that they might go on with that gigantic system of internal improvements

without incurring any additional tax on themselves: in fact, the proposition was made that the

State could borrow money to construct these public works, and never have to pay any taxes

thereon out of their own pockets – that the debt would pay itself.”70

       The new Indiana constitution required the legislature to pass general incorporation laws

and banned special incorporation, but these provisions were so generally accepted that no record

of a substantive debate was entered in the Debates and Proceedings of the convention. The

constitution banned state investment in private corporations. Mr. Morrison of Marion county

spoke in support of the ban:

       I shall be found constantly voting against any proposition to connect the interests of the
       people with the interests of the corporations; for the reason that corporations always labor
       and scheme for their individual benefit, which is always antagonistic to the interests of
       the people. The proposition is so plain that it is unnecessary to elucidate by giving
       examples. Gentlemen have no interests to maintain here which should prevent them from
       reflecting the will of their constituents upon this subject, and the question narrows itself
       down to the simple proposition whether the State is to become a partner or a stockholder
       in any public enterprise – whether taxes shall be laid upon the people to raise capital; and
       then be appropriated by the State for the purpose of private speculation in any concern
       where individual interests are always militating against the interests of the State. The
       individual who stands in such a connection with the State, knows that the State will stand
       more shaving and peculation, and he will indulge more in this way than he would if he
       were acting in an individual partnership concern where his partner stands ever actively
       watching the operations of the concern. The State has been aptly compared to a goose,
       and according to the saying, he was a fool who did not pluck her. And in view of what
       we have suffered heretofore, I think it is but the part of prudence that we should provide
       for the evil to come.71

       Although Indiana politicians did not use the terms taxless finance and benefit taxation,
                                                 34

they used the logic behind the concepts. Their language spoke directly to the evils and dangers

of taxless finance. They did not blame the state’s fiscal crisis on faction or party, but on the

perception that the constitutional organization of the state was “corrupt,” in the 19th century

sense that it allowed the state to pursue methods of financing state investments in good faith, that

in retrospect turned out to be a disaster. The problems they identified were systematic. The

remaining question to answer is whether the reforms were the result of consensus, or were they

pushed only to promote the agenda of the Democratic Party?

VI. Party Politics

       Despite their central importance in the evolution of American economic institutions,

there is no general history of state constitutional change in the 1840s. Occasionally one

encounters the general notion that the new constitutions were the work of the Democratic Party.

In part, this was because the Whigs opposed writing new constitutions in several states: “The

adamant, politically costly, and ultimately unsuccessful opposition by Whig leaders to

constitutional revision in Maryland, Kentucky, North Carolina, Ohio, and Indiana is one such

instance were Whigs undoubtedly suffered from ‘to much respectability,’ where innate

conservatism put them on the losing side of an issue.”72 Carmony’s history of Indiana talks

about the “Democratic” constitution of 1851. But as we have seen, the constitutional provisions

that we are concerned about were not the result of partisan battles between Democrats and

Whigs, nor was the convention itself generally a partisan contest.

       This does not mean that partisan issues did not intrude into the conventions. In Indiana,

Democrats proposed to exclude corporation officers from holding seats in the state legislature

was defeated on almost a straight party vote. Part of the reason Whigs were reluctant to hold
                                                 35

conventions in some states was the unequal apportionment of legislative representation across

districts. In several states, new constitutions adopted more equal apportionment schemes that

hurt the Whigs.

       But in many states party issues were not important. The New York legislature took up

the issue of a constitutional amendment to limit state debt in 1842. The amendment did not pass

that year, but ultimately the debate led to a constitutional convention and the New York

constitution of 1846. The battle over calling the constitutional was not a party issue. The major

split over the convention was within the Democratic party, not between the Democrats and the

Whigs.73 In Louisiana, the state adopted a new constitution in 1845 when the state was

controlled by the Whigs, and again in 1851 when the state was controlled by the Democrats. The

two constitutions had almost identical provisions with regard to debt restrictions, general

incorporations laws, and restrictions on special incorporation. These were simply not party

issues. Everywhere the issue was concern about the growing corruption of politicians: “The

growing populistic rebellion against the regular parties and the politicians who led them as

corrupt, selfish wire pullers was hardly confined to Maryland. It also helped fuel movements to

revise and ratify constitutions in Ohio, Indiana, and Kentucky.” “Nonetheless, the constitution

seemed so popular, especially its provisions reflecting the rising tide of antipolitician,

antiofficeholder sentiment in Indiana and elsewhere...”74

       Perhaps the most persuasive quantitative evidence on this point can be found in Table 8,

which is taken directly from Holt. Holt divided states in the 1840s into three groups: solidly

Whig states (Group I), competitive states (Group II), and solidly Democratic states (Group III).

The states are listed in the table by the share of the Whig presidential vote in the 1844 election,
                                                36

but the more meaningful measure of Whig or Democratic strength is the average Whig share of

the state legislature given in the second column. The first column notes whether the state wrote

a new constitution or passed an amendment altering debt limitations or incorporation laws.

       If constitutional reforms were partisan Democratic issues, we expect new constitutions to

be more prevalent in solidly Democratic states. But only two of the eight solidly Democratic

states wrote new constitutions, Illinois and Michigan. They were both states traumatized by the

debt crisis. Five of the six states where Democrats and Whigs competed on equal terms adopted

new constitutions or amendments. Five of the eleven solidly Whig states adopted new

constitutions. States where political parties competed equally were more likely to adopt

constitutional changes. States with strong Whig parties were less likely to adopt constitutional

changes than competitive states, but much more likely to adopt changes than state with strong

Democratic parties. There is no evidence that debt limitations or incorporation laws were the

result of Democratic party policies. States where politics were the most competitive, where both

parties were most responsive to voter concerns, were the states most likely to adopt new

constitutional provisions.

VII. Effects and Implications

       If the constitutional changes were important, then they should have large and long lasting

effects. This section quantifies the easy to measure effects, and draws implications for several

areas of American economic development. Table 9 shows the relationship between total debt in

1841, per capita debt in 1841, whether a state defaulted, whether a state restricted debt, and the

change in debt between 1841 and 1880. States that defaulted had, on average, $13 million in

total debt and $35 in per capita debt in 1841, while states that did not default had only $4 million
                                                   37

in total debt and $4 in per capita debt.75 States that enacted constitutional restrictions on

procedures for issuing debt had $12 million in total debt and $18 in per capita debt, while states

that did not restrict debt had only $3 million in total debt and $11 in per capita debt.76 Between

1841 and 1880, aggregate nominal state debt grew slightly, from $198 million to $236 million.

In states that adopted debt restrictions, total debt fell by $5 million per state, while in states that

did not adopt debt restrictions total debt rose by $6 million. In states that defaulted, total debt

fell by $6 million per state, while in states that did not default rose by $5 million per state. Both

constitutional restrictions and default experience had a significant impact on the subsequent

borrowing behavior of states.77 Procedural debt restrictions had a significant effect on the

subsequent fiscal behavior of state governments.

        The effect of debt restrictions and the general property tax had a profound effect on the

structure of state and local governments. In 1840, local government debt was one-eighth of state

government debt; in 1902, local government debt was eight times state government debt. In

1840, state government revenues were 75 percent of local government revenues; in 1902 state

government revenues were 20 percent of local government revenues.78 The requirement that

governments use benefit taxation (or something approaching it) shifted borrowing and spending

to smaller, more homogeneous geographic units. Cities, counties and special districts took the

lead in providing basic social infrastructure investments in public utilities (water, sewage gas,

and electric), public health, and education. In aggregate these investments were enormous, but

their scale was well suited for local governments. As Troesken [1994] shows, America was

successful at providing critical urban infrastructure in the late 19th century, and an important

element in how well it did that was the relationship between state and local governments.
                                                 38

Constitutional changes played a role in the decentralization of 19th century American

government, but how much of the change is due to changing constitutional provisions still

remains to be determined.79

       With respect to corporations we cannot compare numbers in the 1830s to the 1880s, as

there are no counts of corporations, reliable or otherwise, until the IRS began collecting statistics

in 1916. But there are some illustrative numbers on the explosion of corporations in the United

States. Lamoreaux and Rosenthal document that between 1807 and 1867, there were only 642

corporations chartered in France. While in New England alone, there were 3,200 corporations

chartered between 1800 and 1843 and 3,500 between 1844 and 1862. In 1920 there were

314,000 corporations operating within the United States.80 We do know that the adoption of a

free banking law, a general incorporation law for banks, usually resulted in a substantial increase

in the number of banks. So, for example, when New York adopted it free banking law in 1838,

93 free banks were created in a state with only 95 banks on January 1, 1837. Similar increases

occurred in Michigan, Indiana, and Ohio.81

       Lamoreaux and Rosenthal compare the development of corporate policy in the United

States and France in light of the recent debate on the importance of legal origins and the apparent

superiority of common law systems over civil law systems in the promotion of corporate

development. What they find is no surprise in light of the history presented here. Despite a few

landmark Supreme Court decisions, corporate law in the United States is a state, not a national,

matter. In the 1840s, states deliberately altered the way they chartered corporations to encourage

entry and to limit flexibility in corporate form. The fact that “Business people in the United

States had much less ability than their French counterparts to modify the basic organizational
                                                 39

forms to meet their needs” [p. 14] is not surprising. General incorporation acts were intended to

limit all corporations to the same rights and governance structures. Special corporations and

flexible charter privileges were a source of corruption. Although strict corporate forms limited

flexibility, it increased transparency, and it certainly encouraged entry.

VIII. Conclusions

       The Constitution and Bill of Rights of the United States provided an invaluable

framework supporting American economic development in the 19th century. Textual change in

the national constitution is glacial and substantive change occurs through judicial

reinterpretation.82 It would be a mistake, however, to assume that only the experience of the

national government and the national constitution can teach us relevant lessons about economic

development. Most of the features of modern economic institutions associated with successful

economic development – legal origins and legal systems, the form of corporate organization and

governance, and the presence of hard budget constraints – were areas of American institutional

development controlled by the state, not national, governments. States continuously revise and

change their constitutions, and many of the changes are conscious efforts to shape economic

institutions. This is a marvelously rich laboratory of social experience.

       In the early 19th century, the adoption of widespread suffrage and democratic forms of

government gave voice to a popular mandate for government promotion of transportation and

finance. States actively intervened in the economy to promote banks, canals, and later railroads.

Their development schemes ranged from the conservative and prudential to the wildy naive and

improvident. At the time, contemporaries worried that democratically elected governments

would not make intelligent decisions about development policy. The internal improvement
                                                  40

boom and the default crisis that followed gave substance to these concerns. There were

problems with venal corruption, but the primary concern of the constitutional conventions that

met in the 1840s and 1850s was not that human beings were corruptible. Instead, they saw that

the very nature of the democratic process made certain ways of doing things, taxless finance in

particular, appear very attractive ex ante to policy makers. Their logic is formalized here in a

simple political economy model. The model does a good job of explaining how states financed

internal improvements in the 1820s and 1830s.

       States did not respond to the fiscal crisis by prohibiting government borrowing, banning

investment in canals, permanently revoking bank charters, or instituting new and stricter

penalties for officials who abused their offices. States wanted to provide financial and

transportation infrastructure. They believed, strongly and actively, that the impartial and

effective provision of these services was exactly the kind of thing that a good government should

do. But they did not want infrastructure investment or corporate chartering to distort how the

political system worked. So they changed the rules. Their solutions were indirect. Rather than

making it illegal for legislators to profit from the sale of special corporate charters, they required

strict free access to the corporate form, guaranteeing free entry into most lines of business and

reducing the rents available to politicians from manipulating chartering. Rather than banning

public provision of canals, railroads, or banks, they required that voters approve tax increases

for the projects before any money was borrowed. This did not eliminate naive and foolish

projects, but it significantly raised the ex ante cost of getting proposals implemented. Equally

important, it did not eliminate the possibility of pursuing good projects.

       Americans did not adopt these new institutions because they were descended from British
                                               41

colonists, because America was a common law country, or because of anything in the national

Constitution. Ideas and history were important, however. Americans acquired a particular way

of thinking about how government should work from their British and revolutionary heritage.

When the default crisis broke in 1841, they came face to face with evidence that the system was

not working they way they hoped it would. Constitution writers throughout the country drew on

a common experience and implemented a set of technical changes in the way governments

interacted with the economy. They changes were significant, but small, alterations in

institutions. Because the changes were relatively small, they were politically viable. Because

the changes altered the underlying costs and benefits facing political decision makers, they had

real effects on government policy. These institutions did help the American economy grow and

develop. There are examples in American history that developed economies can learn from, to

see what works, how it works, and how governments can be convinced that it is in their interest

to do what works.
                                                 42



                                           ENDNOTES

1.The specific institutions of transparent and secure corporate forms and hard budget constraints
for governments is the subject of an active and growing literature in the empirical study of
economic growth. The general importance of institutions is the subject of Rodrik, Subramanian
and Trebbi, 2002; Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson [2001, 2002], Berkowitz, Pistor, and
Richard [2003], Djankov, La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, and Shleifer [2003], and Mahoney [2001].
One group of papers examines the origins of legal systems: La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, Shleifer,
and Vishny [1997, 1998, 1999, and 2000] and Glaeser and Shleifer [2002]. Another group
focuses on connections between legal systems, financial development, and economic growth:
Beck and Levine [2003], Beck, Demirguc-Kunt, and Levine [2003], and Levine, Loayza, and
Beck [2000].
         The importance of hard budget constraints for governments is discussed in Qian and
Weingast [1997], Inman [2003], and Rodden and Eskeland [2003], and de Figueiredo and
Weingast [2003]. Inman uses the federal government’s unwillingness to come to the aid of
states in the 1840's default crisis as critical episode in the development of hard budget constraints
in the United States. This is a good example of the principle, but there is no evidence that states
ever thought the federal government would bail them out. Of course, the states would not have
turned down a hand out in 1841.
         There is a large and venerable economics literature on constitutions. For quantitative
studies see Persson and Tabellini [2003]. For the older tradition see Buchanan [1991], Cooter
[2000], and Mueller [1996]. Finally, there is a growing interest in corruption and the importance
of trust and social capital. See Knack and Keifer [1997], Shleifer and Vishny [1997], Rose-
Ackerman [1978], Klitgaard [1988], Glaeser and Shleifer [2003].

2.The national constitution mentions debt in several places, but not in the context of limiting
debt or forcing the government to set aside revenues to service debt. The clauses that mention
debt are allowing Congress to raise taxes to pay it off: Article I, Section 7; that no state shall
make anything but gold and silver legal tender in the payment of debts: Article 1, Section 10;
recognizing the validity of debts incurred by the national government before the constitution was
written: Article 6; and clarifying the legitimacy of the debt incurred by the government in
suppressing “insurrection or rebellion” but clearly repudiating any responsibility, by nation or
states, for the debts of the confederate government or debts incurred by stated during the
rebellion: Amendment 14. For the history of early state constitutions see Adams [2001], Kruman
[1997], and Tarr [1998].

3.In the decade of the 1800s, New York averaged 18 incorporations per year, Ohio 1, Maryland
2, Pennsylvania 6, and New Jersey 4. In the 1830s, New York averaged 57, Ohio 43, Maryland
18, Pennsylvania 38, and New Jersey 18. Evans [1948]. There is a substantial historical and
legal literature on American corporations: Davis,1961; Dodd, 1936 and 1954; and Hurst, 1970;
Evans, 1948. Also see Handlin and Handlin, 1945; Seavoy, 1982; Maier 1992 and 1993;
Lamoreaux, 2004, and Dunlavy, 2004.
                                                43

4. “The reader does not require to be told, that we have in our country an infinite number of
corporations aggregate, which have no concern whatever with affairs of a municipal nature.
These associations we not only find scattered throughout every cultivated part of the United
States, but so engaged are they in all the varieties of useful pursuit, that we see them directing
the concentration of mind and capital to the advancement of religion; to the diffusion of
literature, science and the arts; to the prosecution of plans of internal communications and
improvement; and to the encouragement and extension of the great interests of commerce,
agriculture, and manufactures. There is a great difference in this respect between our own
country, and the country from which we have derived a great portion of our laws. What is done
in England by combination, unless it be the management of municipal concerns, is most
generally done by a combination of individuals, established by mere articles of agreement. On
the other hand, what is done here by the co-operation of several persons, is, in the greater
number of instances, the result of consolidation effected by an express act or charter of
incorporation.” Preface to A Treatise on the Law of Private Corporations Aggregate, Joseph K.
Angell and Samuel Ames, 1831.
Hurst [1970] put it this way: “In sum, when we began making important use of the corporation
for business in the United States from about 1780, there was little relevant legal experience on
which to draw. For 100 years, we proceeded to use the corporate instrument on a scale
unmatched in England. In that development we built public policy toward the corporation
almost wholly out of our own wants and concerns, shaped primarily by our own institutions.
The one definite inheritance was the idea that some positive act of the sovereign was necessary
to create corporate status. But we gave our own content to that idea.” pp. 8-9.

5.The Camden and Amboy is discussed in Cadman [1949]; the chartering of banks in New York
under the Albany Regency in Seavoy [1982] and L. Benson [1961]; the Arkansas bank in Worley
[1949 and 1950] ; and the Charles River Bridge Company in Hurst [1970].

6.Maier [1992] discusses corporations in early 19th century Massachusetts: “Although anticharter
arguments were frequently stated as if they applied to all corporations without exception, in
practice opposition usually settled on some corporations only. Even the Pennsylvania legislators
who campaigned against the BNA and the reincorporation of Philadelphia [the city] apparently
raised no objections to the charters granted “every day,” as one legislator put it in 1786, to “half
a dozen or 20 people for some purpose or another.” Similarly, in 1792 James Sullivan carefully
distinguished the incorporation of a bank from that “to build a bridge, or to cut a canal,” which
he found unobjectionable. Banks were probably assailed more often than any other kind of
corporation. But consider the position of a delegate to the Massachusetts constitutional
convention of 1853 who launched a rhetorically powerful attack on corporations “of a business
character.” Among corporations “for other purposes,” which were apparently exempted from his
criticisms, he included railroads, insurance companies and banks!” pp. 73-4.

7. In the 1820s and 1830s taxes on bank capital or charter fees were over 25 percent of revenues
in Connecticut, Delaware, Massachusetts, Pennsylvania, and North Carolina. Wallis, Sylla, and
Legler [1994], p. 126. We do not have adequate fiscal data on Alabama and Geogia, but see
Brantley [1961] for Alabama and Wallenstein [1987] for Georgia. In a similar way, dividends
and transportation taxes on the Camden and Amboy Railroad enabled New Jersey to do away
                                                  44

with its property tax in the 1840s, Cadman [1949].

8.The general problem of promoting enterprise through corporate chartering and the conflicts
that could cause with the state’s fiscal interest is discussed in Wallis [2003]. For a detailed and
explicit example of the problem, see Pennsylvania’s considerations over how many banks to
charter in Wallis, Sylla, and Legler [1994] and Schwartz [1987].

9.The “free” in free banking refers to entry, not the absence of banking regulation.

10.The first general incorporation act was for manufacturing firms in New York in 1811. For a
history of general incorporate law, Evans [1948].

11.The classic history of government involvement in transportation remains Goodrich [1960],
which has been supplemented by Larson, [2001].

12.New York, Pennsylvania, and Maryland all chartered private companies to build western
transportation routes. All of the private companies failed.

13.Information on state finances in the 1830s and 1840s is available at ICSPR Richard Sylla,
John Legler, and John Wallis “Sources and Uses of Funds in State and Local Governments,
1790-1915: [United States]”, Data set 1993-05-13.

14.For the history of state defaults see McGrane [1935], Ratchford [1941], and Wallis, Grinath,
and Sylla [2001].

15.Maryland and Ohio outlawed the poll tax in their original constitutions. Early state
constitutions most often mentioned taxes or taxation in the context of qualifications for electors
and legislators or in specifying whether individuals were required to pay taxes to support
churches.

16.See Einhorn [2001] for a detailed discussion of constitutional changes in tax rules. Many
states, of course, essentially had uniform taxation in practice long before they put it into their
constitutions.

17.The general property tax is an elastic concept. It was impossible to tax all wealth, and in the
late 19th century economists like Richard Ely advocated reducing the coverage of wealth taxes to
a more limited, easily measured asset base like real property. States varied, over time and among
themselves, in the coverage of their general property taxes.

18.What follows adapts the models in Shepsle and Weingast [1984] and Weingast, Shepsle, and
Johnsen [1981].

19.Each legislator i has an ideal policy of xi* which solves the problem max Pi(x) and which
occurs when the marginal benefits to district i equals the districts costs, i.e., biN(x) = tiCN(x).
                                                 45

20.All voting models require an assumption about what happens when a legislator is indifferent
between two alternatives.

21.Given a single dimensional policy choice, such as the choice over the scale of a single
project, the majority rule equilibrium is the ideal policy of the median district. Standard results
show that, except in very special circumstances, no majority rule equilibrium exists when the
legislature chooses the scale of many projects simultaneously. These concepts are defined in
Hinich and Munger [1997], Shepsle and Bonchek [1997], and Stewart [2002].

22.For a detailed consideration of the role of population movements in the national debates over
land policy see Feller [1984]. Governor Ford in his A History of Illinois, [reprinted 1946], vol. 2
p. 112.

23.As discussed in the next section, if the existing tax is an ad valorem property tax or some type
of user fee, it is possible that the normal tax is also a benefit tax.

24.This, of course, is just a Lindahl tax scheme.

25.To see that bi > tiC under benefit taxation, substitute on the right hand side: tiC = (bi/B)C =
(C/B)bi. Since C/B < 1, the first inequality holds.

26.The stricture on direct taxation in the federal constitution effectively prohibited the federal
government from using benefit taxation in this period. The federal government implemented a
property tax in 1799, 1814, and 1862, but the tax had to be allocated on the basis of population,
it could not be allocated on the basis of benefits as measured in increased wealth or property
values.

27.Canals required eminent domain and banks required limited liability and, often, the privilege
of note issue.

28.It was common in early charters for the state to “reserve” shares of stock for the state at no
cost to the state.

29.This, obviously, abstracts from any consideration of general opposition to corporations, or the
possibility that the group that does obtain the charter may deprive some other group of the
charter.

30.The inability of purely private corporations to engage in large scale transportation projects is
a central element in Callender’s [1902] argument about the need for state intervention in capital
markets.

31.The second taxless finance variant was commonly used to finance bank investments.

32.The third taxless finance variant was commonly used to finance canals and railroads.
                                                 46

33. As the historical sections of the paper stress, by 1830 states were able to draw on an
extensive experience with investments in banks and canals. An expectation that “M” was
positive and large, and that the probability of a successful investment, “s,” was close to one was
reasonable in the early 1830s.

34.This section draws on the large literature on universalism, including Collie [1988], Inman and
Fitts [1990], Niou and Ordeshook [1985], Shepsle and Weingast [1984], Stein and Bickers
[1995], and Weingast [1979].

35. Both of these restrictions are easily generalized, for example, to projects that benefit a small
number of (perhaps contiguous) districts simultaneously.

36.All of these assumptions can easily be generalized, so that the benefits, bi, costs, ci, and tax
share, ti, differ across districts.

37.Various “universalism theorems” show that, in comparison to the uncertainty of partisan
politics (e.g. minimum winning coalitions) that build fewer projects than one for each district
(but at least a majority), every legislator is better off under universalism (Niou and Ordeshook
1985, Shepsle and Weingast 1981, Weingast 1979).

38.Benefit taxation and taxless finance were not mutually exclusive policies, a state could use a
little of each. Both benefit taxation and taxless finance legislation were easier to pass when there
were large expected returns from the project.

39.There is no estimate of how much state governments invested in banks. There are some
sticky issues of measurement that would have to be addressed to do this. We know that states
had borrowed $66 million to invest in banks by 1841 (see Wallis, Grinath, and Sylla as well as
House Documents, 29th Congress, 1st Session, #226. ???? The William Cost Johnson Report).
States like New York, Pennsylvania, Maryland had extensive bank holdings not purchased or
acquired with borrowed funds. I gave those a ball park figure of $15 million to produce the $80
million figure in the text. The $80 million figure is certainly too low. The history of early 19th
century state banks can be found in Bodenhorn, 2000 and 2003.


40.Figures on state and local transportation expenditure are taken from Goodrich [1960] and on
federal expenditures from Malone [1998]. The idea that government in the early 19th century
was “laissez faire” is based solely on the experience of the federal government. A large and now
venerable set of studies on early 19th century state government policies financed in the 1950s be
the Committee on Research in Economic History showed indisputably that state government
actively promoted economic development policies. This “commonwealth” literature includes
Handlin [1943], Handlin and Handlin [1945 and 1969], Hartz [1948], Lee Benson [1961],
Goodrich [1950 and 1960], Heath [1943 and 1954], and Cole [1970].

41.Quoted in House Document, 29th Congress, First Session, #226, p. 1051.

42.This paragraph is taken largely from Miller, 1962.
                                                  47

43.Scheiber [1969] describes the process in Ohio. Wallis, [2003A] describes Indiana. The
situation in Illinois is a bit murky. Although the Illinois constitution required that all property be
taxed by value, Illinois finessed the constitutional requirement by declaring that all land fell in
one of three value classification. In February 1839, the state began taxing on assessed value
(Haig, p. 79).

44.This is based on the following debts in 1841: Indiana $13 million, Illinois $12 million, Ohio
$15 million, as well as the $7 million issued for New York to build the Erie and the $6 million
issued by Ohio in the 1820s to build its first canals. This does not include the $22 million in
New York debt in 1841, which was incurred after the state abandoned the state property tax.

45.For southern banks in general see Schweikart, 1987, for southern property banks in particular
see Sparks, 1932.

46.Section 7 of the Mississippi charter of the Union Bank required that “Both the capital and
interest of the said bonds shall be paid by said bank, at the times they shall severaly [sic] fall
due.” Laws of Mississippi, Adjourned Session, 1837, January 21, 1837.

47.The $53 million figure is composed of $15 million for Alabama, $4 million for Florida, $7
million for Mississippi, $2.6 million for Arkansas, and $24 million for Louisiana. Some of the
debt issued in support of the Alabama bank after 1837 should perhaps not be included in the
total, as the state at that point was trying to prop up the bank after the Panic of 1837. There was
no immediate prospect that the bank would service the bonds, although the state clearly hoped
that the bank would do so after the crisis had passed. The national government used the same
arrangement to finance its investments in the First and Second Banks of the United States.

48.This includes debt issue of $22 million in New York, $37 million in Pennsylvania, $15
million in Maryland, and $6 million in Massachusetts. Even through Indiana and Illinois made
changes in their property tax systems in 1836 and 1837, they also planned to finance early debt
service out of borrowed funds.

49.For New Jersey and the Camden and Amboy see Cadman [1949]; for Georgia see Wallenstein
[1987]; for Alabama see Brantley [1961]; for Massachusetts and banking in general see Wallis,
Sylla, and Legler [1994]. For a more general discussion of corporations and state finances see
Wallis [2003].

50.The remaining $28 million was for debts incurred by states that are more difficult to
categorize.

51.A procedural restriction was included in the Rhode Island constitution of 1842, but it simply
required the consent of the people before the state could borrow more than $50,000. Its essence,
but not its details, are the same as in New Jersey. All references to constitutions in the paper are
to Thorpe, 1909, as corrected by Wallis, State Constitution Project.

52.And in Indiana, 1851, Article X, section 5, made the usual exceptions: “No law shall
authorize any debt to be contracted, on behalf of the State, except in the following cases: To
                                                  48

meet casual deficits in the revenue; to pay the interest on the State debt; to repel invasion,
suppress insurrection, or, if hostilities be threatened, provide for public defense.”

53.In the late 19th and 20th century, this led states to create “special” governments that were
geographically crafted taxing districts designed to provide a single service such as schools,
water, sewers, electricity, gas, transportation facilities, and other public utilities. Construction of
facilities was financed through bond issues, approved by voters, financed by property tax levies
and user fees. See Mitchell, 1967.

54.New Jersey prohibited local governments from holding stock. New Jersey held several
million dollars in the stock of the Camden and Amboy railroad, an important source of state
revenue. Kentucky had substantial investments in its state bank.

55.States also began asserting their absolute authority to govern corporations, even after they had
granted corporate charters, special or general: “ All general laws or special acts, enacted under
the provisions of this section may be altered or repealed by the Legislature at any time after their
passage.” (Ohio, 1851, Article 13, section 1).


56.For a more in depth treatment of general property taxation, and the requirements for
uniformity and universality see G. Benson [1965] and Einhorn [2001].

57. “Walpole was supposed to be wielding two great instruments of corruption, of which the
first was parliamentary patronage and the second public credit.” Pocock, 1985, p. 131. The
quotation comes from the essay “David Hume and the American Revolution: The dying thoughts
of a North Briton,” which along with the essay “The mobility of property and the rise of
eighteenth-century sociology” give a good introduction to the notion of corruption in British and
American political thinking in the 18th century. For the importance of parties and faction as a
source of corruption see Bailyn, 1967, and Hoftstadter, 1969, particularly his discussion of
Bolingbroke on pages 16 to 23.


58.Murrin, 1994, p. 104. The Virtue, Corruption, and Self-Interest volume edited by Matthews,
1994, contains several excellent essays on the concept of corruption in revolutionary and 19th
century America, and the various concepts of corruption employed by Americans.

59.Shleifer and Vishny, 1993, p. 599. For other treatments of corruption see Klitgaard , 1988;
Rose-Ackerman, 1978; and Clague, 2003.

60.Banning, 1978, p. 47. See the entire chapter 2, “Of Virtue, Balance, and Corruption for a
deeper consideration of corruption in American thought.

61.Banning offers a subtle and insightful analysis of the changing definition of virtue [1988, p.
199]. “The citizen was self-reliant and assertive. He was expected to contribute to political
decisions precisely on the basis of his independent understanding of his needs, choosing what
was good for him as well as for the whole. He was not expected to surrender his particular self-
                                                  49

interest. Instead, he was thought of as pursuing his particular desires while still remaining
conscious of the interests of his peers and participating in a collectivity of equals... What, then,
did the Revolutionaries usually intend by their repeated calls for sacrifice of selfish interests, for
a commitment to the public good?... a vigorous and vigilant defense of one’s own liberties and
interests, as several of the quoted sources say, was an essential characteristic of a republican
citizen; it was his contribution of his virtue to the public.”

62.The quotation is from Banning [1988], p. 202-3. The quotations withing the quote are
citations to Pocock. The first quotation is from Pocock [1977, p. 145] and the second from
Pocock [1972, p. 121]. The brackets in the text are from the original Banning text. The
emphasis in the text has been added.

63.An implication of this line of thinking is that states where the fiscal crisis was linked with
venal corruption should not have changed their constitutions. There is evidence to support this
interpretation in Florida, Mississippi, and Arkansas, the only defaulting states that did not adopt
constitutional reforms. The evidence, however, cannot be easily reviewed in one article.

64.This is not meant to imply that political partisans did nor try to pin blame on whatever party
or administration was in power when the decision to embark on projects was made.

65. Esarey, 1918, p. 410.

66.The details of the Indiana history are described in detail in Wallis [2003A].

67.Indiana Debates and Proceedings [1850], p. 660.

68.Kilgore Speech, Thursday, Nov. 21, Debates, [1850], vol. 1, p. 676.

69.Ibid, p. 676.

70.Ibid, p. 663.

71.Ibid., p. 652.

72.Holt, [1999], p. 958. Holt’s excellent and exhaustive history of the Whig party is eloquent
testimony to the lack of historical interest in the 1840 constitutions. There is not one general
history of state constitutions in the references, paper or book. There are several references to
student papers in Holt’s seminars about state constitutional conventions in the 1840s, testimony
to his interest.

73.In New York, “Partisan divisions alone, however, do not explain either the nature of the
debate over state debts and development policy or its significance. For one thing, the most
intense conflict occurred within the Democratic party and was partially responsible for a breach
within the leadership that would endure throughout the 1840s. Nor was the Whig party united
on the issue... It is equally clear that local and regional interests, when state policy affected
them, were more important than partisanship.” Gunn, p. 168
                                                 50

        Calls for a constitutional convention divided the Democrats: “Thus the Whigs, who held
the balance of power within the legislature, sided first with one and then the other faction,
depending on the issue and the likelihood of its perpetuating dissension among their opponents.
On the question of a constitutional convention, the Whigs supported the Radical position and
Whig support proved crucial in 1844 and 1845.” Gunn, p. 178-9.
        At the constitution convention itself, “after four months of mostly nonpartisan
deliberation, on October 9 the convention adopted a new constitution with only six dissenting
votes.” “The constitutional revision movement does not lend itself to a straight party analysis.
Elements of both major political parties, as well as other political groups such as the Antirenters,
eventually joined to demand changes in the state constitution... It would be extremely
shortsighted, therefore, to attribute passage of the Constitution of 1846 to the machinations of
political parties. To do so would be to seriously misjudge the significance of the critique of the
existing constitution and to trivialize the long-run implications of constitutional change for the
political system.” Gunn, pp. 181-83.

74.Holt, [1999], first quote p. 1094, second quote p. 663. See Holt, 1978, for a discussion of
party competition between the Whigs and the Democrats in the 1840s.

75.The table provides standard errors for descriptive purposes only. This is the universe of
states, not a sample and the absolute differences between means are the real differences, not
estimates.

76.Florida had the largest debts per capita and it did not restrict debt (it repudiated its debts and
was shut out of capital markets). New York and Ohio had large debts, did not default, but did
implement restrictions. This explains the difference in the difference between total debt and per
capita debt states that restricted debt and those that didn’t, compared to those states that
defaulted and those that didn’t.

77. A simple regressions of the change in total debt between 1841 and 1880 on whether a state
restricted debt shows that states that restricted debt reduced their debt by about $11 million in
contrast to states that did not restrict. In a regression where whether a state defaulted is also
included. The difference restricting and non-restricting states falls to $9.5 million, while
defaulting reduces state debt by $7 million.

78.In 1840 state debts were $198 million and local debts were about $25 million. In 1902 state
debts were $237 million while local debts were $1,877 million. State revenues were $.88 per
capita in 1840 and local revenues were $1.23. In 1902, state revenues per capita were $2.44 and
local revenues per capita were $11.44. Wallis [2000].

79.See Wallis, 2000 and 2001 for elaboration of these themes.

80.Lamoreaux and Rosenthal [2004], pp. 5, 6, and 10, citing Freedeman [1979] for France and
Kessler [1948] for New England. Several New England states had de facto general incorporation
before they officially created laws. In fact, while many New England state passed general
incorporation acts, they did not amend their constitutions to require general acts.
                                                51

81.The 95 bank number is taken from House Document #111, 26nd Congress, Second Session,
and the 93 free banks created is taken from House Document #226, 29th Congress, First Session.
Also see Rockoff, 1974; and Rolnick and Weber, 1983.

82.Thus Persson and Tabellini, for example, measure constitutional provisions in the United
States as fixed since 1800 because they focus only on the national government [2003, p. 83-100].
Neither suffrage, electoral rules, or the internal balance of executive and legislative power stayed
constant in the states since 1800.
                                              52

References

Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, and James A. Robinson, “The Colonial Origins of
     Comparative Development: An Empirical Investigation.” American Economic Review, 91
     (December, 2001), 1369-1401.

Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, and James A. Robinson, “Reversal of Fortune: Geography
     and Institutions in the Making of the Modern World Income Distribution,” Quarterly
     Journal of Economics 117 November 2002, pp. 1231-1294.

Adams, Willi Paul. The First American Constitutions. (Expanded Edition, Lanham, MD:
      Rowman and Littlefield, 2001.).

Angell, Joseph K. and Samuel Ames, 1832. A Treatise of the Law of Private Corporations
       Aggregate. (Reprinted by Arno Press, New York, 1972).

Bailyn, Bernard. The Ideological Origins of the American Revolution. Cambridge: Harvard
       University Press, 1967.

Banning, Lance. The Jeffersonian Persuasion. (Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1978).

Banning, Lance. “Some Second Thoughts on Virtue and the Course of Revolutionary Thinking.”
      In Terence Ball and J.G.A. Pocock, eds. Conceptual Change and the Constitution,
      University Press of Kansas.

Beck, Thorsten and Ross Levine, “Legal Institutions and Financial Development.” NBER
       Working Paper 10126, December 2003.

Beck Thorsten, Asli Demirguc-Kunt, and Ross Levine. “Law, Endowments, and Finance.
      Journal of Financial Economics, 69 (2003).

Benson, George C. et al. The American Property Tax: Its History, Administration, and Economic
      Impact. (Claremont, CA: College Press, 1965).

Benson, Lee. The Concept of Jacksonian Democracy: New York as a Test Case. (Princeton:
      Princeton University Press, 1961).

Bentley, Marvin. “The State Bank of Mississippi: Monopoly Bank on the Frontier (1809-1830),”
       The Journal of Mississippi History, XL, 4 (November 1978), pp. 297-319.

Berkowitz, Daniel, Katharina Pistor, and Jean-Francois Richard. “Economic Development,
      Legality and the Transplant Effect.” European Economic Review, 47 (February 2003)
      165-195.
                                               53

Bodenhorn, Howard. A History of Banking in Antebellum America. (Cambridge: Cambridge
      University Press, 2000).

Bodenhorn, Howard. State Banking in Early America: A New Economic History. (Oxford:
      Oxford University Press, 2003).

Brantley, William H. Banking in Alabama, 1816-1860. (Privately Printed, 1961).

Buchanan, James. Constitutional Economics. (Oxford: Blackwell, 1991).

Cadman, John W. The Corporation in New Jersey: Business and Politics, 1791-1875.
     (Cambridge; Harvard University Press, 1949).

Callender, Guy Stevens. “The Early Transportation and Banking Enterprises of the States.”
       Quarterly Journal of Economics , vol. XVII, no. 1 (November,1902), 111-162.

Carmony, Donald. F. Indiana 1816-1850: The Pioneer Era. (Indianapolis: Indiana Historical
      Bureau and Indiana Historical Society, 1998).

Clague, Christopher. “The International Campaign against Corruption: An Institutionalist
       Perspective,” in Heckelman and Coates, ed. Collective Choice: Essays in Honor of
       Mancur Olson, (New York: Springer, 2003).

Cole, Arthur H. “The Committee on Research in Economic History: A Historical Sketch.”
       Journal of Economic History. 20, 4 (December 1970), 723-741.

Collie, Melissa. 1988. “The Legislature and Distributive Policymaking in Formal Perspective.”
        Legislative Studies Quarterly. 12: 427-58.

Cooter, Robert D. The Strategic Constitution. (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2000).

Davis, John P. Corporations: A Study of the Development of the Origin and Development of
       Great Business Combinations and their Relation to the Authority of the State. (New
       York: Capricorn, 1961).

Djankov, Simeon, Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopes-de-Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer. “Courts.”
      Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118 (May 2003), 453-517.

Dodd, Edwin Merrick, 1954. American Business Corporations until 1860; with Special
      Reference to Massachusetts. Cambridge; Harvard University Press.

Dodd, Edwin Merrick, 1936, “Statutory Developments in Business Corporation Law, 1886-
      1936.” Harvard Law Review, 50, pp. 27-.
                                                54

Dunlavy, Colleen A. “From Citizens to Plutocrats: Nineteenth Century Shareholder Voting
      Rights and Theories of the Corporation,” in Crossing Corporate Boundaries: History,
      Politics, and Culture, in Kenneth Lipartito and David B. Sicilia, eds. (New York: Oxford
      University Press, 2004).

Einhorn, Robin. “Species of Property: The American Property Tax Uniformity Clauses
       Reconsidered,” Journal of Economic History 61 (2001), 973-1007.

Esarey, Logan. A History of Indiana: From its Exploration to 1860. (Indianapolis: B. F. Bowen
       and Company, 1918).

Evans, George Heberton. Business Incorporations in the United States, 1800-1943. (NBER,
       Baltimore: Waverly Press, 1948).

de Figueiredo, Rui, and Barry R. Weingast. “Self-Enforcing Federalism,” Working Paper,
       Hoover Institution, Stanford University, 2003.

Ford, Thomas. A History of Illinois form its Commencement as a State in 1818 to 1847. Vol. II
       Chicago: The Lakeside Press, 1946.

Freedemen, Charles E. Joint-Stock Enterprise in France, 1807-1867: From Privileged Company
      to Modern Corporation. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1979.

Glaeser, Edward L. and Andrei Shleifer, “Legal Origins.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 117
       (November 2002), 1193-229.

Glaeser, Edward L. and Andrei Shleifer, “The Rise of The Regulatory State.” Journal of
       Economic Literature, 4, 2 (June 2003), 401-425.

Goodrich, Carter. Government Promotion of American Canals and Railroads. (New York:
      Columbia University Press, 1960).

Goodrich, Carter, "The Revulsion Against Internal Improvements." Journal of Economic
      History, X, (November 1950),145-169.

Gunn, L. Ray. The Decline of Authority: Public Economic Policy and Political Development in
      New York, 1800-1860. (Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1988).

Haig, Robert Murray. History of the Property Tax in Illinois, Illinois Studies in the Social
       Sciences, Urbana: The University of Illinois, 1914.

Handlin, Oscar and Mart Flug Handlin. Commonwealth: A Study of the Role of Government in
       the American Economy: Massachusetts, 1774-1861. (Cambridge: Belknap Press, 1969).
                                               55

Handlin, Oscar and Mary F. Handlin. “Origins of the American Business Corporation.” Journal
       of Economic History, 5 1 (May 1945), 1-23.

Handlin, Oscar. “Laissez-Faire Thought in Massachusetts, 1790-1880.” Journal of Economic
       History, 3 (December 1943), 55-65.

Hartz, Louis. 1948. Economic Policy and Democratic Thought: Pennsylvania, 1776-1860.
       (Chicago: Quadrangle Books, 1948).

Heath, Milton. “Laissez-Faire in Georgia.” Journal of Economic History. 3, (1943), 78-100.

-----. Constructive Liberalism: The Role of the State in Economic Development in Georgia to
        1860. (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1954).

Hinich, Melvin J., and Michael C. Munger. 1997. Analytical Politics. (New York: Cambridge
       University Press).

Hofstadter, Richard. The Idea of a Party System. Berkeley: University of California Press,
1969.

Holt, Michael F. The Political Crisis of the 1850s. (New York: Norton, 1978).

----- The Rise and Fall of the American Whig Party. (New York: Oxford University Press, 1999).

Hurst, James Willard, 1970. The Legitimacy of the Business Corporation in the Law of the
        United States, 1780-1970. (Charlottesville: University of Virginia Press).

Indiana Debates, Report of the Debates and Proceedings of the Convention for the Revision of
       the Constitution, The State of Indiana. Indianapolis: H. Fowler, 1850.

Inman, Robert P., and Michael Fitts. 1990. “Political Institutions and Fiscal Policy: Evidence
       from the U.S. Historical Record.” Journal of Law, Economics, and Organizations 6: 79-
       132.

Inman, Robert P. “Transfers and Bailouts: Enforcing Local Fiscal Discipline with Lessons from
       U.S. Federalism.” In Rodden, Jonathan and Gunnar S. Eskeland, ed. Fiscal
       Decentralization and the Challenge of Hard Budget Constraints. (Boston: MIT Press,
       2003).

Kessler, William C. “Incorporation in New England: A Statistical Study, 1800-1875.” Journal of
       Economic History, 8 (May 1948), pp. 43-62.

Klitgaard, R. Controlling Corruption. (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1988).
                                              56

Knack, Stephen and Philip Keefer. “Does Social Capital Have an Economic Payoff? A Cross-
       Country Investigation.” Quarterly Journal of Economics. 112, 4 (November 1997), 1251-
       1288.

Kruman, Marc W. Between Authority and Liberty: State Constitution Making in Revolutionary
     America. (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1997).

Lamoreaux, Naomi. “Partnerships, Corporations, and the Limits on Contractual Freedom in U.S.
      History: An Essay in Economics, Law, and Culture,” in Crossing Corporate Boundaries:
      History, Politics, and Culture, in Kenneth Lipartito and David B. Sicilia, eds. (New
      York: Oxford University Press, 2004).

Lamoreaux, Naomi and Jean-Laurent Rosenthal, “Legal Regime and Business’s Organizational
      Choice.” NBER Working paper 10288, February, 2004.

Larson, John Lauritz. Internal Improvement: National Public Works and the Promise of Popular
       Government in the Early United States. (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press,
       2001).

La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopes-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert, W. Vishny. “Legal
       Determinants of External Finance.” Journal of Finance, 52 (July 1997), 1131-1150.

_____, “Law and Finance.” Journal of Political Economy, 106 (December, 1998), 1133-1155.

_____, “The Quality of Government.” Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization, 15
       (March, 1999), 222-279.

_____, “Investor Protection and Corporate Governance.” Journal of Financial Economics, 58
       (2000), 3 -27.

Levine, Ross, Norman Loayza, and Thorsten Beck, “Financial Intermediation and Growth:
       Causality and Causes.” Journal of Monetary Economics, 46 (August 2000), 31-77.

Maier, Pauline, 1993 “The Revolutionary Origins of the American Corporation.” William and
       Mary Quarterly, 3d series, 50, 1 (January 1993), 51-84.

Maier, Pauline, “The Debate Over Incorporations: Massachusetts in the Early Republic,” in
       Conrad Wright, ed. Massachusetts an the New Nation. (Boston: Massachusetts Historical
       Society, 1992).

Mahoney, Paul G. “The Common Law and Economic Growth: Hayek Might be Right.” Journal
     of Legal Studies, 30 (June 2001), 503-25.

Malone, Laurence J. Opening the West: Federal Internal Improvements Before 1860.
                                               57

       (Westport, CT: Greenwood Press, 1998).

Matthews, Richard K. ed., Virtue, Corruption, and Self-Interest. Bethlehem: Lehigh University
      Press, 1994.

McGrane, Reginald C. Foreign Bondholders and American State Debts. (New York: Macmillan
     Company, 1935).

Miller, Nathan. The Enterprise of A Free People: Aspects of Economic Development in New
        York State during the Canal Period, 1792-1838. (Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1962).

Mitchell, William E. “The Effectiveness of Debt Limits on State and Local Government
       Borrowing.” The Bulletin, 45 (October 1967) New York University, Graduate School of
       Business Administration.

Mueller, Dennis C.. Constitutional Democracy. (New York: Oxford University Press, 1996).

Murrin, John M. “Escaping Perfidious Albion: Federalism, Fear of Corruption, and
       Democratization of Corruption in Postrevolutionary America.” in Richard K. Matthews,
       ed., Virtue, Corruption, and Self-Interest. Bethlehem: Lehigh University Press, 1994.

Niou, Emerson M. S., and Peter C. Ordeshook. “Universalism in Congress.” American J. of
       Political Science, 298, (May, 1985) 246-90.

Persson, and Guido Tabellini. The Economic Effect of Constitutions. (Boston: MIT Press, 2003).

Pocock, J.G.A. Virtue, Commerce, and History. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1985.

Pocock, J.G.A. ed. The Political Works of James Harrington. Cambridge: Cambridge University
      Press, 1977.

Pocock, J.G.A. “Virtue and Commerce in the Eighteenth Century.” Journal of Interdisciplinary
      History 3 (72) p 124-5.

Qian, Yingyi and Barry R. Weingast. “Federalism as a Commitment to Preserving Market
       Incentives.” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 11, 4 (Autumn, 1997), 83-92.

Ratchford, B. U. American State Debts. (Durham: Duke University Press, 1941).

Rockoff, Hugh “The Free Banking Era: A Reexamination, Journal of Money, Credit and
      Banking, 6, 2, (May 1974), 141-167.

Rodden, Jonathan and Gunnar S. Eskeland, ed. Fiscal Decentralization and the Challenge of
      Hard Budget Constraints. (Boston: MIT Press, 2003).
                                              58

Rodrick, Dani, Arvind Subramanian, and Francesco Trebbi. “Institutions Rule: The Primacy of
       Institutions over Geography and Integration in Economic Development.” NBER Working
       Paper, 9305, October 2002.

Rolnick, Arthur J. and Warren E. Weber. “New Evidence of the Free Banking Era.” American
       Economic Review, 73, 5 (December 1983), 1080-1091.

Rose-Ackerman, Susan. Corruption: A Study in Political Economy, (New York: Academic Press,
      1978).

Scheiber, Harry N. Ohio Canal Era: A Case Study of Government and the Economy, 1820-1861.
       (Athens, Ohio: The Ohio State University Press, 1969).

Schwartz, Anna. “The Beginning of Competitive Banking in Philadelphia.” In (Money in
      Historical Perspective, NBER, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1987).

Schweikart, Larry. Banking in the American South from the Age of Jackson to Reconstruction.
      (Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University Press, 1987).

Seavoy, Ronald E. The Origins of the American Business Corporation, 1784-1855. (Westport:
      Greenwood Press, 1982).

Shepsle, Kenneth A., and Mark S. Bonchek. Analyzing Politics. (New York: W.W. Norton,
       1997).

Shepsle, Kenneth A., and Barry R. Weingast. "Political Solutions to Market Problems,"
       American Political Science Review (June, 1984) 78: 417-34.

Shleifer and Vishny, “Corruption.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 108, 3, (1993), 599-617.

Sparks, Earl Sylvester. History and Theory of Agricultural Credit in the United States. (New
       York: Thomas Crowell, 1932).

Stein, Robert M., and Kenneth N. Bickers. Perpetuating the Pork Barrel: Policy Subsystems and
        American Democracy. (New York: Cambridge University Press, 1995).

Stewart, Charles. Analyzing Congress. (New York: W.W. Norton, 2002).

Sylla, Richard, John B. Legler, and John Joseph Wallis. "Banks and State Public Finance in the
        New Republic." Journal of Economic History, 47, 2 (June, 1987.), 391-403.

Sylla, Richard, John B. Legler, and John Joseph Wallis. ICPSR, data.

Tarr, Alan Understanding State Constitutions, (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1998).
                                              59

Thorpe, Francis Newton, The Federal and State Constitutions, Colonial Charters, and the
      Organic Laws of the State, Territories, and Colonies; Now or heretofore Forming the
      United States of America. Washington, D.C. 1909.

Troesken, Werner. “The Institutional Antecedents of State Utility Regulation: The Chicago Gas
      Industry, 1860 to 1913.” In The Regulated Economy: A Historical Approach to Political
      Economy, edited by Claudia Goldin and Gary D. Libecap, 55 - 80, Chicago: University of
      Chicago Press.

Wallenstein, Peter. From Slave South to New South: Public Policy in Nineteenth Century
      Georgia. (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1987).

Wallis, John Joseph, Arthur Grinath, and Richard Sylla, “Debt, Default, and Revenue Structure.”
        NBER Working Paper and mimeo, 2001.

Wallis, John Joseph, Richard Sylla and John Legler. “The Interaction of Taxation and Regulation
        in Nineteenth Century Banking.” In Goldin and Libecap, eds. The Regulated Economy: A
        Historical Approach to Political Economy, (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1994,
        pp. 121-144).

Wallis, John Joseph, 2000, “American Government Finance in the Long Run: 1790 to 1990,”
        Journal of Economic Perspectives, 14, 1, (January, 2000), 61-82 .

Wallis, John Joseph, 2001, “History of the Property Tax,” in Property Taxation and Local
        Government Finance, Wallace E. Oates, ed., (Cambridge: Lincoln Institute, 2001), 123,
        147.

Wallis, John Joseph, 2003, "Market Augmenting Government? The State and the Corporation in
        19th Century America" in Omar Azfar and Charles Cadwell, ed. Market-Augmenting
        Government: The Institutional Foundations for Prosperity. (Ann Arbor: University of
        Michigan Press, 2003).

Wallis, John Joseph, 2003A “The Property Tax as a Coordination Device: Financing Indiana’s
        Mammoth System of Internal Improvements.” Explorations in Economic History. (July
        2003).

Wallis, John Joseph. The NBER/Maryland State Constitution Project,
        http://129.2.168.174/constitution/.

Weingast, Barry R. 1979. "A Rational Choice Perspective on Congressional Norms," American
      Journal of Political Science 24: 245-262.

Weingast, Barry R., Kenneth A. Shepsle, and Christopher Johnsen. "The Political Economy of
      Benefits and Costs: A Neoclassical Approach to Distributive Politics," Journal of
                                             60

       Political Economy 89, 4, (August, 1981) 642-664.

Worley, Ted R. “The Control of the Real Estate Bank of the State of Arkansas, 1836-1855.” The
      Mississippi Valley Historical Review, 37, 3 (December 1950), 403-426.

_____. “Arkansas and the Money Crisis of 1836-1837.” The Journal of Southern History, 15, 2
       (May 1949), 178-191.
61
                                               62

                                             Table 1
                          Total State debt and debt per capita in 1841,
                          whether a State defaulted or restricted debt,
                                   and total State debt 1880.

           State         Total Debt     Debt PC     Default? Restrict?    Total Debt
                           1841          1841                               1880


                   FL      $4,000,000      $74.07          Y         N  $1,280,500
                   LA     $23,985,000      $68.14          Y         Y $22,430,800
                   MD     $15,214,761      $32.37          Y         Y $11,277,111
                    IL    $13,527,292      $28.42          Y         Y    $281,059
                   AK      $2,676,000      $27.31          Y         N  $2,813,500

                   MI      $5,611,000      $26.47          Y         Y    $905,150
                   AL     $15,400,000      $26.06          N         N  $9,008,000
                   PA     $33,301,013      $19.32          Y         Y $21,561,990
                   MS      $7,000,000      $18.62          Y         N    $379,485
                    IN    $12,751,000      $18.59          Y         Y  $4,998,178

                   NY     $21,797,267       $8.97          N         Y  $8,988,360
                   MA      $5,424,137       $7.35          N         N $33,020,464
                   OH     $10,924,123       $7.19          N         Y  $6,476,805
                   WI       $200,000        $6.45          N         Y     $11,000
                   SC      $3,691,234       $6.21          N         N  $6,639,171

                   TN      $3,398,000       $4.10          N         N $20,991,700
                   KY      $3,085,500       $3.96          N         Y  $1,858,008
                   ME      $1,734,861       $3.46          N         N  $5,848,900
                   VA      $4,037,200       $3.23          N         N $29,345,226
                   MO       $842,261        $2.19          N         N $16,259,000

                   GA      $1,309,750       $1.90          N         N    $9,951,500
                   NH              $0       $0.00          N         N    $3,501,100
                   CT              $0       $0.00          N         N    $4,967,600
                   VT              $0       $0.00          N         N        $4,000
                    RI             $0       $0.00          N         Y    $3,534,500
                   NC              $0       $0.00          N         N    $5,006,616
                   NJ              $0       $0.00          N         Y    $1,896,300
                   DE              $0       $0.00          N         N     $880,750




Notes: Debt in 1841 and 1880 taken from 1880 Census.
                                                      63

                                                 Table 2
                                  Constitutional Changes, 1840 to 1860

                           Wrote New Constitutions

                           Rhode Island                              1842

                           New Jersey                                1844

                           Louisiana                                 1845
                                                                     1851

                           New York                                  1846

                           Illinois                                  1848

                           Kentucky                                  1850

                           Michigan                                  1850

                           Virginia                                  1850

                           Indiana                                   1851

                           Maryland                                  1851

                           Ohio                                      1851

                           Wrote First Constitution

                           Texas                                      1845

                           Iowa                                      1847
                                                                     1857

                           California                                1849

                           Wisconsin                                 1848

                           Florida                                   1838

                           Amended Constitutions

                           Arkansas                                  1846

                           Pennsylvania                              1857

                           Michigan                                  1843

The following states did not write new constitutions or significantly amend their
 existing constitutions between 1840 and 1860
 ME, VT, MA, CT, DE, NC, SC, AL, TN, MS, MO
                                         64

                                     Table 3
                    State Investment in Internal Improvements
                              By method of Finance


Method                    Prediction                Amount

Normal taxation           None                      $0

Something for
     Everyone             None                      $0

Benefit Taxation          Positive                  $53m

Taxless Finance           Positive                  $53m Southern Banks
                                                    $80m Northern transportation
                                                         projects


Total is $186 million out of $198 million in state debt outstanding.
                                  65

                                Table 4
                     General Constitutional Changes

Wrote New Constitutions             Debt   Corporations   Taxation


Rhode Island               1842        Y        Y            Y

New Jersey                 1844        Y        Y            Y

Louisiana                  1845        Y        Y            Y
                           1851        Y        Y            Y

New York                   1846        Y        Y

Illinois                   1848        Y        Y            Y

Kentucky                   1850        Y        Y

Michigan                   1850        Y        Y            Y

Virginia                   1850                              Y

Indiana                    1851        Y        Y            Y

Maryland                   1851        Y        Y            Y

Ohio                       1851        Y        Y            Y

Wrote First Constitution

Iowa                       1847        Y        Y
                           1857        Y        Y

California                 1849        Y        Y            Y

Wisconsin                  1848        Y        Y            Y

Florida                    1838                 Y            Y


Amended Constitutions

Arkansas                   1846

Pennsylvania               1857        Y

Michigan                   1843
                                                         66

                                                  Table 5
                                 Constitutional Restrictions on State Debts

                      Procedural Credit Short          Absolute Refer- Time Ways and Single No
New Const.            Restriction Not    Term          Limit    enda Limit Means     Object Repeal
                                  Loaned Limit

Rhode Island 1842              Y             50,000           N     Y

New Jersey 1844                Y       Y 100,000              N     Y   35          Y     Y          Y

Louisiana      1845            Y            100,000         N                       Y     Y           Y
               1851            Y            100,000 8,000,000                       Y     Y          Y*

New York       1846            Y           1,000,000          N     Y    18 Direct Tax    Y          Y

Illinois       1848            Y             50,000                 Y               Y                Y

Kentucky       1850            Y       Y 500,000                    Y   30          Y

Michigan       1843           Y                                     Y                     Y
Michigan       1850        NO II       Y     50,000

Virginia       1850                    Y                                34

Indiana        1851 Prohibited              Prohibite
                                                   d

Maryland       1851            Y       Y 100,000 100,000                15          Y

Ohio           1851        NO II       Y


First Const.

Iowa           1847            Y         100,000              N     Y   20          Y     Y
               1857            Y       Y 250,000              N     Y   20 Direct Tax     Y


California     1849            Y            300,000                 Y   20          Y     Y          Y

Wisconsin      1848            Y            100,000                      5          Y     Y          Y

Florida        1838      nothing


Amended

Pennsylvania 1857        Limited       Y 750,000

Michigan       1843
                                                67

Notes:

Procedural Restriction is Yes if state has some legislature cannot increase debt unilaterally.
       No II if state cannot issue debt for internal improvements.
Credit Not Loaned is Yes if state cannot loan credit to private individual or corporation.
Short Term Limit is the limit on “casual debt”
Absolute limit is limit of the total amount of debt outstanding, regardless of purpose.
Referenda is Yes if voter approval is required for debt issue (aside from casual debt).
Time Limit is the maximum number of years bonds can be issued for.
Ways and Means is Yes if a taxes must be provided to service the debt.
       Direct Tax if a property tax increase must be provided.
Single Object is Yes if legislation authorizing debt must be constrained to one object.
Repeal is Yes if the laws authorizing taxation cannot be repealed, are “irrepealable.”
                                                     68

                                               Table 6
                     State Constitutional Provisions with Regard to Corporations
                            Investment         General        Special          Special        Repeal or    Banks
New Constitutions           Prohibited         Laws           Prohibited       Absolute       Revoke

Rhode Island         1842                 Y

New Jersey           1844          Y (local)              Y                Y

Louisiana            1845                 Y               Y           Y                                            No
                     1851                Y*                Y, not Banks


New York             1846                                 Y                Y          No
                                                                                No Banks

Illinois             1848         In Banks                Y                Y          NO                      No State
                                                                                                                 Bank
                                                                                                              General
                                                                                                               Voters
Kentucky             1850          nothing

Michigan             1850                 Y               Y                                                   General
                                                                                                               Voters
Virginia             1850

Indiana              1851         Y (S & L)               Y                Y                                  General


Maryland             1851                                 Y                Y          NO                  Y General

Ohio                 1851         Y (S & L)               Y                Y              Y               Y General
                                                                                                             Voters
First Constitution

Iowa                 1847                 Y               Y                Y              Y                        No
                     1857                 Y               Y                Y              Y               Y

California           1849                 Y               Y                N              Y                        No
                                                                                                               Deposit

Wisconsin            1848                 Y               Y                Y              N               Y General
                                                                                                             Voters
Florida              1838                 Y                              N
                                                               2/3 majority
Amended

Pennsylvania         1838                                                                                 Y         6
                                                                                                               months
                     1857                 Y                                                               Y
Table 5, continued

Notes:
                                               69

The Louisiana constitution in 1851 allowed investment in Internal Improvement Companies up
to 1/5 of their capital.

Investment Prohibited: State (Local) government prohibited from investing in corporations.
General Laws: Corporations can be created under General Incorporation Acts.
Special Prohibited: State cannot, under usual circumstances, create corporations by Special Act.
Special Absolute: State can never create corporations by Special Act.

Banks:
No - Banks Prohibited
General - Banks allowed under General Act only
General/Voters - Banks allowed only if voters approve a General Incorporation Act.
Deposit - In California the only banks allowed are deposit banks, no money creating banks.
6 months - In Pennsylvania, bank charters had a 6 month waiting period.
                                         70

                                       Table 7
               State Constitutional Provisions with regard to Taxation

                                              Uniform     Taxed By       Equal
Wrote New Constitutions                        Rules         Value        Rate


Rhode Island                 1842

New Jersey                   1844                    Y            Y

Louisiana                    1845                    Y            Y
                             1851                    Y            Y

New York*                    1846   nothing

Illinois                     1848             Y (local)           Y

Kentucky                     1850   nothing

Michigan*                    1850                    Y            Y         Y

Virginia                     1850                    Y            Y         Y



Indiana                      1851                    Y            Y         Y

Maryland                     1851                                 Y

Ohio                         1851                    Y


Wrote First Constitution

Iowa                         1847   nothing
                             1857   nothing

California                   1849                    Y            Y         Y

Wisconsin                    1848                    Y

Florida                      1838                    Y                      Y

Other States

Tennessee                    1834                    Y            Y

Maine*                       1819                                 Y         Y
                                                   71

                                             Table 8
                         Party Strength in the States in the early 1840s

                               New Constitutions            Average Whig      Whig Percentage
                                      or                     Percentage in     in Popular Vote
                                 Amendment                State Legislature       for President
                                 1842 to 1852                 1841 to 1844               1844

       PRO-WHIG                                                  GROUP I

       Rhode Island        Y                       77                                       60
       Vermont             N                       57                                       55
       Kentucky            Y                       68                                     53.9
       North Carolina      N                       51                                     52.7
       Maryland            Y                       50                                     52.4
       Massachusetts       N                       62                                     51.7
       Delaware            N                       67                                     51.2
       Connecticut         N                       49                                     50.8
       New Jersey          Y                       56                                     50.4
       Tennessee           N                       52.5                                   50.1
       Ohio                Y                       50.5                                   49.6

       IN BETWEEN                                               GROUP II

       Georgia             N                       49                                     48.8
       Louisiana           Y                       54.5                                   48.7
       Pennsylvania        Y                       40                                     48.5
       Indiana             Y                       48                                     48.4
       New York            Y                       29.5                                   47.8
       Virginia            Y                       47                                       47

       PRO-DEMOCRAT                                             GROUP III

       Michigan            Y                       12.5                                   43.5
       Mississippi         N                       35                                     43.4
       Missouri            N                       35.5                                     43
       Illinois            Y                       32.5                                   42.4
       Alabama             N                       37                                       41
       Maine               N                       30                                     40.4
       Arkansas            N                       22.5                                     37
       New Hampshire       N                       32.4                                   36.3

Source: Holt, 1999. Table 20, p. 214.
                                             72

                                            Table 9
               Total and Per Capita debt 1841, in states that defaulted and in
                States that restricted debt, and change in debt 1841 to 1880

States that:                             Defaulted           Did not Default

                      Total Debt     $13,118,451                  $4,258,958
                  standard error     $10,100,139                  $6,886,104

                Per Capita Debt              $35                           $4
                 standard error              $21                           $6


                                       Restricted              Did not Restrict
                                             Debt                        Debt

                      Total Debt     $12,456,069                  $3,094,590
                  standard error     $10,936,273                  $3,936,357

                Per Capita Debt              $18                          $11
                 standard error              $19                          $19


                                       Restricted              Did not Restrict
                                             Debt                        Debt

                Change in Total
                  Debt between
                 1841 and 1880        ($5,437,797)                $6,274,004
                  standard error       $6,202,488                $10,245,757


                                         Defaulted             Did not Default

                Change in Total
                  Debt between
                 1841 and 1880        ($5,793,143)                $4,593,094
                  standard error       $4,508,886                $10,844,711
