NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

R-SQUARED AROUND THE WORLD:
NEW THEORY AND NEW TESTS
Li Jin
Stewart Myers
Working Paper 10453
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10453
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2004

We thank Toby Moskowitz, Rene Stulz, Robert Taggart and Sheridan Titman for helpful comments, and the
Research Computing Services Group at Harvard Business School, especially James Zeilter, for help with
obtaining and understanding the data used in this paper. Anna Yu and Alvaro Vivanco provided helpful
research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2004 by Li Jin and Stewart Myers. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

R-Squared Around the World: New Theory and New Tests
Li Jin and Stewart Myers
NBER Working Paper No. 10453
April 2004
JEL No. G12, G14, G15, G38, N20
ABSTRACT
Morck, Yeung and Yu (MYY, 2000) show that R2 and other measures of stock market synchronicity
are higher in countries with less developed financial systems and poorer corporate governance.
MYY and Campbell, Lettau, Malkiel and Xu (2001) also find a secular decline in R2 in the United
States over the last century. We develop a model that explains these results and generates additional
testable hypotheses.
The model shows how control rights and information affect the division of risk-bearing between
inside managers and outside investors. Insiders capture part of the firm's operating cash flows. The
limits to capture are based on outside investors' perception of the value of the firm. The firm is not
completely transparent, however. Lack of transparency shifts firm-specific risk to insiders and
reduces the amount of firm-specific risk absorbed by outside investors. Our model also predicts that
"opaque" stocks are more likely to crash, that is, to deliver large negative returns. Crashes occur
when insiders have to absorb too much firm-specific bad news and decide to "give up."
We test these predictions using stock returns from all major stock markets from 1990 to 2001. We
find strong positive relationships between R2 and several measures of opaqueness. These measures
also explain the frequency of large negative returns.
Li Jin
Harvard Business School
ljin@hbs.edu
Stewart C. Myers
Sloan School of Management
MIT, Room E52-451
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142-1347
and NBER
scmyers@mit.edu

1. Introduction
Morck et al. 2000 show that R2 and other measures of stock-market synchronicity are higher in
countries with relatively low per-capita GDP and less-developed financial systems. MYY and
Campbell et al. 2001 also find a secular decline in R2s in the United States over the last century.
These are intriguing and important results, which suggest that we may be able to learn about
corporate finance and governance not just from the level of stock prices, or from short-term event
studies, but also from the second or higher moments of stock returns.
Of course there are many possible explanations for the inverse relationship between financial
development and R2s, explanations that have nothing to do with corporate finance or governance.
The pattern of R2s could reflect higher macroeconomic risk or lack of diversification across
industries in smaller, less-developed countries. MYY control for such effects assiduously. The
cross-country pattern in R2s remains.
MYY propose that differences in protection for investors’ property rights could explain the
connection between financial development and R2. MYY are on the right track, but it turns out that
imperfect protection for investors does not affect R2 if the firm is completely transparent. Some
degree of opaqueness (lack of transparency) is essential.
We show how limited information affects the division of risk-bearing between insiders and outside
investors. Insiders capture part of the firm’s operating cash flows. That is, they extract more cash
than they would receive if investors’ property rights could be completely protected. The limits to
capture are based on outside investors’ perception of the firm’s cash flow and value. This
perception is imperfect. Investors can see some changes in cash flow, but not all changes. When
cash flows are higher than investors think, insiders’ capture increases. When cash flows are lower
than investors think, insiders are forced to reduce capture if they want to keep running the firm.
Increased capture therefore reduces the amount of firm-specific risk absorbed by outside investors.
An increase in opaqueness, combined with capture by insiders, leads to lower firm-specific risk for
investors and to higher R2s.
1.1. Opaqueness and investor protection

3

In practice opaqueness and imperfect protection of investors’ property rights go together and
probably are mutually reinforcing. Insiders may make the firm more opaque to protect their capture
of cash flow, for example. We would not expect perfect protection of investors in an opaque firm.
Nevertheless, we draw a distinction between opaqueness and poor protection of investors. That
distinction is important to our model and tests.
Poor protection without opaqueness is not enough to explain high R2s. Consider a simple example.
Suppose that poor protection of investors’ property rights allows insiders to capture half of the
firm’s cash flows. Outside investors can see all of the firm’s cash flows (complete transparency) but
can’t prevent capture. Therefore the stock-market value of the firm is half its potential value.
Market value still fluctuates as cash flows are realized and the firm’s overall value is updated, but
by only half of the unexpected change in potential value. The percentage changes in market value
are not affected by the insiders’ capture, however. Rate-of-return variance is unchanged. Investors
capture half of any value change due to firm-specific information, and also half of any value change
due to market risk, i.e., market-wide, “macro” information. The proportions of firm-specific and
local market volatility are unaffected by insiders’ capture. R2 is not affected.
The story changes when the firm is not completely transparent. Change the example so that outside
investors can observe all market-wide information, but only part of firm-specific information.
Insiders still capture half of the firm’s cash flows on average, but they capture more when the
hidden firm-specific information is positive and less when it is negative. Opaqueness therefore
requires insiders to soak up some firm-specific variance. The firm-specific variance absorbed by
investors is correspondingly lower. Of course investors absorb all market risk – macroeconomic
information is presumably common knowledge. Thus the ratio of market to total risk is increased by
opaqueness. Higher R2s are caused by opaqueness, not by poor investor protection.
The more opaque the firm, the greater the amount of hidden, firm-specific bad news that may arrive
in a given span of time. The amount of bad news that insiders are willing to absorb is limited.1 But
if a sufficiently long run of bad firm-specific news is encountered, insiders give up, and all the bad
news comes out at once. Giving up means a large negative outlier in the distribution of returns.

1

The amount of good news absorbed is, in our model, potentially unlimited. Insiders can hide good news simplyby
capturing the increased cash flows.
4

Therefore we also predict that stocks in more opaque countries are more likely to crash, that is, to
deliver large negative returns, than stocks in relatively transparent countries.
But why should insiders absorb any firm-specific risk on the downside? Why don’t they hide the
upside and reveal the downside? The answer, of course, is that insiders would always report bad
news even when the true news is good.2 Bad news is credible only when reported at a cost -- the
cost of hiring credible auditors and opening up the firm’s books to outsiders, for example, or the
personal costs borne by insiders if they are ejected when bad news is released. These costs set the
strike price of the insiders’ abandonment option, which is exercised after the insiders soak up a
sufficient run of hidden bad news. We discuss this option later.
We have discussed the case of full transparency but limited protection of investors – the case where
insiders can capture cash flow in broad daylight with no impact on R2. Consider the opposite
extreme case. Suppose that investors could enforce their property rights fully and costlessly
whenever they receive information about cash flows or firm value. They obtain every dollar of cash
flow or value that is apparent to them. Nevertheless, if the firm is not completely transparent,
insiders can still capture unexpected cash flows that are not perceived by investors. They will soak
up some firm-specific risk. Again, the more opaque the firm, the higher its R2.
There is only one case where greater opaqueness does not reduce R2. The case is improbable but
worth noting for completeness. Imagine an opaque firm run by a saintly manager who always acts
in shareholders’ interest, never taking a dollar more or less than deserved. That manager does not
have to soak up any firm specific risk. All firm-specific good or bad news is absorbed by investors
sooner or later, even if they cannot see the news as it happens.
The properties of stock market returns in this case depend on how information is finally released.
There are three possibilities. (1) If the saintly manager reports everything promptly and credibly,
opaqueness is eliminated and returns are not affected. (2) Suppose that hidden news is revealed after
a stable lag. Then the average amount of firm-specific information released in any period is the
same as for a transparent firm. Average firm-specific variance and R2 are not affected by delayed
reporting. (3) If a stable lag is implausible, think of good or bad news accumulating within the firm
2

We assume that insiders can’t be forced to report truthfully by some mechanism for punishment after the fact. If such a
mechanism exists, it is evidently not effective – otherwise firms would be transparent. In real life they are not
transparent, especially in developing economies.
5

until the difference between intrinsic value and share price reaches a critical value. The news would
then be released all at once, like a pressure vessel letting off steam. The releases would not affect
average, long-run R2s, although we would see long tails in the distribution of stock returns. (We will
control for kurtosis in our tests.)

1.2. Summary of predictions and results
Our theory makes two basic predictions. (1) Other things equal, R2s should be higher in countries
where firms are more opaque (less transparent) to outside investors. (2) Crashes, that is, large,
negative return outliers, should be more common for firms in less transparent countries. These are
not market-wide crashes, but large, negative, market-adjusted returns on individual stocks.
We test our model’s predictions using returns from all major stock markets from 1990 to 2001. We
confirm that R2 is higher in countries with less developed financial systems, and we find evidence
that R2 is declining over time internationally. We also find a positive relationship between countryaverage R2sand several measures of opaqueness. Finally, we show that the frequency of large
negative returns is higher in markets with high R2 and in countries with less developed financial
markets. The frequency of large negative returns is also positively related to our measures of
opaqueness.
We do not claim that our model is the exclusive explanation of the differences in R2s across
countries or over time. For example, countries with less developed financial markets are more liable
to episodes of political risk, which may translate into increased market risk. Higher market risk
obviously generates higher R2s, other things equal. Therefore we will control for cross-country
differences in market risk in our tests.

1.3. Prior research
There is not much prior work on our topic. The two leading articles, MYY (2000) and Campbell, et
al. (2001) were noted above. Related papers include Wurgler (2000), who finds that capital is more

6

efficiently allocated in countries with better legal protection for minority investors and more firmspecific information in stock returns.
MYY (2000) suggest that poor protection of investors could make firm-specific information less
useful to risk arbitrageurs, decreasing the number of informed traders relative to noise traders. If the
noise traders “herd” and trade the market rather than individual stocks, market risk may be higher in
less developed financial markets.3 Thus poor protection of investors could affect R2 through two
channels. (1) Poor protection could increase market risk. (2) Poor protection could proxy for more
opaqueness, which shifts firm-specific risk from outside investors to inside managers. We focus on
channel (2), but we will control for channel (1) by including the level of market risk as a control
variable.
Bushman et al. (2003) study two kinds of transparency: financial transparency (the intensity and
timeliness of financial disclosures, including interpretation and coverage by analysts and the media)
and governance transparency (for example, the identity, remuneration, and shareholdings of officers
and directors). They find that financial transparency is lower in countries with a high share of stateowned enterprises and in countries where firms are more likely to be harmed by revealing sensitive
information to competitors or local governments. Governance transparency is higher in countries
with high levels of judicial efficiency and common-law legal origin, and in countries where stock
markets are active and well-developed.
Active security analysts should make firms more transparent. Chang et al. (2001) demonstrate a
wide variation in the security-analyst activity in 47 countries. They suggest that transparency is
primarily influenced by countries’ legal systems and information infrastructure. The organizational
structure of firms -- whether they operate as groups or conglomerates, for example – seems less
important. Our tests will use a measure of transparency based on the dispersion of analysts’
forecasts.
Bris, Goetzmann and Zhu (2003) explore international differences in the cost or feasibility of short
sales. They find that restrictions on short-selling reduce the amount of cross-sectional variation in

3

We see no reason why the effects of noise trading should be confined to market returns, however. That result does not
follow from De Long et al. (1989, 1990, 1991), despite their suggestion that the risks created by noise traders should be
assumed to be market-wide and not firm-specific (1990, p. 707). This paper only considers a single-asset economy.
7

equity returns. Their results are consistent with our theory if restrictions on short-selling make the
firm more opaque.
Our paper also joins a larger number of more general studies of investor protection, corporate
governance and the development of financial markets around the world. These include La Porta et
al. (2000, 2002), Friedman and Johnson (2000) and Rajan and Zingales (2001).
Our results can also be compared to Easley and O'Hara (2002) and O'Hara (2003), who discuss the
effects of public vs. private information on firm value. In these papers, private information gives
informed traders an edge in forming optimal portfolios, leaving the uninformed traders with more
risk to bear. The uninformed traders demand higher expected returns, thus decreasing the value of
firms that generate less public and more private information. We also distinguish public and private
information, but assume that all outside investors are imperfectly informed. All private information
is held by inside managers, so long as the inside managers do not “give up” and release it.
The next section presents our theoretical model. Proofs and technical details have been moved to
Appendix A. Section 3 describes the data, explains the setup of the empirical tests and presents our
results. Section 4 wraps up the paper and notes several issues open for future research.

2. A model of control and risk-bearing when outside investors have limited information
We extend Myers (2000) to situations where outside investors cannot see what firm value really is.
The firm is partly opaque. If good news arrives that investors cannot see, insiders can capture more
cash flow than if the firm were completely transparent.
The information received by investors in a particular firm is a combination of macroeconomic and
firm-specific news. But the macroeconomic news can be separated, because it is common to all
firms. We therefore assume that outside investors can observe a market factor that drives all stocks’
returns, as well as some firm-specific information. Lacking a more precise estimate, the outside
investors replace the missing firm-specific information with its expected value, conditioned on the
information that investors do have.

8

The firm has an operating asset. For simplicity, we ignore depreciation and reinvestment.4 The
outside equity investors own all the firm’s shares5 and can take over the operating asset if they are
willing to incur a cost of collective action. Define Kt , the intrinsic value of the firm, as the present
value of future operating cash flows, discounted by a constant cost of capital r. If future cash flows
and firm values are interpreted as certainty equivalents, r is the risk-free rate. Given the information
set It at date t,
Kt(It) = PV{E(Ct+1|It), E(Ct+2|It), . . .; r}

(2.1)

The operating asset’s existence and ownership are verifiable. The inside managers cannot take the
asset, but can intercept cash flow, which is not verifiable. Taking part of the cash flow compensates
the insiders for their firm-specific human capital.6 The insiders will take as much cash as possible,
however, up to the point where further capture would jeopardize their continued right to manage the
firm and capture cash flow in future periods. Any cash flow not captured is paid out as a dividend.7
Outsiders can seize the firm and fire the managers. This requires costly collective action. The net
value that outsiders can get by taking over the firm is denoted by αKt, where α < 1 is a parameter
measuring the efficiency of corporate control. A low value of α indicates a high cost of collective
action.8
The ability of outside investors to take over the firm determines its market value. Outsiders will
take over unless they expect future dividends with present value at least equal to αKt(It ), their
4

It is easy to introduce depreciation and re-investment according to a pre-defined schedule. But discretionary
investment would introduce complications not modeled here. If the decision to invest can be observed, then a new
information channel is opened up from the inside managers to outside investors. On the other hand, outside investors
may not be able to observe whether an investment has actually been made until the investment project is complete and
operating. In that case insiders would have strong incentives to “invest” money into their own pockets. See Myers
(2000, pp. 1030-1033).
5
None of the following analysis is changed if insiders own some of the firm’s shares, provided that insiders cannot
block outside investors’ property rights completely. We can rule that out. Total blockage would mean that the firm has
no value to outside investors and that the firm could not go public and enter our sample.
6
In Myers (2000), the inside manager contributes human capital that augments the firm’s operating cash flows by a
factor m ≥ 1. Here we assume m = 1 for simplicity.
7
The model is not restricted to dividend-paying firms. The “dividend” could be an increase in the verifiable value of the
operating asset. Investors don’t care whether their returns come as cash payouts or as increases in the net value that
investors can realize by exercising their control rights.
8
Jensen and Meckling (1976) would interpret α as the result of outside investors’ optimal outlays on monitoring and
control. At the optimum, the marginal benefit of monitoring and control equals the marginal cost. Here the marginal
benefit is additional cash paid out to investors. Optimal monitoring and control does not force payout of all cash, so the
optimal α is less than 1.0.
9

expected payoff from taking over immediately at date t. Insiders will pay the minimum dividend
sufficient to forestall takeover, conditional on what outside investors know. If outside investors
have full information, and know that the operating asset is worth Kt(It), the minimum dividend Y is
Y = rα K t ( I t ) .9
The insiders can leave the firm at any time, taking all the current-period cash flow with them. There
is a cost of departing, however, including the lost opportunity to capture future cash flows for at
least one future period. Myers (2000) describes the conditions under which the insiders find it
optimal to stick to the firm for one more period, rather than departing and setting up their tents
elsewhere. We use his results here.
In summary, the insiders must take one of two actions in each period: (1) pay a dividend sufficient
to satisfy investors or (2) capture all current period cash flow, triggering collective action and
takeover by outside investors. Action (2), which amounts to exercise of an abandonment option,
imposes a cost on the managers, but can relieve them from hiding and absorbing an accumulation of
negative, firm-specific information.
We now give a more formal statement of the model.

2.1. Model setup
Assume that the firm’s cash-flow generating process is:
Ct = K 0 X t

(2.2)

where K0 is the initial investment, a constant, and Xt captures the random shocks to the cash flow
process. Assume that Xt is the sum of three independent shocks:

X t = f t + θ 1, t + θ 2 , t ,

(2.3)

where f t captures unanticipated changes in a market (macroeconomic) factor that affects all firms
and is common knowledge, and θ 1,t and θ 2,t capture firm-specific cash-flow innovations. The
9

See Myers (2000, p. 1017).
10

inside managers observe both θ 1,t and θ 2,t, but outsiders only observe θ 1,t. Since θ1,t and θ 2,t are
independent, observing one gives no information about the other.10
We assume that f t, θ 1,t and θ 2,t are stationary AR(1). For simplicity we also assume that they all
have the same AR(1) parameter:

ft +1 = f 0 + ϕ ft + ε t +1

(2.4)

θ1,t +1 = θ1,0 + ϕθ1,t + ξ1,t +1

(2.5)

θ2,t +1 = θ2,0 + ϕθ2,t + ξ2,t +1

(2.6)

where 0 < ϕ < 1 . The AR(1) assumption makes sense because profitability should mean-revert as
industry capacity responds to changes in costs or demand. Stationarity is particularly useful here
because it limits the difference between the investors’ and the insiders’ valuations of the firm. A
potentially unbounded difference between these valuations would stretch our model beyond any
reasonable economic interpretation.
The assumptions mean that the distribution of Xt. is also stationary AR(1):
X t +1 = X 0 + ϕ X t + λ t +1 ,

(2.7)

where X 0 = f 0 + θ1,0 + θ 2,0 , and λt = ε t + ξ1,t + ξ 2,t .
Define the ratio of firm-specific to market variance in the cash flow generating process:

κ=

Var (θ1,t + θ 2,t )
Var ( ft )

(2.8)

Also define the transparency of the firm as the ratio of the variance of θ1,t to the sum of the
variances of θ1,t and θ 2,t :

10

Think of θ2 as the forecast error of estimating θ1 + θ2 using θ1 only. Then by construction θ2 is uncorrelated with θ1.
11

η=

Var (θ1,t )
Var (θ1,t + θ 2,t )

=

Var (θ1,t )

(2.9)

Var (θ1,t ) + Var (θ 2,t )

where the last equality follows from the independence of θ1,t and θ 2,t . η close to 1 means that most
firm-specific information is revealed to outsiders through accounting reports or other channels. η
close to zero means that the firm is almost totally opaque.
The time line of the model is:
C t , Yt

C t+1, Yt+1

↓

↓
↑

↑

K t (ex-dividend intrinsic value)

t

t+

K t+1

t+1

t+1+

At time t, a cash flow C t is realized. The insiders observe Ct (and all three shocks ft, θ1,t and θ2,t) and
decides on the dividend Yt. Outside investors observe ft and θ1,t and of course the dividend Yt.
Investors use their information to update their expectations of Ct and K t, and then decide whether to
organize to take over the firm. If outsiders decide to not take over, the sequence repeats at t + 1.

2.2. Investors’ estimates of cash flow and value

Now we can write out the conditional and unconditional expectations of the firm’s cash flow and
value. The first step is to show that both cash flow and the intrinsic value of the firm follow an
AR(1) process.
Proposition 1: Ct and Kt are AR(1) with parameter ϕ.

E (Ct +1 | Ct ) = K 0 X 0 + ϕ Ct = C0 + ϕ Ct

12

1
E ( K t +1 | K t ) = K 0 X 0 + ϕ K t
r

(2.10)

The unconditional means of Ct and Kt are:
E (Ct ) =

K0 X 0
1−ϕ

E ( Kt ) =

1 K0 X 0
r 1−ϕ

(2.11)

Proof: see Appendix A.
Proposition 2: Investors’ assessment of the overall value of the firm, conditional on ft and θ1t , is:

E ( K t | ft , θ1,t ) =

θ
K0 X 0
1 K0 X 0
ϕ
ϕ
K 0 ( ft + θ1,t + 2,0 )
−
+
1− ϕ
r 1−ϕ 1+ r −ϕ 1−ϕ 1+ r −ϕ

θ
K X
1 K0 X 0
ϕ
[ K 0 ( ft + θ1,t + 2,0 ) − 0 0 ]
=
+
r 1−ϕ 1+ r −ϕ
1−ϕ
1−ϕ

(2.12)

Proof: see Appendix A.
The conditional value of Kt, given current-period information about ft and θ1t , equals the
unconditional value

θ
K X
ϕ
1 K0 X 0
plus a correction term
[ K 0 ( ft + θ1,t + 2,0 ) − 0 0 ] . From the
1+ r −ϕ
1−ϕ
1−ϕ
r 1−ϕ

definition of Xt, the bracketed expression in Eq. (2.12) is just the difference between the expectation
of Xt, conditional on observing ft and θ1t , and the unconditional expectation of Xt.

2.3. Equilibrium dividend policy

Define Vt ex as the ex-dividend market value of the firm (its value to outside investors), conditional
on { f t ,θ1,t }.

13

Vt ( f t ,θ1,t ) =
ex

E (Yt +1 | ft , θ1,t ) + E (Vt ex
+1 | f t , θ1,t )

1+ r

,

(2.13)

where Yt+1 is the dividend to be paid in period t+1.
In order for outside investors to be willing to let the inside managers run the firm for another period,
the ex-dividend market value of the firm must at least equal the outside investors’ expectation of the
net liquidation value of the firm, E (α K t | f t ,θ1,t ). The insiders will pay a dividend just sufficient to
make the outsiders indifferent between taking over and letting the insiders continue. We assume that
investors are satisfied and do not intervene if this condition is met. Thus we have:
Vt ex = E (α K t | f t ,θ1,t ).

(2.14)

Any dividend policy that satisfies the two conditions given by Eqs. (2.13) and (2.14) defines an
equilibrium. But it turns out that there is only one equilibrium, defined by constant-payout policy, if
we rule out equilibria supported by bubbles or empty promises from the manager.
Proposition 3: The equilibrium dividend is a constant fraction α of investors’ conditional

expectation of cash flow:
Y *τ = α E (Cτ | f t ,θ1,t ), ∀τ ≥ t

(2.15)

This dividend policy is unique if we rule out bubbles and empty promises11.
Given the cost of collective action, outside investors effectively own a fraction α of the firm. Thus
they demand payment of the same fraction of the firm’s cash flows. Inside managers are willing to
pay this dividend to keep investors quiet and satisfied and to keep them from taking over.
But there may be other equilibria if investors can be swayed by empty promises: managers would
like to pay less than the equilibrium dividend today in exchange for a promise to “make it up later.”

11

Here is a sketch of the proof that Eq. (2.15) defines an optimal solution. First plug (2.15) into (2.13) and (2.14). Using
the definition of Kt, verify that (2.15) does satisfy the equilibrium conditions. Eq. (2.15) supports a Nash Equilibrium: as
long as the unobserved firm-specific shock is not too bad, the insider will find it optimal to stick to the constant
dividend payout. Investors have no incentive to deviate either. In addition, Myers (2000) shows that this solution is
efficient, because insiders will take all positive-NPV projects. Thus this equilibrium will lead to a Pareto-optimal
outcome. There may be other equilibria, but it is natural to assume that the actual equilibrium will settle on this one.
14

(Note that the dividend shortfall goes directly into the managers’ pockets.12) But if investors accept
such a promise today, they must expect that the managers will play the same game again in the
future. If so, the present value of expected future dividends falls below E (α K t | f t ,θ1,t ), violating
Eq. (2.14) and triggering collective action by investors. In other words, investors’ only rational
response to an empty promise is immediate takeover, so in equilibrium empty promises will not be
tried.
The cash flow captured by inside managers equals overall cash flow minus the dividend:
Z t = Ct − Yt = Ct − α E (Ct | ft ,θ1,t ) ,

(2.16)

where Ct is the firm’s actual cash flow, not investors’ conditional expectation. When the hidden
firm-specific information is bad, the inside managers have to make up the difference between the
firm’s actual performance and investors’ estimate of that performance. Thus Z t can be small or
negative. If it is negative, the insiders have to cut ordinary salaries or come up with other sources of
funding. Of course, if the hidden news is bad enough, the insiders abandon the firm to the outside
investors.

2.4. R2

We can now calculate the rate of return on the firm’s shares. Define ri ,t +1 as the realized return in
period t + 1.
ri ,t +1 =

Vt ex
+1 ( f t +1 ,θ1,t +1 ) + Yt +1 ( f t +1 ,θ1,t +1 )
Vt ex ( ft ,θ1,t )

−1

(2.17)

Proposition 4: the return process satisfies:

ri ,t +1 = r +

12

(1 + r )(εt +1 + ξt +1 )
X 0 (1 + r )
+ φ ( ft + θ1t )
r

(2.18)

A dividend cut that was invested could be supported in equilibrium. See fn. 6 above and Myers (2000).
15

Proof: see Appendix A.
The random component in ri ,t +1 is caused by innovations of both ft +1 and θ1,t +1 . The conditional
expected return is always r, however, regardless of ft and θ1,t , because the expected values of

εt +1 and ξt +1 are zero. Although the cash flow process is partially predictable (due to the AR(1)
processes), there is no return predictability. The market valuation incorporates the predictable
component of the cash flows and dividends.
The return on the market portfolio is the same as the return of a stock with no idiosyncratic risk:
rm ,t +1 = r +

(1 + r )(εt +1 )
X 0 (1 + r )
+ φ ft
r

(2.19)

Given stock prices at time t, the t + 1 rate of return for any particular firm depends on two things: a
market factor εt +1 , captured by the market return rm ,t +1 , and a firm specific factor ξt +1. Conditional
on ft and θ1,t , the proportion of variance explained by the market is fixed:13
R2 =

Var (ε t +1 )
1
=
Var (ε t +1 ) + Var (ξt +1 ) κη + 1

(2.20)

Eq. (2.20) shows why stocks could have higher R2s in countries with less developed financial
markets. The stocks could have lower κ , that is, less idiosyncratic cash-flow risk relative to market
risk, or lower η , that is, lower observable idiosyncratic risk.
Notice that α drops out of the expressions for rt and R2. Although α affects the proportion of cash
flows paid to the outsiders, and thus the level of stock prices, it does not affect percentage returns.
We expect low α ’s in countries with less-developed financial markets and relatively poor investor
protection. That by itself does not explain the high R2s observed in such countries, however. In our
model, R2s are determined by the ratio of observable to unobservable firm-specific risk, that is, by
the degree of transparency.

16

2.5. Abandonment

The insider has an abandonment option. The option is exercised if the insider is forced to absorb a
sufficiently long run of firm-specific bad news. We do not model this option specifically. But the
option clearly will be exercised from time to time. Exercise will release the accumulated bad news
all at once. Therefore we predict a greater frequency of large, negative, firm-specific return outliers
in countries where firms are less transparent to outside investors.
Abandonment could mean at least three things. (1) In our model, the inside managers just walk
away from the firm, leaving it to outside stockholders or creditors. For example, the managers could
refuse to pay the dividends called for by public information, thus triggering the outside investors to
organize and take over. (2) The managers could stay with the firm,14 but incur the cost of opening
up the firm to outside investors and convincing them that the bad news is true. (Even if the firm
pays, these costs still come out of the manager’s’ pocket. The managers can take out more cash if
the costs are not incurred.) The managers’ cost of abandonment may also include the loss of
reputation or private benefits. (3) The costs of keeping outside investors ignorant of bad
performance may become so high that insiders can’t prevent the discharge of accumulated bad
news. Note that in our model the costs of hiding good performance are low, because the upside cash
flow that is not seen by outside investors disappears into insiders’ pockets.
Although we do not solve for the optimal exercise of the abandonment option, we can write down
the conditions for the option to be in the money. Suppose the inside managers incur a fixed cost of
abandonment D. The insider then encounters a negative firm-specific shock θ2t, which is not
observed by outside investors. If the insider decides to stick with the firm and absorb the cash flow
impacts of this negative shock, they will end up paying a total present value of
K0θ2,t+ PV{K0 E(θ2,t+1|θ2,t), K0 E(θ2,t+2|θ2,t), …; r} = K 0 [θ 2t +

θ
1 θ 20
ϕ
(− 20 + θ 2t )] (2.21)
+
r 1−ϕ 1+ r −ϕ 1−ϕ

13

The usual market-model regression of a stock’s return on the market return is actually mis-specified, since the
derivative of ri ,t +1 on rm ,t +1 depends on the realization of f t and θ1,t and therefore is not constant over time. But we
will follow previous research and use OLS to fit the market model to individual firms.
The managers could run the firm under more stringent control by investors. Once the investors’ cost of collective
action is sunk, the costs of monitoring and control should fall drastically.

14

17

This option is in the money if the value given by Eq. (2.21) is negative and greater, in absolute
value, than D. We know that the option will be exercised if it is far enough in the money. (The
optimal exercise boundary could depend on the insiders’ wealth, if they are forced to “prop up” the
firm with their own money during a period of hidden bad news.15)
The cost of abandonment is probably not fixed, but linked to current firm value. In Myers (2000),
for example, the defaulting manager takes all of the firm’s current-period cash flow, but loses the
ability to capture future cash flow by exploiting investors’ cost of collective action. The manager is
also forced to sit idle for one or more periods before restarting another firm. The loss of captured
future cash and the opportunity cost of idleness depend on the current cash flow and the current
value of the firm.
Suppose that all abandonment costs add up to a constant fraction p of firm value. Then the option is
in the money if:
K 0 [θ 2t +

θ 2t +

θ
K X
1 θ 20
ϕ
1 K0 X 0
ϕ
(− 20 + θ 2t )] + p{
[− 0 0 + K 0 ( ft + θ1t + θ 2t )]} < 0 ,
+
+
r 1− ϕ 1+ r −ϕ 1−ϕ
r 1− ϕ 1+ r − ϕ 1− ϕ

θ
X
1 θ 20
ϕ
1 X0
ϕ
(− 20 + θ 2t ) + p{
[− 0 + ( f t + θ1t + θ 2t )]} < 0
+
+
r 1−ϕ 1+ r − ϕ 1− ϕ
r 1− ϕ 1+ r − ϕ 1− ϕ

(2.22)

In this case the decision to abandon is affected by both private information from θ2,t and public
information from ft + θ1,t. The private information determines the amount of negative shock that the
insider has to soak up if he stays on. The public information affects the value that insiders have to
give up by defaulting. A more negative value of θ2t makes the insider more likely to give up, while
a more positive value of θ1t or ft makes the insider more likely to continue.
Here we encounter some interesting dynamics. If the manager’s abandonment costs are positively
linked to stock market value, as in Eq. (2.22), we should find fewer crashes (large, negative, firmspecific return outliers) when market returns are positive and the firm’s stock price is doing well.
This may be worth testing if future research examines individual firm returns, rather than the
country averages used in this paper.
15

Friedman and Johnson (2000) propose a model in which insiders usually tunnel resources out of the firm, but
sometimes prop it up, contributing their own money to keep their future tunneling option alive.
18

These at-the-money calculations use the steady-state distribution of the unobservable firm-specific
information. The steady state is not a function of calendar time. That is not quite right when the
manager gives up and the firm starts over again. Abandonment reveals all accumulated information,
and the AR(1) process starts afresh. The probability of another crash in the next period after a crash
is close to zero, although the probability increases as time passes. Thus time can enter investors’
valuations.
Ignoring time, and working with the steady-state distribution, may nevertheless be an excellent
approximation. It typically takes less than ten periods for the variance of the θ2,t distribution to
reach at least 90 percent of steady-state value. This convergence occurs for a wide range of values
of the parameter ϕ. For example, if θ 2t is normal, its distribution is completely characterized by

σ 2,ξ 2 (1 − ϕ 2(t +1) )
θ 20 (1 − ϕ t +1 )
. If we interpret θ 2t as
and Var (θ 2,t ) =
mean and variance, and E (θ 2,t ) =
1−ϕ
1−ϕ 2
the forecast error of an unbiased forecast, then it is natural to assume θ 20 = 0 . Therefore, the mean
of the distribution of θ 2t is always equal to that of the steady state distribution. Furthermore, given
that

Var (θ 2t )
= 1 − ϕ 2(t +1) , for ϕ not larger than about 0.9, it takes less than ten periods after a crash
Var (θ 2 ∞ )

for the variance of the distribution of θ 2t to go back to at least 90% of the variance of the steadystate distribution. In our empirical tests, a crash is defined to happen at most once in 100 periods.
Therefore we believe that the assumption of a steady-state distribution is reasonable.
This is one advantage of using stationary AR(1) processes rather than a random walk or martingale
process for the firm’s cash flows. In a nonstationary process, the distribution of θ2,t will always be a
function of time.
Once the steady state is reached, investors will perceive a constant probability of a crash in each
period. To compensate for the potential loss to outsiders during a crash, insiders will have to pay a
dividend higher than in Eq. (2.15), enough to compensate for the losses incurred if a crash occurs.
This higher dividend will be proportional to the dividend given in Eq. (2.15), however. Thus this
extra dividend does not affect our predictions about R2 or the likelihood of crashes.

19

To summarize, we predict a greater frequency of crashes (large, negative, firm-specific return
outliers) in countries where firms are more opaque to outside investors. Crash frequency does not
just depend on opaqueness, however. Two firms with the same opaqueness, measured by η in Eq.
(2.20), can have different crash frequencies if there are differences in total firm-specific risks or in
the costs incurred by insiders when they exercise their abandonment options. Crash frequency
should always be positively correlated with opaqueness, however.

2.6. Opaqueness and risk-sharing

In this model, the inside managers have no credible way to convey hidden firm-specific information
to outside investors. They are always tempted to report a bad firm-specific shock, bad enough that
no dividend need be paid to the outsiders. Outsiders, fully aware of the insiders’ temptation to
under-report, will demand hard proof for any such claim. Hard proof is costly. In some countries,
there may be no practical way to convey information credibly.
Absent abandonment, insiders are forced to insure outside investors against some of the
unobservable, firm-specific cash flow shocks. The insiders’ inability to convey all the firm-specific
information results in inefficient sharing of firm-specific risk. A risk-averse insider would like to
commit to credibly convey all firm-specific information. Hiring a credible auditing team might be a
pre-commitment to convey inside information, for example. The cost of doing so (and also of
maintaining the team’s credibility ex post) is probably prohibitive in some countries, however.
Credible auditing may also enhance investors’ property rights by reducing costs of monitoring and
control of the firm. In our model, this would show up as a higher α, higher dividends and reduced
cash flow to insiders. Even if a credible auditing team were available, the manager might not wish
to hire it, however. The manager benefits from a lower α once the firm is up and running.16

A commitment to provide credible information to investors could also increase α, thereby increasing the value of the
firm to outside investors and the amount of outside capital that the firm can raise. New and growing firms that need
outside capital have a stronger incentive to establish credibility and transparency. Such firms might end up with lower
R2s for that reason. There might also be differences in R2s within countries that could be traced to other reasons for
differences in opaqueness. The tests in this paper are limited to differences in country averages, however.
16

20

3. Empirical Analysis

We predict higher R2s in countries with less developed financial markets. The reason is not poor
protection of investors’ property rights in such countries, but lack of transparency. Lack of
transparency should also lead to a greater number of stock-price crashes. Insiders do see all firmspecific information, and when the information is sufficiently bad, they will give up and thus let the
whole market know.
MYY examine R2s for a cross section of 40 countries in 1993, 1994 and 1995.17 R2 is higher in
countries with low per capita GDP and in countries where investors’ property rights are not wellprotected. They measure investor protection by a Good Governance Index, which combines three
measures developed by La Porta et al. (1998): measures of government corruption, the risk of
government expropriation of private property and the risk of government repudiation of contracts.
Low values are taken to mean lack of protection of private property.
There are many other reasons why R2s could differ across countries. The scope for diversification is
limited in smaller markets. Operating cash flows could be more highly correlated if firms in poorer
countries are concentrated in relatively few industries. MYY control for these and other possible
explanations. Their basic findings do not change. We use the same controls, which are described
below.
Our empirical tests are organized as follows. First we replicate the MYY’s results, using their
controls, for stocks in a larger sample of 43 countries from 1990 to 2001. We also control for
kurtosis. Then we test whether R2 is also positively related to the frequency of crashes, that is, to
cross-country differences in the frequency of large negative outliers in firm-specific returns. As
predicted, we find a significant positive relationship.
This result is consistent with our model, but not a direct test. High R2 is not caused by a high
likelihood of crashes. Both are caused by opaqueness, that is, reduced information available to
investors. Therefore we introduce three measures of the degree of opaqueness. We find that R2s are
higher in more opaque countries. We also find that crashes are more frequent in more opaque

17

MYY also consider other measures of stock market synchronicity, for example, the average proportion of stocks that
move in the same direction (up or down) in a given period. The results for R2 and these other measures are essentially
the same, however. We will concentrate on R2.
21

countries. These relationships hold even when we control for local market volatility. We conclude
that our results are driven by opaqueness and firm-specific variance, not by correlations with market
risk.

3.1. The sample

We started with returns for all the stocks covered by DataStream from January 1990 to December
2001. We use DataStream’s total return index (RI), which includes dividends as well as price
changes. We have data for stocks in 33 countries for the entire period, and 10 more countries for
part of the period. We include stocks in these 10 countries for years when sufficient data are
available. Following MYY, we exclude stocks that trade for less than 30 weeks during a particular
year. If a country has less than 25 stocks with valid data in a year, we exclude that country for that
year. For example, we always excluded Zambia, which never had more than four listed companies
in Datastream.
We calculate weekly rates of return (Wednesday to Wednesday) for all stocks in our sample. R2s
and residual returns are calculated from an expanded market model regression similar to MYY’s:

rit = α i + β1,i rm , jt + β 2,i [ rUS ,t + EX jt ] + β 3,i rm , j ,t −1 + β 4,i [ rUS ,t −1 + EX j ,t −1 ]
+ β 5 rm , jt − 2 + β 6,i [ rUS ,t − 2 + EX j ,t − 2 ] + β 7,i rm , j ,t +1 + β 8,i [ rUS ,t +1 + EX j ,t +1 ]

(3.1)

+ β 9 rm , jt + 2 + β10,i [ rUS ,t + 2 + EX j ,t + 2 ] + ε it
where rm,jt is the local market index return for country j during time period t, rUS,t is the U.S.
market index return (a proxy for the global market), and EXj,t is the change in country j’s exchange
rate vs. the U.S. dollar. We correct for non-synchronous trading by including two lead and lag terms
for the local and U.S. market indexes. We measure the firm-specific return by the residual return
from Eq. (3.1). This is the return not explained by the local and U.S. markets. We will use the
kurtosis of the residual return as an additional control variable.
Following MYY, we measure a country’s stock market synchronicity by its average R2 for each
year that the country appears in our sample. We use equally weighted averages and also averages

22

weighted by each company’s total return variance.18 We found no clear relationships between the R2
measures and firm size or industry, consistent with Roll (1988). Macroeconomic variables for each
country were obtained from the IMF International Financial Statistics database and other sources.
These variables include exchange rates, geographical areas and per-capita GDPs.
Altogether we have stock returns for 43 countries. Of these, only 33 countries have data for all the
years between 1990 and 2001. Figure 1 plots the mean, median and the 25th and 75th percentiles of
R2 for these 33 countries in each year. Figure 1 also includes a trend line for the mean R2. The mean
falls by about 0.5% each year, and this decrease is statistically significant. R2 was clearly decreasing
over the 1990s, consistent with the evidence reported in MYY and Campbell, et. al. (2001). It
appears that the ratio of firm-specific to market risk increases as financial markets develop over
time.

3.2. Measuring the frequency of crashes

Our theoretical analysis of capture and risk-absorption by inside managers predicts a higher
frequency of crashes in countries where firms are more opaque to outside investors. A crash occurs
when managers exercise their abandonment option to avoid absorbing too much firm-specific bad
news. We constructed three measures of crash likelihood. The first is the skewness of residual
returns. Following Chen, Hong and Stein (2001), we use the third moment of each stock’s residual
returns, divided by the cubed standard deviation.19 We calculate an equally weighted average
skewness across all stocks in each country for each year.
The second measure, COUNT, is based on the number of residual returns exceeding k standard
deviations above and below the mean, with k chosen to generate frequencies of 0.01%, 0.1% or 1%
in the lognormal distribution. We subtract the upside frequencies from the downside frequencies.
The difference is averaged across all stocks within each country in each year. A high value of
COUNT for a country indicates a high frequency of crashes.
18

MYY used R2s weighted by each stock’s sum of squared total variation of returns. In other words, they used variance
weights.
19
Chen, Hong and Stein (2001) also use the ratio of upside and downside standard deviations. They note that this
measure is less likely to capture the effects of extreme outliers. We are particularly interested in outliers, and therefore
rejected this alternative measure.
23

Our third measure, COLLAR, accounts for both the frequency and the severity of crashes.
COLLAR is defined as the profit or loss from a strategy of buying an out-of-the-money put option
on the residual return and shorting a call option on the residual return. We choose the strike prices
of the put so that it would be in the money with frequencies of 0.01%, 0.1% and 1% in a lognormal
distribution. Then we set the call’s strike prices so that the put-call strategies have zero expected
value in a lognormal distribution. In other words, we construct a position that would require zero
net investment. Then we calculate the actual profits or losses from the strategy as a percentage of
the stock price and average over all stocks within each country and year. High values for COLLAR
mean that profits from the downside put outweigh losses from the upside call. A high value of
COLLAR for a country and year indicates that crashes in that country were more frequent and/or
more severe.
Table 1 contains the sample statistics of the two R2 measures, excess kurtosis and the three
measures of crash likelihood. Mean and median R2s are about .30 equally weighted and .25 variance
weighted. Return distributions are positively skewed and have long tails (excess kurtosis). Both
COLLAR and COUNT are negative, as expected with positively skewed returns. Extreme positive
residual returns generally outnumber and outweigh extreme negative returns in our overall sample.
We are not proposing to explain or exploit the average levels of skewness, COLLAR and COUNT,
however, but only differences across countries.

3.3. Replicating MYY’s results

The first two columns of Table 2 show results for MYY’s specification for 43 countries from 1990
to 2001. The dependent variable is the logistic transformation of the annual values of average R2s of
the countries in our sample. The country averages are either equally weighted (EW) or variance
weighted (VW). We fit this and all subsequent specifications using the Fama-MacBeth method, in
order to guard against false significance due to cross-correlation and serial correlation of errors in
our panel regressions.20

20

Fama and MacBeth (1973). We also checked our results using the clustering method described in Appendix B in
Cohen, Polk and Vuolteenaho (2003). This method can accommodate both time series and cross-sectional correlations
among error terms. But the clustering gave essentially the same results as Fama-MacBeth. There were no material
changes in the signs, magnitudes or significance of estimated coefficients.
24

The independent variables of most interest are economic development, measured by the log of percapital GDP, and protection of investors, measured by the Good Government Index. MYY also
include several other variables to control for other factors that might affect a country’s average R2.
The number of stocks listed in each country is included, because R2 should increase as the number
of stocks declines. The log of country size (geographical area) is included as a proxy for limits on
within-country diversification. Firm and industry Herfindal indexes are included: countries with
relatively few large firms or industries (and relatively low Herfindal indexes) are expected to have
high R2s. The variance of GDP growth is included because macroeconomic risk may be higher in
poorer countries or in countries where investor rights are not well protected. MYY explain these
controls in more detail. 21
The results in the first two columns of Table 2 are by and large consistent with MYY. Countries
with high per capita GDP or high scores on the Good Government Index have low R2s, although the
coefficients are not significant in the variance-weighted regression in column 2. None of the control
variables is particularly significant except log(country size). Large countries have significantly
lower R2s.
The t-statistics for the Good Government Index increase in columns 3 and 4, where we control for
kurtosis in residual returns. The t-statistics for kurtosis are negative and extremely significant. It
appears that countries with high kurtosis (long tails in residual return distributions) have low R2s.
We will keep kurtosis as a control in all subsequent tests.

3.4. Crash frequency as a predictor of R2

Columns 5 and 6 of Table 2 add skewness as a measure of crash likelihood. The coefficient is
negative and significant, especially in the regressions for equally weighted R2s. Lower skewness
means relatively more negative outliers in the distribution of residual returns. Lower skewness is
associated with higher R2, controlling for kurtosis and all of MYY’s explanatory variables. This is
just as we predicted. Correcting for kurtosis and skewness has little impact on the coefficients for

21

MYY included one further control, an estimate of the co-movement of earnings for firms within a given country.
Introducing this variable had little effect on our results, but reduced our sample size by more than 30%. We decided to
report results estimated without this additional control.
25

the Good Government Index and Log(GDP per capita). The coefficients remain negative, consistent
with MYY’s results, but significant at conventional levels only in the equal-weighted regressions.
The final columns of Table 2 add local market volatility, i.e., the standard deviation of each
country’s market return, as an additional independent variable. MYY did not include this variable.
They interpreted high local market volatility and high R2s as results of poor investor protection and
the concentration of noise trading on the market portfolio rather than on individual stocks. Our
theory concentrates on firm-specific risk and says nothing about local market volatility. We should
include local market volatility as a control, however, to make sure that the variables of interest in
our theory are not just proxies for differences in market risk.
Local market volatility is of course positively related to R2, as shown in columns 7 and 8 of Table 2.
The addition of local market volatility does not change the sign or significance of skewness and
kurtosis. The log of GDP per capita is no longer significant when local market volatility is included,
however, even in the equal-weighted regression. Perhaps that is no surprise, since poor countries are
known to have volatile stock markets. The significance of the Good Government Index is reduced
in the equal-weighted regression in column 7 and eliminated (with a changed sign) in the varianceweighted regression in column 8. That decline in significance seems consistent with MYY’s
argument that poor protection of investors leads to high local market volatility and high R2s. Market
risk and the Good Government Index are negatively colinear, so we expect the significance of the
good-government coefficient to decline when market risk is added.
Skewness is one measure of the frequency of crashes in firm-specific returns. We have two other
measures, COLLAR and COUNT. The effects of COLLAR and COUNT on R2 are summarized in
Table 3. We control for kurtosis, local market volatility and all the other variables used in MMY
and in Table 2. Each panel of the table contains six regressions. There are three critical values,
corresponding to lognormal frequencies of 0.01, 0.1 and 1%. For each frequency there are both
equal- and value-weighted R2s. Results for COLLAR and COUNT are in panels A and B,
respectively. The coefficients on these variables are positive, as predicted, and significant in all
regressions. Average R2s are higher in countries where the frequency and severity of crashes are
high.

26

The coefficients on the Good Government Index remain negative and significant in the regressions
for equal-weighted R2s in Table 3. The index’s coefficients disappear in the variance-weighted
regressions, however. The coefficients on GDP per capita disappear regardless of the R2 weights.
This pattern of weaker coefficients in regressions for variance-weighted R2s will repeat in our later
tests. We investigated the reasons for this pattern. It appears that country-average R2s are much less
stable when variance weights are used. For example, the time-series volatility of the year-by-year
coefficients on the Good Governance Index is much higher in the variance-weighted regressions,
with obvious outliers. We also ranked countries by their average R2s. The ranks based on equal
weights were much more stable over time. The cross-sectional dispersion of country-average R2s is
much higher with variance weights. The difference in dispersion between equal and value weighting
is significant with a t-statistic of 5.45.
Looking inside countries, we found a significant negative relationship between individual firms’ R2s
and the firms’ total variances. This is not surprising, since higher firm-specific variance should
mean higher total variance and low R2s.22 Variance-weighting thus gives higher weights to firms
with lower R2s. Table 1 confirms that variance weights lead, on average, to lower country-average
R2s.
Since variance weights over-weight firms with high firm-specific risk, it will also over-weight firms
for which the market-model regression is a “bad fit” and return outliers or data-entry errors may be
more prevalent. We suspect that use of variance weights adds significant noise to our results.
We would pursue these problems further if there were any reason to prefer variance weights in our
tests. But variance weights are not the natural choice, given our theory that firm-specific variance
depends on opaqueness. Why make the weights used to calculate the dependent variable a function
of the independent variable that our theory says is most important?
We will continue to report results for variance-weighted R2s for consistency with MYY,23 but we
believe that regressions for equal-weighted R2s are more reliable.24

22

This relationship is automatic if firms’ market risks are held constant. But we can’t logically rule out the possibility
that firms’ average market and firm-specific risks increase proportionally.
23
We also calculated average R2s using market-value weights. Our results using this market-weighted measure are
similar to the results reported below.
27

3.5. The effects of opaqueness on R2 and crash likelihood

The positive relationship between R2 and our measures of crash likelihood does not imply causality
in either direction. Our theory says that they are both determined by opaqueness. We have two
hypotheses: countries where firms are more opaque to investors have (1) higher average R2s and (2)
more frequent crashes in firm-specific returns. We now test these hypotheses directly.
Opaqueness means the lack of information that would enable investors to observe operating cash
flow and income and to determine firm value. We are concerned with value-relevant information,
which may not be the same thing as accounting detail. Accounting numbers can be meaningless or
misleading, even in the U. S., as recent scandals have illustrated. We tried some accounting-based
measures of opaqueness, including an index of accounting “opacity” published by
PricewaterhouseCoopers (2001), with little success.25 These measures were at best weakly related to
R2 and our measures of crash frequency. 26
We use three measures of cross-country differences in opaqueness: (1) a survey-based measure
from the Global Competitiveness Report, (2) a measure of auditing activity and (3) a measure based
on diversity of analysts’ forecasts.

3.5.1. A transparency measure from the Global Competitiveness Report

The Global Competitiveness Reports for 1999 and 2000 include results from surveys about the level
and effectiveness of financial disclosure in different countries.27 The respondents were asked to
assess the statement “The level of financial disclosure required is extensive and detailed” on a scale
24

Bris, Goetzman and Zhu (2003) may also have encountered problems with variance weights. They also regressed
value-weighted R2s on the Good Government Index and other variables used by MYY. Their coefficient on the Good
Government Index bounces around, depending on specification. They get statistical significance, but with both positive
and negative signs.
25
PricewaterhouseCoopers also published a broader opacity index, which included measures of opaqueness in
macroeconomic policy, law, regulation and accounting, plus a measure of corruption. This measure seemed
disconnected from R2 and the other variables used in our tests. It never generated coefficients that were economically or
statistically significant.
26
For example, we tried the average percentage of a country’s firms that adopted an international or U.S. accounting
standard and the average number of key accounting measures included in company financial statements.

28

from 1 (strongly disagree) to 7 (strongly agree). Respondents were also asked to assess the
“availability of information” in on the same scale. For each country, we took the average response
for each question in 1999 and 2000, and averaged again over these two years. The result was a
disclosure score (DISCLOSURE) for each of the 43 countries in our sample.28 Note that high values
for DISCLOSURE measure transparency, not opaqueness. High DISCLOSURE scores should
predict low R2s.
Table 4.1 tests this prediction. Again we control for kurtosis, local market volatility (in columns 3
and 4) and all of MYY’s control variables. As predicted, the coefficients on DISCLOSURE are
negative and significant. Effective disclosure means more transparency and lower R2.
The DISCLOSURE coefficients do not change when local market volatility is added to the
regressions. The Good Government Index is no longer significant, however. Perhaps high scores on
the index proxy for relatively low macroeconomic risk and for more transparency. In that case
adding both local market volatility and a direct measure of transparency should steal index’s
thunder.
Table 4.1 contains two further surprises. First, kurtosis, which generated extremely high negative tstatistics in Tables 2 and 3, is no longer significant when DISCLOSURE is added.29 Second, the
sign of the coefficient for per-capital GDP changes from negative to positive when both
DISCLOSURE and local market volatility are included. The coefficient is not significant, however.
Table 4.2 tests whether DISCLOSURE explains crash likelihoods, measured by skewness,
COLLAR and COUNT. R2 is no longer the dependent variable, so we can eliminate local market
volatility and several variables introduced by MYY to control for other determinants of R2. We
retain the Good Government Index, log(GDP per capita) and kurtosis as controls, however. Results
for skewness and COLLAR are reported in Panel A. Panel B reports results for COUNT.
The coefficient of DISCLOSURE for skewness is positive, as predicted. That is, companies in more
transparent countries have fewer crashes, fewer large downside outliers, and more positive (or less
27

Gelos and Wei (2002) suggest use of the Global Competitiveness Report to measure transparency.
There is no time-series variation in DISCLOSURE. The report’s surveys were conducted about one year prior to
publication, i.e. in 1998 and 1999. The survey results do not appear in earlier years’ reports.

28

29

negative) skewness. The coefficients for COLLAR and COUNT are negative, again indicating that
extreme negative firm-specific returns are less common in transparent countries. Significance levels
are high for skewness and COLLAR, less so for COUNT. The t-statistics for COUNT are above
2.0, however, except for the last regression where the frequency of crashes is calculated at the 1.0%
level.30 We conclude that crashes are less common in transparent countries. But Table 4.2 has one
puzzling result: the coefficients for the Good Government Index suggest that crashes are more
frequent in countries with high good-government scores, once DISCLOSURE and per-capita GDP
are controlled for.

3.5.2. Auditing

Bhattacharya, Daouk and Welker (2002) use the number of professional auditors as a proxy for
transparency. They report the number of auditors per 100,000 population for 38 different countries,
based on data from Saudagaran and Diga (1997). Tables 5.1 and 5.2 use this measure (AUDITOR)
to predict R2 and the frequency of crashes. The format and control variables are identical to Tables
4.1 and 4.2.
AUDITOR is again a measure of transparency, not opaqueness, so we predict negative coefficients
for AUDITOR in Table 5.1, where R2 is the dependent variable. The coefficients are negative and
significant, except in column 2, where R2s are variance-weighted and local market volatility is not
included.31 AUDITOR is highly significant when local market volatility is added in columns 3 and
4. The Good Government Index and per-capita GDP regain sensible and significant coefficients in
columns 3 and 4, although kurtosis essentially drops out of the regression in these columns.
The results in Table 5.2 are about the same as in Table 4.2. Higher values for AUDITOR are
positively associated with skewness (more transparency means fewer negative outliers) and with
lower crash frequencies, as measured by COLLAR and COUNT. The negative coefficients for
29

We also tested the relationship between kurtosis and our measures of opaqueness. We found that kurtosis increases
when opaqueness increases.
30
We also calculated COLLAR and COUNT at lognormal frequencies of 2.5% to 10% and repeated our regressions.
The results were somewhat weaker but otherwise similar to the results reported here.
31
This is one case where use of the Fama-MacBeth method pushed t-statistics below normal significance levels. The
corresponding OLS t-statistic is –3.58. Most OLS t-statistics are considerably higher than the t-statistics reported in this

30

AUDITOR in the COUNT regressions (Panel B) are now highly significant in all specifications. As
in Table 4.1, the coefficients for the Good Government Index suggest that crashes are more frequent
in countries with high good-government scores, once a direct measure of opaqueness is added to the
regression.

3.5.3. Diversity of analyst forecasts

We measure diversity as the standard deviation of analysts’ forecasts of the firm’s earnings in the
following year, normalized by the mean forecast, and then divided by the square root of the number
of analysts following that firm:
DIVERSITY =

σˆ S / µˆ s
N

(3.2)

Appendix B shows that this measure is proportional to the standard deviation of hidden firmspecific information. If analysts receive noisy signals about a firm’s residual cash flows, then part of
each period’s change in residual cash flow is revealed to the market. The part that is not revealed
remains opaque to investors.
We construct DIVERSITY from analysts’ earnings forecasts reported in I/B/E/S international
editions from 1990 to 2001. We have such forecasts only for a subset of the firms in our main
sample. Only 26 countries have I/B/E/S/ data for the full sample period, and the number of firms
covered by I/B/E/S/ is about half the number in Datastream. In addition, we exclude firms in years
where the firm’s DIVERSITY equals zero, i.e. where all analysts agree. (Complete agreement could
reflect full information, but it could also imply total ignorance.)
The results for DIVERSITY are presented in Tables 6.1 and 6.2. The format is identical to Tables
4.1 and 4.2 for DISCLOSURE and Tables 5.1 and 5.2 for AUDITOR. DIVERSITY is a measure of
opaqueness, not transparency, however, so we expect the signs of its coefficients to be opposite to
the signs for DISCLOSURE and AUDITOR.

paper. Use of the Fama-MacBeth method never changed the sign or approximate magnitude of the estimated
coefficients, however.
31

The coefficients for DIVERSITY in Table 6.1 are positive and significant, as predicted. The Good
Government Index has significant negative t-statistics, more or less as in Table 5.1. GDP per capita
has a significant positive coefficient in columns 3 and 4, where local market volatility enters the
regression.
Table 6.2 reports the relationship between DIVERSITY and crash frequency. As expected, the
coefficient for skewness is negative (more opaqueness means more negative outliers) and
significant. The coefficients for COLLAR and COUNT are positive and significant at all predicted
frequencies. The coefficients for the Good Government Index are not significant, however.
Taken together, our tests show that countries where firms are more opaque to outside investors have
(1) higher R2s and (2) higher frequencies of crashes. Conclusion (1) is perhaps not surprising, given
MYY’s results. We would expect firms to be less transparent in poorer countries with relatively
undeveloped financial markets and poor protection of investors’ property rights. (Our model draws
a logical distinction between the effects of opaqueness and poor protection of investors, but these
two factors are probably positively correlated in practice.) Conclusion (2) is new, however. As far
as we know, no study has tested the effects of opaqueness in the far-left tail of the distribution of
residual returns.
Our tests extend MYY’s results. For example, all of our tests control for MYY’s chief variable of
interest, the Good Governance Index. MYY argue that market risk is higher in less developed
countries with ineffective governance and poor protection of investors. That is probably true, but we
control for local market risk directly in order to make sure that our measures of opaqueness are not
just proxies for the effects that MYY are interested in. The explanatory power of the Good
Government Index naturally degrades when we introduce local market volatility and our measures
of opaqueness. That does not prove that MYY are wrong, only that opaqueness also matters, even
when market volatility and a measure of investor protection are also included.

4. Conclusion

We set out to explain MYY’s finding that stock market R2s are higher in countries with less
developed financial systems and poorer corporate governance. The key to our explanation is the

32

effect of opaqueness on the division of risk bearing between inside managers and outside investors.
Opaqueness is both good news and bad news for insiders. The good news is that more opaqueness
allows insiders to capture more cash flow when the firm is doing well. The bad news is that insiders
have to hold a residual claim and absorb downside risk. They can abandon the residual claim and
reveal downside news to outside investors, but this abandonment option is costly and not frequently
exercised. Exercise of this option causes a crash, that is, a large, negative residual return
We replicated MYY’s results for a much larger sample, and showed that higher crash frequencies
were associated with higher R2s. We also developed three measures of opaqueness, and showed
that these measures helped explain both R2 and the frequency of crashes. These latter results are, of
course, more direct tests of our theory. All of our results hold when local market volatility is used as
a control.
There is plenty more to do. For example, we have used kurtosis only as a control variable. We have
not explained how and why it varies so significantly. We have only investigated country averages,
as they have varied across countries and (to a lesser extent) over time. There ought to be differences
in transparency within countries. For example, firms in some industries may be naturally more
transparent. Large, actively traded firms may be more transparent than small, thinly traded firms.
Conglomerates may be relatively opaque. Growth companies, which have greater appetites for
capital, could choose to become more transparent in order to reassure investors and facilitate
financing.
The nature and determinants of crashes deserve further investigation. A crash is defined as a remote
outlier in a firm’s residual return. We are confident that crashes release firm-specific bad news. The
nature of that news has not been investigated here. We interpret it as abandonment by insiders, but
there may be other sources of extreme bad news that are firm-specific. Crashes are rare enough that
it may be possible to examine them one by one, at least for a sub-sample of countries. That would
require research on returns and R2s for individual companies, however, which will have to wait for
another paper.

33

Appendix A
Proof of proposition 1:

Given the assumptions set out in Section 2,
C t+1 = K0 X t+1 =K0 (X0 + ϕ Xt + λt +1 ) = K0 X0 + ϕ Ct + K0 λt +1

(A.1)

Derive the expected cash flow k periods ahead:
k −1

E (Ct + k | Ct ) = E[ K 0 ( X 0 + ϕ X t + k −1 + λt + k −1 )] = ... = ∑ K 0 X 0ϕ i + ϕ k K 0 X t = K 0 X 0
i =0

1−ϕ k
+ ϕ k Ct (A.2)
1−ϕ

Combining these results with Eq. (2.1) gives Kt as a function of Ct:

+∞

K t (Ct ) = PV {E (Ct +1 | Ct ), E (Ct + 2 | Ct ),...; r} = ∑
j =1

K t (Ct ) =

K0 X 0

1−ϕ j
+ ϕ j Ct
1−ϕ
, thus,
(1 + r ) j

K X
1 K0 X 0
ϕ
+
(− 0 0 + Ct )
r 1−ϕ 1+ r −ϕ
1−ϕ

(A.3)

We can also plug in the unconditional expected value of Ct into Eq. (A.3) to obtain the
unconditional expected value of Kt:
E(K t ) =

1 K0 X 0 1
= E (Ct )
r 1−ϕ r

(A.4)

Eq. (A.3) also gives the K t as a linear function of C t :
Kt (C t ) = a+bC t
where a =

(A.5)

K0 X 0 1
ϕ
ϕ
. Therefore
( −
) and b =
1+ r −ϕ
1−ϕ r 1+ r −ϕ

34

E(K t+1|C t )=E(a+ b Ct+1 |Ct ) = a+bE (C t+1|C t ) =a+b(K0X0 + ϕ C t )=a+bK0 X0+b ϕ C t
Now verify that:
1
a (1 − ϕ ) + bK 0 X 0 = K 0 X 0
r

(A.6)

From Eq. (A.3), there is a one-on-one relation between Ct and Kt, so:
E(K t+1|K t )

= E(Kt+1 | Ct)=a+bK0 X0+b ϕ (K t -a)/b= a(1- ϕ )+bK0 X0+ ϕ K t
1
E ( K t +1 | K t ) = K 0 X 0 + ϕ K t
r

(A.7)

That is, K t follows an AR(1) process with parameter ϕ. Equation (2.11) follows.
Proof of Proposition 2:

The outside investors’ estimates of rt, Ct and Kt are:
1) E ( rt | ft ,θ1,t ) = ft + θ1,t + E (θ 2,t ) , so:

E (rt | ft ,θ1,t ) = ft + θ1,t +

θ 2,0
1−ϕ

(A.8)

2) E (Ct | ft ,θ1,t ) = E ( K 0 rt | ft + θ1,t ) , so
E (Ct | ft ,θ1,t ) = K 0 ( ft + θ1,t +

E (Ct + k | ft ,θ1,t ) = E[ E (Ct + k | Ct ) | f t ,θ1,t ] =

θ 2,0
)
1−ϕ

(A.9)

K 0 R0 (1 − ϕ k )
+ ϕ k E (Ct | ft ,θ1,t ) , so
1−ϕ

E (Ct + k | ft ,θ1,t ) =

θ
K 0 X 0 (1 − ϕ k )
+ ϕ k K 0 ( f t + θ1,t + 2,0 )
1−ϕ
1−ϕ

(A.10)

35

And, E ( K t | ft ,θ1,t ) = E[ K t (Ct ) | f t ,θ1,t ] =

E ( K t | ft ,θ1,t ) =

K0 X 0
1 K0 X 0
ϕ
ϕ
E (Ct | f t ,θ1,t ) , so
−
+
r 1−ϕ 1+ r − ϕ 1− ϕ 1+ r − ϕ

θ
1 K0 X 0
ϕ
K0 X 0
ϕ
K 0 ( ft + θ1,t + 2,0 )
−
+
r 1−ϕ 1+ r − ϕ 1−ϕ 1+ r −ϕ
1−ϕ

(A.11)

Proof of Proposition 4:

From (2.17) and definition of Vt ex ,

rtotal ,t +1 =

E (α K t +1 | f t +1 ,θ1,t +1 ) + α E ( Ct +1 | ft +1 ,θ1,t +1 )
E (α K t | f t ,θ1,t )

−1

(A.12)

From (A.10) and (2.12),
K0 X 0
1 K0 X 0
ϕ
1+ r
−
+
K 0 ( ft +1 + θ1,t +1 )
r 1−ϕ 1+ r − ϕ 1− ϕ 1+ r − ϕ
−1
ri ,t +1 =
1 K0 X 0
ϕ
ϕ
K0 X 0
−
+
K 0 ( ft +1 + θ1,t )
r 1−ϕ 1+ r − ϕ 1− ϕ 1+ r − ϕ

(A.13)

The denominator can be simplified to:
K 0 X 0 (1 + r )(1 − ϕ )
ϕ
+
K 0 ( ft + θ1,t )
1 − ϕ r (1 + r − ϕ ) 1 + r − ϕ

(A.14)

After some re-organization, we can write:

−r
ri ,t +1 = r +

K 0 X 0 (1 + r )(1 − ϕ )
1+ r
 ft +1 + θ1,t +1 − ϕ f t − ϕθ1,t 
+ K0
1 − ϕ r (1 + r − ϕ )
1+ r −ϕ 
ϕ
K 0 X 0 (1 + r )(1 − ϕ )
+
K 0 ( ft + θ1,t )
1 − ϕ r (1 + r − ϕ ) 1 + r − ϕ

Using (2.4) and (2.5), the numerator becomes:

(A.15)

K 0 (1 + r )
( ε t +1 + ξt +1 ) , and
1+ r −ϕ

36

ri ,t +1 = r +

(1 + r )( ε t +1 + ξt +1 )
X 0 (1 + r )
+ φ f +θ

(

r

t

1,t

(A.16)

)

Appendix B. Diversity of analyst opinion as proxy for opaqueness

Firm cash flows are generated by Ct +1 = K 0 X t +1 . Analysts observe signals of Xt. Assume at time t,
analyst i generates an independent observation, Sit, such that Sit = X t + γ it , where, γ it ~ N (0, σ s2 ) ,
and is distributed IID over all i. Assume also that market observes all Sit, at least ex post. Then, the
market’s ex-post estimate of the signal, Xt, is Xˆ t =

N

1
N

∑S
i =1

it

. Define θ1t = Xˆ t − ft , recalling that ft is

the market-factor return, and θ 2t = X t − Xˆ t . Thus we have X t = f t + θ1t + θ 2t , where ft is the market
component, θ1t is the observable firm-specific component, and θ 2t is the unobservable firm-specific
component, after the market observes all signals Sit. In addition, θ 2t ~ N (0,

σ s2
N

).

In practice, we estimate σ s2 by its sample analogue, σˆ s2 , and we define our measure of remaining
uncertainty by:
DIVERSITY =

σˆ S / µˆ s
N

.

Where the normalization by µˆ s is often used to address the heterogeneity of the size of the forecasts
across firms. This proxy for remaining opaqueness can be put in the frameworks of Barry and
Jennings (1992, pp. 172-175), who analyze the informativeness of signals using a Bayesian
approach.

37

References

Barry, C., Jennings, R., 1992. Information and Diversity of Analyst Opinion. Journal of Financial
and Quantitative Analysis 27, 169-183.
Bhattacharya, U., Daouk, H., Welker, M., 2002. The World Price of Earnings Opacity. Unpublished
working paper, Indiana University.
Bris, A., Goetzmann, W., Zhu, N., 2003. Efficiency and the Bear: Short Sales and Markets around
the World. NBER working paper No. 9466.
Bushman, R., Piotroski, R., Smith, A., 2003. What Determines Corporate Transparency?
Unpublished working paper, University of Chicago.
Campbell, J., Lettau, M., Malkiel, B., Xu, Y., 2001. Have Individual Stocks Become More Volatile?
An Empirical Exploration of Idiosyncratic Risk. Journal of Finance 56, 1-43.
Chang, J., Khanna, T., Palepu, K., 2001. Analyst Activity Around the World. Harvard Business
School Working paper No. 01-061.
Chen, J., Hong, H., Stein, J., 2001. Forecasting crashes: trading volume, past returns, and
conditional skewness in stock prices. Journal of Financial Economics 61, 345-381.
Cohen, R., Polk, C., Vuolteenaho, T., 2003. The Value Spread. Journal of Finance 58, 609-41.
Conrad, J., Kaul, G,. 1988. Time-Variation in Expected Returns. Journal of Business 61, 409-25.
De Long, B., Shleifer, A., Summers, L., Waldmann, R., 1989. The Size and Incidence of the Losses
from Noise Trading. Journal of Finance 44, 681-696.
De Long, B., Shleifer, A., Summers, L., Waldmann, R., 1990. Noise Trader Risk in Financial
Markets. Journal of Political Economy 98, 703-738.
De Long, B., Shleifer, A., Summers, L., Waldmann, R., 1991. The Survival of Noise Traders in
Financial Markets. Journal of Business 64, 1-19.

38

Dimson, E., 1979. Risk Measurement When Shares are Subject to Infrequent Trading. Journal of
Financial Economics 7, 197-226.
Easley, D., O'Hara, M., 2002. Information and the Cost of Capital. Unpublished working paper,
Cornell University.
Fama, E., MacBeth, J., 1973. Risk, Return, and Equilibrium: Empirical Tests. Journal of Political
Economy 81, 607-36.
Friedman, E., Johnson, S., 2000. Tunneling and Propping. Unpublished working paper, MIT Sloan
School of Management.
Jensen, M., Meckling, W., 1976. Theory of the Firm: Managerial Behavior, Agency Costs and
Ownership Structure. Journal of Financial Economics 3, 305-60.
La Porta R., Lopez-de-Silanes, F., Shleifer, A., 2002. Government Ownership of Banks. Journal of
Finance 57, 265-301.
La Porta R., Lopez-de-Silanes, F., Shleifer, A., Vishny, R., 2000. Investor protection and corporate
governance. Journal of Financial Economics 58, 3-27.
Morck, R., Yeung, B., Yu, W., 2000. The information content of stock markets: why do emerging
markets have synchronous stock price movements? Journal of Financial Economics 58, 215-260.
Myers, S., 2000. Outside Equity. Journal of Finance 55, 1005-37.
O'Hara, M., 2003. Liquidity and Price Discovery. Journal of Finance, 58, 1335-54.
PriceWaterhouseCoopers, 2001. The Opacity Index. Available at http://www.opacity-index.com/.
Rajan, R., Zingales, L., 2001. Financial systems, industrial structure, and growth. Oxford Review of
Economic Policy 17, 467-482.
Roll, R., 1988. R-squared. Journal of Finance 43, 541-66.
Saudagaran, S., Diga, J., 1997. Financial Reporting in Emerging Capital Markets: Characteristics
and Policy Issues. Accounting Horizons 11, 41-64.

39

Wei, S., Gelos, R., 2002. Transparency and International Investor Behavior. NBER Working paper
No. 9260.
Wurgler, J., 2000. Financial markets and the allocation of capital. Journal of Financial Economics
58, 187-214.

40

Figure 1: Change of average R-squared over time
0.5
equal-weighted R-squared

0.45
0.4
0.35
0.3
0.25
0.2
0.15
0.1
0.05
0
1988

1990

1992

1994

1996

1998

2000

2002

Year
Mean

75th percentile

Median

25th percentile

Linear (Mean)

Plot of the R-squared for the 33 countries for which we have data from 1990-2001. The trend line for the mean of the R-squared is estimated at
Average_R2 = 0.33 – 0.00496 (Year-1990)
(26.88) (-2.60)
where t-statistics in parentheses are below the estimated coefficients

Table 1. Summary Statistics
R2s for individual stocks were averaged, using equal weights or variance weights, for each country and year. The sample includes 33
countries from 1990 to 2001, plus 10 other countries for part of that period. R2s for each country were then averaged across time.
Summary statistics were calculated from the cross-sectional distribution of these country averages. Annual values of kurtosis, skewness,
COLLAR and COUNT were calculated from each stock’s residual returns. Summary statistics for these variables were calculated in the
same way as for R2s, but only with equal-weighted country averages. COUNT counts the difference between the numbers of incidences
where the residual return is k standard deviations below vs. above the mean in a lognormal distribution. The cutoff return k is set to
generate critical values of 0.01%, 0.1% and 1%. COLLAR is the average payoff from a strategy of buying a put on residual returns, with a
strike price chosen to generate payoffs with probabilities of 0.01%, 0.1% and 1% in a lognormal distribution, and selling a call with a strike
price that makes the put-call portfolio to have a zero present value.
Standard
Deviation
Variables
Mean
Minimum
Median
Maximum
R2, equal weighted
R2, variance weighted
Kurtosis
Skewness
COLLAR (x 10 4)

COUNT (x 10 4)

0.31
0.25
4.43
0.13

0.06
0.05
2.51
0.17

0.20
0.18
1.66
-0.35

0.30
0.23
3.89
0.15

0.47
0.39
13.05
0.47

0.01%
0.10%
1%

-0.50
-1.16
-2.88

0.60
0.84
1.35

-2.31
-3.43
-5.74

-0.47
-0.96
-2.65

0.88
0.85
0.41

0.01%
0.10%
1%

-6.45
-19.39
-45.75

8.54
12.95
24.85

-24.82
-48.12
-93.27

-6.32
-18.12
-45.08

16.68
12.92
8.32

Critical value

Critical value

Table 2. Explaining differences in country-average R2s across countries and over time. The dependent variables are logistic transformations of equal-weighted
(EW) or value-weighted (VW) R2s. The explanatory variables are a Good Government Index based on LaPorta, et al., (1998); the average skewness and
kurtosis of residual returns; the log of GDP per capita, and volatility measured by the standard deviation of the local market return. Additional control variables
are defined below the table. The first two columns replicate Morck, Yeung and Yu (MYY, 2000), but for a panel of 43 countries from 1990 to 2001. Coefficients
were estimated by the Fama-MacBeth (1973) method. t-statistics are reported under each coefficient.
logistic(R-squared)
Independent variables
Intercept

EW

VR
-0.96
-(1.94)
-111.04
-(0.86)

VR

EW

1.32
(6.74)
-485.70
-(6.68)

-0.21
-(0.44)
-180.23
-(1.58)

-92.15
-(14.53)

VR

EW

-111.79
-(14.31)

1.51
(6.52)
-543.49
-(6.08)
-0.21
-(4.51)
-83.98
-(11.57)

-0.05
-(0.10)
-227.67
-(1.65)
-0.18
-(2.70)
-105.09
-(11.98)

VR

-235.56
-(4.89)
-0.06
-(2.28)
-57.50
-(3.62)
0.85
(0.45)
-0.95
-(1.42)
-0.34
-0.48

-141.08
-(1.66)
-0.04
-(0.97)
-43.41
-(3.03)
0.71
(0.24)
-0.11
-(0.22)
0.03
0.05

-251.32
-(4.62)
-0.11
-(4.52)
-39.50
-(3.59)
2.26
(2.11)
-0.09
-(0.15)
-1.86
-3.14

-160.20
-(1.77)
-0.10
-(2.45)
-21.57
-(2.35)
2.42
(1.07)
0.94
(2.42)
-1.81
-4.30

-255.32
-(4.51)
-0.10
-(4.15)
-37.68
-(3.26)
1.19
(0.70)
-0.15
-(0.22)
-1.81
-2.82

-163.48
-(1.79)
-0.10
-(2.48)
-20.07
-(2.20)
1.54
(0.54)
0.89
(2.09)
-1.77
-3.84

0.19
(0.56)
-251.33
-(3.47)
-0.22
-(5.29)
-67.13
-(9.32)
13.15
(5.27)
-101.11
-(1.66)
-0.07
-(2.18)
-35.87
-(2.77)
-0.40
-(0.27)
0.11
(0.13)
-1.82
-(2.23)

Adjusted R2

0.11

0.09

0.34

0.11

0.33

0.12

0.49

0.23

Sample size

344

344

344

344

344

344

344

344

Good Government Index (x10 -4)

0.70
(3.79)
-428.67
-(5.32)

EW

Skewness
Kurtosis (x10 -3)
Local market volatility
log (GDP per capita) (x10 -4)
log (number of stocks)
log (country size) (x10 -3)
Variance (GDP growth)
Industry Herfindahl Index
Firm Herfindahl Index

Control variables from MYY (2000):
1.
The log of the number of stocks traded in each country and year.
2.
Log(country size). Size means geographical area in square kilometers.
3.
The variance of the growth rate of each country’s GDP, measured in nominal U.S. dollars, from 1990 to 2001.
4.
Herfindal Indexes calculated from the distribution of sales of individual firms or industries within each country and year.

-1.43
-(2.18)
78.58
(0.47)
-0.19
-(3.04)
-87.43
-(9.39)
13.78
(3.29)
-1.84
-(0.02)
-0.06
-(1.88)
-18.17
-(1.84)
-0.12
-(0.06)
1.16
(2.73)
-1.78
-(3.66)

Table 3. Testing whether crash frequency, measured by COLLAR and COUNT rather than skewness, explains
differences in R2s across countries and over time. The dependent variables are logistic transformations of equalweighted or value-weighted country-average R2s. All independent variables except for COLLAR and COUNT are as
defined in Table 2. COUNT is the difference between the number of positive and negative outliers, defined as residual
returns exceeding k standard deviations above or below the mean. The cutoff return k is set to generate critical values of
0.01%, 0.1% and 1% in a lognormal distribution. COLLAR is the average payoff from a strategy of buying a put on
residual returns, with a strike price chosen to generate payoffs with probabilities of 0.01%, 0.1% and 1% in a lognormal
distribution, and selling a call that would generate payoffs with the same probabilities. Coefficients were estimated by the
Fama-MacBeth (1973) method. t-statistics are reported under each coefficient.
Panel A (COLLAR)
Independent variables
Intercept
COLLAR
Good Government Index (x10 -4)
Kurtosis (x10 -3)
Local market volatility
log(GDP per capita)(x10 -4)
log (number of stocks)
Log (country size) (x10 -3)

Variance (GDP growth)
Industry Herfindahl Index
Firm Herfindahl Index
Adjusted R2
Sample size

Critical value of COLLAR, Equal weights Critical value of COLLAR, variance weights
0.01%
0.10%
1%
0.01%
0.10%
1%
0.55
0.56
0.57
0.25
0.26
0.27
(5.25)
(5.14)
(5.37)
(2.20)
(2.20)
(2.34)
45.47
36.06
28.00
36.10
28.64
21.83
(2.83)
(2.91)
(3.43)
(2.73)
(3.03)
(3.80)
-51.93
-53.55
-56.61
6.15
4.86
2.53
-(2.09)
-(2.10)
-(2.21)
(0.35)
(0.26)
(0.14)
-21.50
-21.45
-21.56
-15.33
-15.29
-15.40
-(5.90)
-(5.80)
-(5.71)
-(5.40)
-(5.33)
-(5.21)
4.50
4.48
4.45
2.80
2.78
2.76
(4.38)
(4.42)
(4.37)
(2.99)
(3.00)
(2.99)
-9.15
-9.14
-9.72
3.65
3.65
3.23
-(0.32)
-(0.32)
-(0.33)
(0.17)
(0.17)
(0.15)
-0.01
-0.01
-0.01
-0.01
-0.01
-0.01
-(1.32)
-(1.34)
-(1.34)
-(1.48)
-(1.50)
-(1.55)
-7.86
-7.86
-7.89
-3.51
-3.51
-3.53
-(1.60)
-(1.52)
-(1.45)
-(1.18)
-(1.10)
-(1.06)
0.12
0.10
0.07
0.12
0.10
0.07
(0.29)
(0.24)
(0.16)
(0.30)
(0.24)
(0.18)
0.05
0.05
0.05
0.13
0.13
0.13
(0.28)
(0.27)
(0.23)
(1.24)
(1.11)
(0.89)
-0.50
-0.51
-0.51
-0.35
-0.35
-0.36
-(2.71)
-(2.88)
-(3.27)
-(3.27)
-(3.66)
-(3.94)
0.64
0.64
0.65
0.53
0.54
0.54
344

344

344

344

344

344

Panel B (COUNT)
Independent variables
Intercept
COUNT
Good Government Index (x10 -4)
Kurtosis (x10 -3)
Local market volatility
log(GDP per capita)(x10 -4)
log (number of stocks)
Log (country size) (x10 -3)

Var (GDP growth)
Industry Herfindahl Index
Firm Herfindahl Index
Adjusted R2
Sample size

Critical value of COUNT, Equal weights Critical value of COUNT, variance weights
0.01%
0.10%
1%
0.01%
0.10%
1%
0.57
0.59
0.62
0.27
0.29
0.30
(5.46)
(5.75)
(6.44)
(2.27)
(2.49)
(2.83)
5.13
4.57
3.58
4.13
3.49
2.45
(2.58)
(3.34)
(3.33)
(3.04)
(3.77)
(3.18)
-56.43
-61.92
-66.35
2.51
-1.41
-3.53
-(2.15)
-(2.35)
-(2.56)
(0.12)
-(0.07)
-(0.20)
-22.02
-22.30
-23.15
-15.74
-15.98
-16.60
-(5.33)
-(5.51)
-(5.33)
-(5.10)
-(5.08)
-(4.88)
4.47
4.42
4.34
2.77
2.74
2.70
(4.52)
(4.37)
(4.26)
(3.06)
(2.95)
2.95
-8.31
-9.53
-12.66
4.30
3.42
1.46
-(0.29)
-(0.32)
-(0.42)
(0.20)
(0.15)
(0.06)
-0.01
-0.01
-0.01
-0.01
-0.01
-0.01
-(1.30)
-(1.36)
-(1.22)
-(1.47)
-(1.58)
-(1.58)
-7.77
-7.81
-7.95
-3.44
-3.46
-3.53
-(1.48)
-(1.43)
-(1.43)
-(1.10)
-(1.06)
-1.02
0.04
-0.02
0.01
0.06
0.01
0.04
(0.11)
-(0.04)
(0.02)
(0.13)
(0.03)
0.08
0.06
0.05
0.06
0.14
0.13
0.15
(0.29)
(0.22)
(0.25)
(1.03)
(0.78)
(0.82)
-0.51
-0.51
-0.53
-0.36
-0.36
-0.38
-(2.91)
-(2.64)
-(2.39)
-(4.22)
-(2.94)
-(2.49)
0.65
0.65
0.64
0.54
0.54
0.54
344

344

344

344

344

344

Table 4.1. Testing whether opaqueness, measured by DISCLOSURE, explains differences in R2 across
countries and over time. The dependent variables are logistic transformations of equal-weighted or valueweighted country-average R2s. DISCLOSURE is an index of the level of financial disclosure and the
availability of information, based on the Global Competitiveness Reports (1999, 2000). All independent
variables except for DISCLOSURE are as defined in Table 2. Coefficients were estimated by the FamaMacBeth (1973) method. t-statistics are reported under each coefficient.

Equal weights

Variance weights

Equal weights

Variance weights

Independent variables
Intercept

0.99
(6.13)
-28.80
-(2.54)
-240.94
-(3.08)
4.84
0.45

0.96
(5.01)
-33.98
-(2.90)
-273.20
-(4.03)
6.03
0.60

Adjusted R2

-66.58
-(1.33)
-0.04
-(1.67)
-32.22
-(2.85)
-(0.75)
-(0.56)
-0.91
-(4.05)
0.07
(0.22)
0.48

Sample size

334

DISCLOSURE (x10 -3)
Good Government Index (x10 -4)
Kurtosis (x10-3)

-48.78
-(1.00)
-0.04
-(2.01)
-30.01
-(2.87)
-(0.55)
-(0.41)
-0.80
-(1.90)
-0.35
-(0.75)
0.47

-0.63
-(2.83)
-15.38
-(3.09)
-36.81
-(0.53)
3.23
0.33
14.54
(9.08)
94.98
(1.74)
-0.01
-(0.43)
-27.64
-(2.53)
-1.68
-(2.02)
-0.19
-(1.42)
-0.58
-(2.07)
0.68

-0.84
-(4.47)
-15.62
-(2.86)
-66.52
-(1.21)
4.20
0.47
15.88
(10.39)
126.18
(2.32)
-0.01
-(0.69)
-24.82
-(2.64)
-1.50
-(1.86)
0.00
-(0.01)
-1.05
-(3.49)
0.67

334

334

334

Local market volatility
log(GDP per capita) (x10-4)
log (number of stocks)
log (country size) (x10 -3)
Variance (GDP growth)
Industry Herfindahl Index
Firm Herfindahl Index

Table 4.2. Testing whether DISCLOSURE and the Good Government Index explain crash
frequency, measured by the skewness of residual returns, COLLAR and COUNT. COLLAR and
COUNT are defined in Tables 2 and 3. We retain kurtosis and log(GDP per capita) as controls.
The other controls in Tables 2, 3 and 4.1 are eliminated, since R2 is no longer the dependent
variable. Coefficients were estimated by the Fama-MacBeth (1973) method. t-statistics are
reported under each coefficient.
Panel A

Skewness

Critical value of COLLAR
0.01%
0.10%

1%

Independent variables
Intercept

Adjusted R2

0.68
(6.18)
36.53
(3.99)
-381.66
-(3.79)
-13.84
-(0.79)
-50.19
-(0.89)
0.35

0.00
-(1.98)
-0.01
-(3.19)
0.10
(2.41)
-0.02
-(2.57)
-0.01
-(0.24)
0.46

0.00
-(5.89)
-0.02
-(5.16)
0.20
(4.62)
-0.02
-(2.80)
0.01
(0.36)
0.46

0.00
-(7.70)
-0.03
-(3.82)
0.39
(4.41)
-0.01
-(0.88)
0.04
(0.88)
0.33

Sample size

415

415

415

415

DISCLOSURE (x10 -3)
Good Government Index (x10 -4)
Kurtosis (x10 -3)
log(GDP per capita) (x10 -4)

Panel B

Critical value of COUNT
0.01%
0.10%

1%

Independent variables
Intercept

Adjusted R2

0.00
-(0.92)
-0.29
-(2.46)
3.35
(3.75)
0.07
(0.76)
-0.24
-(0.56)
0.25

-0.01
-(2.80)
-0.36
-(2.18)
5.11
(3.79)
0.26
(2.62)
0.15
(0.24)
0.28

-0.01
-(5.61)
-0.38
-(1.73)
7.13
(3.77)
0.67
(4.81)
0.69
(0.68)
0.32

Sample size

415

415

415

DISCLOSURE (x10 -3)
Good Government Index (x10 -4)
Kurtosis (x10 -3)
log(GDP per capita) (x10 -4)

Table 5.1. Testing whether opaqueness, measured by AUDITOR, explains differences in R2 across
countries and over time. The dependent variables are logistic transformations of equal-weighted or valueweighted country-average R2s. AUDITOR is the number of auditors per 100,000 population, based on data
from Saudagaran and Diga (1997). All independent variables except for AUDITOR are as defined in Table 2.
Coefficients were estimated by the Fama-MacBeth (1973) method. t-statistics are reported under each
coefficient.

Equal weights

Variance weights

Equal weights

Variance weights

Independent Variables
Intercept

1.30
(3.50)
-350.54
-(3.09)
-514.54
-(6.71)
-92.16
-(5.58)

0.93
(2.50)
-209.72
-(1.88)
-627.00
-(6.39)
-80.00
-(5.53)

Adjusted R2

45.75
(0.54)
-0.07
-(2.29)
-25.77
-(2.90)
(2.97)
(2.13)
0.23
(0.46)
-2.62
-(1.80)
0.63

Sample size

255

AUDITOR (x10 -6)
Good Government Index (x10 -4)
Kurtosis (x10 -3)

87.08
(1.25)
-0.03
-(0.96)
-26.74
-(3.51)
(3.72)
(2.09)
-0.09
-(0.21)
-1.91
-(1.52)
0.63

-0.87
-(1.82)
-1010.98
-(4.91)
-202.63
-(2.73)
6.21
(0.40)
10.10
(3.78)
279.49
(2.86)
0.02
(0.45)
-46.70
-(4.07)
0.53
(0.28)
-0.21
-(0.36)
0.73
(0.45)
0.70

-1.41
-(2.50)
-785.17
-(3.76)
-308.31
-(2.87)
6.98
(0.45)
15.19
(3.42)
319.50
(2.92)
0.05
(1.03)
-45.22
-(3.73)
0.22
(0.08)
-0.49
-(0.80)
0.66
(0.45)
0.74

225

255

225

Local market volatility
log(GDP per capita) (x10 -4)
log (number of stocks)
log (country size) (x10 -3)
Variance (GDP growth)
Industry Herfindahl Index
Firm Herfindahl Index

Table 5.2. Testing whether AUDITOR and the Good Government Index explain crash frequency,
measured by the skewness of residual returns, COLLAR and COUNT. COLLAR and COUNT are defined
in Tables 2 and 3. Kurtosis and log(GDP per capita) are controls. Other controls are eliminated, since R2
is not the dependent variable. Coefficients were estimated by the Fama-MacBeth (1973) method. tstatistics are reported under each coefficient.
Panel A

Skewness

Critical value of COLLAR
0.01%
0.10%

1%

Independent variables
Intercept

Adjusted R2

0.78
4.30
341.08
3.76
-201.93
-2.06
20.77
1.47
24.32
0.48
0.31

0.00
-1.36
-0.08
-3.05
0.04
1.35
-0.04
-7.68
-0.01
-0.59
0.59

0.00
-3.12
-0.18
-4.04
0.10
1.98
-0.05
-5.77
-0.02
-0.80
0.50

0.00
-4.94
-0.40
-4.57
0.25
2.60
-0.04
-3.24
-0.04
-0.77
0.39

Sample size

258

258

258

258

AUDITOR (x10 -6)
Good Government Index (x10 -4)
Kurtosis (x10 -3)
log(GDP per capita) (x10 -4)

Panel B

Critical value of COUNT
0.01%
0.10%

1%

Independent variables
Intercept

Adjusted R2

0.00
-4.30
-2.40
-4.50
1.33
2.51
-0.21
-2.41
-0.34
-1.03
0.35

-0.01
-5.68
-4.13
-4.84
2.87
3.09
0.01
0.08
-0.52
-0.89
0.33

-0.02
-5.58
-6.91
-4.22
4.59
2.58
0.61
2.79
-0.11
-0.10
0.33

Sample size

258

258

258

AUDITOR (x10 -6)
Good Government Index (x10 -4)
Kurtosis (x10 -3)
log(GDP per capita) (x10 -4)

Table 6.1. Testing whether opaqueness, measured by DIVERSITY, explains differences in R2 across
countries and over time. The dependent variables are logistic transformations of equal-weighted or valueweighted country-average R2s. DIVERSITY is an index of opaqueness based on the variance of differences
is security analysts’ earnings forecasts. All independent variables except for DIVERSITY are as defined in
Table 2. Coefficients were estimated by the Fama-MacBeth (1973) method. t-statistics are reported under
each coefficient.
Equal weights

Variance weights

Equal weights

Variance weights

Independent Variables
Intercept

1.32
(7.68)
1255.11
(1.84)
-472.65
-(10.98)
-86.71
-(5.87)

0.75
(3.13)
1536.34
(3.08)
-477.48
-(9.62)
-81.46
-(4.50)

Adjusted R2

-81.56
-(1.81)
-0.10
-(6.00)
-18.85
-(1.94)
(1.61)
(0.56)
0.03
(0.09)
-1.31
-(3.08)
0.51

Sample size

320

DIVERSITY (x10 -3)
Good Government Index (x10 -4)
Kurtosis (x10 -3)

-26.91
-(0.53)
-0.07
-(4.09)
-17.31
-(2.08)
(0.68)
(0.21)
0.25
(0.55)
-1.52
-(2.43)
0.48

-0.84
-(3.68)
2607.28
(4.55)
-135.64
-(2.44)
-53.44
-(5.87)
16.89
(8.34)
135.15
(2.55)
-0.02
-(1.07)
-15.16
-(1.30)
2.35
(0.92)
0.23
(1.30)
-1.35
-(3.80)
0.75

-1.09
-(5.87)
1554.65
(2.75)
-119.36
-(2.96)
-49.90
-(4.75)
17.22
(8.50)
145.39
(2.98)
-0.01
-(0.53)
-18.96
-(2.13)
2.09
(0.75)
0.50
(1.43)
-1.89
-(4.01)
0.68

320

320

320

Local market volatility
log(GDP per capita) (x10 -4)
log (number of stocks)
log (country size) (x10 -3)
Variance (GDP growth)
Industry Herfindahl Index
Firm Herfindahl Index

Table 6.2. Testing whether DIVERSITY and the Good Government Index explain crash frequency,
measured by the skewness of residual returns, COLLAR and COUNT. COLLAR and COUNT are defined
in Tables 2 and 3. Kurtosis and log(GDP per capita) are controls. Other controls are eliminated, since R2
is no longer the dependent variable. Coefficients were estimated by the Fama-MacBeth (1973) method. tstatistics are reported under each coefficient.
Panel A

Skewness

Critical value of COLLAR
0.01%
0.10%

1%

Independent variables
Intercept

Adjusted R2

0.54
2.26
-2357.60
-4.13
-56.28
-0.44
-27.57
-2.55
-72.72
-1.72
0.35

0.00
-0.57
0.80
3.91
-0.01
-0.22
-0.01
-2.66
0.03
2.90
0.32

0.00
-2.38
1.30
6.39
0.01
0.33
-0.01
-2.86
0.03
3.86
0.32

0.00
-2.64
2.17
3.95
0.09
0.72
0.00
-0.39
0.05
1.13
0.30

Sample size

358

358

358

358

DIVERSITY (x10 -3)
Good Government Index (x10 -4)
Kurtosis (x10 -3)
log(GDP per capita) (x10 -4)

Panel B

Critical value of COUNT
0.01%
0.10%

1%

Independent variables
Intercept

Adjusted R2

0.00
-2.07
13.09
4.34
0.45
0.62
0.09
1.87
0.24
0.91
0.32

-0.01
-2.98
17.29
3.48
1.12
0.96
0.24
2.65
0.42
0.86
0.33

-0.02
-4.18
30.29
2.82
3.12
1.58
0.59
3.62
0.97
1.02
0.31

Sample size

358

358

358

DIVERSITY (x10 -3)
Good Government Index (x10 -4)
Kurtosis (x10 -3)
log(GDP per capita) (x10 -4)

