                                   NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      SOFT INFORMATION, HARD SHELL:
               THE ROLE OF SOFT INFORMATION IN THE PRICING OF
         INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY – EVIDENCE FROM SCREENPLAYS SALES

                                          William N. Goetzmann
                                           Vicente Pons-Sanz
                                           S. Abraham Ravid

                                           Working Paper 10468
                                   http://www.nber.org/papers/w10468


                        NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                 1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                   Cambridge, MA 02138
                                        May 2004




We thank Judy Chevalier and Kose John for helpful conversations on this topic; as well as seminar
participants at Rutgers University, especially Darius Palia. All errors are the responsibility of the authors. We
thank the International Center for Finance at the Yale School of Management for financial support. The views
expressed herein are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

©2004 by William N. Goetzmann, Vicente Pons-Sanz, and S. Abraham Ravid. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Soft Information, Hard Shell: The Role of Soft Information in the Pricing of Intellectual Property
– Evidence for Screenplays Sales
William N. Goetzmann, Vicente Pons-Sanz, and S. Abraham Ravid
NBER Working Paper No. 10468
May 2004
JEL No. G12, L14, J31
                                         ABSTRACT

There is a growing literature on the differential impact of "soft" vs. "hard" information on

organizational structure and behavior. This study is an attempt to empirically quantify the value of

soft information, using a data-base on the market for screenplays. Script quality is difficult to

estimate without subjective evaluation. Therefore soft information should be an integral part of the

pricing of these intellectual assets. In our empirical analysis, we find that "hard information"

(reputation) variables as well as "soft information" proxies are priced. Screenplays with high soft

information content are priced significantly lower than "high concept" "harder information"- type

scripts. We also follow the screenplays to production, and find that buyers seem to be able to

forecast the success of a script, paying more for screenplays resulting in more successful films. In

other words, "high concept" (harder information) screenplays sell for more and result in more

successful movies.

William N. Goetzmann
Yale School of Management
Box 208200
New Haven, CT 06520-8200
and NBER
william.goetzmann@yale.edu

Vicente Pons-Sanz
Yale School of Management
vicente.pons@yale.edu

S. Abraham Ravid
Rutgers University
ravid@andromeda.rutgers.edu
I. INTRODUCTION

There is a growing literature on the role of soft information in organizations.2 The
theoretical literature focuses on the impact of soft information on organizational
structure, whereas most of the testing was done in the banking sector. Stein (2002)
suggests that in the presence of soft information, decentralization can allow good projects
to be funded properly. He defines soft information as the ability to credibly communicate
information to an outsider – in this case, a CEO. Faure Grimaud et al. (2002) consider an
organizational structure with a principal, supervisor and agents. The information structure
is nested, and as in Stein (2002), soft information in this context means information that
cannot be credibly communicated to an outside agent. The paper itself is concerned with
coalition formation and collusion, and develops an optimal organizational structure.
        Important recent applications of the concept of soft information have focused on
the banking industry. Petersen (2002) suggests that soft information has been in the
background but not necessarily the foreground of various theoretical papers, including the
ones we mentioned. His survey discusses empirical work, suggesting that small banks
tend to prefer to work with soft information whereas larger banks work better with harder
information. Empirical tests show that firms that are less informationally transparent have
a lower probability of loan approval. Further, such firms tend to do better with smaller
banks that can better evaluate soft information. Berger et al. (2003) is the most recent
paper finding support for this view using a matched sample of banks and firms. The
banking literature also relates soft information issues to distance between the bank and
the firm in question.3 Similarly, Liberti (2002) finds that a more decentralized structure
increases reliance on soft information in Argentinean banks, consistent with Stein’s
(2002) characterization.
        Petersen (2002) provides some specific characterization of hard information; hard
information is numerical, it is gathered in an impersonal way, and it is valued the same
way by different people. He suggests that markets have recently been using less soft
information, and he also relates it ultimately to the relative costs of quantification. In

2
  See, for example Stein (2002), Faure, Grimaud, Laffont and Matrimont (2002) and in a less formal sense
Baker, Gibbons and Murphy (1994), and Laffont and Tirole (1997).
3
  See Petersen and Rajan (1994), Petersen and Rajan (2002) in addition to Berger et al. (2003).


                                                   1
contrast, Baker et al. (1994) suggest that contracts based upon subjective assessments can
improve upon objective contracts, regardless of relative costs. The paper argues that there
is some aspect of value-relevant performance that is too complex to quantify, hence
objective measures are imperfect and subjective measures can help. This characterization
is perhaps closer to the notion presented in this paper. We propose a slightly more formal
definition of soft information, and we use this as the basis for testing the proposition that
the fundamentally subjective nature of soft information itself affects valuation. Our
empirical analysis focuses on the film industry – a setting in which the inputs to the
decision-making process have a high level of soft information. We use a unique data set
to study the impact of the information content on the pricing of screenplays and
ultimately, on the success of the movies that are produced based upon these scripts.


II. A CONCEPTUAL MODEL OF SOFT INFORMATION
       Consider a simple decision model with data inputs and a single output – a yes or
no decision, such as loan approval, project funding, script purchase, a decision to operate
on a patient, or a choice to hire an employee. Data inputs may take many forms:
narrative, visual, numeric or verbal. A strictly quantitative model relies solely on
numerical data as inputs. Quantitative models may also include hedonic specifications
that code qualitative inputs into quantitative values. Visual, narrative and verbal data
cannot easily be adapted to such a model unless they can be systematically coded – that
is, the data can be mechanically and unambiguously translated into a numeric code.
Mathematical functions can process quantitative information, but humans (i.e. human
cognitive functions) are needed to process the additional signals. Thus soft information
can either be defined as non-numeric input to a decision-making process or it can be
regarded as data for which human cognition is required to convert it into decision-
relevant information. One distinctive feature of soft information is that the need for
human cognition means that no two functional mappings will precisely match due to the
fact that no two people are alike.
       For example, in a home mortgage approval decision, inputs might include the
income and financial assets of the borrower, the loan to value ratio, and an extended
discussion with a bank officer regarding the plans for use of the proceeds from the loan.



                                             2
The clear quantitative inputs are the income and financial assets. The loan to value ratio
[LTV] in fact shares some of the characteristics of a soft information variable, since,
although quantitative, it relies upon the subjective evaluation of a property appraiser.
However, most economists interested in soft information would regard the LTV as hard
information because it is ultimately numeric. The conversation with the loan officer is
archetypical soft information – it is potentially relevant to the decision, but not mapped
explicitly into a number such as “the officer’s numeric assessment of the probability of
default.” If, in this example, the bank finds that its loan decisions are better [i.e. the NPV
is greater] when they include a conversation between an officer and the borrower, then
soft information is value-relevant to the model. In this example, the conversation is the
soft information, and the bank officer supplies the human cognitive processing function.
Thus, the difference between hard information and soft information must lie not only
with the information itself, but the processor needed to use it.
        Another way of thinking about soft information is simply as the opposite of hard
information. Perhaps it is the fuzziness or noise in a quantitative model or specification
that cannot be reduced through collecting more data. Consider, for example, a point on a
two dimensional plane with coordinates (x, y) and a sender of a message and a receiver.
The sender sends a message and the receiver is trying to identify the point. If the
information enables any receiver to identify the point with certainty, then this is hard
information. If the information provides only a confidence interval or a space around the
point, that is, a larger area X+C; Y+D where C and D are positive, then this is soft (i.e.
noisy) information. This definition combines definitions such as Petersen (2002) and
others, which describe hard information as numerical, and fits the banking context of soft
information. For example, after an interview a credit officer can say: “this person
presents good credit risk” this is soft information, since it provides only a bound around
the exact credit evaluation of the person. On the other hand, the information may be: “he
was delinquent three times, his mortgage is 500,000 which combines to a credit score of
4.2”. Notice, that even in the latter case we still do not know whether or not the person
will pay the loan, however, the information is hard4.


4
  Is this view of soft information isomorphic to other definitions (such as Laffont and Tirole (1997) and
others) which differentiate between the two types of information by the cost of transmission? In some


                                                   3
        Thus far, the main institutional settings in which soft information has been
discussed are in the financial industry, where soft information is typically one element in
a decision-making process. However, in this industry there are quite a few objective,
numerical measures that can be evaluated in a standard framework by agents in the
organization. Our empirical setting for this paper is an industry where soft information is
considerably more important. The broadest conceptualization of the film industry is that
it is a mechanism for turning ideas into profit. Regardless of one’s personal views on the
aesthetic quality of Hollywood productions, it is undeniable that a major portion of the
industry is devoted to the solicitation, evaluation, screening and business assessment of
artistic projects. Many of these projects begin as script concepts that are read by agents,
pitched to studio professionals, reviewed within studio companies, discussed and
approved or rejected at meetings, optioned or purchased by studios through simple or
contingent contracts, revised and re-written as part of the production process and finally
reviewed by industry participants for awards. This trajectory is common to many artistic
endeavors. However, unlike non-commercial aesthetic creations, such as art produced by
not-for-profit enterprises, products of the film industry are subject to the judgment of the
marketplace. Thus, the aesthetic characteristics of the project – in our case, the quality of
the script – can matter a lot, economically. A film can have all the elements of a past box
office hit – talented cast, the requisite number of chase scenes and love scenes and great
special effects and still be a flop if the script is not good. Much of the evaluation of
quality is based upon the economic processing of soft information. This makes the film
industry an excellent laboratory for the study of the role of soft information. Whereas
previous research has relied upon indirect or residual measures of soft information effects
(cf. Berger, Miller, Rajan and Stein, 2002) with movie industry data we can directly study
intellectual property sales, where soft information is an integral part of the transaction. In
particular, we will gauge the complexity and depth of information available about a
project and relate this to its price.
        We adopt complexity as a convenient measure of soft information, because simple
information is presumably easier to quantify. Recall that our definition suggests that


sense, the answer to this question is yes. That is, you can investigate more and more and make soft
information increasingly harder.


                                                4
assets whose value depends on soft information will tend to be evaluated differently by
different people. In the case of screenplay sales, since many people are involved in the
decision, soft information can cause a divergence of views and make sale at an agreed-
upon price more difficult. A script with a short, simple description like “A buddy story
set in the Wild West” is low on soft information content, and thus more easily evaluated
and agreed upon by industry participants. Our other measure directly assesses the
information content available to the purchaser of screenplays.


Predictions
       The hypotheses we test are rather straightforward. The first, most general
hypothesis is that soft information as well as hard information is priced in sales of
intellectual property – in other words, we can quantify the impact of soft information on
prices paid. The second hypothesis is that a high ratio of soft to hard information will
lower prices. Since one measure of hard information about screenplays is the reputation
of the writer, we will also test a third hypothesis, which is much more obvious; that
(measurable) reputation is priced in intellectual property sales.
       In the second part of the paper, we will test how this pricing function ultimately
affects valuation of the finished product, in this case revenues and rates of return.


III. DATA, BACKGROUND AND VARIABLES
       The process of turning an idea into a completed movie is complex and long. Not
only is it difficult to get a screenplay produced, but it is difficult to even get an idea
reviewed. One can register a screenplay with the Writers Guild of America (WGA),
however, a writer will need an agent in order to submit a screenplay to a studio or
production company. Getting an agent may not be trivial either – quite a few agencies do
not accept unsolicited manuscripts (see WGA.org), and represent only people who are
referred by people they know. Once a writer has representation, an agent may submit a
screenplay to be evaluated by a production company. Most major studios have several
layers of screening before a script ends up actually in the hands of someone who can
make a purchase decision. This latter decision can come in several ways. A screenplay
may be optioned. That is, a studio may pay an agreed-upon amount, typically 10% of the



                                              5
total estimated sale value and in return it will have some time, typically 18 months, to
study the screenplay. During the option period, the screenwriter is not allowed to sell the
script to anybody else. This “option” period can be extended. At the end of the period, the
script may or may not be purchased. WGA sets minimum prices for screenplays (which
are currently around $50,000 for a low budget movie and up to $90,000 for a high budget
film). Most purchases in our data set are at much higher prices. However, a purchase
(which is when the screenplay appears in our data), even at a very high price, is no
guarantee of production. It may still take a while for anything to happen -- first,
screenplays are “developed,” that is, changed, re-written and adapted to both the creative
and pragmatic (budget) requirements of the purchasing entity.5 Then, even if everybody
is happy with the final write-up there may not be a studio that is willing to finance and
distribute the film.6
        Fundamental to the entire process is the “pitch.” That is, the basic concept of the
screenplay boiled down to a parsimonious narrative that can be delivered in a paragraph
or two or verbally by a writer, agent or another intermediary in the process. The pitch
must have all of the necessary elements to explain the potential appeal of the story,
without the complexities and detail of the actual script. A script with a simple pitch is
characterized as a “high concept” script. The common belief in Hollywood is that a high
concept script is more valuable, and easier to sell to readers and producers.7
        We gather data on the screenplay “pitch” or “logline,” (the description used to sell
the script) as well as screenwriter compensation, screenwriter reputation, script
complexity, and movie financials and characteristics from various sources. Our main
source of information is the 2003 Spec Screenplay Sales Directory, compiled by
Hollywoodsales.com. It contains approximately six years of screenplays sales. The
information provided on each sale includes: title, pitch, genre, agent, producer, date-of-


5
  A playwright contractually controls a play written for the theater- no one is not allowed to change her
lines. In the movie business this is very different. Don Jacoby, who received 1.5 million dollars for his
script told Variety in November 1998 "Not eight words from the original script were in the movie".
6
  The film industry boasts a large number of people who make a very nice living writing screenplays but
rarely if ever seeing anything actually produced.
7
   Cf. Orr, Bonnie, “High Concept,” Screentalk.biz, http://www.screentalk.biz/art043.htm. See also:
Lerch, Jennifer, 1999, 500 Ways to Beat the Hollywood Script Reader : Writing the Screenplay the Reader
Will Recommend, Fireside Press. Also. Downs, William Missouri and Robin U. Russin, 2003,
Screenplay: Writing the Picture, Silman-James Press.


                                                   6
sale, purchase price, and buyer. Sometime additional information regarding the particular
screenplay is provided. This information is generally positive, but it may be more
“neutral” in nature, for example, that a production deal is sought. There are 1,269 scripts
in our sample.
         We have a purchase price for 788 scripts (62.09% of the total sample). The
purchase price may be an exact number (which we have for 224 scripts, 28.42% of scripts
with available purchase price, 17.65% of the total sample). In other cases, Spec
Screenplay Sales Directory may record an approximate price (554 scripts). This is
generally recorded as, for example, mid- 600’s, or low 400’s. In the latter case, we
transform the price range into a best estimate (for instance, low five figures is
transformed into $25,000; high six figures is transformed into $750,000). Using these
numbers and transformations, we analyze the data further.
         Screenwriters may be offered two types of contracts. The first is a fixed payment,
non-contingent contract. There are 299 (38%) such screenplays in our sample.
Alternatively, the screenwriter may be offered a contingent contract -- 489 of the scripts
in our sample fit this description. In a contingent contract the screenwriter receives an
initial payment upon contract signing and an additional amount if the script is produced.
Average compensation in non-contingent contracts is (in thousands) $1,204.19 (standard
deviation, 4,314.66). In contingent contracts, the average initial payment is much lower,
$405.06 (standard deviation, 411.28); total compensation if the script is finally produced
is $882.38 (standard deviation, 900.22).
         A screenplay, as we explained earlier, needs to pass several layers of approval.
The logline is the first step in that process, and is widely regarded as a vital part of
getting the project accepted by an agent and then a studio. 8 In order to assess the soft
information in the logline, we start with a simple measure, namely, the number of words.
The theory is straightforward. – if a concept is complicated, then more words are required
to describe it9.

8
   For example, see web advice on crafting the logline. http://www.inktip.com/tips-loglines.php .
9
  In recent years the theory and practice of automated evaluation of texts has been progressing rapidly. Yet,
as we discussed, it would be difficult to quantify a measure for soft information. At this stage of progress it
is not clear that a machine can indeed perform a sufficiently transparent analysis. Therefore, we preferred
the simplest measure, namely, the number of words. Chevalier and Mayzlin (2003) consider the number of
characters in reviews posted for books sold on Amazon.com and BN.com as a value measure. Their


                                                      7
         Out of 1,269 scripts, the Directory reports logline for 1,218 scripts (95.98%). The
average logline description contains 25.92 words (standard deviation is 13.65). Since the
number of words is a rough approximation, and different types of descriptions require
more or less words for the same level of complexity, we created a coarse division to
approximate the fundamental differences in complexity. Our variable soft_words equals 0
if the logline contains less than 20 words; 1 if the logline contains between 21 and 30
words; 2 if the logline contains between 31 and 40 words; and 3 if the logline contains
more than 40 words. The logline may be just descriptive or may contain references to
existing movies. Eighty-five scripts (6.97% of the scripts for which we have the
storyline) mention at least one movie in the story line (56 mention 1 movie, 29 mention 2
movies). We assume that analogy or reference to other movies makes the logline more
transparent. Additional information is provided for 573 scripts, (45.15% of the sample).
This information obviously makes the script easier to interpret. We create a dummy
variable for the availability of additional information.
         The discussion of soft information in the previous section should make it clear
that it is very difficult to measure soft information precisely. Thus, even if we have the
correct characterization, most of the action should probably be in the extreme cases. We
create a very simple script complexity index, Transparent Script, that equals 1 when the
log line contains less than 20 words (i.e. Soft_Words equals 0), and additional
information about the script is available (i.e. InfoDummy equals 1 ). Transparent Script is
equal to 1 for 217 scripts (17.1% of the sample).
         Genres are commonly considered to be important variables in studies of films (for
a recent example see DeVany, 2004). Four hundred and sixty five scripts (36.64% of the
sample) are assigned more than one genre (453 are assigned two genres, 11 three genres
and 1 four genres). We group the different genres reported by Spec Screenplay Sales
Directory into six broad categories: action (189 scripts), comedy (571 scripts), drama
(257 scripts), romance (257 scripts), thriller (224 scripts), and other (123 scripts). Genres
can be control variables (i.e. compensation may be higher for certain genres than for

findings suggest that longer reviews are required to support a “mixed” review, i.e. 1 star (worst) and 5 star
(best) reviews are associated with shorter reviews. This is consistent with our view of length as a measure
of complexity and nuances. Godes and Mayzlin (2003) find that more complicated measures are very
noisy. For a discussion and implementation of some of the automated methodologies see for example
Tetlock (2003).


                                                     8
others), but can also serve as a measure of complexity, namely, if more than one genre is
assigned to a screenplay that may indicate more complexity and a higher component of
soft information.
       The next set of variables describes our “hard information” set, namely, the
screenwriter’s reputation and past success. Many papers show that reputation matters.
John, Ravid and Sunder (2004) show that the re-hiring decision of film directors depends
on their past success. To measure screenwriter reputation, we search the Internet Movie
Database (IMDb) for the number of scripts previously sold by the screenwriter and
produced. If we find no entries, we also search our own data-base to see if any screenplay
had been previously sold by this writer. The average number of previously produced
scripts is 2.0236 per screenwriter (standard deviation, 5.5593). The writers of 730 scripts
(57.52% of the sample) have not sold any previous work. Reputation Movies takes the
value 0 if the screenwriter has never had any screenplay produced (as per IMDB); 1 if the
screenwriter has had between 1 and 3 scripts produced (which is the case for 348 scripts,
27.42% of the sample); 2 if between 4 and 10 scripts have been produced (142 scripts,
11.18% of the sample); and 3 if the screenwriter has previously had more than 10 scripts
produced(49 scripts, 3.86% of the sample). If we cannot find any produced screenplay in
IMDB and no previous sale in our data base, then our experienced writer variable
receives a value of zero. We use additional reputation variables. Nominated Oscar
(Awarded Oscar) takes the value 1 if the screenwriter had been previously nominated to
(had won) an Oscar. Any Nomination (Any Award) takes the value 1 if the screenwriter
had been previously nominated to (had won) an award in any of the major festivals
tracked by IMDb: Oscars, Golden Globes, British Academy Awards, Emmy Award,
European Film Award, Cannes, Sundance, Toronto and Berlin. For 71 scripts, the
screenwriter had been nominated in a major festival; in 32 cases, the screenwriter has
previously won an award in a major festival; in 27 cases, s/he had been nominated to an
Oscar; and for 10 scripts, the screenwriter had previously won an Oscar. Finally, an
unknown screenwriter may use a manager to compensate for his lack of reputation. Spec
Screenplay Sales Directory reports that the screenwriters who wrote 172 of the scripts
sold (13.55% of the total sample) employ a manager.




                                            9
        The Internet Movie Database (IMDb) reports all films produced or that are in
production. 311 scripts (24.51% of the total sample) have been produced or are in
production as of December 2003. It is virtually certain that more screenplays will be
produced in the future, especially from the most recent acquisitions10. Thus, although we
do run a regression for the probability of being produced, we do not consider the results
an important part of our analysis. On the other hand, we can certainly evaluate the
projects produced and compare them to the screenplays that generated them.
         For each movie produced, we obtain its financial performance from Baseline
services in California. Specifically, we have the budget of each film, domestic revenues,
international revenues as well as video and DVD revenues. We use two measures of
return. One is total revenues over budget, and the other is total revenues over budget plus
advertising and promotion expenditures11. For each film we obtain several additional
control variables. MPAA ratings (in particular, family friendly ratings) have been shown
to be a most important determinant of revenues and returns in a number of previous
papers12 . We obtain ratings for all films released. Interestingly, our sample of films
produced tends to be somewhat skewed – there are no G rated films, and more PG-13
than expected (see MPAA.org or Ravid (1999) for a discussion of the distribution of
ratings). It seems that G- rated films and in general family films, which also tend to be
the most successful (see Ravid (1999), Simonoff and Sparrow (2000), De Vany and
Walls (2002) or Fee (2002)) are developed “in house” rather than as a result of purchases
of outside screenplays.
        We use several additional control variables. Star power can, in principle,
significantly impact box office revenues13. To assess star qualities, we use IMDB, which
provides a list of the director, and up to 8 main cast members. We then classify each cast

10
   “If you aspire to be a screenwriter, you should look at your work as a process that will come to fruition
over time- perhaps a long time” writes Peter Miller (1998) in a book (p.90) for newcomers to the business.
11
   In spite of industry wisdom, promotional expenditures are highly correlated with the budget (see Ravid
and Basuroy, 2004). Therefore the two indices are highly correlated. Although we do have rental numbers
i.e. what the studio collects of the revenues, we do not have comparable numbers for home entertainment,
where contracts are more complicated. Thus, for consistency, we use total revenues as a measure of
income. Rentals are roughly half the revenues for theatrical exhibition, but not so for home entertainment
revenues.
12
   See for example, Ravid (1999), Ravid and Basuroy (2004) Fee (2002), DeVany and Walls (2002) or
Simonoff and Sparrow (2000).
13
   In Ravid (1999), however, star power did not end up being a significant determinant of either revenues or
return on investment.


                                                    10
member following a similar procedure to the one used to measure screenwriter
reputation. The variable Cast Nominated Oscar counts, for each film, the total number of
Oscar nominations for the film’s 8 main cast members, previous to the film’s production
date. Cast Awarded Oscar, Cast Any Nomination and Cast Any Award have a similar
interpretation.
        Alternatively, we use IMDB Starmeter to classify an actor as a star. STARmeter
uses proprietary algorithms that take into account several measures of popularity for
people and titles. The primary measure captures who or what is being viewed on the
public IMDb.com website. Other factors include box office receipts and user quality
votes on a scale of 1-10. The rankings are updated on a weekly basis. We classify an
actor as a star if he or she has a Starmeter ranking higher than 150 in the first entry in
January of the year the movie is released. For example, Edward Norton was the lead
character in the film The 25th Hour, released on December 19, 2002. Norton’s ranking on
January 6, 2002 was 99, so that according to the Starmeter classification, he would be
classified as a star14.Our Starmeter variable counts for each film (similar to other cast
reputation variables)the total number of cast members who were classified as stars in
January of the year the movie was released. Using the different reputation variables, we
create dummies as alternative measures of cast stardom. Thus, Cast Dummy Awarded
Oscar, for instance, takes the value one if any cast member has been previously awarded
an Oscar15.
        We use several additional variables. The publication Variety lists reviews for the
first weekend in which a film opens in New York. Although reviews are provided for
other cities, the “New York” reviews are usually the first to appear, contain the largest
number of reviews, and include national listings as well (such as broadcast network
reviews or national magazines). Thus we use the New York reviews in our analysis. The
total number of reviews, Total Reviews proxies for the attention the movie receives16. In


14
   We experimented with star meter rankings of the highest 50 or highest 100, but that did not change the
qualitative results. None of these variables was significant.
15
   Following with our example, Cast Dummy Awarded Oscar takes the value one for the film The 25th
Hour, since one of the film’s cast members, Anna Paquin, received an Academy Award in 1994 for his role
in the film The Piano.
16
   Ravid (1999) found that the total reviews variable significantly affected movie performance in his
sample.


                                                   11
its Crix pix column, Variety classifies reviews as “pro”, “con”, and “mixed.” We use
these classifications to come up with measures of the quality of critical reviews: Positive
Reviews is the ratio of number of “pro” reviews divided by the number of total reviews.
Non-Negative Reviews is the ratio of non-negative reviews (i.e., good plus mixed)
divided by the number of total reviews17.
         Finally, we looked up each film’s release date. In some other studies (Litman
1983; Chisholm 2000), release dates were used as dummy variables, on the theory that a
Christmas release should attract greater audiences, and on the other hand, a release in a
low attendance period should be bad for revenues. However, since there are several peaks
and troughs in attendance throughout the year, we use information from Einav (2003),
which provides a ranking for each week of the year18.


IV. RESULTS
1. Hard information, Soft Information and Screenplay Pricing.
         Table I suggests that two elements are salient in the screenplay price –
screenwriter reputation and soft information. We see that the number of movies
previously credited to the screenwriter dramatically increases the compensation.
Reputation and experience matter -- if it is a writer’s first movie, he or she receives
significantly less money. Similarly, writers who have written more screenplays
(reputation movies = 3) are significantly less likely to receive a contingent contract,
which has a risk-sharing element. Nomination of any kind increases the writer’s
compensation significantly. Surprisingly, it seems that receiving an Oscar is less valuable
that being nominated, however, we should recall that we only have very few academy
award winners in the sample. Thus, panel B suggests that the “hard information”
component is important for pricing.
         The next panel includes “soft information” variables. The results suggest that
shorter (“high concept”) loglines (soft-words=0) are associated with much higher
17
   In Ravid (1999) only the total number of reviews mattered. However, Eliashberg and Shugan (1997) as
well as Basuroy et al. (2003) found that reviews significantly affect the weekly revenues.
18
    Another variable that may be of interest is whether or not a film is a sequel. While sequels tend to be
more expensive and bring in lower revenues than the original film, they may still outperform the average
film if they can capitalize on a successful formula. Ravid (1999) supports this view. However, for obvious
reasons we do not have sequels in our sample.



                                                    12
payments, and a lower probability of a contingency pay. Similarly, screenplays that
provide additional information are rewarded for it, and a “transparent script”, which is a
composite of the two measures, is worth almost three times as much as a “non-
transparent” one. Genres may play a role, but the role is unclear from the tabulation
above. (Unreported) medians of our variables tell the same story.
         Regressions test the hypothesis of a relationship between soft information,
compensation and deal structure.19 Table II reports a regression in which the dependent
variable is the price paid in either contingent or non-contingent contracts. For contingent
contracts, the dependent variable is the price paid if the movie is not made, that is,
upfront. In the case of non-contingent contracts, we use the price actually paid. The
results seem to confirm the findings in the means tests.
         In all regression specifications, the genres and even the manager variable add
virtually nothing to explanatory power. The only significant variables are reputation
variables, such as the number of films the screenwriter had written, or nominations for
major awards, (which are our “hard information” variables), as well as several soft
information variables, in particular, when they interact with low reputation. Specifically,
we find that the longer the log-line the lower the price, and the more information is
available the higher is the price paid. The significance level increases for “low
reputation” (first time) screenwriters. However, the most significant variable is
“transparent script”, which describes screenplays with additional information and for
which the log line contains less than 20 words. The lower is the “soft information”
content, as measured by “transparent script,” the higher is the price. This makes sense. If
a screenwriter has a sterling reputation, a studio may be willing to buy a much softer
product from him or her. However, if he or she is untested, they had better have a very
clear “high concept” script at hand.20 As a rough estimate, we can say that having sold a
previous movie increases the price received by roughly a half a million dollars. However,
a transparent screenplay is worth over $1 million more.


19
   All regressions are tested for multicolinearity and the standard errors are White heteroskedasticity
adjusted standard errors.
20
   This result is conceptually similar to the finding in the banking literature that small, opaque firms have
more difficulties in obtaining credit, and prefer working with smaller banks which can better handle soft
information (see Petersen (2002) and Berger et al. (2003).


                                                      13
           Table III presents similar tests for the subset of non-contingent contracts in which
a firm price is established. The results are qualitatively similar, but the explanatory power
is higher. The R2 increases in the first and last columns to about 38% from 27%. As
before, soft information variables, and in particular “transparent script,” are significant
and so are reputation variables. For low reputation screenwriters even the genre-related
soft information approximation (characterizing a screenplay that had to be classified by
several genres) significantly reduces the price paid. Again, soft information matters more
for the less well-known writers.21
           This latter soft information variable is also significant in table IV, which measures
the initial compensation in contingent contracts. All previously significant variables are
significant here as well. Interestingly, the genre of the film does not matter – in other
words, it seems that studios are eclectic in what they are willing to buy. Here, however,
the “manager” variable has a negative value – having a manager is associated with a
lower price up front.
           Table V presents a probit regression estimating the likelihood of receiving a
contingent contract. In principle, such contracts should not be offered to risk-averse
screenwriters. A risk neutral corporate entity should be willing to take the risk and pocket
the risk premium while offering a risk-averse writer a lower compensation. However, as
argued in Ravid and Basuroy (2004), it seems studio executives are more risk averse than
they should be, and thus, as risk increases, they may want the writer to share it.
           High concept screenplays by well-established writers should be the least risky,
and thus should not require contingent contracts to address uncertainty. This comes
through clearly in our test. Writers are less likely to receive a contingent contract if they
have sold more screenplays. There is an interesting contrast between this result and the
findings of Chisholm (1997). Chisholm discusses the probability that actors receive a
share contract (as opposed to fixed compensation). She finds that more experienced
actors are, if anything, more likely to receive share contracts. Chisholm’s findings
support the Gibbons and Murphy (1992) and Holmstrom and Milgrom (1992)
interpretation of the life cycle of contracts. Experienced actors may need more incentives
since their reputation will not be tarnished by one less successful movie, or they may be

21
     Action films command a lower price as well. We are not sure why this is the case.


                                                      14
closer to retirement. However, in the case of screenwriters, a contingent contract only
reflects uncertainty as to the prospects of the product, which are diminished with
experience.
       All complexity variables, including the two variables reflecting the number of
words in the log line, and including the number of genres, seem to increase the
probability of receiving a contingent contract, and similarly, if information is available
the contract is less likely to be contingent. In other words, soft information of any kind
seems to present a risk factor which the studios would like to share with the writer. If the
writer can provide “hard information” assurances that the risk is lower, studios are
willing to pay more upfront.
       In Table VI, we report a probit regression estimating the probability of a
screenplay being produced. Since it sometimes takes several years or more in
development for a screenplay to become a movie, and since our last screenplay was sold
in 2002, we have a right-truncation of the data. The specification suggests that
screenplays by reputable writers seem to have an edge and similarly, low reputation and
soft information seemed to delay production. In other words, the lower price paid for low
reputation high soft information screenplays may be justified and there appears to be a
lower probability of such screenplays making it to the big screen.
       Our analysis thus far indicates that both hard information and soft information are
priced in screenplays sales. Soft information in general lowers the price whereas
(positive) hard information increases it significantly. Further, there seems to be an
interaction between the two types of factors- low reputation further depresses the value of
soft- information- rich screenplays. We turn next to examine the role of soft information
in the success or failure of movies that are actually produced, and in the process, we are
able to consider whether the first stage (screenplays) pricing makes sense.


2. Hard information, soft information and the success of films
        Table VII describes a sample of 151 films produced from the screenplay sample.
The distribution of movie releases from our sample is somewhat skewed compared to a
random sample – there are no G rated movies, fewer PG -rated movies, fewer R- rated
movies and more PG-13 rated movies than in a random sample, (see Ravid, 1999, and



                                            15
MPAA.org). It seems that the most profitable family movies tend to be developed in
house, rather than purchased from outside screenwriters. However, the pattern of
profitability in the films produced is similar to that of most other studies, (c.f. Ravid,
1999, DeVany and Walls, 2002 Fee, 2001, and Simonoff and Sparrow, 2000). PG rating,
the most family friendly rating is also the most profitable.
           Table VIII compares the screenplays of first time writers vs. experienced writers.
Films based on scripts by first time screenwriters have lower budgets, as expected.
However, their rate of return is higher. These differences in performance, however, are
not statistically significant. Interestingly, the reviews for films based upon “better”
screenwriters’ work are worse than average and worse than for first time screenwriters. A
similar pattern emerges when we classify screenwriters according to any nomination,
however, here films by more reputable writers receive somewhat better reviews. We also
note that, as expected, whereas 57% of the screenplays in our sample were produced by
first-time screenwriters, only 46% of the sample of films produced are based on
screenplays by first time writers.
           We sought to explain the components of revenue (domestic, international, video
and DVD as well as total revenues and rate of return) by control variables as well as the
price paid for the screenplay.22 We only report domestic (Table IX) and total revenues,
which include revenues from all sources (Table X). The control variables that are
significant are similar to those that mattered in other work – namely, family friendly [PG]
rating, a seasonal variable and the budget. The star status of the cast does not make a
difference (see Ravid, 1999, for similar results on a different sample, as well as DeVany,
2004). However the price paid for the screenplay is positive and significant in all
regressions. Consistent with the idea that the industry is able to effectively process soft
information and make rational economic decisions, it seems that if a studio pays more for
a screenplay, the movie makes more money. Results are similar for other revenue
components (not reported). However, other elements in the decision process of buying a




22
     See Ravid (1999) and Ravid and Basuroy (2004) for a discussion of the methodology.


                                                    16
screenplay, which depend on actually making the films, were not significant in any of the
regressions.23
         Perhaps more interesting is the rate of return regression (Table XI). The control
variables that matter are PG rating and seasonality, which mattered in other work (see
Ravid, 1999, and Einav, 2003). However, the rate of return increases significantly with
the price paid as well. This means that more expensive screenplays not only increase
revenues, but actually increase profitability.
         Finally, Table XII suggests another way of looking at the correlation between
prices paid for a screenplay and the success of the resulting movie. Here we regress the
price paid for the screenplay on soft and hard information variables as well as on a
financial success variable for the resulting movie. We see that the price paid to the
screenwriter essentially forecasts the success of the film, and that, even when this is taken
into account, soft information significantly lowers the price paid to screenwriters.
Reputation variables significantly increase the price. The results suggest that the market
for screenplays is an efficient one. Screenwriters and their agents understand the
economic potential of a script and set the price accordingly. However reliance on soft
information as a signal of this potential appears to be a risk factor, the cost of which is
borne by the writer.


V. CONCLUSIONS
         Aesthetic evaluation is central to the film industry. However, despite the message
of the annual Academy Awards ceremony, the industry does not make art for art’s sake –
it processes complex inputs from many different fields of art with the ultimate goal of
making a profit. This makes it an interesting setting for the analysis of the role and nature
of soft information processing in an industrial setting. Our analysis of the trajectory of
film scripts and the movies they eventually become suggests that “high concept” (low on
soft information) scripts command a higher compensation. Further, films based upon
such screenplays are also more successful. This may not be a shock to industry



23
  This may be related to the fact that we do not have the complete set of produced films since some
screenplay have a long gestation period. On the other hand, it may be that the value of the screenplay is
easier to estimate than the probability of actually getting it produced.


                                                     17
participants, but it is interesting to economists who study the role of soft information in
organizations.
       Our major findings highlight the dual role of soft and hard information in the
pricing of intellectual property. Reputation, which can be easily expressed in measurable
terms, is very important, and increases the prices paid. However, a high ratio of soft to
hard information depresses prices. That is, screenplays characterized in “softer” terms --
particularly if they are written by lesser known writers -- command substantially lower
prices. Various manifestations of soft information seem also to increase the probability of
a contingent contract, again, suggesting that soft information is viewed as a risk factor.
Interestingly, the type of screenplay (drama, comedy, action) does not seem to affect the
price paid. These results are consistent conceptually with findings in the banking
industry.
       In the second part of the paper we link the economic performance of the film with
screenplay characteristics. We find that the industry can reasonably forecast how the
resulting movie will perform. All else equal, studios pay more for screenplays that lead to
movies with higher revenues and also higher rates of return. This finding certainly
contradicts the view that production decisions are arbitrary and ill-informed. From an
economic perspective, it suggests that pricing is efficient, even in an industry with a
complex production function relying fundamentally on soft information. In addition, not
only is the economic value of inputs to the production process well determined, but the
quality and type of signals about the inputs are priced as well.
       In recent years, quantification and statistical analysis have become increasingly
important tools in business. Objective measures of inputs are manifestly important –
indeed our study verifies the value of objective recognition of past success. However, as
quantification and measurement continue to rationalize business practice, the limits to
these tools have become abundantly clear. Banks may never be able to eliminate loan
officers. The soft information they provide -- the cognitive processing – is still
irreplaceable. Similarly, electronic script-reading automatons might be able to screen
thousands of screenplays rather than relying upon agents and readers to filter them.
However such complete mechanization is unlikely. Thus, in the interim we find ourselves




                                             18
in a situation in which the ambiguity of human judgment is seen as a necessary cost of
business.




                                         19
REFERENCES:


Atchity, K. and C.L. Wong (1997) “Writing Treatments that Sell”, Henry Holt and
Company, New York

Aghion, P. nad J. Tirole (1997) “Formal and Real Authority in Organizations” Journal of
Political Economy, 105, #1 pp. 1-29

Baker, G. R. Gibbons and K.J. Murphy (1994): “Subjective Performance Measures in
Optimal Incentive Contracts” Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 109 # 4, November,
pp. 1125-1156.

Basuroy, S., Chatterjee, S., and S. A. Ravid, 2003, “How Critical Are Critical Reviews?
The Box Office Effects of Film Critics, Star Power and Budgets”, Journal of Marketing,
Vol.67 (October), 103-117.

Berger, A. N.M. Miller, M.A Petersen R. Rajan and J. Stein: (2003) “ Does Function
Follow Organizational Form? Evidence from the Lending Practices of Large and Small
Banks” working paper, Northwestern University, November.

Carter, Richard B., and Steven Manaster (1990) “Initial public offerings and underwriter
reputation,” Journal of Finance 45, 1045-1068.

Carter, Richard B., Frederick H. Dark, and Ajai K. Singh (1998) “Underwriter reputation,
initial
returns, and the long-run performance of IPO stocks,” Journal of Finance 53, 285-311.

Chevalier, J. and D. Mayzlin “The Effect of Word of Mouth on Sales: Online Book
Reviews” Working paper, Yale University School of Management, October 2003.

Chisholm, D.C. "Profit Sharing Vs. Fixed Payment Contracts - Evidence from the Motion
Pictures Industry" Journal of Law, Economics and Organization, 1997, Vol. 13 #1, pp.
169 -201

DeVany, A.(2004) “Hollywood Economics” Routledge, New York.

De Vany, A., and Walls, W.D. 2002. Does Hollywood make too many R-rated movies?
Risk, stochastic dominance, and the illusion of expectation. Journal of Business 75
(July): 425-451.

De Vany A., and Walls, W.D. 1999. Uncertainty in the Movies: Can Star Power Reduce
the Terror of the Box Office? The Journal of Cultural Economics 23 (November): 285-
318.



                                          20
Einav, L., 2003. Gross Seasonality and Underlying Seasonality: Evidence from the U.S.
Motion Picture Industry, SIEPR Discussion Paper No. 02-36.

Eliashberg, J., and S. M. Shugan (1997), “Film Critics: Influencers or Predictors?”
Journal of
Marketing, 61(2), 68-78.

Faure Grimaud, A. J.J. Laffont and D. Martimort (2002) “Collusion, Delegation and
Supervision with Soft Information” USC Center for Law Economics and Organization
Research paper C02-9.

Fee, C.E. 2002. The Costs of Outside Equity Control: Evidence from Motion Picture
Financing Decisions. Journal of Business 75 (October): 681-711.

Gibbons, R. and Murphy, K.J., 1992, "Optimal Incentive Contracts in the Presence of
Career Concerns: Theory and Evidence", Journal of Political Economy, Vol.100, No. 3,
pp. 468-505.

Godes, D. and Mayzlin, D. (2003) “Using Online Conversations to Study Word of Mouth
Communication” Working paper, Yale School of Management.

John, K. S. A. Ravid and J. Sunder 2003. The Role of termination in Employment
Contracts – Theory and Evidence from the Careers of Film Directors ( March). Working
Paper, New York University.

Liberti, J.M. (2002) “Initiative, Incentives and Soft Information- How Does Delegation
Impact the Role of bank Managers?” Working paper, University of Chicago,

Miller ,P (1998) . Get Published, Get Produced Lone Eagle, Los Angeles.

Petersen, M.A.(2002) “Information: Soft and Hard” Working paper, Northwestern
University.

Petersen, M. A. and R. Rajan (1994): “ The Benefits of Firm-creditor Relationships:
Evidence from Small Business Data” Journal of Finance, 49, 3-37.

Petersen, M. A. and R. Rajan (2002): “ Does Distance Still Matter? The Information
Revolution in Small Business Lending ” Journal of Finance,

Ravid, S.A. 1999. Information, Blockbusters and Stars. Journal of Business 72 (October):
463-92.

Ravid, S. Abraham and S. Basuroy (2004) :” . Executive objective function, the R-rating
puzzle and the production of violent movies, forthcoming Journal of Business.




                                          21
Simonoff, J., and Sparrow, I.R. 2000. Predicting movie grosses: Winners and Losers,
Blockbusters and Sleepers. Chance 13 (Summer): 15-24.

Stein, J. (2002) “Information Production and Capital Allocation: Decentralized vs.
Hierarchical Firms” Journal of Finance, October, pp. 1891-1921.

Tetlcok, P.C. (2003) “Giving Content to Investor Sentiment: The Role of Media in the
Stock Market” Harvard Economics Working paper.




                                        22
                                                        Panel A: Contract Summary Statistics

                                                                                     Price         Cont            Produced
                         Scripts with Compensation Information               788     778.36        0.6206              22.1
                         Scripts with Contingent Contracts                   299                                      23.02
                         Scripts with Non-Contingent Contracts               489                                      19.09

                                                           Panel B: Screenwriter Reputation

                                                                                     Price         Cont            Produced
                         Reputation Movies                                       0    479          0.6290            0.1840
                                                                                 1    765          0.6091            0.2786
                                                                                 2   1,633         0.6667            0.2464
                                                                                 3   4,761         0.3810            0.3261
                         Experienced Writer                                      0    479          0.6290            0.1840
                                                                                 1   1,205         0.6081            0.2743
                         Nominated Oscar                                         0    702          0.6232            0.2172
                                                                                 1   5,090         0.4615            0.4615
                         Awarded Oscar                                           0    770          0.6229            0.2199
                                                                                 1   2,736         0.0000            0.5556
                         Any Nomination                                          0    620          0.6238            0.2104
                                                                                 1   3,572         0.5609            0.3585
                         Any Award                                               0    765          0.6237            0.2169
                                                                                 1   1,573         0.4166            0.4231

                                                               Panel C: Soft Information

                                                                                     Price         Cont            Produced
                         Soft_Words                                              0   1,050         0.6047            0.2016
                                                                                 1    639          0.6065            0.2447
                                                                                 2    496          0.6383            0.2227
                                                                                 3    660          0.7157            0.2548
                         InfoDummy                                               0    638          0.6323            0.2058
                                                                                 1   1,034         0.5985            0.2431
                         Tansparent Script                                       0    627          0.6210            0.2208
                                                                                 1   1,735         0.6176            0.2297


                                                                    Panel D: Genres

                                                                                     Price         Cont            Produced
                         Action                                              125      685          0.6617            0.2097
                         Comedy                                              344      752          0.6169            0.2157
                         Drama                                               109      613          0.6471            0.2621
                         Romance                                             105     1,046         0.7000            0.2241
                         Thriller                                            155     1,102         0.5342            0.1843
                         Other                                                67      587          0.6842            0.2773


Table I: Summary Statistics.
This table summarizes the relationship between screenwriter compensation, screenwriter reputation and script complexity. The last two columns analyze
how screenwriter reputation and script complexity influence the type of contract offered to the screenwriter, as well as the probability that the script is
ultimately produced. Price measures the compensation paid to the screenwriter. Cont is a dummy variable that takes the value 1 when the screenwriter
is offered a contingent contract (i.e. a contract in which compensation depends on whether the movie is ultimated produced or not). Produced is a
dummy variable that takes the value 1 if the movie is produced and 0, otherwise. We include several screenwriter reputation variables. Reputation
Movies takes the value 0 if the screenwriter has not previously sold any script; 1 if the screenwriter has previously sold between 1 and 3 scripts; 2 if the
screenwriter has previously sold between 4 and 10 scripts; and 3 if the screenwriter has previously sold more than 10 scripts. Experienced Writer takes
the value zero if the screenwriter has not previously sold any script, and 1 otherwise. Nominated Oscar (Awarded Oscar) takes the value 1 if the
screenwriter has been previously nominated to (won) an Oscar. Any Nomination (Any Award) takes the value 1 if the screenwriter has been previously
nominated (won) to an award in the following festivals: Oscars, Golden Globes, British Academy Awards, Emmy Award, European Film Award, Cannes,
Sundance, Toronto, Berlin. We also include several variables that try to capture soft information or script complexity. Soft_Words equals 0 if the script
logline contains less than 20 words; 1 if the script logline contains between 21 and 30 words; 2 if the script logline contains between 31 and 40 words;
and 3 if the script logline contains more than 40 words. InfoDummy equals 1 if additional information about the script is available. We create a script
complexity index, Tansparent Script, that equals 1 when the log line contains less than 20 words (i.e. Soft_Words equals 0), and additional information
about the script is available (i.e. InfoDummy equals 1 ). The genres variables are dummy variables. Action (Comedy, Drama, Romance, Thriller) takes
the value 1 if the script is classified in the “Action” (Comedy, Drama, Romance, Thriller) category by Spec Screenplay Directory, and 0 otherwise.
Compensation, soft information and type of contract data are from the Spec Screenplay Sales Directory. Reputation variables and information regarding
whether the movies has been produced is from IMDB.




                                                                            23
                                                                                     Price
Scr Number Movies                       448.618***                                                      448.561***                                      565.927***       502.679***
                                         (12.4569)                                                       (12.4635)                                       (14.3588)        (13.7585)
Scr Reputation Movies                                   713.975***                      795.673***                      713.663***
                                                          (4.5817)                        (5.0832)                        (4.5747)
Scr Nominated Oscar                                   3,677.747***                                                    3,819.013***    4,433.434***
                                                          (3.4757)                                                        (3.6010)        (4.3892)
Scr Any Nomination                    1,505.073***                    2,919.137***                    1,011.407***
                                          (3.3005)                        (5.8651)                        (3.5164)
Transparent Script                    1,013.103***    1,217.529***                                    1,010.025***    1,230.291***
                                          (3.5277)        (3.8139)                                        (3.6625)        (3.8450)
Low Rep * Transparent Script                                                                                                                             795.281**
                                                                                                                                                          (2.2702)
Words Log                                                                                   -8.471
                                                                                          (1.0627)
Low Rep * Words Log                                                                                                                        -10.816*       27.988***
                                                                                                                                           (1.7450)        (4.3381)
Info Dummy                                                               489.014**
                                                                          (2.1348)
Low Rep * Info Dummy                                                                                                                                                     578.270**
                                                                                                                                                                           (2.2613)
Action                                                                                                    -356.222        -289.984                        -391.526        -386.396
                                                                                                           (1.0775)        (0.7874)                        (1.2292)        (1.1514)
Comedy                                                                                                       84.535        179.582                         142.065         109.362
                                                                                                           (0.2342)        (0.4469)                        (0.4085)        (0.2986)
Drama                                                                                                     -348.264        -222.686                        -283.122        -315.132
                                                                                                           (0.8812)        (0.5062)                        (0.7437)        (0.7866)
Romance                                                                                                    281.973         501.239                         312.522         260.353
                                                                                                           (0.9322)        (1.4871)                        (1.0657)        (0.8474)
Thriller                                                                                                   426.906           469.53                        434.126         416.746
                                                                                                           (1.0791)        (1.0640)                        (1.1370)        (1.0376)
Other                                                                                                     -518.095        -312.182                        -446.081        -533.463
                                                                                                           (1.0430)        (0.5633)                        (0.9305)        (1.0580)
Manager                                                                                                   -298.581        -413.324                        -220.137        -376.226
                                                                                                           (0.9883)        (1.2284)                        (0.7556)        (1.1952)
Constant                                   -73.117        176.095       375.104***       558.741**          -48.386           79.35     776.775***        -624.663          -34.928
                                          (0.6127)        (1.2279)        (2.5873)        (2.2337)         (0.1278)        (0.1861)       (5.0133)         (1.5283)        (0.0903)
Observations                                   747             747             747             747              747             747            747              747             747
Adjusted R-squared                          0.2856          0.1159          0.0967           0.079           0.2915           0.121         0.0767           0.2874          0.2697




Table II: General Compensation.
This table reports OLS estimates of general compensation regresions on a set of variables that measure screenwriter reputation, script complexity, movie genre and agency
relationships. The dependent variable, Price, reflects the payment made to the screenwriter when he sells the script. In non-contingent contracts, the screenwriter compensation
is fixed (i.e. the screenwriter compensation does not depend on whether the movie is produced or not). In contingent contracts, Price reflects the screenwriter compensation
when the movie is not. We include several screenwriter reputation variables. Number Movies measures the number of scripts previously sold by the script’s screenwriter.
Reputation Movies takes the value 0 if the screenwriter has not previously sold any script; 1 if the screenwriter has previously sold between 1 and 3 scripts; 2 if the screenwriter
has previously sold between 4 and 10 scripts; and 3 if the screenwriter has previously sold more than 10 scripts. Nominated Oscar takes the value 1 if the screenwriter has been
previously nominated to an Oscar. Any Nomination takes the value 1 if the screenwriter has been previously nominated to an award in the following festivals: Oscars, Golden
Globes, British Academy Awards, Emmy Award, European Film Award, Cannes, Sundance, Toronto, Berlin. We also include several variables that try to capture soft information
or script complexity. Words Log counts the number of words in the script logline. InfoDummy equals 1 if additional information about the script is available. We create a script
complexity index, Tansparent Script, that equals 1 when the log line contains less than 20 words (i.e. Soft_Words equals 0), and additional information about the script is
available (i.e. InfoDummy equals 1 ). The genres and agency variables are dummy variables. Action (Comedy, Drama, Romance, Thriller) takes the value 1 if the script is
classified in the “Action” (Comedy, Drama, Romance, Thriller) category by Spec Screenplay Directory, and 0 otherwise. Manager takes the value of 1 if the screenwriter has a
manager, and 0 otherwise. We create interaction variables for soft low reputation - soft information. These variables, identified by Low Rep, take the value of the relevant soft
information variable if the screenwriter has not previously sold any script, and 0 otherwise. Compensation, soft information and type of contract data are from the Spec
Screenplay Sales Directory. Reputation variables and information regarding whether the movies has been produced is from IMDB.




                                                                                         24
                                           Price - Non Contingent Contract
Scr Number Movies                690.886***                                        790.389***                                       840.684***
                                   (9.3568)                                         (11.4987)                                        (11.9124)
Scr Reputation Movies                           1,327.030***
                                                    (3.3647)
Scr Experienced Writer                                            1,130.701*
                                                                     (1.8002)
Scr Nominated Oscar                             6,389.574***                                                      8,379.540***
                                                    (2.7864)                                                          (3.5707)
Scr Any Nomination              2,399.208**
                                   (2.1716)
Transparent Script             1,947.201***     2,905.857***    3,105.465***
                                   (2.7722)         (3.5384)        (3.6290)
Low Rep * Words Log                                                                                   -33.355*
                                                                                                      (1.7134)
Info Dummy                                                                        1,099.781**
                                                                                     (2.1354)
Low Rep * Info Dummy                                                                                                               1,387.298**
                                                                                                                                      (2.2920)
Low Rep * Soft Genres                                                                                 953.201        -797.130*
                                                                                                      (1.4831)         (1.9445)
Action                                                              -864.506       -1285.903                          -507.576      -1,447.929*
                                                                     (0.8674)        (1.5973)                          (0.5021)         (1.7908)
Comedy                                                               104.404        1118.078                           941.209         1153.325
                                                                     (0.0899)        (1.1913)                          (0.7986)         (1.2309)
Drama                                                               -498.514           -4.965                           -64.125            2.216
                                                                     (0.3947)        (0.0049)                          (0.0501)         (0.0022)
Romance                                                          2,493.916**        1295.004                      2,965.384***         1202.894
                                                                     (2.3474)        (1.5066)                          (2.6872)         (1.4021)
Thriller                                                             876.294        1561.609                         1731.885        1,762.459*
                                                                     (0.6994)        (1.5405)                          (1.3648)         (1.7432)
Other                                                              -1076.824       -1125.115                          -240.672        -1137.348
                                                                     (0.6626)        (0.8573)                          (0.1473)         (0.8679)
Manager                                                             -663.485       -1084.283                          -671.861           -995.44
                                                                     (0.7195)        (1.3806)                          (0.7295)         (1.2959)
Constant                             -220.32          -2.237         172.404       -1051.032     1,386.904***            731.18       -1083.838
                                    (0.7923)        (0.0061)         (0.1395)        (1.0572)        (2.7377)          (0.6030)         (1.0911)
Observations                             282             282              282             282             282               282              282
Adjusted R-squared                    0.3843          0.1337           0.0682          0.3928         -0.0046            0.0727           0.3947


Table III: Compensation in Non Contingent Contracts.
This table reports OLS estimates of compensation in non contingent contracts (i.e. contracts in which the screenwriter compensation does
not depend on whether the movie is produced or not) on a set of variables that measure screenwriter reputation, script complexity, movie
genre and agency relationships. The dependent variable, Price_Cont0, measures the payment that the screenwriter receives in a non-
contingent contract. We include several screenwriter reputation variables. Number Movies measures the number of scripts previously sold
by the script’s screenwriter. Reputation Movies takes the value 0 if the screenwriter has not previously sold any script; 1 if the screenwriter
has previously sold between 1 and 3 scripts; 2 if the screenwriter has previously sold between 4 and 10 scripts; and 3 if the screenwriter
has previously sold more than 10 scripts. Experienced Writer takes the value zero if the screenwriter has not previously sold any script,
and 1 otherwise. Nominated Oscar takes the value 1 if the screenwriter has been previously nominated to an Oscar. Any Nomination takes
the value 1 if the screenwriter has been previously nominated to an award in the following festivals: Oscars, Golden Globes, British
Academy Awards, Emmy Award, European Film Award, Cannes, Sundance, Toronto, Berlin. We also include several variables that try to
capture soft information or script complexity. Words Log counts the number of words in the script logline. InfoDummy equals 1 if additional
information about the script is available. We create a script complexity index, Tansparent Script, that equals 1 when the log line contains
less than 20 words (i.e. Soft_Words equals 0), and additional information about the script is available (i.e. InfoDummy equals 1 ).
Soft_Genre equals 1 if the qualified number of genres is greater than 2, and 0 otherwise. The genres and agency variables are dummy
variables. Action (Comedy, Drama, Romance, Thriller) takes the value 1 if the script is classified in the “Action” (Comedy, Drama,
Romance, Thriller) category by Spec Screenplay Directory, and 0 otherwise. Manager takes the value of 1 if the screenwriter has a
manager, and 0 otherwise. We create interaction variables for soft low reputation - soft information. These variables, identified by Low
Rep, take the value of the relevant soft information variable if the screenwriter has not previously sold any script, and 0 otherwise.
Compensation, soft information and type of contract data are from the Spec Screenplay Sales Directory. Reputation variables and
information regarding whether the movies has been produced is from IMDB. t-statistics are in parenthesis.
*,**,*** indicate significance at the 10, 5 and 1 percent levels.




                                                                       25
                                Price - Movie Not Made Contingent Contract
Scr Number Movies                   32.881*
                                   (1.6552)
Scr Reputation Movies                            176.156***      170.986***
                                                   (5.9712)        (5.8447)
Low Rep * Log Words                                                                 -3.242**                                         -2.873*
                                                                                    (2.2411)                                        (1.9439)
Soft Words                                                                                        -45.311***
                                                                                                    (3.1005)
Low Rep * Soft Words

Info Dummy                                           52.264          85.089*                                           10.56
                                                   (1.1988)         (1.8866)                                        (0.1925)
Low Rep * Soft Genres                                                              -69.993**                     -119.700***       -79.462**
                                                                                    (2.2228)                        (4.2469)        (2.4024)
Low Rep * Log Movies                                                                                 -12.788
                                                                                                    (0.2040)
Soft Log Movies                    110.534
                                   (1.4254)
Action                                                             102.825                                            10.516           7.622
                                                                   (1.4790)                                         (0.4270)        (0.3114)
Comedy                                                               -3.224                                           64.556          39.674
                                                                   (0.0438)                                         (0.8476)        (0.5168)
Drama                                                               -90.397                                          -33.529         -58.686
                                                                   (1.1031)                                         (0.3946)        (0.6894)
Romance                                                             -31.345                                           34.754          13.945
                                                                   (0.5317)                                         (0.5654)        (0.2247)
Thriller                                                            -16.449                                           49.944          13.967
                                                                   (0.1998)                                         (0.5887)        (0.1618)
Other                                                               -24.634                                           41.851           7.503
                                                                   (0.2474)                                         (0.4078)        (0.0726)
Manager                                                         -171.697***                                       -159.649**      -149.951**
                                                                   (2.7020)                                         (2.4671)        (2.4073)
Constant                         392.893***      334.714***      354.656***      549.772***      480.868***       481.267***      529.214***
                                  (11.7908)       (11.3939)        (4.5431)       (16.6460)       (17.4110)         (6.1087)        (6.4861)
Observations                            465             465             465             465             465              465             465
Adjusted R-squared                   0.1722          0.2399          0.2555          0.2142           0.186           0.2218          0.2298




Table IV: Initial Compensation in Contingent Contracts.
This table reports OLS estimates of initial compensation in contingent contracts (i.e. contracts in which the screenwriter compensation
depends on whether the movie is produced or not) on a set of variables that measure screenwriter reputation, script complexity, movie
genre and agency relationships. The dependent variable, Price_Cont1 measures the initial payment that the screenwriter receives in a
contingent contract. If the movie is not produced, the screenwriter does not receive any additional compensation. When the movie is
produced, the screenwriter is paid an additional fee. We include several screenwriter reputation variables. Number Movies measures the
number of scripts previously sold by the script’s screenwriter. Reputation Movies takes the value 0 if the screenwriter has not previously
sold any script; 1 if the screenwriter has previously sold between 1 and 3 scripts; 2 if the screenwriter has previously sold between 4 and
10 scripts; and 3 if the screenwriter has previously sold more than 10 scripts. We also include several variables that try to capture soft
information or script complexity. Words Log counts the number of words in the script logline. Soft_Words equals 0 if the script logline
contains less than 20 words; 1 if the script logline contains between 21 and 30 words; 2 if the script logline contains between 31 and 40
words; and 3 if the script logline contains more than 40 words. Soft_Logmovies equals 1 if the scripts logline refers to any other movie, and
0 otherwise. InfoDummy equals 1 if additional information about the script is available. Soft_Genre equals 1 if the qualified number of
genres is greater than 2, and 0 otherwise. The genres and agency variables are dummy variables. Action (Comedy, Drama, Romance,
Thriller) takes the value 1 if the script is classified in the “Action” (Comedy, Drama, Romance, Thriller) category by Spec Screenplay
Directory, and 0 otherwise. AgeManager takes the value of 1 if the screenwriter has a manager, and 0 otherwise. We create interaction
variables for soft low reputation - soft information. These variables, identified by Low Rep, take the value of the relevant soft information
variable if the screenwriter has not previously sold any script, and 0 otherwise. Compensation, soft information and type of contract data
are from the Spec Screenplay Sales Directory. Reputation variables and information regarding whether the movies has been produced is
from IMDB. t-statistics are in parenthesis.
*,**,*** indicate significance at the 10, 5 and 1 percent levels.




                                                                     26
                                        Contingent Contract (Type of Contract)
Scr Number Movies                          -0.018*                                          -0.020*                           -0.017         -0.021*
                                          (1.7338)                                         (1.8115)                         (1.5961)        (1.9050)
Scr Experienced Writer                                                       -0.069                           -0.063
                                                                           (0.7372)                         (0.6617)
Transparent Script                          -0.009                                                            -0.023
                                          (0.0634)                                                          (0.1684)
Low Rep * Transparent Script                                                                                                   0.209
                                                                                                                            (1.2502)
Words Log                                                   0.006*
                                                          (1.7882)
Soft Words                                                                   0.052*
                                                                           (1.6702)
Log Movies                                                                                   -0.031
                                                                                           (0.2664)
Low Rep * Info Dummy                                                                                                                          -0.095
                                                                                                                                            (0.8017)
Soft Genres                                 1.002*          1.017*                                            0.928*          0.973*
                                          (1.8845)        (1.8892)                                          (1.6848)        (1.8672)
Action                                                                                        0.194            0.124                           0.202
                                                                                           (1.2188)         (0.7629)                        (1.2695)
Comedy                                                                                       -0.137           -0.191                            -0.13
                                                                                           (0.7893)         (1.0742)                        (0.7472)
Drama                                                                                         0.022           -0.042                           0.026
                                                                                           (0.1141)         (0.2125)                        (0.1371)
Romance                                                                                      0.282*           0.247*                          0.289*
                                                                                           (1.9065)         (1.6565)                        (1.9573)
Thriller                                                                                     -0.254           -0.313                          -0.247
                                                                                           (1.3332)         (1.6219)                        (1.2968)
Other                                                                                         0.249             0.25                           0.257
                                                                                           (1.0287)         (1.0091)                        (1.0601)
Manager                                                                                       0.061            0.116                           0.085
                                                                                           (0.4425)         (0.8266)                        (0.6028)
Constant                                  0.346***           0.153         0.264***         0.374**          0.417**        0.325***         0.383**
                                          (6.5605)        (1.5129)         (3.3667)        (2.0603)         (2.1990)        (6.1873)        (2.1061)
Observations                                   762             762              762             762              762             762              762


Table V: Type of Contract Offered to the Screenwriter.
This table reports probit estimates of the type of contract offered to the screenwriter depending on a set of variables that measure screenwriter r
script complexity, movie genre and agency relationships. The dependent variable, Cont, is a dummy variable that equals 0 if the screenwriter’s com
is fixed; that is, the screenwriter receives a certain salary regardless of whether the movie is produced or not. The variable equals 1 when compe
structured in two steps: the screenwriter receives a certain amount for selling the script; and additional payment if the movie is actually made. W
several screenwriter reputation variables. Number Movies measures the number of scripts previously sold by the script’s screenwriter. Experienc
takes the value zero if the screenwriter has not previously sold any script, and 1 otherwise. We also include several variables that try to ca
information or script complexity. Words Logline counts the number of words in the script logline. Soft_Words equals 0 if the script logline contains les
words; 1 if the script logline contains between 21 and 30 words; 2 if the script logline contains between 31 and 40 words; and 3 if the script logline
more than 40 words. Soft_Logmovies equals 1 if the scripts logline refers to any other movie, and 0 otherwise. InfoDummy equals 1 if additional in
about the script is available. We create a script complexity index, Tansparent Script, that equals 1 when the log line contains less than 20 w
Soft_Words equals 0), and additional information about the script is available (i.e. InfoDummy equals 1 ). Soft_Genre equals 1 if the qualified n
genres is greater than 2, and 0 otherwise. The genres and agency variables are dummy variables. Action (Comedy, Drama, Romance, Thriller)
value 1 if the script is classified in the “Action” (Comedy, Drama, Romance, Thriller) category by Spec Screenplay Directory, and 0 otherwise. Mana
the value of 1 if the screenwriter has a manager, and 0 otherwise. We create interaction variables for soft low reputation - soft information. These
identified by Low Rep, take the value of the relevant soft information variable if the screenwriter has not previously sold any script, and 0 o
Compensation, soft information and type of contract data are from the Spec Screenplay Sales Directory. Reputation variables and information
whether the movies has been produced is from IMDB. t-statistics are in parenthesis.
*,**,*** indicate significance at the 10, 5 and 1 percent levels.




                                                                         27
                                                                                Produced
Scr Number Movies                     0.012*          0.014**                                                         0.015**
                                    (1.6801)         (1.9769)                                                        (2.0489)
Scr Experienced Writer                                               0.286***
                                                                     (3.4830)                                                        0.579**
Scr Nominated Oscar                                   0.539**                         0.627**                                        -2.2922
                                                     (2.0782)                        (2.4647)
Scr Awarded Oscar                                                                                                                                      0.800*
                                                                                                                                                     (1.8929)
Scr Any Nomination                  0.559***
                                    (3.3792)
Scr Any Award                                                                                         0.573**                                                         0.508**
                                                                                                     (2.3838)                                                        (2.0876)
Low Rep * Log Words                                                                                                                                 -0.008***
                                                                                                                                                     (2.9810)
Low Rep * Soft Words                                                                                                 -0.067**
                                                                                                                     (2.1131)
Info Dummy                                                             0.143*          0.149*          0.146*
                                                                     (1.7062)        (1.7733)        (1.7355)
Low Rep * Soft Genres                                                                                                               -0.146***                       -0.157***
                                                                                                                                     (2.7544)                        (2.8502)
Action                                                                  0.037           0.048           0.059                                                           0.133
                                                                     (0.2620)        (0.3423)        (0.4287)                                                        (0.9438)
Comedy                                                                   0.12           0.125           0.088                                                           0.184
                                                                     (0.7711)        (0.8014)        (0.5664)                                                        (1.1572)
Drama                                                                   0.254           0.255           0.229                                                          0.301*
                                                                     (1.5473)        (1.5555)        (1.3874)                                                        (1.8127)
Romance                                                                 0.056           0.051           0.044                                                            0.12
                                                                     (0.4378)        (0.4040)        (0.3469)                                                        (0.9198)
Thriller                                                               -0.008           0.016          -0.007                                                            0.07
                                                                     (0.0440)        (0.0928)        (0.0412)                                                        (0.3921)
Other                                                                  0.351*          0.365*           0.334                                                         0.417**
                                                                     (1.7006)        (1.7764)        (1.6266)                                                        (2.0125)
Manager                                                              -0.333**        -0.330**        -0.337**                                                        -0.288**
                                                                     (2.5105)        (2.5104)        (2.5587)                                                        (2.2298)
Constant                            -0.821***       -0.803***       -1.071***       -0.966***       -0.935***       -0.733***       -0.665***       -0.660***       -0.858***
                                   (18.6295)       (18.4657)         (6.3452)        (5.8819)        (5.7136)      (13.9983)       (11.7016)       (12.3844)         (5.2801)
Observations                            1190            1190             1190            1190            1190           1190            1190            1190             1190



Table VI: Probability of Movie Being Produced.
This table reports probit estimates of the decision to produce the movie or not depending on a set of variables that measure screenwriter reputation, script complexity, movie
genre and agency relationships. The dependent variable, Produced, is a dummy variable that takes the value 1 if the script has been produced or is in production, and 0
otherwise. We include several screenwriter reputation variables. Number Movies measures the number of scripts previously sold by the script’s screenwriter. Experienced
Writer takes the value zero if the screenwriter has not previously sold any script, and 1 otherwise. Nominated Oscar (Awarded Oscar) takes the value 1 if the screenwriter has
been previously nominated to (won) an Oscar. Any Nomination (Any Award) takes the value 1 if the screenwriter has been previously nominated (won) to an award in the
following festivals: Oscars, Golden Globes, British Academy Awards, Emmy Award, European Film Award, Cannes, Sundance, Toronto, Berlin. We also include several
variables that try to capture soft information or script complexity. Words Logline counts the number of words in the script logline. Soft_Words equals 0 if the script logline
contains less than 20 words; 1 if the script logline contains between 21 and 30 words; 2 if the script logline contains between 31 and 40 words; and 3 if the script logline
contains more than 40 words. Soft_Logmovies equals 1 if the scripts logline refers to any other movie, and 0 otherwise. InfoDummy equals 1 if additional information about
the script is available. Soft_Genre equals 1 if the qualified number of genres is greater than 2, and 0 otherwise. The genres and agency variables are dummy variables. Action
(Comedy, Drama, Romance, Thriller) takes the value 1 if the script is classified in the “Action” (Comedy, Drama, Romance, Thriller) category by Spec Screenplay Directory,
and 0 otherwise. Manager takes the value of 1 if the screenwriter has a manager, and 0 otherwise. We create interaction variables for soft low reputation - soft information.
These variables, identified by Low Rep, take the value of the relevant soft information variable if the screenwriter has not previously sold any script, and 0 otherwise.
Compensation, soft information and type of contract data are from the Spec Screenplay Sales Directory. Reputation variables and information regarding whether the movies
has been produced is from IMDB. t-statistics are in parenthesis.
*,**,*** indicate significance at the 10, 5 and 1 percent levels.




                                                                                     28
                                       PG (N = 12)               PG-13 (N = 62)            R (N = 77)

                                    Average      St. Dev.    Average       St. Dev.    Average      St. Dev.    K-Wallis
Negative Costs                       35,100       25,604       40,355       26,796       35,074      29,198       0.2312
Dom. Print & Advertising Costs       24,272       11,219       29,724        9,662       24,441      15,406        0.061
Domestic Gross                       68,395       93,205       55,412       50,032       33,368      36,634       0.0017
Domestic Rentals                     22,096       21,935       32,421       31,934       17,281      19,142       0.0003
Foreign Gross                        59,362      123,182       35,385       48,868       28,187      41,711       0.6878
Foreign Rentals                      11,813       13,777       20,093       31,645       12,652      19,043       0.4977
Domestic Video Gross                 31,009       23,683       30,681       23,419       17,923      14,295       0.0002
Domestic DVD Gross                   12,755       16,800       15,010       26,035        6,676       9,041       0.0027
Total Revenues                      163,386      222,384      133,822      122,897       82,862      87,670       0.0019
Rate1                                  5.98         6.42         3.96         3.37         3.14        4.02        0.009
Rate2                                  3.36         3.95         1.84         1.21         1.48        1.58       0.0117
Positive Reviews                       0.44         0.18         0.25         0.21         0.34        0.24       0.0116
Non-Negative Reviews                   0.65         0.11         0.70         0.13         0.72        0.13       0.3706
Total Reviews                         31.10        11.71        26.04        12.02        24.57       12.15       0.2512
Starmeter                              0.08         0.29         0.71         0.89         0.71        0.97       0.0409
Nominated Oscar                        1.67         2.50         1.73         2.61         1.99        3.29       0.8453
Awarded Oscar                          0.33         0.89         0.55         1.07         0.55        1.01       0.7104
Any Nomination                        12.58        14.69        10.66        11.87         7.53        8.52       0.2778
Any Award                              4.50         5.25         3.73         4.78         2.43        3.10       0.1798
Dummy Starmeter                        0.08         0.29         0.47         0.50         0.45        0.50        0.041
Dummy Nominated Oscar                  0.42         0.51         0.58         0.50         0.45        0.50       0.2782
Dummy Awarded Oscar                    0.17         0.39         0.26         0.44         0.29        0.45       0.6785
Dummy Any Nomination                   0.75         0.45         0.84         0.37         0.74        0.44       0.3658
Dummy Any Award                        0.75         0.45         0.74         0.44         0.64        0.48       0.3678



Table VII: Financial Performance for Different Movie Ratings.
This table compares movie financials, reviews and cast reputation for our sample of produced scripts for which Baseline
FT gathers financial data, based on the movie rating. Total Revenues equals Domestic Gross, Foreign Gross, Domestic
Video Gross and Domestic DVD Gross. Rate1 equals Total Revenues Divided by Negative Costs. Rate2 equals Total
Revenues Divided by Negative Costs plus Domestic Print and Advertising Costs. For each film we gather Variety
Reviews. Each Variety's reviewer grades the movie as positive, negative and mixed. Positive Reviews equals the ratio
between positive reviews and total reviews. Non-negative reviews equals the ratio between positive and mixed reviews
and total reviews. Total reviews equals the total number of reviews. We gather several measures of cast reputation at
the movie level. For each movie, we gather the total number of Oscar and major festival nominations and awards for the
entire cast. We then create a set of dummy variables that equal one if any cast member is defined as a star for each star
definition. Starmeter measures cast reputation following the opinion of IMDb readers. We classify as a star any
actor/actress which in the january prior to the film's release has a starmeter below 150.




                                                            29
                                        0 (N = 70)                1 (N = 81)

                                    Average      St. Dev.     Average      St. Dev.    T-test
Negative Costs                        33,149       28,748      40,760       26,835         0.048
Dom. Print & Advertising Costs        25,933       14,994      27,189       11,488        0.2813
Domestic Gross                        40,686       44,055      49,197       54,520        0.1502
Domestic Rentals                      20,578       22,390      26,775       29,011        0.0753
Foreign Gross                         29,752       43,365      36,713       62,296        0.2256
Foreign Rentals                       13,182       19,790      17,821       28,580        0.1367
Domestic Video Gross                  22,120       20,610      26,206       19,982        0.1119
Domestic DVD Gross                     8,751       14,206      12,091       21,966        0.1606
Total Revenues                        97,132      100,567     121,643      134,953        0.1079
Rate1                                   3.86         4.60        3.56         3.54        0.3273
Rate2                                   1.83         2.16        1.73         1.44        0.3752
Positive Reviews                        0.32         0.25        0.31         0.22        0.4497
Non-Negative Reviews                    0.71         0.14        0.70         0.13        0.3184
Total Reviews                          26.52        12.17       24.90        12.06        0.2193
Starmeter                               0.63         0.85        0.69         0.97        0.3379
Nominated Oscar                         1.56         2.89        2.11         3.01        0.1261
Awarded Oscar                           0.40         0.84        0.64         1.14         0.073
Any Nomination                          6.93         9.47       11.20        11.24        0.0067
Any Award                               2.46         3.62        3.70         4.40        0.0308
Dummy Starmeter                         0.43         0.50        0.43         0.50        0.4827
Dummy Nominated Oscar                   0.44         0.50        0.56         0.50        0.0847
Dummy Awarded Oscar                     0.24         0.43        0.28         0.45        0.2856
Dummy Any Nomination                    0.69         0.47        0.86         0.34         0.004
Dummy Any Award                         0.60         0.49        0.77         0.43        0.0143


Table VIII: Experienced Screenwriter.
This table compares movie financials, reviews and cast reputation for our sample of produced
scripts for which Baseline FT gathers financial data, based on whether the movie's original
script was the first one sold by the screenwriter. Total Revenues equals Domestic Gross,
Foreign Gross, Domestic Video Gross and Domestic DVD Gross. Rate1 equals Total
Revenues Divided by Negative Costs. Rate2 equals Total Revenues Divided by Negative Costs
plus Domestic Print and Advertising Costs. For each film we gather Variety Reviews. Each
Variety's reviewer grades the movie as positive, negative and mixed. Positive Reviews equals
the ratio between positive reviews and total reviews. Non-negative reviews equals the ratio
between positive and mixed reviews and total reviews. Total reviews equals the total number of
reviews. We gather several measures of cast reputation at the movie level. For each movie,
we gather the total number of Oscar and major festival nominations and awards for the entire
cast. We then create a set of dummy variables that equal one if any cast member is defined as
a star for each star definition. Starmeter measures cast reputation following the opinion of IMDb
readers. We classify as a star any actor/actress which in the january prior to the film's release
has a starmeter below 150.




                                               30
                                        All Sample                 Non Contingent Cont                                                 Contingent Contract

                                                                                                             Price                        Price If Made                     Ratio

Price - All Sample                   3.337***          3.388***
                                     (3.6933)          (3.8342)
Price - Cont 0                                                        2.994***      2.793***
                                                                      (4.2050)      (3.6754)
Price - Cont 1                                                                                           0.663              4.814
                                                                                                      (0.0228)           (0.1586)
Priceifmade - Cont 1                                                                                                                       -12.652      -12.036
                                                                                                                                          (0.8633)     (0.8228)
Ratio - Cont 1                                                                                                                                                      -15,393.15        -15,676.04
                                                                                                                                                                      (0.9182)          (0.9560)
Ln Budget 1                     13,966.915**                       15,109.056* 16,795.692*                             18589.643
                                    (2.3617)                          (2.0527)    (1.8792)                               (1.5526)
Ln Budget 2                                      19,426.760***                                 28,156.673**                           32,867.405** 27,356.245**    24,473.300*      28,295.246**
                                                      (2.9979)                                     (2.0831)                               (2.6048)      (2.2936)      (1.9031)          (2.1851)
PG                              41,753.265**      42,304.349**       -7477.374 -12161.002       53,176.135*          54,810.807*       53,281.379* 64,326.185**    57,186.550*      66,180.328**
                                    (2.0211)          (2.0829)         (0.2420)    (0.4145)        (1.7449)             (1.7213)          (1.7595)      (2.2394)      (1.8959)          (2.2181)
PG-13                               4,781.45          7,888.25        12,683.19   17,309.31       7625.118              7,399.83         4004.122 -6466.789           6,382.20         10,148.62
                                    (0.4574)          (0.7386)         (1.0017)    (1.2748)        (0.4866)             (0.4539)          (0.2557)      (0.4259)      (0.3939)          (0.6392)
Positive Reviews                                                                  1831.454        40235.47             28,257.46        33432.884
                                                                                   (0.0581)        (0.8574)             (0.5744)          (0.7433)
NonNegative Reviews              -54346.405        -49976.537       -60584.374                                                                       -35,523.65      -5194.099       -14733.984
                                    (1.2851)          (1.2374)         (1.1820)                                                                         (0.5607)       (0.0790)         (0.2290)
Total Reviews                       647.708           706.675          856.179     961.779            771.01              694.406          676.296      802.172        786.794            869.76
                                    (1.4056)          (1.5687)         (1.4306)    (1.6003)         (1.0475)              (0.8968)        (0.9032)      (1.1774)       (1.1769)         (1.3189)
Seasonal                       59,553.335***     56,467.549***     63,213.818* 69,975.038**     49,691.718*          63,803.275**       42992.271     41,851.28      47,874.68         45,723.72
                                    (3.0302)          (2.9432)         (2.0464)    (2.2656)         (1.7658)              (2.2680)        (1.5758)      (1.4690)       (1.6391)         (1.5922)
Cast Nominated Oscar              -3789.597          -553.363                      2,749.55        -1526.74             -2949.846                     -6294.686      -2260.054        -1912.779
                                    (1.3053)          (0.2557)                     (0.9418)         (0.5380)              (1.1190)                      (1.6055)       (0.6881)         (0.7138)
Cast Awarded Oscar                 6453.782                                                                                                          14496.004
                                    (0.7563)                                                                                                            (1.2287)
Cast Any Nomination                                                    -107.37                                                             256.095
                                                                      (0.1419)                                                            (0.4042)
Cast Dummy Nominated Oscar                          -12892.875                                      -21544.978
                                                       (1.0145)                                        (1.1854)
Cast Dummy Awarded Oscar                                                                                                                                            -11285.908
                                                                                                                                                                       (0.4969)
Cast Dummy Any Nomination                                                        -11998.127                            -16,647.75       -22871.235
                                                                                    (0.5498)                             (0.7712)          (1.1229)
Cast Dummy Any Award                                                 3513.298                                                                                                        -25775.353
                                                                      (0.1893)                                                                                                          (1.4042)
Constant                       -121,328.993*    -189,063.017**    -138287.717 02,465.069** -319,916.301**         -207,810.193*      -346,809.607**264,125.278*    -239286.055    -263,888.378*
                                    (1.6939)          (2.4394)        (1.7103)    (2.2973)       (2.2965)              (1.8177)            (2.6387)    (1.8668)        (1.5062)         (1.6796)
Observations                              88                88              34          34             54                    54                  55          55              56               56
Adjusted R-squared                    0.3637            0.3888          0.6197      0.6124         0.2532                0.1934              0.2356       0.246          0.1896           0.2188



Table IX: Domestic Gross
This table reports the OLS estimates of the regression of domestic gross revenues on screenwriter compensation, and a set of control variables that includes movie reviews and cast
reputation. The first two columns report estimates for the for our sample of produced scripts for which Baseline FT gathers financial data. Columns three and four are restricted to scripts in
which a non-contingent contract is offered to the screenwriter. Columns five to ten look at the relationship between movie financials and screenwriter compensation in contingent contracts. In
columns five and six the compensation measure used is the intial payment made to the screenwriter. In columns seven and eight, we use the compensation the screenwriter receives when
the script is made. Finally, columns nine and ten look at the ratio between the compensation when the movie is made and the compensation when the movie is not made. Budget1 equals
Negative Costs. Budget2 Negative Costs plus Domestic Print and Advertising Costs. For each film we gather Variety Reviews. Each Variety's reviewer grades the movie as positive, negative
and mixed. Positive Reviews equals the ratio between positive reviews and total reviews. Non-negative reviews equals the ratio between positive and mixed reviews and total reviews. Total
reviews equals the total number of reviews. We gather several measures of cast reputation at the movie level. For each movie, we gather the total number of Oscar and major festival
nominations and awards for the entire cast. We then create a set of dummy variables that equal one if any cast member is defined as a star for each star definition. Starmeter measures cast
reputation following the opinion of IMDb readers. We classify as a star any actor/actress which in the january prior to the film's release has a starmeter below 150.




                                                                                               31
                                         All Sample                    Non Contingent Cont                                                      Contingent Contract

                                                                                                                    Price                           Price If Made                        Ratio

Price - All Sample                    9.917***          9.280***
                                      (4.7122)          (4.2317)
Price - Cont 0                                                           8.394***         8.998***
                                                                         (3.8560)         (4.9192)
Price - Cont 1                                                                                                  31.346            12.524
                                                                                                              (0.4467)          (0.1826)
Priceifmade - Cont 1                                                                                                                               -17.567           -16.779
                                                                                                                                                  (0.5127)          (0.5014)
Ratio - Cont 1                                                                                                                                                                   -33224.04        -26258.354
                                                                                                                                                                                   (0.8992)          (0.7075)
Ln Budget 1                     43,982.055***     51,371.121***     49,045.525**     45,922.332***         45,884.692*
                                     (3.1926)          (3.4663)         (2.7969)          (2.8571)             (1.6803)
Ln Budget 2                                                                                                                 71,682.144**     72,507.298**    75,534.527*** 64,591.950**        72,274.662**
                                                                                                                                 (2.3083)        (2.5465)         (2.7497)      (2.2698)           (2.4874)
PG                               98,971.650**       88,183.557*       -49253.239       -26455.874         134,113.167*      138,400.153*    148,771.316**    149,110.031** 144,419.105**      162,511.632**
                                     (2.0567)           (1.6743)         (0.5801)         (0.3681)             (1.8584)          (2.0040)        (2.1423)         (2.2954)      (2.1776)           (2.4565)
PG-13                                9,033.75         21,955.10        39970.828        18675.763             7,839.39         -5,679.39        -5,566.41         1,237.46     3818.406          17320.653
                                     (0.3710)           (0.8680)         (1.1230)         (0.4936)             (0.2094)          (0.1593)        (0.1592)         (0.0353)      (0.1106)           (0.4892)
Positive Reviews                                     75789.372         44480.321                            104,972.67
                                                        (1.1211)         (0.5384)                              (0.9452)
NonNegative Reviews              -154677.985                                         -192170.748                             -107,436.59      -101,642.95      -103,193.21     -60174.819        -122885.761
                                      (1.5702)                                            (1.5281)                               (0.7426)        (0.6871)          (0.7272)       (0.4155)           (0.8280)
Total Reviews                         971.579          951.706          1952.615         1483.856            15.264              605.031          971.624         1497.645       1167.331           1082.339
                                      (0.9051)         (0.8366)          (1.2821)         (1.0293)         (0.0087)              (0.3769)        (0.6001)          (0.9618)       (0.7885)           (0.7161)
Seasonal                       137,233.299***    145,005.896***    159,134.106**    155,735.150**     139,863.363**         117,742.189*      104565.124       104811.509      101254.998          80295.845
                                      (2.9977)         (3.1583)          (2.2857)         (2.3580)         (2.1653)              (1.7999)        (1.5336)          (1.6535)       (1.5650)           (1.2690)
Cast Nominated Oscar                -9175.091                          -4515.818        -7194.782                                                                -5,242.13      -8330.815
                                      (1.3567)                           (0.4028)         (0.6850)                                                                 (0.9226)       (1.4815)
Cast Awarded Oscar                   6,522.86        -15056.208       16592.288                                                                 -4597.278
                                      (0.3281)          (0.9481)         (0.3790)                                                                 (0.2221)
Cast Any Nomination                                    -797.712                                              4456.817            -135.43         -328.608                                             -328.96
                                                        (0.5881)                                              (1.0416)          (0.0880)          (0.1852)                                           (0.2133)
Cast Any Award                                                                                              -14,190.42
                                                                                                              (1.3137)
Cast Dummy Starmeter                                                                                                         -38451.851
                                                                                                                                (0.9824)
Cast Dummy Nominated Oscar                                                              34232.866
                                                                                          (0.6673)
Cast Dummy Any Nomination                                                                                                                                       -40254.341                        -72282.126
                                                                                                                                                                   (0.8878)                          (1.5918)
Cast Dummy Any Award

Constant                       -355,120.490** -569,414.653*** -581,631.457***       -377,999.241*     -509,017.467*       -690,973.203*     -689,912.274**   -704,771.729**    -580079.728       -580499.633
                                     (2.1285)        (3.7665)        (3.0998)             (2.0206)          (1.9353)            (1.9438)          (2.0596)         (2.2245)        (1.6503)          (1.6141)
Observations                               88              88              34                   34                54                  54                55               55              56                56
Adjusted R-squared                     0.4207          0.4065          0.6299               0.6628            0.1942              0.2317            0.2223           0.2567          0.2376            0.2396



Table X: Total Revenues
This table reports the OLS estimates of the regression of total revenues on screenwriter compensation, and a set of control variables that includes movie reviews and cast reputation. Total Revenues
equals Domestic Gross, Foreign Gross, Domestic Video Gross and Domestic DVD Gross.The first two columns report estimates for the for our sample of produced scripts for which Baseline FT gathers
financial data. Columns three and four are restricted to scripts in which a non-contingent contract is offered to the screenwriter. Columns five to ten look at the relationship between movie financials and
screenwriter compensation in contingent contracts. In columns five and six the compensation measure used is the intial payment made to the screenwriter. In columns seven and eight, we use the
compensation the screenwriter receives when the script is made. Finally, columns nine and ten look at the ratio between the compensation when the movie is made and the compensation when the
movie is not made. Budget1 equals Negative Costs. Budget2 Negative Costs plus Domestic Print and Advertising Costs. For each film we gather Variety Reviews. Each Variety's reviewer grades the
movie as positive, negative and mixed. Positive Reviews equals the ratio between positive reviews and total reviews. Non-negative reviews equals the ratio between positive and mixed reviews and total
reviews. Total reviews equals the total number of reviews. We gather several measures of cast reputation at the movie level. For each movie, we gather the total number of Oscar and major festival
nominations and awards for the entire cast. We then create a set of dummy variables that equal one if any cast member is defined as a star for each star definition. Starmeter measures cast reputation
following the opinion of IMDb readers. We classify as a star any actor/actress which in the january prior to the film's release has a starmeter below 150.




                                                                                                     32
                                         All Sample                    Non Contingent Cont                                                   Contingent Contract

                                                                                                                  Price                          Price If Made                           Ratio

Price - All Sample                    0.001***          0.001***
                                      (3.2465)          (3.6836)
Price - Cont 0                                                           0.001***         0.001***
                                                                         (2.5440)         (3.7977)
Price - Cont 1                                                                                                     0                0
                                                                                                            (0.3181)         (0.1766)
Priceifmade - Cont 1                                                                                                                                  0                 0
                                                                                                                                               (0.5451)          (0.6452)
Ratio - Cont 1                                                                                                                                                                     -0.646            -0.508
                                                                                                                                                                                 (1.4217)          (1.0983)
Ln Budget 1                             -0.004                                               0.012                                                                                 -0.162
                                      (0.0230)                                            (0.0618)                                                                               (0.5052)
Ln Budget 2                                                0.032            0.052                              0.178            0.279             0.354             0.298                             0.074
                                                        (0.1728)         (0.2465)                           (0.4695)         (0.7307)          (0.9935)          (0.8242)                          (0.2034)
PG                                     1.386**          1.572***            0.048            0.068           1.942**          1.940**           2.183**          2.449***          1.701*          2.299***
                                      (2.2426)          (2.7100)         (0.0579)         (0.0824)          (2.2684)         (2.2325)          (2.5527)          (2.9915)        (1.9423)          (2.6947)
PG-13                                     0.26              0.20             0.65            0.393              0.18             0.16              0.16              0.06           0.241             0.079
                                      (0.8627)          (0.6644)         (1.6101)         (1.1307)          (0.4182)         (0.3525)          (0.3670)          (0.1388)        (0.5386)          (0.1802)
Positive Reviews                         1.054                              0.462                               1.53             1.46              0.97                              1.73
                                      (1.3192)                           (0.5364)                           (1.1568)         (1.0767)          (0.7650)                          (1.3380)
NonNegative Reviews                                          -1.2                           -1.335                                                                 -0.934                            -0.091
                                                        (1.0403)                          (0.9635)                                                               (0.5231)                          (0.0497)
Total Reviews                            0.012             0.014            0.021            0.021             0.009              0.01            0.013             0.014           0.004             0.016
                                      (0.8834)          (1.0999)         (1.2834)         (1.2700)          (0.4502)         (0.4018)          (0.6107)          (0.7278)        (0.2017)          (0.8162)
Seasonal                              1.582***          1.457***          1.968**           1.681*             1.278              1.33            1.097             1.202           1.304             1.222
                                      (2.9747)          (2.6778)         (2.7429)         (2.0406)          (1.6162)         (1.6764)          (1.4235)          (1.5422)        (1.6735)          (1.4972)
Cast Nominated Oscar                      -0.08           -0.054                                              -0.064             -0.10                                             -0.144            -0.079
                                      (1.1293)          (0.8766)                                            (0.8020)         (1.3814)                                            (1.2790)          (0.8229)
Cast Awarded Oscar                                                                                                                                                                  0.047
                                                                                                                                                                                 (0.1405)
Cast Any Nomination                                                                                                                              -0.011            -0.008
                                                                                                                                               (0.5955)          (0.4049)
Cast Any Award                          -0.027                             -0.125           -0.099                                                                                                   -0.037
                                      (0.5874)                           (1.5450)         (1.3674)                                                                                                 (0.5897)
Cast Dummy Nominated Oscar                                -0.425                                              -0.729
                                                        (1.1701)                                            (1.4284)
Cast Dummy Awarded Oscar                                                    0.661
                                                                         (1.0139)
Cast Dummy Any Nomination                                                                                                        -0.66           -0.798
                                                                                                                             (1.1283)          (1.3883)
Cast Dummy Any Award                                                                         0.321                                                                 -0.639
                                                                                          (0.6042)                                                               (1.1704)
Constant                                -0.216             0.665           -1.266            0.463            -1.824           -2.673              -3.00           -1.729           2.993             0.595
                                      (0.1211)          (0.3005)         (0.5486)         (0.2100)          (0.4662)         (0.6858)          (0.8073)          (0.4152)        (0.8208)          (0.1319)
Observations                                89                89               35               35                54               54                 55            55.00              56                56
Adjusted R-squared                    (0.2866)          (0.2832)         (0.5024)         (0.5036)          (0.2245)         (0.2113)          (0.1927)          (0.1679)        (0.1956)          (0.1525)



Table XI: Rate of Return.
This table reports the OLS estimates of the regression of the films rate of return on screenwriter compensation, and a set of control variables that includes movie reviews and cast reputation. Rate of
return is defined as the ratio between total revenues and negative costs plus print and advertisements costs. The first two columns report estimates for the for our sample of produced scripts for which
Baseline FT gathers financial data. Columns three and four are restricted to scripts in which a non-contingent contract is offered to the screenwriter. Columns five to ten look at the relationship between
movie financials and screenwriter compensation in contingent contracts. In columns five and six the compensation measure used is the intial payment made to the screenwriter. In columns seven and
eight, we use the compensation the screenwriter receives when the script is made. Finally, columns nine and ten look at the ratio between the compensation when the movie is made and the
compensation when the movie is not made. Budget1 equals Negative Costs. Budget2 Negative Costs plus Domestic Print and Advertising Costs. For each film we gather Variety Reviews. Each
Variety's reviewer grades the movie as positive, negative and mixed. Positive Reviews equals the ratio between positive reviews and total reviews. Non-negative reviews equals the ratio between
positive and mixed reviews and total reviews. Total reviews equals the total number of reviews. We gather several measures of cast reputation at the movie level. For each movie, we gather the total
number of Oscar and major festival nominations and awards for the entire cast. We then create a set of dummy variables that equal one if any cast member is defined as a star for each star definition.
Starmeter measures cast reputation following the opinion of IMDb readers. We classify as a star any actor/actress which in the january prior to the film's release has a starmeter below 150.




                                                                                                     33
                                                                                      Price
Domestic Gross                             0.025***
                                           (3,1442)
Foreign Gross                                               0.017**        0.024***
                                                           (2,2983)        (2,9031)
Domestic Video Gross                                                                         0.040*
                                                                                           (1,6712)
Total Revenues                                                                                             0.012***
                                                                                                           (3,5701)
Rate of Return 1                                                                                                           201.950*        217.856*
                                                                                                                            (1,8128)        (1,6894)
Rate of Return 2                                                                                                                                          941.253***      975.711***
                                                                                                                                                            (3,2199)        (2,8248)
Experienced Writer

Number Movies                                                                             385.289**                                                                        351.962**
                                                                                           (2,1125)                                                                         (2,0273)
Reputation Movies

Nominated Oscar                                        6,599.978***                                    6,108.459***    7,098.516***
                                                           (3,8844)                                        (3,7292)        (4,2276)
Any Nomination                        4,572.046***                     4,800.311***                                                    5,707.279***     4,670.881***
                                          (3,3497)                         (3,0801)                                                        (3,6529)         (3,4538)
Transparent Script                   10,625.555*** 10,768.470***                                       9,865.486*** 11,266.609***                      11,321.133***
                                          (4,8086)      (4,9024)                                           (4,6272)      (5,1583)                           (5,2348)
Soft Words                                                                               -761.171**                                       -630.717*                        -659.396*
                                                                                           (1,9865)                                         (1,7559)                         (1,8278)
Info Dummy                                                              2,304.799*
                                                                           (1,8943)
Constant                                  -956,605        -280,089        -663,674         874,402      -1,001.528*          -390,73       1.085,05      -1,295.639*        221,183
                                           (1,5809)        (0,5317)        (0,9998)        (0,7959)         (1,7512)        (0,6518)       (1,0731)          (1,9416)       (0,2086)
Observations                                     96              95              95              95               96              97             97                97             97
Adjusted Rsquared                          (0,3614)        (0,3676)        (0,1830)        (0,0904)         (0,4127)        (0,3545)       (0,1443)          (0,3641)       (0,1359)




Table XII: Screenwriter Compensation and Future Financial Performance.
This table reports OLS estimates of general compensation regresions on a set of variables that measure screenwriter reputation, script complexity, and different measures of films
financial performance. The dependent variable, Price, reflects the payment made to the screenwriter when he sells the script. In non-contingent contracts, the screenwriter
compensation is fixed (i.e. the screenwriter compensation does not depend on whether the movie is produced or not). In contingent contracts, Price reflects the screenwriter
compensation when the movie is not produced. We include several screenwriter reputation variables. Number Movies measures the number of scripts previously sold by the script’s
screenwriter. Reputation Movies takes the value 0 if the screenwriter has not previously sold any script; 1 if the screenwriter has previously sold between 1 and 3 scripts; 2 if the
screenwriter has previously sold between 4 and 10 scripts; and 3 if the screenwriter has previously sold more than 10 scripts. Experienced Writer takes the value zero if the
screenwriter has not previously sold any script, and 1 otherwise. Nominated Oscar takes the value 1 if the screenwriter has been previously nominated to an Oscar. Any Nomination
takes the value 1 if the screenwriter has been previously nominated to an award in the following festivals: Oscars, Golden Globes, British Academy Awards, Emmy Award, European
Film Award, Cannes, Sundance, Toronto, Berlin. We also include several variables that try to capture soft information or script complexity. Soft_Words equals 0 if the script logline
contains less than 20 words; 1 if the script logline contains between 21 and 30 words; 2 if the script logline contains between 31 and 40 words; and 3 if the script logline contains
more than 40 words. InfoDummy equals 1 if additional information about the script is available. We create a script complexity index, Tansparent Script, that equals 1 when the log
line contains less than 20 words (i.e. Soft_Words equals 0), and additional information about the script is available (i.e. InfoDummy equals 1 ). Compensation, soft information and
type of contract data are from the Spec Screenplay Sales Directory. Reputation variables and information regarding whether the movies has been produced is from IMDB. We
obtain movie financials from Baseline.




                                                                                         34
