                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         FACTOR SUBSTITUTION AND UNOBSERVED
                           FACTOR QUALITY IN NURSING HOMES

                                             John Cawley
                                          David C. Grabowski
                                           Richard A. Hirth

                                         Working Paper 10465
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w10465


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       May 2004




The authors gratefully acknowledge financial support from the Center for Aging at the University of Alabama
at Birmingham (UAB). We thank Christine Bishop, Jeff DeSimone, Elizabeth Graddy, Dana Mukamel, Joann
Spetz, and seminar participants at the Allied Social Science Associations meetings, Association of Public
Policy and Management meetings, Southern Economic Association meetings, Southeastern Health Economics
Study Group meetings, Cornell University, University of Rochester, Duke University, Harvard University,
Indiana University-Purdue University Indianapolis and UAB Center for Aging for their helpful comments.
The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

©2004 by John Cawley, David C. Grabowski, and Richard A. Hirth. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Factor Substitution and Unobserved Factor Quality in Nursing Homes
John Cawley, David C. Grabowski, and Richard A. Hirth.
NBER Working Paper No. 10465
May 2004
JEL No. I12, L1, J4
                                        ABSTRACT

This paper studies factor substitution in one important sector: the nursing home industry.

Specifically, we measure the extent to which nursing homes substitute materials for labor when labor

becomes relatively more expensive. From a policy perspective, factor substitution in this market is

important because materials-intensive methods of care are associated with greater risks of morbidity

and mortality among nursing home residents. Studying longitudinal data from 1991-1998 on nearly

every nursing home in the United States, we use the method of instrumental variables (IV) to address

the potential endogeneity of nursing home wages. The results from the IV models are consistent with

the theory of factor substitution: higher nursing home wages are associated with lower staffing,

greater use of materials (specifically, physical restraints), and a higher proportion of residents with

pressure ulcers. A comparison of OLS and IV results suggests that empirical studies of factor

substitution should take into account unobserved heterogeneity in factor quality.

John Cawley
134 MVR Hall
Department of Policy Analysis and Management
Cornell University
Ithaca, NY 14853
and NBER
jhc38@cornell.edu

David C. Grabowski
University of Alabama at Birmingham
grabowsk@uab.edu

Richard A. Hirth
University of Michigan
rhirth@sph.umich.edu
                                            Introduction

        Nursing homes choose between labor-intensive and materials-intensive methods

of providing many types of care, including feeding, incontinence, and wandering.

Feeding of residents may be labor intensive, as when employees feed residents by hand,

or materials-intensive, as when feeding tubes are used. Care of an incontinent patient

may be labor-intensive, involving regularly scheduled toileting and bladder rehabilitation,

or materials-intensive, involving urethral catheterization. Wandering may be countered

with staff attention, or with the use of materials such as physical restraints and

psychoactive drugs.

        This paper tests whether increases in wages for nursing home direct care

providers cause nursing homes to shift away from labor-intensive, and towards more

materials-intensive, production of care. Results from this analysis have important

implications for policy. The most recent National Nursing Home Survey counted 1.6

million Americans living in nursing homes in 1999 (National Center for Health Statistics,

2002). It has been projected that in the next twenty years, 46 percent of Americans who

survive to age 65 will use a nursing home at some point in their lives (Spillman and

Lubitz, 2002).2     The market for long-term care is large; nursing home expenditures

totaled $98.9 billion in 2001, which represents 7 percent of national health expenditures

(National Center for Health Statistics, 2003). The provision of nursing home care in

materials-intensive ways is of interest because such methods are associated with greater

risks of morbidity and mortality (Zinn, 1993; Harrington et al., 1992) and the fact that

2
  The odds differ by gender; currently 33 percent of men and 52 percent of women who reach age 65 will
use a nursing home at some point in their lives (Kemper and Murtaugh, 1991). Women are much more
likely to use a nursing home than men because women have longer life expectancies than men and women
tend to marry older men, leaving them at greater risk of becoming a widow than men’s risk of becoming a
widower.


                                                   2
nursing home residents are among the most vulnerable in society because of their

deteriorated mental and physical condition and, often, their lack of family to monitor

nursing home care (Hirth et al., 2000).

       Factor substitution has been studied in hospitals (Jensen and Morrisey, 1986;

Morrisey and Jensen, 1990), health maintenance organizations (Okunade, 2003),

physician practices (Escarce and Pauly, 1998), hospital pharmacies (Okunade, 1993),

dentist offices (Okunade, 1999), and for treatment of depression (Berndt, Frank, and

McGuire, 1997). Two previous studies find evidence consistent with factor substitution

in nursing homes. Weisbrod (1988, 1998), in the course of studying the differences

between for-profit and not-for-profit health care providers, speculated that church-

sponsored nursing homes face lower labor costs because their employees are willing to

work for lower wages and in some cases as volunteers. He tested this hypothesis using

data on nursing homes from the 1978 Survey of Institutionalized Persons and consistently

found that, relative to proprietary nursing homes, church-related nonprofit nursing homes

used significantly higher quantities of labor. He also found that although the percentage

of residents admitted with a prescription for sedatives was roughly equal in for-profit and

non-profit homes, those in for-profit homes received more than four times as many doses

of sedative per month.

       Zinn (1993) finds evidence of labor-materials substitution in 1987

Medicare/Medicaid Automated Certification Survey (MMACS) data. Specifically,

higher wages for nursing home workers were associated with greater use of catheters,

physical restraints, and feeding tubes.




                                             3
        A limitation of the cross-sectional data used in these studies is that local wages

may be correlated with factor quality (i.e. the productivity of nursing home workers);

nursing homes that employ more productive workers likely pay higher wages. For this

reason, we pursue an instrumental variables approach. A comparison of our OLS and IV

suggests that it is important for empirical studies of factor substitution to correct for

unobserved heterogeneity in factor quality.

        The current analysis seeks to improve on the previous literature in the following

ways. First, our study uses recent (1991-1998) longitudinal data on nearly every nursing

home in the United States. Second, we address the possibility that nursing home wages

may be correlated with unobserved factor quality by employing IV estimation methods.



           1. Factor Substitution in the Production of Nursing Home Care

        This section describes the process and feasibility of factor substitution in nursing

homes and presents hypotheses regarding factor substitution in nursing homes.

        In the long run, a profit-maximizing firm chooses the cost-minimizing

combination of capital (K), labor (L), and materials (M) to produce a given amount of

output. However, in the short run, a firm’s capital is fixed, and firms must minimize

costs of production by adjusting their use of labor and materials. Assume that v and w are

the prevailing per-unit costs of materials and labor, respectively. We assume

that ∂L / ∂w < 0 ; all else equal, an increase in wage rate w will result in less labor L being

hired. As w rises, there will also be an increase in M as firms substitute materials for

labor in order to minimize costs. We show this graphically in Figure 1.




                                               4
       In Figure 1, the isoquant q1 joins all bundles of labor and materials that can be

combined to produce a given level of output (e.g., patient-days of nursing home care).

The slope of the isoquant is equal to the marginal rate of technical substitution (MRTS)

between labor and materials; specifically, the negative of the ratio of the marginal

productivity of labor (MPL) and the marginal productivity of materials (MPM).

       The point on the isoquant that a firm will choose is the bundle of materials and

labor that minimizes cost, illustrated by the point of tangency between the isoquant and

an isocost line with a slope equal to the ratio of the factor prices. At this point of

tangency, the slope of the isoquant (the MRTS) is equal to the negative of the ratio of the

factor prices: MPL / MPM = w / v . This condition can be rewritten as MPL / w = MPM / v ,

which indicates that when a firm has chosen the cost-minimizing mix of materials and

labor, the last dollar a firm spends on labor and the last dollar a firm spends on materials

generate equal marginal productivity. This implies that if wages w rise while the other

three variables remain constant, a firm will seek to minimize costs by hiring less labor

and more materials until the familiar condition of MPL / w = MPM / v holds given the new

wage w.

       Assume that point A represents the bundle of labor (L1) and materials (M1) used

to produce the quantity of output q1. Next, suppose that wages rise. The total effect of

the wage rise can be decomposed into two distinct parts. The first is the substitution

effect, which is for the firm to buy more of the input that has become relatively less

expensive (materials) and less of the input that has become relatively more expensive

(labor), holding output constant. This effect is shown as the movement along isoquant q1

from point A to point B – the quantity of labor used by the firm has fallen from L1 to L2,



                                               5
and the quantity of materials used by the firm has risen from M1 to M2. At point B, the

cost-minimizing condition is satisfied for the new, higher w.

         The increase in wages also causes an upward shift in the firm’s marginal cost

curve; the second part of the impact of a rise in wages is the output effect whereby the

firm produces less output because of the increase in costs. This effect causes the firm to

employ less of both labor and materials – the quantity of labor falls from L2 to L3 and the

quantity of capital falls from M2 to M3. Whereas the substitution effect was a shift in

labor and materials keeping output constant, the output effect is a shift in labor and

materials to a different level of output; the output effect is represented as the movement

from point B on the isoquant q1 to point C on the lower isoquant q2.

         Excluding the very unlikely case in which labor is an inferior input (less labor

hired at higher output levels), it is unambiguous that a rise in wages results in less labor

being used in production; both the substitution and output effects work in the same

direction. We assume that the net effect of a rise in wages is that more materials will be

used in production; i.e. we assume that the substitution effect dominates the output effect.

In terms of Figure 1, we assume that M3 > M1.3

         The theory of factor substitution typically assumes that inputs are perfectly

homogenous. However, factor units may differ in quality; that is, workers may differ in

their productivity. If so, one might observe cross-sectionally that firms that produce

using a high ratio of L to M may pay higher wages than firms that produce using a low

ratio of L to M.4 The possibility that there may be unobserved heterogeneity in factor


3
  In the long run a firm may also alter its level of capital used in production, but we limit our analysis to
factor substitution in the short run.
4
  Philpot (1970) discusses how unobserved international variation in labor quality creates bias in estimates
of factor substitution across countries.


                                                      6
quality makes it important to seek exogenous variation in factor prices when attempting

to estimate the extent of factor substitution.

       We next describe how factor substitution operates in nursing homes specifically.

Nursing homes are staffed in part by registered nurses (RNs) and licensed practical

nurses (LPNs), but these workers provide little direct patient care. Nurse aides (NAs)

provide 80 to 90 percent of the direct care to patients (Institute of Medicine, 1996). More

than 90 percent of NAs are women and three-fourths have not completed high school.

They earn close to the minimum wage and less than half of them have any employer-

provided health insurance coverage. The labor market for NAs in nursing homes is very

fluid and is characterized by high turnover (Munroe, 1990).

       The care provided by NAs is non-technical and consists primarily of helping

residents with activities of daily living (ADLs) such as eating, dressing, bathing, toileting,

and walking. For several types of such care, nursing homes choose between providing

care in a relatively labor-intensive manner or in a relatively materials-intensive manner.

For example, managing incontinence may be labor-intensive, through regularly scheduled

toileting and bladder rehabilitation, or materials-intensive through urethral catheterization

(Zinn, 1993). Nursing homes face a similar decision with respect to feeding residents;

feeding may be labor-intensive (by hand) or materials-intensive (involving feeding

tubes). A third example is monitoring and controlling residents’ behavior. Homes may

choose a labor-intensive method through constant monitoring, or they may choose

materials-intensive methods such as physical or chemical restraints.

       In some cases, the resident or a third-party payer shoulders some of the costs of

materials-intensive care. For example, in some states nursing homes receive a higher




                                                 7
Medicaid reimbursement for tube-fed patients (Mitchell et al., 2003). Prescription drugs

must be paid for by homes out of the Medicare per diem, but Medicaid pays a discounted

price for drugs on a per-drug basis, and private payers pay the nondiscounted price of the

drug (Mendelson et al., 2002). This may lead economists to ask why nursing homes do

not minimize costs by reducing staffing and putting all residents on feeding tubes and

psychoactive drugs.5 It may be due to a sense of humaneness or fear of lawsuits, but

answering that question is outside the scope of this paper; our focus is whether a rise in

the price of labor, holding constant the price of materials, leads homes to substitute

materials for labor.

         Unlike hospital care that is predominantly provided by nonprofit facilities,

roughly two-thirds of all nursing homes are for-profit facilities. Thus, nursing homes

have strong incentives to choose the cost-minimizing combination of inputs in the

production of care. Moreover, labor costs represent 60-70 percent of all nursing home

costs, implying that homes have a strong incentive to quickly change their factor mix

after labor becomes more expensive (Zinn, 1993). There is a high rate of turnover among

NAs (Institute of Medicine, 1996), so nursing homes can quickly decrease the size of

their staff simply by slowing the rate at which they replace departing staff members.

         Homes do not have complete freedom in choosing the amount of labor used in

production; minimum staffing laws impose constraints. The federal government requires

that Medicaid and Medicare certified nursing homes have licensed practical nurses

(LPNs) on duty 24 hours a day; a registered nurse (RN) on duty at least 8 hours a day, 7

days a week and an RN director of nursing in place (Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act,


5
 In our sample, only 0.04 percent of homes had all of their residents on feeding tubes and only 0.37 percent
had all their residents on psychoactive drugs.


                                                     8
1987). In some states, there are further legal limits on the minimum number of RNs and

other nurses that must staff a nursing home (Institute of Medicine, 1996). These

minimum staffing requirements prevent nursing homes that are at or close to the

minimums from significantly altering their factor mix, and will cause attenuation bias in

our results.

        Substitution of materials-intensive methods of care for labor-intensive methods of

care is of interest because materials-intensive methods of care in nursing homes are

typically associated with a greater risk of morbidity and mortality. Urethral

catheterization places the resident at greater risk for urinary tract infection; other long-

term complications include bladder and renal stones, abcesses, and renal failure. Feeding

tubes can result in complications including self-extubation, infections, aspiration,

unintended misplacement of the tube, and pain. Immobility resulting from the use of

physical restraints may increase the risk of pressure ulcers, depression, mental and

physical deterioration, and mortality (Zinn, 1993). Psychotropic drugs may also result in

mental and physical deterioration (Harrington et al., 1992).

        Microeconomic models of factor substitution assume that quality of the output

good is held constant, but for the reasons just described, in nursing homes a change in the

input mix may change the quality of care. Under the conditions of perfect information,

perfect rationality, costless mobility, and privately purchased care, one would predict that

residents would respond to a decrease in nursing home quality by departing for a higher-

quality nursing home. However, consumers in the nursing home market tend to be poorly

informed, many are cognitively impaired, and many are without relatives to help them

make decisions. Grabowski and Hirth (2003) find results consistent with nursing home




                                               9
markets operating under conditions of asymmetric information that can lead to the

delivery of suboptimal levels of quality.6 Residents whose nursing home care is paid for

by Medicaid may face great search costs in finding another nursing home that will accept

them. In general, moving between nursing homes can be very costly in time and effort,

and although such transfers do occur, they are relatively uncommon (Hirth et al., 2000).

Further, nursing homes cannot directly increase output prices to recoup higher costs

incurred for care under these primarily prospective payment systems. Medicaid and

Medicare are the primary payers for a majority of nursing homes, and payment rates are

revised only periodically to reflect changes in input prices (GAO, 2003). All of these

features of nursing home markets make it possible for nursing homes to adjust factor

inputs and lower quality with few repercussions in terms of volume or revenue.

        Our specific hypotheses regarding the effect of higher wages on the production of

nursing home care are as follows.

        Hypothesis 1. Increases in local wages for nursing home workers result in

nursing homes employing fewer workers. We predict that homes will employ both fewer

NAs and fewer professional nurses (LPNs and RNs).

        Hypothesis 2. Increases in local wages for nursing home workers cause nursing

homes to provide care in materials-intensive ways. As the wage rate for nursing home

workers increases, nursing homes will look to substitute away from labor and towards

materials such as catheters, feeding tubes, physical restraints, and psychoactive drugs.




6
  Chou (2002) finds that differences in the quality of care between not-for-profit and for-profit nursing
homes are greater among residents who lack information about the quality of nursing home care (defined as
residents who did not have a spouse or child visit them within a month after admission) than among those
with better information (defined as residents who had a spouse or child visit them).


                                                   10
       Hypothesis 3. Increases in local wages for nursing home workers are associated

with a rise in indicators of low quality of care in nursing homes. We predict that the

prevalence of pressure ulcers (which are commonly termed bedsores) will rise after the

wages of nursing home workers rise.



          2. The Online Survey Certification and Reporting System (OSCAR) Data

       This study uses a longitudinal data set: the linked annual data of the federal

Online Survey Certification and Reporting (OSCAR) system from 1991 through 1998 for

the 48 contiguous United States (excluding Alaska, Hawaii, and the District of

Columbia). The OSCAR system contains information from state surveys of all federally

certified Medicaid nursing facilities and Medicare skilled nursing care homes in the U.S.

Almost 96 percent of all facilities nationwide are federally certified (Strahan, 1997) so

the OSCAR system includes the vast majority of nursing homes in the U.S. Collected and

maintained by the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS), the OSCAR data

are used to determine whether homes are complying with federal regulations. Every

facility is required to have an initial survey to verify compliance. Thereafter, states are

required to resurvey each facility at least every 15 months; in practice, the average is

about 12 months (Harrington et al., 1998).

       Although many of the elements in the OSCAR system are self-reported by the

facilities, the data are generally considered accurate and reliable (Harrington et al. 2000).

The OSCAR data have been recommended for more extensive use by a recent IOM

expert panel on nursing home quality (IOM 2001). Our sample includes 121,627




                                              11
complete surveys from 18,220 nursing homes conducted between 1991 and 1998 within

the 48 contiguous states.

       Summary statistics for the sample are contained in Table 1. The average home

uses 2.15 Nurse Aide hours per resident day and 1.22 professional (i.e. LPN and/or RN)

hours per resident day. The average home in the sample has 8.3 percent of residents with

a catheter, 6.1 percent with a feeding tube, 18 percent under restraints, 38 percent on at

least one psychoactive drug, and 7.2 percent of residents with pressure ulcers. The

OSCAR files are supplemented with data from several sources. Data on the wages of

nursing home workers is from the Covered Employment and Wages data collected by the

Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS). Table 1 indicates that the average state-level hourly

wage of all nursing home workers is $8.19 (wages have been converted to 1998 dollars).

Data on the costs of materials (pharmaceuticals, plastics and rubber) come from the BLS

Producer Price Index. Aggregate county level demographic data are taken from the

Bureau of Health Professions’ Area Resource File (ARF). We also merge with the

OSCAR data on the effective minimum wage rate law for each state and year. All

variables expressed in dollars are converted to 1998 dollars using the BLS consumer

price index.



                                  3. Empirical Methods

3.1. Basic Model

       We initially use OLS to estimate the following reduced-form regression of the

relationship between the cost of labor and outcomes related to factor substitution:

                       YHT = WHT βW + VT βV + T βT + X HT β X + ε HT                      (1)




                                             12
        The dependent variable, YHT , represents one of several outcomes of interest at

nursing home H at time T . The first set of dependent variables measures the quantity of

labor used in production. There are two such outcomes of interest: the number of NA

hours per resident day, and the number of professional nurse (RN and LPN) hours per

resident day, employed by the facility. We predict that the sign of βW , the coefficient on

the real wages of nursing home workers, will be negative when the dependent variable

measures the quantity of labor used in nursing home production.

        The second set of dependent variables measures the extent of materials-intensive

care. There are four such outcomes of interest: the proportion of residents in the facility

with catheters, tube feedings, physical restraints, or on psychoactive drugs7. We predict

that the sign of the coefficient on nursing home worker wages will be positive when the

dependent variable measures the extent of materials-intensive care.

        The final dependent variable measures the quality of care; specifically: the

proportion of residents with pressure ulcers. Pressure ulcers (or decubitis ulcers),

commonly associated with immobility, are areas of the skin and underlying tissues that

erode as a result of pressure or friction and/or lack of blood supply. Pressure ulcers have

been found to be associated with an increased rate of mortality (Brandeis et al., 1990).

Pressure ulcers are a particularly good measure of quality because they are preventable

and treatable conditions (Kane et al., 1989). We predict that the sign of the coefficient on

nursing home worker wages will be positive when the dependent variable measures the

quality of care.



7
 Psychoactive medications encompass antipsychotic, antianxiety, antidepressant, and hypnotic
medications.


                                                  13
         For each of the outcomes represented as a percentage of residents, we use the

                                                                 P
logit transformation so dependent variables are of the form An( i ) where Pi
                                                               1 − Pi

represents the proportion of residents of nursing home i. Because the logit transformation

assigns no value when the percent is equal to either zero or one, zero values were recoded

as .001 and values of one were recoded as .999.8 In each regression, observations are

weighted according to the number of residents in nursing home H at time T .

         Among the independent variables in equation (1), WHT is the real wage of nursing

home workers in the local labor market of nursing home H at time T . For each state, we

use the average state-level quarterly wage associated with Standard Industrial

Classification (SIC) code 805: Nursing and Personal Care Facilities Employees. This

category includes employees in skilled nursing care facilities, intermediate care facilities,

and nursing and personal care facilities not classified in the first two categories. This

classification excludes employees in medical offices and clinics, hospitals, medical and

dental laboratories, home health care, and outpatient facilities.9

         We measure factor substitution as wages rise holding constant the cost of

materials. In equation (1), VT is a vector of variables that measure of the cost of materials

at time T . The variables included in that vector are the same variables that the Centers

8
  Prior to this recoding, 9.01 percent of the home-year observations in our sample had 0 percent of residents
on catheters while 0.04 percent had 100 percent of residents on catheters. Similarly, 10.21 percent of
homes had 0 percent of residents under physical restraints and only 0.10 percent had 100 percent of
residents under restraints. 21.86 percent of observations had 0 percent of residents on feeding tubes and
only 0.04 percent had all residents on feeding tubes. 2.34 percent of observations had 0 percent of residents
on antipsychotic drugs and only 0.37 percent had all residents on such drugs. 8.92 percent of observations
had 0 percent of residents with pressure ulcers and 0.03 percent had all residents with pressure sores.
9
  We also estimated our models using the county-level wage, but this is measured at the 2-digit SIC code
level. SIC code 80 includes not only nursing home workers but also all workers in medical offices, clinics,
hospitals, medical and dental laboratories. Our estimates using the 2-digit SIC measure were generally not
supportive of our hypotheses, we suspect because it is an inaccurate measure of the wages of nursing home
workers.


                                                    14
for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) uses to track changes over time in the costs

of hospitals and nursing homes using the Hospital Input Price Index and the Skilled

Nursing Facility Price Index. Specifically, we use the Producer Price Index for the

components Pharmaceuticals and Plastics & Rubber. The cost of materials is assumed to

be uniform nationally at a particular point in time.

         T is a linear time trend, and X is a vector of control variables. At the home level,

we include an index for activities of daily living to control for the underlying case-mix

within the facility. This index is equal to the average number of activities of daily living

(ADLs) with which residents need assistance, which reflects the average dependence of

the residents in each facility. ADLs form the cornerstone of nursing home resident

classification and play a major role in all state-level Medicaid case-mix adjustment

payment systems. Total number of certified beds, profit status (for-profit, not-for-profit

and government), hospital-affiliation and whether the home is part of a multiple-facility

chain are also included as facility-level control variables.

         A Herfindahl index is included to control for the competitiveness of the county

nursing home market.10 The population of individuals over age 75 per square mile in the

county, and the real median income in the county, are also included as regressors. Given

the importance of Medicaid as a payer of nursing home services (Grabowski, 2001), we

also controlled for the real average state Medicaid payment rate.

         Our data is a census of Federally-certified nursing homes, and as such, the point

estimates of the coefficients could be interpreted as their true values; by this

interpretation, standard errors are not informative and tests of statistical significance are


10
  This index is constructed by summing the squared market shares of all nursing home facilities in the
county. The index ranges from 0 to 1, with a higher value signifying a greater concentration of facilities.


                                                     15
unnecessary. However, standard errors are meaningful if one interprets the sample

(which covers 1991-1998) as drawn from all possible years. For readers who wish to see

tests of statistical significance, we provide standard errors and indicators of when p

values meet the thresholds of traditional levels of statistical significance.

        We adjust the standard errors for two types of correlation in error terms across

observations. First, the “grouped” nature of the data (i.e. multiple observations from each

home) may introduce heteroskedasticity and bias the estimates of the parameter standard

errors, so we cluster-correct standard errors to account for the correlation within homes

over time. Second, we adjust the standard errors to account for the fact that we are

regressing individual nursing home outcomes on a regressor of interest (nursing home

wages) that varies only by state and quarter. As a result of regressing micro outcomes on

an aggregate regressor, unadjusted standard errors will be biased downwards, perhaps

dramatically.11 We adjust for this by bootstrapping the standard errors, selecting with

replacement all observations by particular state and quarter.12 As expected, this

adjustment considerably increases the standard errors.

3.2. Instrumental Variables Model

        One concern with the OLS model is that variation in labor costs may be correlated

with variation in factor quality (i.e. nursing home worker productivity). For example,

states with more productive nursing home workers will also likely have higher nursing

home wages. Such unobserved heterogeneity will bias the OLS coefficients on nursing




11
   Moulton (1990). Donald and Lang (2001) and Bertrand, Duflo, and Mullainathan (2004) discuss this
problem as it applies to the standard errors of difference-in-differences estimators.
12
   We conduct 50 replications to estimate the bootstrap standard errors, which is in the range recommended
by Efron and Tibshirani (1993).


                                                   16
home worker wages. To address this problem, we estimate a model of instrumental

variables.

       Equation (2) shows that nursing home wages W may also be related to the

variables X , V , and T from equation (1). Nursing home wages may also be a function

of Z , a set of variables uncorrelated with the error term in the second-stage regression.

The variable ν represents the residual.

                       WHT = Z HT λZ + X HT λX + VT λV + T λT + ν HT                         (2)

       A key econometric issue is that nursing home wages W may be correlated

with εHT , the error term in the second-stage regression. Changes over time in local wage

rates for nursing home workers may be correlated with changes in the demand for labor-

intensive nursing home care. In these cases, the error terms ε and ν will be correlated,

which violates the assumptions underlying the linear regression model.

       We can generate consistent estimates of the effect of nursing home wages on our

outcomes of interest if we can identify a set of variables Z that are correlated with nursing

home wages but not ε , the error term in the second-stage regression. Given Z , we can

calculate an IV estimate of the effect of nursing homes wages on the outcomes of interest.

       We identify two plausible instruments for the wages of nursing home workers.

The first is the effective real minimum wage in the state. The effective minimum wage is

the state’s own legislated minimum unless the federal minimum is greater, in which case

the federal minimum wage is the state’s effective minimum wage. Nursing homes are

primarily staffed by nurse aides who tend to be paid at or near the minimum wage

(Institute of Medicine, 1996), so a change in the effective minimum wage rate represents

an exogenous shock to nursing home wages (Machin, Manning, and Rahman, 2002).



                                              17
Over the period 1991 to 1998, there were 17 instances in which states changed their

effective minimum wage relative to the federal minimum wage. There were also two

changes in the federal minimum wage over our period of study; the minimum wage

increased from $4.25 to $4.75 in 1996 and from $4.75 to the current level of $5.15 in

1997. We assume that such changes are uncorrelated with worker productivity and

uncorrelated with the demand for labor-intensive nursing home care.

       Our second instrument is the state wage rate for similar workers in a non-health

care industry; the correlation between wages in the two sectors identifies local wage

shocks for a given skill level of worker that are uncorrelated with nursing home worker

productivity or with the demand for labor-intensive nursing home care. Specifically, our

second instrument is the average state real wage for Standard Industrial Classification

(SIC) code 53: General Merchandise Stores; this SIC code includes employees in

department stores, variety stores and miscellaneous general merchandise stores. This

wage rate is likely to be correlated with nurse aide wages because, as stated in a 1996

Institute of Medicine (IOM) report, “wages of nursing assistants are generally near the

minimum wage and are comparable to levels offered by fast food chains and retail

establishments” (p. 160). The IOM committee “heard reports of NAs leaving health care

for retail jobs when a K-Mart opened” (p. 263). In Section 5: Robustness Checks, we

describe that our results are largely robust to the use of wages from other sectors as

instruments.

       Tests of overidentification are often used to determine the validity of instruments

by testing whether the IV coefficient estimated one instrument is similar to the IV

coefficient estimated using another instrument that is assumed to be valid. A weakness




                                             18
of overidentification tests is that two valid instruments may have different marginal

effects and one may incorrectly conclude based on an overidentification test that an

instrument is invalid. For example, the minimum wage is not binding in high-wage-

paying nursing homes, but all homes may be affected by wages offered to their workers

by the retail sector; for this reason, the two instruments may have different marginal

effects. Overidentification tests (Sargan, 1958) indicate that our instruments seem to

have similar effects in the staffing regressions, but different effects in the regressions

concerning materials-intensive care. Given that the effective minimum wage and the

wages in other sectors are very unlikely to be affected by nursing home decisions about

methods of care, we believe that both instruments are valid, and that the results of the

overidentification test reflect the fact that the instruments have different marginal effects.

       The identifying assumption is that the effective minimum wage and wages for

general merchandise store employees are correlated with W , the nursing home wage rate,

but are uncorrelated with ε , the error term in the second-stage regression. In the first

stage of IV estimation (Eq.3), the nursing home wage is regressed on these instruments

plus the other regressors ( X , V , and T ) from the second stage of IV estimation. In the

second stage, the various outcomes of interest are regressed on the instrumented nursing

home wage rate and the other regressors X , V , and T . The IV analyses are weighted by

the number of facility residents and the standard errors reflect Huber-White corrections

for intra-home correlation.

       Bound et al. (1995) argue that the use of instruments that explain little of the

variation in the endogenous variable can do more harm than good. If a set of instruments

is weakly correlated with the endogenous explanatory variable, then even a small




                                              19
correlation between the instruments and the error term in the second-stage regression can

seriously bias estimates. Their results suggest that the partial R2 and F-statistics on the

excluded instruments in the first-stage regression are useful as rough guides to the quality

of the IV estimates. Staiger and Stock (1997) argue that 10 is an acceptable value of the

F-statistic associated with the hypothesis that the coefficients on the instruments in the

first-stage regression are jointly equal to zero (Stock and Yogo, 2002).13

        The set of instruments far exceeds the minimum standard of Staiger and Stock . In

the first stage of IV estimation, the hypothesis that the coefficients on the instruments are

jointly equal to zero is rejected. Appendix Table 1 indicates that in the first-stage

regression, the instruments have an F-statistic equal to 185.05 and ∆R2 = 0.06. The first-

stage coefficients on the instruments are of the expected sign. Both the minimum wage

and the general merchandising store wage are positively correlated with nursing home

wages. Each of these instruments is statistically significant at the 1 percent level.

        IV raises standard errors, and this loss of efficiency should only be incurred if

something is gained in terms of consistency. A Hausman test is one piece of evidence as

to whether OLS estimates are inconsistent. Testing both instruments, we reject at the 1

percent level the null hypothesis of OLS consistency only for the professional staffing

measure. If we test each instrument separately, we reject the null for professional staffing

when we use the manufacturing wage as the instrument, and we reject the null for

physical restraints and psychoactive drugs when we use minimum wage as the



13
   More recent work by Stock and Yogo (2002) has argued that this Staiger-Stock rule of thumb is
somewhat general in that the strength of the instrument depends on the inferential task to which the
instruments are applied and how that inference is conducted. The authors propose a more detailed set of F-
statistics to account for different estimators and the number of endogenous regressors. Given our use of
least squares with only one endogenous regressor, we will use the Staiger-Stock rule of thumb.



                                                    20
instrument. Although these Hausman test results suggest that only for certain outcomes

is the OLS coefficient inconsistent, the failure to reject the null hypothesis should not be

confused with confirmation of the null. Moreover, there is a reason to believe that OLS

coefficients are inconsistent: there likely exists heterogeneity in factor quality, and when

homes employ higher-productivity workers they may pay higher wages. The difference

in point estimates between OLS and IV (even though often not statistically significant)

and the likelihood that unobserved factor quality affects OLS results suggest that IV

estimation offers gains in consistency that are worth the loss in efficiency.

       The second part of the identifying assumption is that the instruments are

uncorrelated with the error term in the second-stage regression. Although it is impossible

to confirm the null hypothesis that they are uncorrelated, examining whether the

instruments are strongly correlated with observable factors can be informative

(McClellan, McNeil, and Newhouse, 1994). To this end, the sample was divided in two:

observations for which the effective minimum wage was above the mean for the sample

and observations for which it was below the mean for the sample. This process was

repeated but with the division occurring on the basis of whether the general merchandise

store wage was above or below the sample mean. Appendix Table 2 lists the means of

the variables used in this study by group, and indicates with asterisks whether the

differences in the means of the groups are statistically significant.

       Appendix Table 2 is divided into three sections. The first is devoted to nursing

home worker wages, the second to explanatory variables, and the third to outcome

variables. The first section indicates that homes in states with above-average minimum

wages pay on average 40 cents more per hour. Homes in states with above-average




                                             21
manufacturing wages pay on average $1.22 more per hour. These are consistent with the

assumption that the instruments are correlated with the potentially endogenous regressor.

       The second section of the table presents means of the explanatory variables for

the two groups. In general, the means of the variables are similar for the observations

associated with above-average and below-average values of the instrument; however,

given the large sample, the difference in means is usually statistically significant. The

largest differences in means occur between those above and below the average

manufacturing wage for the following variables: number of beds, hospital-based,

Herfindahl Index, per capita income, and elderly per square mile. It should be noted that

the group means in this table are unconditional.

       The outcome variables occupy the bottom section of Appendix Table 2. There are

only slight differences between homes with high values of the instruments with those

with low values of the instruments. This comparison represents a preliminary and

unconditional IV estimate of the effect of wages on the outcomes.

       In summary, the instruments used in this study appear to be strongly correlated

with the endogenous regressor. Although the difference in observables between homes

with high and low values of the instruments are usually statistically significant, the size

of the difference is often small.



                                       4. Empirical Results

       Empirical results from fourteen regressions are presented in Table 2.

Bootstrapped standard errors are presented in parentheses below the estimated

coefficients. There are seven outcomes of interest, and column 1 contains results from




                                             22
OLS and column 2 contains those from IV models. For each outcome and method of

estimation, we report the coefficient on nursing home wages, the t statistic associated

with that coefficient, and the elasticity of that outcome with respect to changes in wages.



4.1. OLS Results

        We hypothesize that higher wages result in lower staffing, greater use of

materials, and a rise in pressure ulcers. The OLS results in column 1 of Table 2 provide

some support for these hypotheses. The point estimates indicate that higher wages are

associated with fewer NAs and professional staffing. However, only the NA result is

statistically significant. A 10 percent increase in nursing home wages is associated with

0.65 percent fewer NAs. Also consistent with our hypotheses, homes facing higher wages

tend to have a greater proportion of their residents on physical restraints and a greater

proportion of residents with pressure ulcers. The coefficient on feeding tubes is of the

expected sign, but not statistically significant.

        The coefficients on catheters and psychoactive drugs were not of the expected

sign. Two Registered Nurses have pointed out to us that they believe that catheters are a

complement, not a substitute, for nurse labor, given the need for nurse time to insert and

supervise the catheter. Our results are consistent with their claim; higher nurse wages are

associated with a smaller percentage of residents with catheters and the correlation is

statistically significant. A 10 percent increase in nursing home wages is associated with

3.4 percent fewer residents with catheters.

        Although these results show some support for Zinn’s earlier cross-sectional

estimates, the mixed results may reflect heterogeneity in factor quality. For example,




                                              23
when average nursing home worker productivity rises in a state, it is likely that nursing

home worker wages also rise. To address this problem, we estimate IV models.



4.2 Instrumental Variables Results

           The results from the IV models are presented in column 2 of Table 2. In general,

the IV estimates provide stronger support for the predictions derived from the model of

factor substitution. The coefficients on nursing home worker wages are negative, as

predicted, in both the nurse aide and professional nurse regressions. However, while the

coefficient is significant in the professional nurse regression, it fails to meet the 10

percent significance level in the NA regression. We find that a 10 percent increase in the

wages of nursing home workers is associated with a 3.2 percent decline in professional

staffing.

           The IV estimates also support the hypothesis that higher wages will lead to

increasingly materials-intensive provision of care. For example, a rise in wages of 10

percent is associated with an 8.7 percent rise in the number of residents under physical

restraints.14 The coefficients on wages in the feeding tubes and psychoactive drugs

regressions are positive, as predicted, but they are not statistically significant.

           The IV results also confirm that higher wages are associated with more pressure

ulcers; specifically, a 10 percent increase in the wages of nursing home workers is

associated with a 6.5 percent increase in the number of residents with pressure ulcers.



14
     In regressions in which the outcome of interest is a percentage, and the dependent variable has been logit
transformed, the elasticity is calculated as: ε = (1− p )β X where p is the average outcome of interest in
the sample, β is the coefficient on the wage of nursing home workers, and X is the average wage of
nursing home workers in the sample.


                                                       24
        The IV point estimates on nursing home worker wages in the catheter use

regression are opposite to our prediction but are consistent with the claim that catheters

are complements with nurse time. However, the coefficient is not statistically significant.

        In general, the IV point estimates are larger in absolute magnitude than those from

OLS. The contrast between the IV and OLS results is consistent with time-varying

unobserved heterogeneity in factor quality that is correlated with factor prices. Of

course, it does not prove the existence of such unobserved heterogeneity, it is merely

consistent with it. Variation in average nursing home worker productivity in a state may

be correlated with average nursing home worker wages in a state. For the purposes of

this paper, we are agnostic about what causes changes over time in factor quality.

        In summary, the IV results support our three hypotheses. The wage coefficient is

of the expected sign in six of the seven models and three of the coefficients are

statistically significant.



                             5. Extensions and Robustness Checks

        We conducted the following robustness checks of these results. First, because our

measures of the cost of materials are nationwide and annual, it is not possible to use

indicator variables for year when also controlling for the cost of materials; instead, a time

trend is included. In order to test whether our results are due to the failure to include

indicator variables for year, we re-estimated our models dropping the cost of materials

and adding a set of indicator variables for year. The results were robust.

        Second, we were concerned that the mix of payers for nursing home residents

may influence the results. In the previous results in this paper, we excluded as regressors




                                             25
the percent of nursing home residents whose stay was paid by Medicare and the percent

paid by Medicaid, out of the concern that the labor-materials mix of care was

simultaneously determined with payer type. As a robustness check, we re-estimated the

models of this paper controlling for the percent of residents in the home whose stay was

paid by Medicare, and the percent paid by Medicaid, and found no meaningful changes in

the results.

        Third, we re-estimated our IV models using as instruments wages from other

occupations and sectors, including those related to health (SIC 808: home health care,

SIC 806: hospitals, and SIC 801: offices and clinics of doctors of medicine) and sectors

unrelated to health (SIC 581: eating and drinking places, and SIC 701: hotels and motels).

We found that the results in the Nurse Aide, feeding tube, catheter, and bedsore

regressions were remarkably robust to the choice of instrument. For the other outcomes

of interest, professional staffing, restraints, and psychoactive drugs, results are generally

robust to the choice of wages from health sectors as instruments, but are generally not

robust to the choice of wages from a non-health sector as instruments.

        Fourth, we experimented with dropping hospital-based nursing homes from our

sample. This did not substantially affect our estimates.



                                       6. Conclusion

        This paper measures the extent of factor substitution in the nursing home industry

by estimating IV models using longitudinal data from 1991-1998 on nearly every nursing

home in the United States. We find that a 10 percent increase in nursing home worker

wages is associated with a 3.2 percent decrease in professional nurse staffing, an 8.7




                                              26
percent increase in the percentage of residents who are physically restrained, and a 6.5

percent increase in the percentage of residents who suffer from pressure sores.

        The implications of these results extend beyond nursing homes. Buerhaus,

Staiger, and Auerbach (2000) document a decline over the past twenty years in the

number of younger women entering the nursing profession and predict that unless the

trend is reversed the RN workforce will decline nearly 20 percent below projected

workforce requirements by 2020. Ceteris paribus, this decrease in the supply of nurses

will lead to higher wages. Policymakers should anticipate that health care providers will

react to such a rise in nurse wages by substituting away from nurse labor and toward

other inputs. If the other input is physician labor, there may be no adverse effects for

patients, but if providers substitute towards lower-skilled staff, materials or capital,

patients may experience a lower quality of care. A number of studies have already

implicated low RN staffing as a source of adverse outcomes, including increased risk of

mortality, experienced by medical and surgical patients (see Buerhaus et. al, 2002 for a

discussion of this literature).

        Given evidence that materials-intensive methods of care are associated with

higher morbidity and mortality among residents, policymakers may wish to limit the

flexibility of nursing homes to substitute materials for labor. In particular, policymakers

may wish to combine minimum staffing standards with indexing of Medicaid payment

rates to local labor market conditions so that homes with higher labor costs would receive

higher Medicaid payments. Such indexing must be combined with minimum staffing

requirements; otherwise homes in high-wage areas could pocket any additional Medicaid

payment and continue to choose the factor mix that minimizes total costs.




                                              27
       This research also contributes to the broader economic literature on factor

substitution. We offer a framework for addressing the possible endogeneity of wages that

future work can extend to the study of factor substitution in other industries. Our

findings suggest that empirical studies of factor substitution must consider the possibility

of unobserved heterogeneity in factor quality and use methods like instrumental variables

to generate consistent estimates of the effect of changing factor prices on the factor mix

employed in production.




                                             28
                                           References
Berndt, E.R., R.G. Frank, and T.G. McGuire. 1997. “Alternative Insurance
       Arrangements and the Treatment of Depression.” American Journal of Managed
       Care, 3(2): 243-252.
Bertrand, Marianne, Esther Duflo, and Sendhil Mullainathan. 2004. “How Much Should
       We Trust Differences-in-Differences Estimates?” Quarterly Journal of
       Economics, 119(1): 249-276.
Bound, J., D.A. Jaeger, and R.M. Baker. 1995. “Problems with instrumental variables
       estimation when the correlation between the instruments and the endogenous
       explanatory variable is weak.” Journal of the American Statistical Association.
       90(430): 443-450.
Brandeis, G.H., J.N Morris, D.J. Nash, and L.A. Lipsitz. 1990. “The epidemiology and
       natural history of pressure ulcers in elderly nursing home residents.” Journal of
       the American Medical Association 264: 2905-2909.
Buerhaus, P.I., J. Needleman, S. Mattke, and M. Stewart. 2002. “Strengthening Hospital
       Nursing.” Health Affairs, 21(5): 123-132.
Buerhaus, P.I., D.O. Staiger, and D.I. Auerbach. 2000. “Implications of an Aging
       Registered Nurse Workforce.” Journal of the American Medical Association,
       283(22): 2948-2954.
Chou, S-Y. 2002. “Asymmetric Information, Ownership, and Quality of Care: An
       Empirical Analysis of Nursing Homes.” Journal of Health Economics, 21: 293-
       311.
Donald, S.G. and K. Lang. 2001. “Inference with Difference in Differences and Other
       Panel Data.” Unpublished manuscript, Boston University.
Efron, B. and R. J. Tibshirani, 1993. An Introduction to the Bootstrap. New York:
       Chapman & Hall.
Escarce, J.J. and M.V. Pauly. 1998. “Physician Opportunity Costs in Physician Practice
       Cost Functions.” Journal of Health Economics, 17: 129-151.
General Accounting Office. 2003. Medicaid Nursing Home Payments: States’ Payment
       Rates Largely Unaffected by Recent Fiscal Pressures. (United States General
       Accounting Office: Washington, D.C.).
Grabowski, D.C. 2001. “Medicaid Reimbursement and the Quality of Nursing Home
       Care,” Journal of Health Economics 20(4): 549-569.
Grabowski, D.C., R.A. Hirth. 2003. “Competitive Spillovers across Nonprofit and For-
       Profit Nursing Homes,” Journal of Health Economics 22(1): 1-22.
Harrington, C., J.H. Swan, V. Wellin, W. Clemena, and H.M. Carillo. 1999. 1998 State
       Data Book on Long Term Care Program and Market Characteristics. Department
       of Social and Behavioral Sciences. University of California. San Francisco, CA.
Harrington, C., C. Tompkins, M. Curtis, and L. Grant. 1992. “Psychotropic Drug Use in
       Long-Term Care Facilities: A Review of the Literature,” The Gerontologist,
       32(6): 822-833.
Harrington, C., D. Zimmerman, S.L. Karon, J. Robinson, and P. Beutel. 2000. “Nursing
       home staffing and its relationship to deficiencies,” Journal of Gerontology: Social
       Sciences 55B(5): S278-S287.




                                           29
Hirth, R.A., J.C. Banaszak-Holl, and J.F. McCarthy. 2000. “Nursing Home to Nursing
        Home Transfers: Prevalence, Time Pattern and Resident Correlates,” Medical
        Care 38(6): 660-669.
Institute of Medicine. 1996. Nursing Staffing in Hospitals and Nursing Homes: is it
        Adequate? (National Academy Press, Washington, DC).
Institute of Medicine 2001. Improving the Quality of Long-term Care. (National
        Academy Press: Washington, DC).
Jensen, G.A. and M.A. Morrisey. 1986. “The Role of Physicians in Hospital
        Production.” Review of Economics and Statistics, 68: 432-442.
Kane, R; J. Ouslander and I. Abrass. 1989. Essentials of Clinical Geriatrics. (2nd ed.).
        (McGraw-Hill, New York).
Kemper, P. and C.M. Murtaugh. 1991. “Lifetime Use of Nursing Home Care.” New
        England Journal of Medicine, 324(9): 595-600.
Machin, S, A. Manning, and L. Rahman. 2002. “Where the Minimum Wage Bites Hard:
        The Introduction of the UK National Minimum Wage to a Low Wage Sector.”
        Unpublished manuscript, London School of Economics.
McClellan, M., B.J. McNeill, and J.P. Newhouse. 1994. “Does More Intensive
        Treatment of Myocardial Infarction in the Elderly Reduce Mortality?” Journal of
        the American Medical Association, 272(11): 859-866.
Mendelson, D., R. Ramchand, R. Abramson, and A. Tumlinson. 2002. “Prescription
        Drugs in Nursing Homes: Managing Costs and Quality in a Complex
        Environment.” National Health Policy Forum Issue Brief #784.
Mitchell, S.L., J.L. Buchanan, S. Littlehale, and M.B. Hamel. 2003. “Tube-Feeding
        Versus Hand-Feeding Nursing Home Residents with Advanced Dementia: A Cost
        Comparison.” Journal of the American Medical Directors Association, 4(1):27-
        33
Morrisey, M.A. and G.A. Jensen. 1990. “Hospital Demand for Physicians.” Quarterly
        Review of Economics and Business, 30: 16-39.
Moulton, B.R. 1990. “An Illustration of a Pitfall in Estimating the Effects of Aggregate
        Variables in Micro Units.” Review of Economics and Statistics, 72(2): 334-338.
Munroe, D.J. 1990. “The influence of registered nurse staffing on the quality of nursing
        home care.” Research in Nursing & Health. 13(4): 263-270.
National Center for Health Statistics, Centers for Disease Control. 2002. National
        Nursing Home Survey. World wide web content.
National Center for Health Statistics. 2003. “Health, United States, 2003: with
        Chartbook on Trends in the Health of Americans.” (Hyattsville, MD: National
        Center for Health Statistics).
Nicholson, W. 2002. Microeconomic Theory. Eighth Edition (Mason, OH: South-
        Western).
Norton, E.C. 2000. “Long-Term Care.” In: Cuyler, A.J., Newhouse J.P. (Eds.). Handbook
        of Health Economics, Volume 1. Elsevier Science, Amsterdam, pp. 955-994.
Okunade, A.A. 2003. “Are Factor Substitutions in HMO Industry Operations Cost
        Saving?” Southern Economic Journal, 69(4): 800-821.
Okunade, A.A. 1999. “Will the Real Elasticity of Substitution ‘in Norwegian Dentistry’
        Please Stand Up?” Health Economics, 8: 221-232.




                                          30
Okunade, A.A. 1993. “Production Cost Structure of US Hospital Pharmacies: Time-
        Series, Cross-Sectional Bed Size Evidence.” Journal of Applied Econometrics, 8:
        277-294.
Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act. 1987. Pub. L. No. 100-203, Subtitle C: Nursing
        Home Reform.
Philpot, G. 1970. “Labor Quality, Returns to Scale, and the Elasticity of Factor
        Substitution.” Review of Economics and Statistics, 52(2): 194-199.
Sargan, J. D. 1958. “The Estimation of Economic Relationships Using Instrumental
        Variables.” Econometrica, 26: 393-415.
Spillman, B.C. and J. Lubitz. 2002. “New Estimates of Lifetime Nursing Home Use:
        Have Patterns of Use Changed?” Medical Care, 40(10): 965-975.
Staiger, D., Stock, J.H. 1997. “Instrumental variables regression with weak instruments.”
        Econometrica 65(3), 557-586.
Stock, J.H. and M. Yogo. 2002, “Testing for Weak Instruments in Linear IV Regression.”
        NBER Working Paper, No. t0284.
Strahan, G.W. 1997. An overview of nursing homes and their current residents: data
        from the 1995 national nursing home survey, Advance Data. Number 280,
        National Center for Health Statistics, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention,
        U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.
Weisbrod, B.A. 1988, The Nonprofit Economy, (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
        Press).
Weisbrod, B.A. 1998. “Institutional Form and Organizational Behavior.” In Private
        Action and the Public Good, Walter W. Powell and Elizabeth S. Clemens
        (editors). (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press).
Zinn, J.S. 1993. “The Influence of Nursing Wage Differentials on Nursing Home
        Staffing and Resident Care Decisions.” The Gerontologist, 33 (6): 721-729.




                                           31
               Figure 1: Cost-Minimization by Firms in the Short Run




Materials per period


                               B
   M2



   M3             C
                                               A
   M1
                                                                  q1




                                                      q2

             L3           L2              L1
                                                   Labor per period




                                     32
               Table 1: Summary Statistics of OSCAR data (N=121,627)

                      Variable                          Mean        S.D.       Min         Max
Nurse Aides Hours per Resident Day                       2.15       1.47         0          24
Professional Nurse Hours per Resident Day                1.22       1.22         0          16
% Residents with Catheter                                0.083      0.089     0.0001      0.9999
% Residents with Feeding Tube                            0.061      0.080     0.0001      0.9999
% Residents with Restraints                              0.18       0.16      0.0001      0.9999
% Residents with Psychoactive Drugs                      0.38       0.18      0.0001      0.9999
% Residents with Pressure Ulcers                         0.072      0.068     0.0001      0.9999
Average Hourly Wage of SIC 805 in State ($1998)          8.19       1.47       5.24       13.48
For-profit                                               0.67       0.47         0           1
Non-profit                                               0.27       0.44         0           1
Number of Beds                                          107.67      78.20        1        9,309
Hospital-Based                                           0.11       0.31         0           1
Chain                                                    0.51       0.50         0           1
ADL Index                                                3.81       0.61         0           5
Herfindahl Index                                         0.21       0.24         0           1
Per Capita Income ($1998)
                                                       23,062.55   5,887.44   6,225.60   72,194.00
Elderly (65+) Per Square Mile                           137.45      421.99      0.03     7,036.11
Average State Medicaid Payment Rate ($1998)              86.06       20.83      50.53     163.10
Producer Price Index – Pharmaceuticals                  269.12       8.41      260.06     290.10
Producer Price Index – Plastics & Rubber                154.70       8.53      139.20     170.06
Effective Minimum Wage ($1998)                           4.95        0.25       4.55        6.00
Average Hourly Wage of SIC 53 in State ($1998)           7.57        0.98       5.10       12.26
Year                                                    1994.53      2.26       1991       1998




                                                  33
                       Table 2: Evidence of Factor Substitution
             Nursing Home Wage Coefficients, (standard errors), and elasticities
                                     N=121,627

                 Dependent Variable                      1                         2
                                                  Ordinary Least            Instrumental
                                                     Squares                  Variables
              NAs Per Resident Day                   -0.0168*                   -0.031
                                                     (0.0086)                  (0.019)
                                                     ε= -.065                  ε= -.118

              RNs and LPNs per                         -0.0046                -0.048***
              Resident Day                             (0.0061)                (0.010)
                                                       ε= -.031                ε= -.322

              Catheters                              -0.0445***                 -0.025
                                                       (0.0114)                (0.018)
                                                       ε= -.338                ε= -.188

              Feeding Tubes                             0.026                    0.019
                                                       (0.023)                  (0.041)
                                                       ε= .200                  ε= .146

              Physical Restraints                     0.069***                 0.135**
                                                       (0.023)                 (0.055)
                                                       ε= .463                 ε= .873

              Psychoactive Drugs                        -0.011                  0.0040
                                                       (0.012)                 (0.0245)
                                                       ε= -.056                 ε= .020

              Pressure Ulcers                         0.059***                 0.085***
                                                       (0.012)                  (0.021)
                                                       ε= .448                  ε= .646

Notes:
1) * = statistically significant at 10% level; ** = statistically significant at the 5% level;
*** = statistically significant at the 1% level.
2) Standard errors are bootstrapped, with clustering by state-quarter. From each bootstrapped sample, the
regression is estimated with standard errors cluster-corrected at the nursing home level.
3) The other regressors in each regression are: number of beds, Herfindahl Index for the nursing home
market, an index of the number of Activities of Daily Living with which residents need assistance, real
county per capita income, number of elderly residents in county per square mile, the real state-level
Medicaid payment rate, the producer price index for pharmaceuticals, the producer price index for plastics
& rubber, year, and indicator variables for whether the nursing home is non-profit, part of a chain, or based
in a hospital.




                                                     34
                     Appendix Table 1: First Stage of IV Estimation
                Dependent Variable: Wage of Nursing Home Workers ($1998)

                                 Regressor                               Coefficient and
                                                                          (t Statistic)
            Effective Minimum Wage ($1998)                                     0.28
                                                                              (3.06)
            General Merchandise Store Wage ($1998)                             0.42
                                                                             (18.45)
            For-profit                                                       -0.018
                                                                             (-0.93)
            Non-profit                                                       -0.062
                                                                             (-4.43)
            Nursing home beds                                              0.000066
                                                                              (1.29)
            Hospital-Based                                                    0.033
                                                                              (2.09)
            Chain                                                             0.020
                                                                              (2.17)
            Average ADLs                                                      0.011
                                                                              (0.87)
            Herfindahl Index                                                  -0.25
                                                                             (-6.13)
            Per capita income ($1998)                                      0.000021
                                                                             (12.56)
            Population Age 65+ per square mile                              -0.00005
                                                                             (-2.92)
            Medicaid rate ($1998)                                             0.052
                                                                             (48.63)
            Year trend                                                        0.040
                                                                              (3.92)
            PPI for Pharmaceuticals                                           0.003
                                                                              (0.70)
            PPI for Plastics                                                 0.0086
                                                                              (2.59)
            Constant                                                         -82.78
                                                                             (-4.18)
            R2                                                                  0.85
            ∆R2 associated with the instruments                                 0.06
            F-statistic of instruments                                        185.05
            Number of observations                                            121,627
Notes:
    1) Regressions are weighted by the total number of residents in each facility.
    2) T statistics reflect standard errors Huber-White adjusted for correlation in the error terms within
       state and quarter.



                                                    35
                                   Appendix Table 2:
                    Comparison of Observables by Value of Instrument

                                                                                 Manufacturing
                                             Minimum Wage Rate                     Wage Rate
                                             Below-    Above-                   Below-   Above-
             Variable                        Average   Average                  Average Average
Nursing Home Wage Rate                          8.24            8.64**             7.77         8.99**

                                       Explanatory Variables

For-profit                                     0.68             0.67**              0.66       0.69**
Non-profit                                     0.25             0.26**              0.26       0.25**
Number of Beds                                150.73            151.32            142.16      159.23**
Hospital-Based                                 0.055             0.055             0.055        0.055
Chain                                          0.50              0.50              0.53         0.48**
ADL Index                                       3.86            3.76**              3.83       3.82**
Herfindahl Index                               0.19             0.18**              0.23       0.14**
Per Capita Income                             23,235           24,709**           22,299      25,249**
Elderly per sq mile                           221.19           207.72**           116.25      309.17**
State Medicaid Payment Rate                    87.93            91.51**            84.45       93.96**
PPI – Pharmaceuticals                         268.03           270.55**           268.64      269.40**
PPI – Plastics & Rubber                       155.40           153.82**           155.02      154.54**

                                               Outcomes

Nurse Aides Hours                              2.03            2.00**             2.04         2.00**
Professional Nurse Hours                       0.97            0.99**             0.98          0.98*
% with Catheter                                0.077           0.072**            0.076         0.74**
% with Feeding Tube                            0.062            0.062             0.061        0.063**
% with Restraints                               0.21            0.16**            0.19         0.19**
% with Psychoactive Drugs                       0.37            0.40**            0.38         0.38**
% with Bedsores                                0.070           0.067**            0.066        0.072**
Number of observations                        72,786           48,841             61,447       60,180

Notes:
1) The means are weighted by the total number of residents in each facility.
   *                                                               **
2) = Difference in means is statistically significant at 5% level; = Difference in means is statistically
significant at 1% level




                                                   36
