                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          WHAT DETERMINES CORRUPTION?
                     INTERNATIONAL EVIDENCE FROM MICRO DATA

                                              Naci Mocan

                                         Working Paper 10460
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w10460


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       April 2004




I thank Norovsambuu Tumennasan for excellent research assistance, and Murat Iyigun, Patrick Emerson and
Erdal Tekin for helpful comments.The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and not necessarily
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2004 by Naci Mocan. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
What Determines Corruption? International Evidence from Micro Data
Naci Mocan
NBER Working Paper No. 10460
April 2004
JEL No. H1, K4, O1
                                       ABSTRACT

        This paper utilizes a micro-level data set from 49 countries to address three issues: What
determines corruption at the individual level? What determines the perception of the extent of
corruption in the country? Does corruption have a direct impact on growth when the quality of the
institutions are controlled for? In addition, the paper creates a direct measure of corruption which
portrays the extent of corruption as revealed byindividuals who live in those countries.

        The results show that both personal and country characteristics determine the risk of
exposure to bribery. Examples are gender, wealth, education, marital status, the city size, the legal
origin of the country, the existence of uninterrupted democracy, a war between 1960s and 1980s,
and the strength of the institutions in the country (measured by the risk of expropriation).

        The second part of the paper shows that controlling for endogeneity of corruption and
institutional quality, actual corruption in the country and the proportion of the bribes asked by
various government agencies have no direct impact on corruption perception. On the other hand, an
improvement in the quality of institutions lowers the perception of corruption.

        The final section of the paper shows that controlling for the quality of the institutions,
corruption does not have a direct impact on growth. Keeping constant the geographical location of
the country, the legal origin, religious composition, the presence of a war, the federal status, initial
education and income as well as the extent of corruption in the country, a one-half standard
deviation increase in the quality of institutions (e.g. from the level of Indonesia to the level of India),
generates an additional 0.7 percentage point increase in the average annual per capita GDP growth.

Naci Mocan
Department of Economics
University of Colorado
Campus Box 181; P.O. Box 173364
Denver, CO 80217-3364
and NBER
naci.mocan@cudenver.edu
                             WHAT DETERMINES CORRUPTION?
                       INTERNATIONAL EVIDENCE FROM MICRO DATA


I. Introduction

          Because an increase in perceived corruption in a country is thought to be associated with

a slower rate of economic growth (Mauro 1995), a sizable literature has emerged recently to

examine factors that impact the level of corruption across countries. For example, Ades and Di

Tella (1999) found that corruption is higher in countries where domestic firms are sheltered from

foreign competition. Graeff and Mehlkop (2003) documented the relationship between a

country’s economic freedom and its level of corruption. Brunetti and Weder (2003) found that a

higher freedom of the press is associated with less corruption. Van Rijckeghem and Weder

(2001) showed that the higher the ratio of government wages to manufacturing wages, the lower

is corruption in a country.1

          The current research on corruption has two common characteristics. First, it exclusively

relies on subjective measures of corruption. Specifically, it employs various indexes of

corruption perception, based on the surveys of international business people, expatriates, risk

analysts, and local residents. The use of a corruption perception index is justified because the

actual level of corruption in a country is difficult to observe. Certain potential measures of

corruption, such as the number of prosecuted corruption-related cases in a country, may be rather

noisy measures. For example, a low arrest rate for bribery may indicate a low prevalence of

corruption or it may indicate wide-spread corruption with no prevention efforts.

          Second, because corruption data are available only at the aggregate (country) level,

existing research has focused on explaining the cross-country variation in corruption. Two


1
    Research on the consequences of corruption is more limited. An example is Alesina and Weder (2002),



                                                    1
exceptions are Swamy et al. (2001) and Svensson (2003). Swamy et al. (2001) used micro data

where respondents answered questions on hypothetical situations regarding corruption. In the

same paper, they analyzed the responses of 350 managers from the former Soviet Republic of

Georgia to a question on the frequency of an official requesting unofficial payments. Svensson

(2003) analyzed the bribery behavior of 176 firms in Uganda.

       This paper analyzes information obtained from over 90,000 individuals from 49 countries

pertaining to their direct experiences with corruption. Specifically, the individuals are asked

whether any government official such as a government worker, police officer, or inspector in that

country has asked them or expected them to pay a bribe for his services during the previous year.

Using these micro data the paper looks at four issues. First, it investigates the determinants of

the probability of being asked for a bribe. Following the theoretical arguments put forth by

Treisman (2002), this probability is explained by a number of country characteristics. In

addition, personal characteristics of the individuals are controlled for as they are expected to

impact the exposure to corruption through the mechanisms discussed in Section II below. The

results show that the characteristics of an individual influence his/her propensity of exposure to

bribery. For example, males, individuals with higher income and education are more likely to be

asked for a bribe. Country characteristics also influence exposure to bribery. For example, an

increase in the quality of the institutions in the country and the existence of uninterrupted

democracy are associated with reduced corruption propensity.

       Second, using these micro data, an aggregate (country level) corruption index is created,

which is the weighted proportion of individuals who were asked for a bribe in the country. This

index is a direct indicator of the breadth of corruption. Put differently, it measures how wide-

spread corruption is in the country. This measure of corruption is compared to four widely-used




                                                  2
 corruption perception indices generated by Transparency International, World Bank, Business

International and International Country Risk Guide.

        Third, exploiting the detail of the micro data, the proportion of bribes asked for by

various players, such as government officials, police officers, customs’ officers, inspectors and

other officials is calculated. The relationship between corruption perception indexes and these

various sources of corruption is analyzed, which demonstrates that the extent of corruption in

government offices and the police have significant impacts on perceived corruption about the

country.   However, when the quality of the institutions (measured by the risk of expropriation)

in the country is controlled for, the association between actual corruption in the country and the

corruption perception about the country disappears. Instead, the quality of institutions are

significant determinants of corruption perception about the country.

        Finally, the paper shows that for the countries in this data set, per capita income growth

between 1975 and 1995 is influenced by the quality of the institutions of the country; but keeping

constant the quality of the institutions, the extent of corruption does not exert a statistically

significant impact on economic growth. This result is in contrast to earlier studies which

suggested the existence of a direct negative impact of corruption on economic development.



II. What Determines Corruption? Theoretical Considerations

Macro-level

        Treisman (2000) details a number of hypotheses that link the level of corruption in the

country to its legal, political and socio-economic characteristics. Following his discussion and

the literature he cites, it is postulated that at the macro level the following holds:

(1) CORj=f1(Lj, Cj, Econj),




                                                   3
where the extent of corruption in country j (CORj) depends on Legal (L) and Cultural (C)

attributes of the country, as well as the level of economic development of the country (Econ).

Economic development, on the other hand, is argued to be negatively impacted by the extent of

corruption in the country (Mauro 1995). To incorporate this connection, consider Equation (2)

where corruption is postulated to have a direct impact on economic development.

(2) Econj=f2(CORj, Kj, Cj, Hj ,Lj).

    Acemoglu, Johnson and Robinson (2001) demonstrate that the quality of institutions in the

country, such as secure property rights, has a direct impact on development. Thus, in Equation

(2) K represents the institutional characteristics of the country. H stands for standard human

capital measures that impact economic development, such as the level of education in the

country.

    Substituting Equation (2) into (1) generates the macro-level reduced form

(3) CORj=f3(Lj, Cj, Hj, Kj).



Micro-level

    At the micro level a number of formulations can be developed to demonstrate the

determinants of corruption. Examples are Kaufmann and Wei (1999), Ades and Di Tella (1999),

Van Rijckeghem and Weder (2001). Similarly, one can consider that the utility of the bribe-

receiving government official depends on composite consumption good, the number of bribes he

receives, and the quality of the institutions in the country. Consumption is determined by the sum

of earned legal income and illegal income (the unit price of each bribe multiplied by quantity of

bribes). An increase in the income of the target victim increases the unit price of each bribe, and

an increase in the quality of institutions in the country lowers it, perhaps by increasing the




                                                  4
 probability of apprehension. In this framework, it is easy to show that an increase in the

income of the potential victim would increase the propensity to ask for a bribe. Alternatively, an

increase in the quality of the institutions in the country, which would increase probability of

apprehension, would in turn reduce the propensity to ask for a bribe.

    Within this framework I estimate

(4) CORij=f (Xij, Lj, Cj, Hj, Kj),

where CORij is the propensity of the ith individual who lives in country j to be a victim of

corruption, Xij represents personal characteristics of the individual, and Lj, Cj, Kj, and Hj are the

characteristics of the country as described above. The theoretical and empirical research have

identified viable candidates of X, L, C, H and K, which are described below.



Individual-specific Explanatory Variables

       The propensity for being targeted for a bribe is assumed to depend on the following

individual characteristics. Age, marital status, labor market activity, wealth, education, gender

and the location of the residence. Because the dependent variable is essentially a measure of

“exposure to bribery,” individuals in certain age, wealth and labor market categories may be at a

higher risk of being asked for a bribe. For example, all else the same, highly-educated and

wealthy individuals should have higher exposure to being asked for a bribe by a government

official because of their higher earning capacity. The opposite should be true for people who are

not active in the labor market, such as the very young and old, as they may have less contact with

government officials in comparison to prime-age individuals. Males are expected to be more

frequent targets of bribery for a number of reasons. First, in most countries males are more

active than females in the labor market for various reasons, and therefore they have more




                                                  5
exposure to government officials. Second, all else the same, males have a higher propensity to

engage in criminal activity or to have tolerance for illegal activity (Mocan and Rees 1999,

Swamy et al. 2001).

       In larger cities the extent of bribery may be higher both because economic activity may

be larger and more varied in scope which may increase the contact with the government, and also

the relationship between individuals and government officials may be less personal in larger

cities in comparison to smaller ones, which may make it easier to ask for a bribe.



Legal, Political and Cultural Country Characteristics

       Following La Porta et al. (1998) and Treisman (2000), I include variables that measure

the structure of the existing legal system in the country. More specifically, La Porta et al. (1998)

argue that the common law system developed in England in the 17th century has been shaped by

the parliament and aristocracy at the expense of the crown and it is intended to limit the power of

the sovereign. As a consequence, British common law puts emphasis on individuals’ private and

property rights, and it intends to limit, rather than strengthen, the power of the state (David and

Brierley 1978, Finer 1997, La Porta et al., 1998). In comparison, French civil law, Scandinavian

civil law and German civil law are designed as instruments of the state to expand its power; and

socialist law is a manifestation of the state’s intent to create institutions to maintain power and

extract resources without much regard for protecting economic interests (La Porta et al. 1998).

Thus, individuals in countries with British legal origin are expected to face a lower propensity of

corruption.

       As discussed in Acemoğlu, Johnson and Robinson (2001), an argument dating back to

Max Weber points to religion as a determinant of economic performance. Treisman (2000)




                                                  6
argues that religion may have a direct impact on corruption through two avenues. First, religion

is a major part of culture, and in countries with hierarchical religions such as Catholicism,

Eastern Orthodoxy and Islam, it may be culturally more difficult to challenge the authority of

office-holders in comparison to cultures with more individualistic or egalitarian religions such as

Protestantism. Second, as argued by Treisman (2000), in religions such as Protestantism, which

emerged as a reaction to a state-sponsored religion, there may be stronger emphasis on

monitoring potential abuses of state officials. By contrast, in more traditional religions such as

Islam or Catholicism, such a check-and-balance role may be absent.

       The impact of centralized versus de-centralized governmental structure on the level of

corruption is unclear. There exist various theories that predict detrimental effects of both. For

example, it is argued that the existence of a federal system leads to a more honest government

because it promotes competition between various jurisdictions (Weingast 1995). Alternatively, it

is hypothesized that a federal structure may lead to more corruption because in that system there

are fewer centralized forces to enforce honesty, and the level of interaction between potential

corrupters and government officials is greater at the local level (Tanzi 1995). To investigate this

impact of the structure of the government, I control whether the country has a federal system of

government.



Institutional and Political Characteristics

       Higher quality institutions are expected to reduce the incidence of corruption. Along the

same lines, interrupted democracy in the country and involvement in a war in recent history may

have destabilizing effects, and therefore they may propagate the incidence of corruption.




                                                 7
        A large government creates more occasions for individuals to interact with government

workers, increasing the exposure to corruption. To control for the effect, I add a variable which

is the share of government in per capita gross domestic product.

       The quality of the institutions of the country can be measured in a number of ways such

as the independence of the judicial system and the protection of civil liberties. Following

Acemoğlu, Johnson and Robinson (2001), I use the risk of expropriation in the country (the risk

of confiscation and forced nationalization of property) as a measure of the quality of the

institutions. The structure of institutions is likely to change over the course of development; that

is, the protection of property rights might get stronger as the country develops economically.

Acemoglu Johnson and Robinson (2001) contol for the endogeneity of institutions by using the

settler mortality rates in ex-colonies as instruments. As explained in section IV below,

institutional quality and other potentially endogenous variables are instrumented by geographic

indicators as employed by McArthur and Sachs (2001).



Other Country Characteristics

        Ades and Di Tella (1999) indicate that countries with large endowments of raw materials

are more susceptible to corruption because such resources create opportunities for the officials to

exploit the associated rents, and this behavior may have spillover effects to other segments of the

society. Thus, I control for the richness of oil, iron, gold and zinc reserves in the country. The

level of education in the country is an aggregate measure of the human capital, and it is expected

to be negatively related to the incidence of corruption as a more educated population is expected

to be less tolerant of corruption. The population of the country and the percentage of young

people in the population, and male unemployment rate are additional country characteristics




                                                 8
 included. If increased unemployment is due to a cyclical downturn, it may capture a temporary

decrease in income of the target population and therefore may reduce the size of a bribe, as well

as frequency with which it is asked for. On the other hand, if high unemployment is an

indication of structurally high joblessness, and if this is correlated with low income for

government workers, unemployment may be positively correlated with the incidence of

corruption.

          Swamy et al. (2001) and Dollar, Fisman and Gatti (2001) use country-level data and

show that corruption is less severe in countries where women hold a larger share of

parliamentary seats. It is hypothesized that an increase in the proportion of seats held by women

in the parliament may have a detrimental impact on corruption through women’s influence on

executive and judicial branch appointments and through being anti-corruption role models.

Thus, I also investigate the impact of a change in the percentage of seats occupied by women in

the parliament on individuals’ risk of corruption.



III.      Corruption Data

       The data are compiled from a number of sources. The corruption data and the corresponding

characteristics of the individuals are obtained from the International Crime Victim Survey

compiled by the United Nations Inter-regional Crime and Justice Research Institute

(http://www.unicri.it/icvs). Table 1 presents the list of countries included in the analysis. The

data are collected through face-to-face and telephone interviews. The corruption measure for

each individual is the answer to the question: “In some areas, there is a problem of corruption

among government or public officials. During [the past year] has any government official, for




                                                 9
instance a customs officer, police officer or inspector in your own country, asked you or

expected you to pay a bribe for his services?”

       Table 1 also displays the number of individuals surveyed in each country, the year of

their bribery experience (which is the year before the survey is administered), and the gender-

specific means of the dichotomous variable “corruption”, which is coded as 1 if the respondent

indicated that he/she was asked for a bribe by a government official. As can be seen from the

table, females are asked for a bribe less frequently than males in almost every country.

   The third column of Table 1 displays country averages, which are weighted means of the

corruption question. Corruption is highest in Indonesia, where 31 percent of the citizens

indicated that they were asked for a bribe. The extent of corruption, measured this way, is 29

percent in Argentina, 26 percent in Bolivia, 24 percent in Uganda, and 21 percent in India and

Kyrgyz Republic. Western European countries have low corruption rates, generally less than 0.5

percent; and corruption is practically zero in Japan.

   There exist four widely-used aggregate corruption perception indexes. They are the

measures created by Transparency International (TI)

(http://www.transparcency.org/surveys/index.html), by the World Bank Researchers

(http://www.worldbank.org/wbi/governance/govdata2002/), by Business International (BI)

(Mauro 1995), and by International Country Risk Guide (ICRG) (Fishman and Gatti 2002). The

TI index ranges from 1 to 10, the WB index ranges from –2.5 to 2.5, the BI index ranges from 1

to 10, and the ICRG ranges from 1 to 6, where a higher value represents a lower degree of

perceived corruption. Simple correlations between these corruption perception indexes are high,

ranging from 0.71 to 0.96.




                                                 10
     There are two dimensions of corruption: how widespread it is in the country (breadth) and

the size of each bribe (depth). The depth of bribery is likely to vary between government

agencies. The amount of bribe asked by a licensing office will be different from the amount of

bribe asked by a custom’s officer. It also depends on whether bribe involves theft (Schleifer and

Vishny 1993).      The four corruption indexes which are used in previous literature are measures

of corruption perception. Therefore it is unclear whether they capture the beliefs about the depth

or breath of corruption, or whether and they are mixtures of both. In contrast, the index used in

this paper is a measure of the breath of corruption in the country.

     Figures 1-5 display the corruption measure created from the data set used in this paper

(Average Overall Corruption of Table 1) along with the four subjective corruption perception

indexes, where the corruption perception indexes are reversed such that higher values represent

higher levels of corruption. For each country, the data are merged with corruption perception

indexes by year. For example, as can be seen in Table 1, France is surveyed twice, and

individuals are asked about their corruption experiences for the years 1995 and 1999. The TI

index is available for both of these years. Therefore, average corruption in France in 1995

(0.007) is matched with the corresponding value of the TI index in 1995, and average corruption

in France in 1999 (0.0125) is matched with the value of the TI index for France in 1999. Thus,

some countries contribute more than one observation in Figures 1-5.2 The World Bank

corruption index is created for the years 1996, 1998, 2000 and 2002 (Kaufmann, Krayy and

Mastruzzi 2003). Therefore, the closest year of the World Bank index is matched with our data.

For example, for countries where corruption activity pertains to 1995 in our data, the World




2
    These countries are the U.K., Netherlands, Finland, Sweden, France, United States, Canada and Poland.



                                                       11
Bank index of 1996 is used. The match is less accurate for the BI and ICRG perception indexes

as these indexes cover the intervals 1980-83, and 1982-90, respectively (see Mauro 1995, and

Fisman and Gatti 2002).

    The curves in Figures 1-4 are the predicted values of regressions of perceived corruption

indexes on the percentage of individuals who are asked for a bribe (displayed on the horizontal

axes). In all cases a non-linear relationship is visible, which is especially pronounced in the case

of TI and WB indexes. Regressions with quadratic terms of corruption provided better fits. For

example, in the regression with TI perception index as the dependent variable (Figure 1), the

adjusted-R2 was 0.77, and it was 0.59 without the quadratic term. In case of the regressions

involving the WB Corruption Perception index, the adjusted-R2 was 0.62 in the linear case, and

it was 0.80 in the quadratic case (Figure 2). This non-linearity is primarily due the fact that in a

small number of countries, such as Argentina, Bolivia and Indonesia, citizens have reported high

levels of corruption, but the external perception of corruption is relatively low in these cases.

For example, Figure 1 shows that in Argentina 29 percent of the people indicate that they were

asked for a bribe, while the perception of corruption based on the TI index does not fully reflect

this phenomenon.

   Figure 1 shows that a number of countries have very low levels of corruption, although their

perceived corruption seems disproportionately higher than warranted. To be able to

accommodate the patterns at the low- and high-end of the corruption spectrum, I fit a third-order

polynomial of corruption. The predicted values from this regression are plotted in Figure 1 as

the dotted curve, which are not much different from the ones provided by the quadratic

regression.




                                                 12
    In order to minimize the impact of outliers in a different way, robust regressions are

estimated, which produced very similar coefficient estimates and predicted values to those

obtained from quadratic OLS regression. The predicted values from robust regressions are

displayed in Figures 1-4 as dashed lines.

   Another way to address the nonlinearity is to run regressions on logarithmic scale. Figure 5

presents the data and the predicted values of the regression where the logarithm of the TI

corruption perception index is regressed on the logarithm of actual corruption. The point

estimate was 0.35 with a t-value of 10.6 (n=56, Adjusted R-square=0.67), suggesting that a 10

percent increase in the rate of bribery in the country increases the corruption perception of the

country by 3.5 percent. In the model with the BI index, the elasticity of perceived corruption

with respect to average corruption was 0.33 (t=5.25, Adjusted R-square=0.57). The elasticity

was 0.64 in the model with the WB perception index (t=4.26, Adjusted R-square=0.23), and 0.25

in case of the ICRG index (t=5.03, Adjusted R-square=0.43).

   Finally, multiple observations from some countries are dropped and regressions are re-

estimated. That is, for the six countries that are surveyed both in 1995 and 1999 (see Table 1 and

footnote 1), I dropped observations pertaining to 1999. In case of Poland, which is surveyed in

1991, 1995 and 1999, I dropped 1991 and 1999. Estimating the regressions without these eight

observations did not change the pictures depicted in Figures 1-5.



IV. Empirical Results


       Missing data pertaining to country-level variables (such as average education and

institutional quality) are a problem for some counties, especially for those in Central and Eastern

Europe. The countries with complete macro data are Indonesia, Philippines, Uganda, South



                                                 13
    Africa, Zimbabwe, Botswana, Brazil, Argentina, Bolivia, Paraguay, Colombia United Kingdom,

Netherlands, Switzerland, Belgium, France, Finland, Spain, Sweden, Austria, Portugal,

Denmark, United States, Canada, Australia, Poland, Hungary, Japan, and India.3 Table 2

displays the definitions and the descriptive statistics of the explanatory variables along with their

sources. The descriptive statistics pertain to 54,209 individuals from the 29 countries mentioned

above with no missing personal or country-level information. This is the data set used in micro-

level empirical analyses in this section.

          Columns I and II of Table 3 present the results of the estimated probit model, where the

dependent variable is one if the respondent indicated that he/she was asked for a bribe in that

year, and zero otherwise. The model includes time dummies to control for the impact of the year

in which the survey is given. The regressions are weighted and the standard errors are adjusted

to account for the fact that the unit of observation is the individual, but country-specific variables

vary at the country and not at the individual level. Columns (I) and (II) report the estimated

coefficients and their standard errors where all the right-hand-side variables are considered

exogenous. Adding a dichotomous variable to distinguish between face-to-face and phone

interviews did not have any impact on the results, and the variable itself was not significant.

          The model contains an extensive number of variables to control for cultural

characteristics of the country which may be correlated with both corruption propensity and

women in the parliament, institutional quality and democracy. Examples are the religious make-


3
  In case of India, there was one missing variable, which was the male unemployment rate for the year
1995. Unemployment rate was not reported for India by the World Bank, World Development Report,
which is the data source other countries’ unemployment rate data. For not to lose the 1,193 observations
from India, I used the 7.0 percent unemployment rate in 1995 for this country, reported by Planning
Commission, Government of India, “9-th Five Year Plan”
http://planningcommis sion.nic.in/plans/planrel/fiveyr/default.html




                                                   14
 up of the country, the population size and structure, and the legal origin of the country.

However, if democracy, expropriation risk, women in the parliament, and the share of the

government in per capita GDP are correlated with some omitted cultural factors which also

influence corruption, the estimates may be biased. Therefore, I also estimate the model with

instrumental variable probit, where democracy, expropriation risk, the percentage of women in

the parliament, and government’s share of GDP are considered as endogenous variables, which

are instrumented by the life expectancy in the country, the extent of enthnolinguistic

fragmentation of the country, and geographical attributes of the country, measured by the

absolute latitude of the country, average temperature and whether the country is landlocked. The

descriptive statistics of these variables are reported in Table 2.

       The geographical characteristics of the country are exogenous, and McArthur and Sachs

(2001) argue that they are appropriate instruments for institutions and other determinants of

economic growth. Life expectancy at birth and the degree of ethnolinguistic fragmentation of

the country change only slowly over time. These variables may capture aspects of the culture

which may be correlated with institutions, democracy and women’s involvement in politics, but

they themselves are not expected to be influenced by corruption. The results of the instrumental

variable probit are reported in columns (III) and (IV) of Table 3. The point estimates are very

similar between columns (I) and (III), but for the most part the coefficients are estimated with

more precision when democracy, low expropriation risk, women in parliament and share of

government are considered endogenous.




                                                  15
The Impact of Personal Characteristics

       The results, reported in Table 3, show that individuals who live in smaller cities face a

lower propensity of being asked for a bribe. Males are more likely to be asked for a bribe.

Wealthier individuals (those who are in the top 50 percent of the income distribution in the

country) are more likely to engage in corruption. Similarly, individuals who are more educated

are more likely to be targeted for bribes. These results are consistent with theoretical predictions

discussed earlier in the paper, which indicate that more educated people who have higher

incomes may have more contact with the government, which exposes them to a higher risk of

being asked for a bribe.

       Individuals who are 20-to-39 years of age are more likely to be asked for a bribe in

comparison to those who are younger than 20. Individuals who are 60 years and older are less

likely to get involved in corruption. Single individuals are less likely to be asked for a bribe in

comparison to married individuals. These results may suggest that older (possibly retired)

individuals and those who are single may have to deal with government rules and regulations

less frequently.



Country Characteristics and Institutions

       Instrumental variable probit results show that the legal origin of the country has an

impact on corruption propensity. In countries with French legal origin the corruption propensity

is about 1.4 percentage points higher in comparison to countries with Scandinavian or Socialist

legal origins. German legal origin of the country increases the risk of corruption by14

percentage points. Following Acemoğlu, Johnson and Robinson (2001), the quality of the

institutions is measured by the risk of expropriation. Table 3 shows that in countries where the




                                                 16
risk of expropriation is lower (where the variable Low Expropriation Risk takes higher values)

the propensity to be asked for a bribe is lower. An improvement of expropriation risk by one

standard deviation generates about a one-percentage point decrease in the propensity to be asked

for a bribe. Given that the sample mean of corruption is 4.1 percent, this translates into a 24

percent decline, which is substantial.

       If the country had uninterrupted democracy between 1950 and 1995, the risk of being a

victim of bribery is about 1 percentage point lower. A federal government structure is also

associated with about 1 percentage point reduction in corruption propensity. Having experienced

a war in1960s to 1980s increases the risk of corruption by one percentage point.

       Individuals who live in more populous countries face a higher propensity of corruption.

More specifically, an increase in the country’s population by one million is associated with an

increase in the propensity to be asked for a bribe by 0.01 percentage points. A one percentage

point increase in the unemployment rate in the country increases the risk of corruption by 0.1

percentage points. Average education in the country and the percentage of women in parliament

have negative impacts on corruption risk, but they are statistically insignificant.



V. Is Perceived Corruption Related to the Source of Corruption?

         Aggregate corruption perception indicators used by previous research by and large

capture the sentiments of businesspeople and international organizations. Thus, they can be

considered measures of risk assessment for the relevant countries. In this section I investigate

whether the perceived extent of corruption is related to particular types of corruption incidence in

the country. More importantly, I also analyze whether the quality of institutions has a direct

influence on the corruption perception about the country, controlling for the source of corruption.




                                                 17
This is important for two reasons. First, this analysis will help us understand how perceptions

of corruption are formed. Second, if perceived corruption about a country hurts that country’s

economic development, it would be important to shed light into the question of how to alter the

perceived corruption about the country.

       In the survey used in this paper, there is a follow-up question that was asked to those who

indicated that they were asked for a bribe, which is posed as “[The last time somebody asked for

a bribe], what type of official was involved?” In some years of the survey, the alternatives were

government official, customs officer, police officer, inspector, and other. In some other years the

alternatives were government official, customs officer, police officer, inspector, elected

municipal councilors, municipal officials, tax/revenues officials, doctors/nurses,

teachers/professors, officials in courts, private sector, and other. This allows a classification of

the extent of bribery by type of recipient such as a government official, police officer, customs

officer, inspector, and other recipients. For each country, the weighted percentage of bribes

asked by each category is calculated.

       Table 4A displays regression results where the reversed-TI index is regressed on region

dummies (Central Europe, Mediterranean, etc.), legal origin dummies and variables that measure

the religious composition of the country. In these regressions the unit of observation is the

country, and the regressions are based on 43 observations.     Standard errors are adjusted for

clustering at the region level, and the models are estimated with instrumental variables, where

linear and quadratic measures of corruption indicators and expropriation index are instrumented

by average temperature of the country, absolute latitude of the country, whether the country is

landlocked, and the extent of ethnolinguistic fragmentation. The results displayed in Panel A

are from the regression where the rate of overall bribery (average corruption) is the indicator of




                                                  18
 corruption incidence. Column (I) of Table 4A demonstrates that an increase in average

corruption in the country generates an increase in perceived corruption about that country

measured by the TI index. A non-linear relationship was evident in a regression with no control

variables (which created Figure 1). Column (II) adds the quadratic corruption term to the

regression, but the existence of the control variables eliminates the statistical significance of the

quadratic term of corruption. On the other hand, the hypothesis that linear and quadratic terms

are jointly significant is rejected at the 1.6 percent level. The F-tests pertaining to this hypothesis

are reported for each regression.

       When Low Expropriation Risk is added to the model (column III) a different picture

emerges. Neither the expropriation nor the corruption variables are individually significant, and

the hypothesis that corruption variables are jointly zero cannot be rejected. When the

specification omits the quadratic corruption term, but keeps the Low Expropriation Risk

(column IV) the coefficient of the linear corruption term remains insignificant. Low

Expropriation Risk becomes borderline significant in this specification (p=0.15), and it is

significant in column (V) where corruption variables are omitted.

       Panel B presents the results of the model where average corruption is replaced by

government corruption. This variable is the weighted average of the proportion of the

individuals who indicated that the bribe was asked by a government or public official.

Similarly, Panel C presents the results from the model where TI corruption perception index is

regressed on the incidence of Police Corruption in the country, where Police Corruption is the

weighted percentage of the individuals who were asked for a bribe by a police officer, given that

a bribe was requested. The country averages of these corruption measures are listed at the

bottom of each panel. For example, in the 43 countries used in these regressions, 30.08 percent




                                                  19
of the time it was a government official who asked for a bribe, and 31.73 percent of the time the

perpetrator was a police officer.

         Columns (I) and (II) of Panels B and C indicate that increases in the extent of corruption

in government offices and within the police generate increases in the corruption perception of the

country as measured by the (reversed) TI index. However, when the measure of institutional

quality is added to the model, the significance of corruption variable disappears. Instead,

institutional quality (Low Expropriation Risk) becomes a significant determinant of corruption

perception. The same result is obtained in panels D, E and F where the TI corruption perception

index is explained by Customs Corruption, Inspector Corruption, and corruption among others,

respectively.

       The median estimate of the coefficient of Low Expropriation Risk within the panels of

Table 4A is about -1.7. This means that, a 10 percent decline in the risk of expropriation in the

country generates an improvement in the corruption perception of the country by 1.42 on the TI

scale, which is 56 % of a standard deviation.

       Table 4B presents the results of the same regressions as in Table 4A, with one difference:

the dependent variable is the reversed-World Bank corruption measure. The same pattern is

observed. That is, the quality of the institutions of the country, as measured by the risk of

expropriation, influences the corruption perception about the country; but holding constant the

quality of institutions, the extent of actual corruption has no direct impact on corruption

perception. The WB scale is narrower than the TI index, ranging from 0 to 3.38. The median

estimate of the impact of institutions within each panel is about -0.5, which means that a 10

percent decline in the risk of expropriation in the country generates an improvement in the




                                                 20
 corruption perception of the country by 0.42 on the WB scale, which is 40 % of a standard

deviation of the WB index.

       Same regressions were run for the BI and the ICRG indexes. These indexes were not

related to either bribery incidence in the country, or it components, or the quality of institutions.

       Given that the incidence of corruption is low in North America, Western Europe,

Australia and Japan, the corruption rates among government officials, police, inspectors and

other officials are calculated on small samples, and are therefore noisy. Measurement error in

these variables may be the cause for the lack of a statistically significant relationship between

corruption perception indexes and sources of corruption. To minimize measurement error in the

sources of corruption, the regressions are estimated by excluding Western European and

Mediterranean countries, the U.S., Canada, Australia and Japan. In case of the BI index,

regressions could not be run because most central European countries do not have an assigned

value for the BI index. In case of the TI and WB indexes the results were very similar to those

displayed in Tables 4A and 4B. Furthermore, although the sample sizes were smaller (21

countries), higher statistical significance is obtained, and in regressions that use the ICRG index,

the expropriation risk was highly significant.

       These results show that the perception of corruption formed about a country is influenced

by the quality level of the institutions of that country. Once the level of institutional quality is

controlled for, the extent of actual corruption in the country or the extent of corruption in various

government offices (police, customs, etc.) do not have a direct impact on corruption perception.

This suggests that the efforts to curb corruption can be focused on reforming the institutions of

the country to impact the corruption perception about the country.




                                                  21
VI. Growth and Corruption

       In this section I re-visit the corruption-growth relationship documented by Mauro (1995).

In light of the results of the previous sections, it is important to investigate whether previously

documented relationship between corruption and growth is a causal one. Given that institutional

quality impacts corruption as well as the perception of corruption about a country, and given the

evidence that institutions impact growth (Acemoğlu, Johnson and Robinson 2001), it is

conceivable that corruption-growth relationship is a correlation which emerges in models that do

not control for institutions. This is an important issue with significant policy implications. If

corruption has a direct causal impact on growth, efforts can be channeled on corruption control

and deterrence. On the other hand, if institutions have an impact on growth, then efforts should

be focused on institutional reforms.

       For each country in the data set the average annual growth in per capita GDP between

1975 and the year of the survey (typically 1995) is calculated. For the countries where the

survey is conducted in multiple years, the year closest to 1995 is chosen. For many Eastern

European countries GDP data are not available in 1975; thus such counties cannot be included in

this analysis. The average value of annual income growth in the sample of countries is 1.7

percent. The highest average annual growth during this two-decade period is in Botswana with

4.8 percent, and the two negative average annual growth rates are in South Africa and Bolivia,

with –0.2 percent and –0.055 percent, respectively.

        In addition to geographic location indicators, legal origin measures and religious

composition variables, the growth regressions include dichotomous variables to indicate the

presence of a war and federal structure of the country. Also included are average education in




                                                 22
    the country in 1975 as a measure of human capital at the beginning of the period where growth

is analyzed, and real per capita GDP in 1975 (Initial GDP).4 In order to investigate the direct

impact of corruption on growth net of the impact of the quality of institutions, the regressions

also include expropriation risk as a regressor.5 Regressions are estimated with instrumental

variables where the corruption and expropriation risk are instrumented by the absolute latitude of

the country, average temperature in the country, an indicator variable which takes the value of

one if the country is landlocked, and the extent of the ethnolinguistic fragmentation of the

country.

          Table 5 displays the result from five different regressions. In column (I), linear and

quadratic corruption measures are included along with Low Expropriation Risk. The coefficients

have predicted signs, where increased corruption has a detrimental effect on growth, and Low

Expropriation Risk increases growth. However, neither variable is statistically significant,

although all three are jointly significant with an F-value of 11.35 (p=0.007). The hypothesis that

corruption variables are jointly zero cannot be rejected (F=0.65, p=0.55). Column (II) presents

the results where economic growth is explained by linear and quadratic corruption variables, but

the expropriation risk is omitted from this specification. In this case, corruption variables are

jointly significant (F=22.2, p=0.002). Column (III) contains the results from the model where

only the linear corruption term is included, which shows that the estimated impact of corruption

is not statistically significant. In Column (IV) we see that reduced risk of expropriation has a

positive and statistically significant impact on growth when it is included to the model with no


4
   Education in 1975 was obtained from Barro and Lee (1996), and per capita income in 1975 was
obtained from Penn World Tables, version 6.1. The results did not change when I used average education
in 1970, 1965 or 1960; or primary, secondary and high school completion rates in 1975, 1970, 1965 or
1960.
5
  Thus, these regressions are based on Equation (2).



                                                   23
 corruption measures. Column (V) demonstrates that the corruption measure has no statistically

significant impact on growth when included along with low expropriation risk. In this

specification the expropriation risk variable is not statistically significant at conventional levels

with a p-value of 0.13.

       The regressions in Table 5 are based on 30 observations, which imply 10-12 degrees of

freedom. To increase the precision of the estimates, regressions with various alternative

specifications are estimated which are reported in Table 6. Column (I) of

Table 6 omits the region dummies. In column (II) both region indicators and legal origin

dummies are dropped. Column (III) presents the results from a regression which does not

include region, legal origin, war or federal government indicators. Finally, column (IV) displays

the results from a regression where only legal origin indicators are omitted. In all cases the

coefficient of corruption is insignificant and the point estimate is close to zero. The

expropriation risk, on the other hand, remains statistically significant with almost no change in

the point estimate.

       Table 7 performs the same exercise excluding developed economies. More specifically,

columns (I) to (III) display the results of regressions that use data from 19 countries in Central

Europe, Latin America, Asia, Africa and the Mediterranean. Columns (IV) to (VI) reports the

results based on the sample which excludes the Mediterranean countries and Japan in addition to

North America, Australia and Western Europe. Although the sample size gets smaller in these

regressions, the coefficient of Low Expropriation Risk remains statistically significant, and the

point estimate is around 0.009, which is similar to the one observed in Tables 5 and 6. The

coefficient of corruption, on the other hand, is never significant. Using the four corruption

perception indexes (TI, WB, BI and ICRG), instead of the corruption index employed in this




                                                  24
 paper, did not change the results. These indexes were not significant determinants of growth

even in the models which did not contain expropriation risk.

       In summary, the results displayed in Table 7 indicate that when included jointly with the

expropriation risk, corruption does not have a direct impact on economic growth. This suggests

that the effect of corruption on growth is because of the impact of institutions on corruption. Put

differently, weak institutions cause corruption and weak institutions impede economic growth,

but once the quality of institutions are controlled for, there is no direct impact of corruption on

growth.

       The point estimates in Tables 5-7 imply that a 1/2-standard deviation improvement in the

quality of institutions (0.81 units) generates an increase in the average annual per capita GDP

growth rate by about 0.7 percentage points. Another way to put this magnitude in perspective

would be to consider two otherwise similar countries with per capita incomes of $2,500 in 1975.

Assume that the first country’s level of institutional quality is one-half standard deviation below

that of the second country (which is akin to the case of Indonesia and India). Real per capita

income of the first country is expected to rise to $3,500 by 1995, while per capita income in the

country with one-percentage point less corruption would be about $4,000.



VII. Conclusion

       This paper utilizes a micro-level data set from 49 countries to address three issues: What

determines corruption at the individual level? What determines the perception of the extent of

corruption in the country? Does corruption have a direct impact on growth when the quality of

the institutions are controlled for?




                                                 25
        The paper portrays the extent of corruption as revealed by citizens who live in those

countries. Exposure to corruption is defined as having been asked for a bribe by a government

official, such as a government worker, customs officer, police officer, or inspector in that

country. The country-level corruption indicator created in this paper is the proportion of

individuals in a country who were asked for a bribe in a year. This is the first direct measure of

corruption created in this literature, which gauges how wide-spread corruption is in the country.

This measure is shown to be highly correlated with widely-used corruption perception indexes

such as the ones generated by Transparency International (TI), World Bank (WB), Business

International (BI), and International Country Risk Guide (ICRG). However, some countries,

such as Argentina and Indonesia seem to be outliers where the extent of bribery reported in these

data is more severe than the perceived corruption in those countries.

       The analysis of the determinants of corruption is done using 54,209 individuals from 29

countries who had no missing data on personal and country attributes. The regressions control

for the endogeneity of institutions, democracy, the proportion of women in the parliament, and

the government’s share of per capita GDP. The results show that both personal and country

characteristics determine the likelihood of being asked for a bribe. Males, wealthier and more

educated individuals are more likely to be asked for a bribe. The same is true for individuals

living in larger cities, and those who are not single.

       If the legal origin of the country is French or German, this is associated with a higher risk

of being asked for a bribe in comparison to British, Scandinavian or Socialist legal origins. If the

country had uninterrupted democracy between the years of 1960 and 1980, this reduces the risk

of being asked for a bribe one percentage point. If a war occurred in the country during the

1960s to 1980s, the risk of corruption is one percentage point higher.




                                                  26
        The strength of institutions in the country (as measured by low risk of expropriation) has

the benefit of reducing the extent of corruption in the country. If the risk of expropriation in the

country goes down by one standard deviation, this reduces the propensity of corruption by

almost one percentage point.

       The second part of the paper investigates how the perception of the extent of the

corruption in the country is formed. Country-level regressions are run where TI, WB, BI and

ICRG corruption perception indexes are regressed on a number of country characteristics, the

extent of actual corruption in the country (and its components, such as police corruption,

government corruption, etc.), as well as the institutional quality of the country.   Controlling for

endogeneity of corruption and institutional quality, it is shown that actual corruption in the

country and the proportion of the bribes asked by various government agencies have no direct

impact on corruption perception. On the other hand, an improvement in the quality of

institutions lowers the perception of corruption. Specifically, a 10 percent decline in the risk of

expropriation in the country generates an improvement in the corruption perception of the

country by about 60% of a standard deviation of the TI corruption perception index, and by 40%

standard deviation of the WB corruption perception index. These findings suggest that

concentrating efforts on reforming the institutions of the country will be an effective method to

influence the perceptions about the extent of corruption in the country.

       Earlier research has argued that corruption is negatively correlated with development

(Mauro 1995). Another line of research has demonstrated that weak institutions cause

macroeconomic volatility and slower economic growth (Acemoğlu, Johnson, and Robinson

2001; Acemoğlu, Johnson, Robinson and Thaicharoen 2003). Given the results in this paper

which show that institutions influence corruption, it is important to re-investigate the link




                                                 27
between corruption and growth in a model that accounts for the quality of institutions of the

country. This analysis in the final section of the paper shows that the strength of institutions in

the country (as measured by low risk of expropriation) improves the rate of economic growth in

the country. However, controlling for the quality of the institutions, corruption does not have a

direct impact on growth. It cannot be ruled out that this result is specific to the time period

analyzed (1975-1995) or to the countries in the data set. But it suggests that the documented

association between corruption and growth is likely due to the omitted influence of institutions

on corruption. Keeping constant the geographical location of the country, its legal origin,

religious composition, the presence of a war, federal status, initial education and income as well

as the extent of corruption in the country, a one-half standard deviation increase in the quality of

institutions (e.g. from the level of Indonesia to the level of India), generates an additional 0.7

percentage point increase in the average annual per capita GDP growth. For a developing

country with $2,500 per capita income in 1975 this translates into an additional $500 per capita

income by 1995.




                                                  28
                                                                            Figure 1
                                                           Transparency International Corruption Index
                                                                  vs. Corruption in the Country


                                             9
                                                                                                                                     Indonesia
                                             8
           TI Corruption Index (re-scaled)




                                             7
                                                                                                                     Bolivia
                                             6

                                             5
                                                                                                                         Argentina
                                             4

                                             3

                                             2

                                             1

                                             0
                                                   0   5       10              15                 20           25                 30             35
                                                                                    Corruption


                                                             OLS (Quadratic)             Robust Regression          OLS (Cubic)



                                                                              Figure 2
                                                                    World Bank Corruption Index
                                                                    vs. Corruption in the Country


                                              4
                                                                                                               Bolivia
                                             3.5
                                                                                                                                  Indonesia
WB Corruption Index (re-scaled)




                                              3

                                             2.5                                                                          Argentina

                                              2

                                             1.5

                                              1

                                             0.5

                                              0
                                                   0   5       10              15                 20           25                 30             35
                                                                                     Corruption


                                                                           OLS             Robust Regression




                                                                                    29
                                                                                 Figure 3
                                                                  Business International Corruption Index
                                                                       vs. Corruption in the Country


                                                      9

                                                                                                                         Indonesia
                                                      8
                    BI Corruption Index (re-scaled)




                                                      7

                                                      6

                                                      5

                                                      4

                                                      3                                                              Argentina

                                                      2

                                                      1

                                                      0
                                                          0   5   10            15                20            25      30                35
                                                                                     Corruption

                                                                             OLS            Robust Regression


                                                                                 Figure 4
                                                                           ICRG Corruption Index
                                                                       vs. Corruption in the Country


                                                      5                                                                      Indonesia

                                                 4.5
ICRG Corruption Index (re-scaled)




                                                      4

                                                 3.5

                                                      3

                                                 2.5
                                                                                                                     Argentina
                                                      2

                                                 1.5

                                                      1

                                                 0.5

                                                      0
                                                          0   5   10            15                20            25     30                35
                                                                                     Corruption

                                                                             OLS           Robust Regression




                                                                                   30
                                                                               Figure 5
                                                         Log of Transparency International Corruption Index
                                                                 vs. Log of Corruption in the Country


                                        2.5

                                          2
Ln of Ti Corruption Index (re-scaled)




                                        1.5

                                          1

                                        0.5

                                          0

                                        -0.5

                                         -1

                                        -1.5

                                         -2
                                               -8   -7          -6           -5              -4          -3   -2   -1
                                                                              ln of Corruption




                                                                             31
                                           Table 1
                           The Incidence of Corruption by Country
                                               Average          Average      Average
Country Name         Year of Number of        Corruption       Corruption   Corruption
                     Activity Observations (Overall)             (Male)      (Female)
WESTERN EUROPEAN COUNTRIES
United Kingdom        1995        5404             0.0025         0.0030       0.0021
United Kingdom        1999        5513             0.0007         0.0009       0.0005
Netherlands           1995        2007             0.0055         0.0082       0.0028
Netherlands           1999        1998             0.0040         0.0037       0.0044
Switzerland           1995        1000             0.0023         0.0040       0.0007
Belgium               1999        2499             0.0035         0.0049       0.0022
Finland               1995        3829             0.0013         0.0027       0.0000
Finland               1999        1780             0.0016         0.0033       0.0000
Sweden                1995        1000             0.0025         0.0020       0.0029
Sweden                1999        2001             0.0009         0.0000       0.0018
Austria               1995        1507             0.0072         0.0126       0.0022
Denmark               1999        3006             0.0028         0.0053       0.0004
MEDITERRANEAN COUNTRIES
France                1995        1003             0.0070         0.0126       0.0017
France                1999         997             0.0125         0.0155       0.0097
Spain                 1999        2908             0.0025         0.0015       0.0034
Malta                 1996         993             0.0408         0.0467       0.0350
Portugal              1999        1998             0.0135         0.0182       0.0091
U.S., CANADA and AUSTRALIA
United States         1995        1000             0.0027         0.0055       0.0000
United States         1999         999             0.0021         0.0044       0.0000
Canada                1995        2132             0.0039         0.0043       0.0036
Canada                1999        2075             0.0039         0.0070       0.0009
Australia             1999        2003             0.0033         0.0044       0.0021
CENTRAL AND EASTERN EUROPEAN COUNTRIES
Estonia               1994        1153             0.0391         0.0513       0.0257
Poland                1991        1974             0.0546         0.0734       0.0374
Poland                1995        3438             0.0480         0.0664       0.0310
Poland                1999        5194             0.0517         0.0699       0.0350
Czech Republic        1995        1752             0.0809         0.1040       0.0587
Slovakia              1996        1091             0.1414         0.1929       0.0940
Russia                1995        1006             0.1896         0.2545       0.1308
Georgia               1995        1110             0.2234         0.2887       0.1717
Slovenia              1996        2046             0.0124         0.0149       0.0095
Latvia                1995        1380             0.1380         0.1837       0.1051
Romania               1995        1083             0.1148         0.1535       0.0789
Hungary               1995         746             0.0392         0.0527       0.0275
Yugoslavia            1995        1089             0.1750         0.2325       0.1198
Albania               1995        1188             0.1295         0.1378       0.1211
Macedonia             1995         698             0.0775         0.1011       0.0534


                                              32
                                        Table 1 (concluded)
Croatia            1996                981            0.1625            0.2046              0.1266
Ukraine            1996                979            0.1287            0.1586              0.1038
Belarus            1996                960            0.1250            0.1623              0.0937
Bulgaria           1996               1066            0.1932            0.2393              0.1497
Lithuania          1996               1165            0.1112            0.1659              0.0647
ASIAN COUNTRIES
Japan              1999               2198             0.0004           0.0000              0.0008
Indonesia          1995               1338             0.3111           0.3692              0.2526
Philippines        1995               1497             0.0437           0.0462              0.0415
India              1995               1193             0.2119           0.2563              0.1691
Mongolia           1995               1188             0.0467           0.0559              0.0376
Kyrgyz Republic    1995               1714             0.2087           0.2951              0.1419
AFRICAN COUNTRIES
Uganda             1995               1191             0.2372           0.3043              0.1745
South Africa       1995                996             0.0763           0.1235              0.0303
Zimbabwe           1995               1003             0.0722           0.0969              0.0491
Botswana           1996                638             0.0292           0.0569              0.0052
LATIN AMERICAN COUNTRIES
Costa Rica         1995                998             0.0997           0.1449              0.0554
Brazil             1995               1000             0.1786           0.2763              0.0785
Argentina          1995                996             0.2935           0.3492              0.2408
Bolivia            1995                994             0.2600           0.2989              0.2230
Paraguay           1995                585             0.1386           0.1636              0.1181
Colombia           1996                984             0.1953           0.2397              0.1518

   Corruption rates are weighted means of individuals who indicated that they were asked for a
   bribe in that country.




                                                 33
                                                Table 2
                                         Descriptive Statistics
       Variable Name                            Definition (source)                            Mean
                                                                                             (Std. Dev)
Individual Characteristics
Corruption                   Dummy Variable (=1) if the respondent is asked for bribe, 0         0.041
                             otherwise (A)                                                      (0.197)
Small City                   Dummy Variable(=1) it the respondent is living in a town            0.450
                             with a population of 50,000 less (A)                               (0.498)
Middle Size City             Dummy Variable(=1) it the respondent is living in a town            0.298
                             with a population of 50,000 to 1 million (A)                       (0.458)
Male                         Dummy Variable (=1) if the respondent is male, 0 otherwise          0.465
                             (A)                                                                (0.499)
Age16to19                    Dummy Variable (=1) if the respondent is between ages 16            0.027
                             and 19, 0 otherwise (A)                                            (0.161)
Age20to24                    Dummy Variable (=1) if the respondent is between ages 20            0.070
                             and 24, 0 otherwise (A)                                            (0.256)
Age25to29                    Dummy Variable (=1) if the respondent is between ages 25            0.100
                             and 29, 0 otherwise (A)                                            (0.299)
Age30to34                    Dummy Variable (=1) if the respondent is between ages 30            0.111
                             and 34, 0 otherwise (A)                                            (0.314)
Age35to39                    Dummy Variable (=1) if the respondent is between ages 35            0.119
                             and 39, 0 otherwise (A)                                            (0.324)
Age40to44                    Dummy Variable (=1) if the respondent is between ages 40            0.105
                             and 44, 0 otherwise (A)                                            (0.307)
Age45to49                    Dummy Variable (=1) if the respondent is between ages 45            0.093
                             and 49, 0 otherwise (A)                                            (0.290)
Age50to54                    Dummy Variable (=1) if the respondent is between ages 50            0.085
                             and 54, 0 otherwise (A)                                            (0.278)
Age55to59                    Dummy Variable (=1) if the respondent is between ages 55            0.071
                             and 59, 0 otherwise (A)                                            (0.256)
Age60to64                    Dummy Variable (=1) if the respondent is between ages 60            0.059
                             and 64, 0 otherwise (A)                                            (0.236)
Age65to69                    Dummy Variable (=1) if the respondent is between ages 65            0.056
                             and 69, 0 otherwise (A)                                            (0.230)
Age70+                       Dummy Variable (=1) if the respondent is older than 70, 0           0.105
                             otherwise (A)                                                      (0.306)
Single                       Dummy Variable (=1) if the respondent is single, 0 otherwise        0.217
                             (A)                                                                (0.412)
Married                      Dummy Variable (=1) if the respondent is married, 0                 0.574
                             otherwise (A)                                                      (0.495)
Widowed                      Dummy Variable (=1) if the respondent is widowed, 0                 0.082
                             otherwise (A)                                                      (0.274)
Living together              Dummy Variable (=1) if the respondent is living together as a       0.061
                             couple (but not married, 0 otherwise (A)                           (0.240)



                                                   34
                                         (Table 2 continued)
Divorced                    Dummy Variable (=1) if the respondent is divorced, 0             0.066
                            otherwise (A)                                                   (0.248)
Working                     Dummy Variable (=1) if the respondent is working, 0              0.565
                            otherwise (A)                                                   (0.496)
Looking for job             Dummy Variable (=1) if the respondent is looking for job, 0      0.061
                            otherwise (A)                                                   (0.240)
Home keeper                 Dummy Variable (=1) if the respondent is house keeper, 0         0.106
                            otherwise (A)                                                   (0.308)
Retired/disabled            Dummy Variable (=1) if the respondent is retired or disabled,    0.216
                            0 otherwise (A)                                                 (0.411)
Student                     Dummy Variable (=1) if the respondent is still at school, 0      0.033
                            otherwise (A)                                                   (0.180)
Other                       Dummy Variable (=1) if the respondent is in other                0.018
                            occupational position, 0 otherwise (A)                          (0.134)
Upper income                Dummy Variable (=1) if the family income is in the upper         0.506
                            50% of the country, 0 otherwise (A)                             (0.500)
Education                   Years of education of the respondent (A)                        11.755
                                                                                            (3.764)
Country Characteristics
Western Europe              Dummy Variable (=1) if the country is in Western Europe, 0       0.425
                            otherwise                                                       (0.494)
Mediterranean               Dummy Variable (=1) if the country is in Mediterranean           0.072
                            region, 0 otherwise                                             (0.258)
Central Europe              Dummy Variable (=1) if the country is in Central Europe, 0       0.166
                            otherwise                                                       (0.372)
Africa                      Dummy Variable (=1) if the country is in Africa, 0 otherwise     0.054
                                                                                            (0.227)
Asia                        Dummy Variable (=1) if the country is in Asia, 0 otherwise       0.088
                                                                                            (0.283)
Latin America               Dummy Variable (=1) if the country is in Latin America, 0        0.075
                            otherwise                                                       (0.263)
U.S., Canada, Australia     Dummy Variable (=1) if the country the U.S, Canada or            0.119
                            Australia, 0 otherwise                                          (0.324)
British Legal Origin        Dummy Variable (=1) if the legal origin of the respondent is     0.357
                            English, 0 otherwise (E)                                        (0.479)
French Legal Origin         Dummy Variable (=1) if the legal origin of the respondent is     0.275
                            French, 0 otherwise (E)                                         (0.446)
Scandinavian Legal Origin   Dummy Variable (=1) if the legal origin of the respondent is     0.128
                            Scandinavian, 0 otherwise (E)                                   (0.334)
German Legal Origin         Dummy Variable (=1) if the legal origin of the respondent is     0.073
                            German, 0 otherwise (E)                                         (0.261)
Socialist Legal Origin      Dummy Variable (=1) if the legal origin of the respondent is     0.166
                            Socialist, 0 otherwise (E)                                      (0.372)



                                                  35
                                       (Table 2 Continued)
Percent Muslim             Percent of Muslims in the country (E)                                3.454
                                                                                               (4.804)
Percent Catholic           Percent of Catholics in the country (E)                             45.117
                                                                                              (35.613)
Percent Protestant         Percent of Protestants in the country (E)                           22.471
                                                                                              (27.900)
Population                 Population of the country in millions in the survey year (G)        62.038
                                                                                             (132.438)
Population less than 25    Percentage of population less than 25 years of age (K)              37.374
                                                                                               (9.975)
Oil                        Oil reserve of the country in million barrels (B)                   39.049
                                                                                              (55.024)
Iron                       Iron reserves of the country as a percent of world reserves          1.436
                           (B)                                                                 (3.349)
Gold                       Gold reserves of the country as a percent of world reserves          1.523
                           (B)                                                                 (6.507)
Zinc                       Zinc reserves of the country as a percent of world reserves          2.304
                           (B)                                                                 (4.422)
Democratic                 Dummy Variable (=1) if the country was democratic in all 46          0.593
                           years between 1950 and 1995(D)                                      (0.491)
Federal                    Dummy Variable (=1) if at least two levels of government             0.273
                           rule the same land and people, each level has at least one area     (0.446)
                           of action in which autonomous, there is some guarantee of
                           the autonomy of each government, 0 otherwise (D)
War                        Dummy Variable (=1) if a war occurred during 1960s to                0.150
                           1980s, 0 otherwise (C)                                              (0.357)
Women in parliament        Percentage of women in parliament of the corresponding              17.302
                           country (F)                                                        (10.044)
Low Expropriation Risk     Expropriation Risk in the Country (High values indicate low          8.847
                           expropriation risk, or stronger institutions) (C)                   (1.350)
Average education          Average education of adults in the country in the survey year        8.911
                           (J)                                                                 (1.988)
Unemployment Rate          Unemployment rate among males in the country (F)                     8.206
                                                                                               (3.576)
Landlocked                 Dummy Variable (=1) if the country is landlocked                     0.116
                           (surrounded by land), 0 otherwise (B)                               (0.320)
Latitude                   Absolute latitude of the country (E)                                 0.496
                                                                                               (0.175)
Ethnoling. Fragmentation   Ethnolinguistic Fragmentation in the country (E)                     0.194
                                                                                                0.222
Life Expectancy            Life Expectancy at Birth in the country in 1995 (C)                 73.443
                                                                                                7.744
Temperature                Average temperature of the country in Celsius (B)                   11.784
                                                                                               (5.881)


                                                 36
                                                  Table 2 (concluded)
Government Share               Government share of per capita DGP (G)                                    11.368
                                                                                                         (6.257)
Year95                         Dummy Variable (=1) if the survey in the country was done                  0.462
                               in 1995, 0 otherwise                                                      (0.499)
Year96                         Dummy Variable (=1) if the survey in the country was done                  0.023
                               in 1996, 0 otherwise                                                      (0.151)
Year99                         Dummy Variable (=1) if the survey in the country was done                  0.515
                               in 1999, 0 otherwise                                                      (0.500)


   The descriptive statistics pertain to 54,209 observations with non-missing values in all variables.

   A: UNICRI International Crime Victim Survey version ICVS2000_2(1)
   B: “National Cultures of the World: A Statistical Reference” (1997), Parker, Philip M., Greenwood Press.
   C: Institutions and Geography: Comment on Acemoglu, Johnson and Robinson (2000), McArthur, John
   W.; Sachs, Jeffrey D. NBER Working Paper: 8114 (February 2001)
   D: The causes of corruption: a cross-national study; Daniel Treisman, Journal of Public Economics
   76 (2000) , 399-457
   E: The Quality of Government; La Porta, Rafael et al., NBER Working Paper: 6727 (1998)
   F: World Development Indicators. CD 2003
   G: Alan Heston, Robert Summers and Bettina Aten, Penn World Table Version 6.1, Center for
   International Comparisons at the University of Pennsylvania (CICUP), October 2002.
   H: The State in a Changing World, World Development Report 1997, World Bank, Washington, DC:
   Oxford University Press, 1997
   I: Governance Matters III: Governance Indicators for 1996-2002, Daniel Kaufmann, Aart Kraay, Massimo
   Mastruzzi, The World Bank, June 30,2003
   J: World Bank, Education Statistics Database http://www1.worldbank.org/education/edstats/
   K: United Nations Statistics Division, Common Database, Population by Sex, Age Group, Urban and
   Rural, Census Years, Series Number 14890: http://unstats.un.org/unsd/cdb
   L: Barro, Robert and Lee, Jong-Wha, 1996 “International Measures of Schooling Years and Schooling
   Quality” Dataset (http://www.worldbank.org/research/growth/ddbarle2.htm).




                                                        37
                                              Table 3
                                The Determinants of Corruption
                                     at the Individual level
                                          Probit                 Instrumental Variable Probit
                             Coefficient       Standard Error    Coefficient    Standard Error
Individual Characteristics         I                  II             III              IV
Small City                    -0.008***            (0.003)        -0.006***         (0.001)
Middle Size City              -0.004*              (0.002)        -0.002*           (0.001)
Male                           0.007***            (0.001)         0.007***         (0.001)
Upper income                   0.003***            (0.001)         0.003***         (0.001)
Education                      0.001***            (0.0002)        0.001***         (0.0001)
Age20to24                      0.004*              (0.003)         0.004**          (0.002)
Age25to29                      0.003               (0.003)         0.004**          (0.002)
Age30to34                      0.003               (0.004)         0.003*           (0.002)
Age35to39                      0.002               (0.003)         0.003*           (0.002)
Age40to44                      0.0004              (0.003)         0.001            (0.002)
Age45to49                      0.002               (0.004)         0.002            (0.002)
Age50to54                      0.001               (0.005)         0.001            (0.002)
Age55to59                     -0.002               (0.003)        -0.001            (0.002)
Age60to64                     -0.005***            (0.001)        -0.004**          (0.001)
Age65to69                     -0.004               (0.003)        -0.003            (0.002)
Age70+                        -0.006***            (0.002)        -0.006***         (0.001)
Single                        -0.002*              (0.001)        -0.001*           (0.001)
Widowed                        0.003               (0.003)         0.003*           (0.002)
Living together                0.001               (0.002)         0.001            (0.001)
Divorced                     `-0.0003              (0.002)         0.0002           (0.001)
Working                        0.002               (0.001)         0.001            (0.001)
Looking for job                0.0002              (0.002)         0.0005           (0.001)
Home keeper                    0.00004             (0.002)        -0.0004           (0.001)
Retired/disabled              -0.002               (0.002)        -0.002            (0.002)
Other                          0.005               (0.003)         0.004*           (0.003)
Country Characteristics
Western Europe               -0.02***             (0.006)          0.002           (0.019)
Mediterranean                -0.011***            (0.001)         -0.006           (0.007)
Asia                         -0.016***            (0.001)         -0.014**         (0.004)
Africa                       -0.011***            (0.001)         -0.009           (0.003)
Latin America                -0.011***            (0.001)         -0.008           (0.006)
Central Europe               -0.012***            (0.002)         -0.001           (0.019)
British Legal Origin         -0.012***            (0.003)         -0.009           (0.007)
French Legal Origin           0.012***            (0.003)          0.014**         (0.009)
German Legal Origin           0.083***            (0.015)          0.137***        (0.078)
Low Expropriation Risk       -0.008***            (0.0005)        -0.006***        (0.001)
Democratic                   -0.008***            (0.003)         -0.013*          (0.008)
War                           0.004*              (0.003)          0.011**         (0.006)
Federal                      -0.008***            (0.001)         -0.009**         (0.003)
Percent Muslim                0.0003***           (0.0001)         0.001**         (0.0003)



                                             38
                                             (Table 3 concluded)
Percent Catholic                     -0.00004           (0.00005)                 0.000002         (0.0002)
Percent Protestant                   -0.000001          (0.0001)                  0.0001           (0.0002)
Oil                                   0.0001***         (0.00001)                 0.00001**        (0.00003)
Iron                                  0.0004            (0.0003)                  0.001            (0.001)
Zink                                 -0.001*            (0.0003)                  0.0002           (0.001)
Gold                                 -0.0004***         (0.0001)                 -0.0004**         (0.0002)
Population                            0.0001***         (0.00001)                 0.0001***        (0.00002)
Population less than 25               0.0002            (0.0002)                  0.0004           (0.001)
Unemployment Rate                     0.002***          (0.0002)                  0.001***         (0.0004)
Average education                    -0.003***          (0.001)                  -0.001            (0.001)
Women in parliament                  -0.0001            (0.0001)                 -0.0002           (0.0003)
Government Share                      0.001***          (0.0005)                  0.001***         (0.0002)
Year95                               -0.002             (0.001)                  -0.002            (0.001)
Year96                               -0.007***          (0.001)                  -0.007**          (0.001)
Number of Observations                          54,209                                     54,209
Log-Likelihood                                -6532.006                                  -6315.237
The Coefficients are the marginal effects. Standard errors are in parentheses. They are adjusted for clustering ate the
country level. * signifies statistical significance at the 10% level; ** ate the 5 percent level, and *** at the 1%
percent level or less.




                                                          39
                                        Table 4A
                    The Determinants of Corruption Perception Index
            Dependent Variable: Transparency International Corruption Measure
                           Instrumental Variables Estimation

                             Coefficient Coefficient Coefficient Coefficient Coefficient
                             (Std. Err.) (Std. Err.) (Std. Err.) (Std. Err.) (Std. Err.)
                                  I           II         III         IV          V
    Average Corruption          0.177**     0.73*      0.09         -0.038
                                                                                 ---
                               (0.056)     (0.311)    (0.315)       (0.182)
    (Average Corruption)2                  -0.023     -0.004
                                 ---                                 ---         ---
                                           (0.016)    (0.011)
    Low Expropriation Risk                            -1.709        -1.947     -1.775**
A                                ---             ---
                                                      (1.157)       (1.172)    (0.603)
    F                                       8.95       0.09
                                 ---                                 ---         ---
    p-value                                (0.016)    (0.918)
    Mean (std.) of Average      6.771       6.771      6.771         6.771      6.771
    Corruption                 (9.090)     (9.090)    (9.090)       (9.090)    (9.090)
    Government Corruption       0.019**     0.289**    0.173         0.001
                                                                                 ---
                               (0.007)     (0.08)     (0.203)       (0.048)
    (Government                            -0.003*** -0.002
                                 ---                                 ---         ---
    Corruption)2                           (0.001)    (0.002)
    Low Expropriation Risk                            -1.136        -1.77**    -1.775**
B                                ---             ---
                                                      (1.116)       (0.574)    (0.603)
    F                                      (6.96)      0.40
                                 ---                                 ---         ---
    p-value                                 0.0273    (0.684)
    Mean (std.) of             30.076      30.076     30.076       30.076      30.076
    Government Corruption     (26.685)    (26.685)   (26.685)     (26.685)    (26.685)
    Police Corruption           0.09        0.296**    0.078        -0.062
                                                                                 ---
                               (0.05)      (0.106)    (0.337)       (0.13)
    (Police Corruption)2                   -0.005     -0.003
                                 ---                                 ---         ---
                                           (0.006)    (0.008)
    Low Expropriation Risk                            -1.923        -2.282     -1.775**
C                                ---             ---
                                                      (2.308)       (1.402)    (0.603)
    F                                       4.39       0.06
                                 ---                                 ---         ---
    p-value                                (0.067)    (0.946)
    Mean (std.) of Police      31.730      31.730     31.730       31.730      31.730
    Corruption                (21.669)    (21.669)   (21.669)     (21.669)    (21.669)




                                           40
                                     Table 4A (concluded)
     Custom Corruption             -0.032**     0.549       0.255             0.046
                                                                                            ---
                                   (0.011)     (0.487)     (0.387)           (0.078)
     (Custom Corruption)2                      -0.016      -0.006
                                     ---                                      ---           ---
                                               (0.014)     (0.011)
     Low Expropriation Risk                                -1.72**           -2.317**     -1.775**
 D                                   ---            ---
                                                           (0.607)           (0.799)      (0.603)
     F                                          0.65        0.29
                                     ---                                      ---           ---
     p-value                                   (0.557)     (0.756)
     Mean (std.) of Custom         12.938      12.938      12.938            12.938       12.938
     Corruption                   (14.310)   (14.310)     (14.310)          (14.310)     (14.310)
     Inspector Corruption          -0.106*     -0.035      -0.073            -0.07
                                                                                            ---
                                   (0.045)     (0.064)     (0.112)           (0.09)
     (Inspector Corruption)2                   -0.002       0
                                     ---                                      ---           ---
                                               (0.003)     (0.005)
     Low Expropriation Risk                                -1.686            -1.678**     -1.775**
 E                                   ---            ---
                                                           (0.94)            (0.644)      (0.603)
     F                                          2.20        0.48
                                     ---                                      ---           ---
     p-value                                   (0.192)     (0.640)
     Mean (std.) of Inspector       8.444       8.444       8.444             8.444        8.444
     Corruption                   (11.384)   (11.384)     (11.384)          (11.384)     (11.384)
     Other Corruption               0.001       0.182       0.095            -0.022
                                                                                            ---
                                   (0.026)     (0.134)     (0.143)           (0.061)
     (Other Corruption) 2                      -0.006      -0.004
                                     ---                                      ---           ---
                                               (0.006)     (0.006)
     Low Expropriation Risk                                -1.474**          -1.805**     -1.775**
 F                                   ---            ---
                                                           (0.431)           (0.64)       (0.603)
     F                                          1.14        0.23
                                     ---                                      ---           ---
     p-value                                   (0.381)     (0.802)
     Mean (std.) of Other          16.813      16.813      16.813            16.813       16.813
     Corruption                   (16.202)   (16.202)     (16.202)          (16.202)     (16.202)
     N                                 43        43           43                43           43
Linear and quadratic Corruption and Low Expropriation Risk are endogenous. Regressions also
include region and legal origin dummies and religion variables.
Standard errors are in parentheses. They are adjusted for clustering at the region level. *
signifies statistical significance at the 10% level; ** at the 5 percent level, and *** at the 1%
percent level or less.



                                                41
                                     Table 4B
                 The Determinants of Corruption Perception Index
                Dependent Variable: World Bank Corruption Measure
                        Instrumental Variables Estimation

                             Coefficient Coefficient Coefficient    Coefficient Coefficient
                              (Std. Err.) (Std. Err.) (Std. Err.)   (Std. Err.) (Std. Err.)
                                    I         II           III           IV         V
    Average Corruption          0.095*      0.246**     0.097         0.049
                                                                                    ---
                               (0.04)      (0.088)     (0.148)       (0.035)
    (Average Corruption)2                  -0.006      -0.002
                                   ---                                  ---         ---
                                           (0.004)     (0.004)
    Low Expropriation Risk                             -0.339        -0.427      -0.647**
A                                  ---        ---
                                                       (0.295)       (0.269)     (0.253)
    F                                       5.32        1.39
                                   ---                                  ---         ---
    p-value                                (0.047)     (0.320)
    Mean (std.) of Average      6.710       6.710       6.771         6.771       6.771
    Corruption                 (8.993)     (8.993)     (9.090)       (9.090)     (9.090)
    Government Corruption       0.002       0.096*** 0.036           -0.011
                                                                                    ---
                               (0.017)     (0.026)     (0.055)       (0.012)
    (Government                            -0.001*** -0.001
                                   ---                                  ---         ---
    Corruption)2                           (0.00)      (0.001)
    Low Expropriation Risk                             -0.512        -0.687**    -0.647**
B                                  ---        ---
                                                       (0.272)       (0.241)     (0.253)
    F                                      31.64        2.43
                                   ---                                  ---         ---
    p-value                                (0.001)     (0.169)
    Mean (std.) of            30.037       30.037      30.076        30.076      30.076
    Government Corruption     26.374       26.374     (26.685)      (26.685)    (26.685)
    Police Corruption           0.033       0.125       0.077        -0.012
                                                                                    ---
                               (0.027)     (0.072)     (0.137)       (0.026)
    (Police Corruption)2                   -0.002      -0.002
                                   ---                                  ---         ---
                                           (0.004)     (0.002)
    Low Expropriation Risk                             -0.516        -0.747      -0.647**
C                                  ---        ---
                                                       (1.446)       (0.396)     (0.253)
    F                                       2.46        0.48
                                   ---                                  ---         ---
    p-value                                (0.166)     (0.643)
    Mean (std.) of Average    31.284       31.284      31.730        31.730      31.730
    Corruption               (21.619)     (21.619) (21.669)         (21.669)    (21.669)




                                          42
                                     Table 4B (concluded)
        Customs Corruption         -0.012       0.278        -0.023        0.025
                                                                                          ---
                                   (0.013)     (0.203)       (0.138)      (0.022)
        (Customs Corruption)2                  -0.009         0.001
                                       ---                                   ---          ---
                                               (0.006)       (0.004)
        Low Expropriation Risk                               -1.079       -0.942**     -0.647**
   D                                   ---           ---
                                                             (0.747)      (0.321)      (0.253)
        F                                        1.09         0.40
                                       ---                                   ---          ---
        p-value                                 (0.395)      (0.685)
        Mean (std.) of Custom      13.718       13.718       12.938       12.938      12.938
        Corruption                (15.059)     (15.059)     (14.309)     (14.309)    (14.309)
        Inspector Corruption       -0.045       -0.002       -0.021       -0.044
                                                                                          ---
                                   (0.025)      (0.02)       (0.037)      (0.033)
        (Inspector Corruption)2                 -0.001       -0.001
                                       ---                                   ---          ---
                                                (0.001)      (0.002)
        Low Expropriation Risk                               -0.528       -0.586**     -0.647**
   E                                   ---           ---
                                                             (0.307)      (0.233)      (0.253)
        F                                        1.73         1.35
                                     ---                                     ---          ---
        p-value                                 (0.254)      (0.329)
        Mean (std.) of Inspector 8.410           8.410        8.444        8.444       8.444
        Corruption               11.253         11.253       11.384       11.384      11.384
        Other Corruption          0.01           0.081        0.065        0.019
                                                                                          ---
                                 (0.025)        (0.043)      (0.041)      (0.029)
        (Other Corruption) 2                    -0.002       -0.002
                                     ---                                     ---          ---
                                                (0.002)      (0.001)
        Low Expropriation Risk                               -0.491*      -0.621**     -0.647**
   F                                   ---           ---
                                                             (0.212)      (0.243)      (0.253)
        F                                        1.86         1.27
                                       ---                                   ---          ---
        p-value                                 (0.235)      (0.348)
        Mean (std.) of Other       16.551       16.551       16.813       16.813      16.813
        Corruption                (16.107)     (16.107)     (16.202)     (16.202)    (16.202)
        N                              44            44         43           43           43
Linear and quadratic Corruption and Low Expropriation Risk are endogenous. Regressions also
include region and legal origin dummies and religion variables.
Standard errors are in parentheses. They are adjusted for clustering at the region level. *
signifies statistical significance at the 10% level; ** at the 5 percent level, and *** at the 1%
percent level or less.




                                                43
                                                  Table 5
                                          Determinants of Growth
                          Dependent Variable: Average Annual Growth 1975-1995
                                     Instrumental Variables Estimation
                                  I                II              III          IV                                V
Corruption                      -0.007          -0.006            -0.002                                        -0.001
                                                                                ---
                                (0.014)         (0.005)           (0.002)                                       (0.002)
           2
Corruption                       0.0002          0.0001
                                                                   ---          ---                               ---
                                (0.0004)        (0.0002)
Low Expropriation Risk          -0.001                                        0.01**                             0.007
                                                  ---              ---
                                (0.02)                                       (0.004)                            (0.004)
Western Europe                  -0.003          -0.005            -0.004     -0.02                              -0.013*
                                (0.018)         (0.01)            (0.004)    (0.012)                            (0.005)
Central Europe                  -0.001          -0.006            -0.018     -0.044                             -0.034
                                (0.069)         (0.02)            (0.013)    (0.025)                            (0.021)
Africa                          -0.023          -0.021            -0.011     -0.01                              -0.007
                                (0.062)         (0.032)           (0.013)    (0.02)                             (0.016)
Latin America                    0.028           0.023             0.014     -0.027                             -0.004
                                (0.049)         (0.027)           (0.033)    (0.023)                            (0.027)
Asia                            -0.021          -0.022            -0.02*     -0.028                             -0.024
                                (0.018)         (0.02)            (0.01)     (0.021)                            (0.014)
Mediterranean                   -0.009          -0.011            -0.005     -0.029                             -0.018
                                (0.014)         (0.016)           (0.017)    (0.028)                            (0.018)
British Legal Origin            -0.004          -0.006            -0.014     -0.021                             -0.02
                                (0.048)         (0.026)           (0.023)    (0.022)                            (0.025)
French Legal Origin             -0.007          -0.008            -0.01      -0.009                             -0.013
                                (0.047)         (0.04)            (0.035)    (0.018)                            (0.03)
German Legal Origin             -0.005          -0.006            -0.008     -0.007                             -0.01
                                (0.044)         (0.038)           (0.039)    (0.026)                            (0.036)
Percent Muslim                   0.001           0.001             0.002     (0.0004)                            0.001
                                (0.002)         (0.002)           (0.001)    (0.0003)                           (0.001)
Percent Catholic                -0.0003         -0.0002           -0.0003    -0.0001                            -0.0001
                                (0.0004)        (0.0002)         (-0.0002)   (0.0002)                           (0.0002)
Percent Protestant              -0.0002         -0.0002           -0.0003    -0.0002                            -0.0003
                                (0.0005)        (0.0004)          (0.0003)   (0.0002)                          (-0.0003)
War                              0.006           0.005            -0.003     -0.002                              0.0001
                                (0.02)          (0.013)           (0.009)    (0.009)                            (0.008)
Initial GDP                      0.012           0.01              0.011     -0.001                              0.004
                                (0.008)         (0.011)           (0.008)    (0.003)                            (0.008)
Federal                         -0.002          -0.002            -0.001     -0.003**                           -0.002*
                               (-0.002)         (0.002)           (0.002)    -0.0007                            (0.001)
Average Education in 1975       -0.004          -0.004            -0.002     -0.001                             -0.001
                                (0.009)         (0.003)           (0.004)    (0.003)                            (0.004)
Constant                         0.117           0.103**           0.079     -0.003                              0.023
                                (0.226)         (0.029)           (0.044)    (0.043)                            (0.075)
No. of observations            30              30                30         30                                 30
    Linear and quadratic corruption variables and expropriation risk are endogenous. Standard errors are adjusted for
    clustering at the region level. The mean value of Initial GDP (per capital income in 1975) in the sample of 30
    countries is 9.23 (in $1,000s). The mean value of Average Education in 1975 is 5.73.



                                                            44
                                         Table 6
                                 Determinants of Growth
                  Dependent Variable: Average Annual Growth 1975-1995
                            Instrumental Variables Estimation
                                   (I)            (II)         (III)                           (IV)
 Corruption                      0.0001         -0.00003      -0.0003                        -0.001
                                (0.001)         (0.0005)      (0.001)                        (0.001)
 Low Expropriation Risk          0.010**         0.007***      0.007**                        0.011**
                                (0.003)         (0.002)       (0.002)                        (0.003)
 Western Europe                                                                              -0.007
                                   ---             ---          ---
                                                                                             (0.005)
 Central Europe                                                                              -0.014
                                          ---               ---               ---
                                                                                             (0.011)
 Africa                                                                                      -0.001
                                          ---               ---               ---
                                                                                             (0.018)
 Latin America                                                                               -0.0004
                                          ---               ---               ---
                                                                                             (0.013)
 Asia                                                                                        -0.011
                                          ---               ---               ---
                                                                                             (0.015)
 Mediterranean                                                                               -0.013
                                          ---               ---               ---
                                                                                             (0.014)
 British Legal Origin                   0.007
                                                            ---               ---               ---
                                       (0.007)
 French Legal Origin                    0.003
                                                            ---               ---               ---
                                       (0.008)
 German Legal Origin                    0.006
                                                            ---               ---               ---
                                       (0.008)
 Percent Muslim                         0.0005            0.001**            0.001*           0.001
                                       (0.0003)          (0.0002)           (0.0003)         (0.001)
 Percent Catholic                      -0.00001          -0.0001            -0.00003         -0.00002
                                       (0.0001)          (0.0001)            0.0001           0.0001
 Percent Protestant                     0.00002          -0.00004           -0.00004         -0.0001
                                       (0.00004)         (0.00004)          (0.0001)          0.0002
 War                                   -0.004            -0.007                               0.001
                                                                              ---
                                       (0.013)           (0.013)                             (0.007)
 Federal                               -0.002***         -0.002*            -0.001           -0.002**
                                       (0.0005)          (0.001)            (0.001)          (0.001)
 Initial GDP                           -0.0005            0.003                              -0.0005
                                                                              ---
                                       (0.006)           (0.005)                             (0.006)
 Average Education in 1975             -0.0003           -0.001             -0.001           -0.0004
                                       (0.001)           (0.001)            (0.001)          (0.002)
 Constant                              -0.047            -0.019             -0.023           -0.036
                                       (0.026)           (0.013)            (0.017)          (0.045)
 No. of observations                      30               30                 30                30
Linear and quadratic corruption variables and expropriation risk are endogenous. Standard errors are
adjusted for clustering at the region level. The mean value of Initial GDP (per capital income in 1975) in
the sample of 30 countries is 9.23 (in $1,000s). The mean value of Average Education in 1975 is 5.73.


                                                    45
                                                  Table 7
                                          Determinants of Growth
                           Dependent Variable: Average Annual Growth 1975-1995
                                     Instrumental Variables Estimation

                                        Excluding Developed                       Excluding Developed and
                                             Countries                            Mediterranean Countries
                                    (I)         (II)        (III)              (IV)          (V)        (VI)
Corruption                       -0.0004       -0.001      -0.0002             -0.0003       -0.0003 -0.0003
                                 (0.0004)      (0.001)     (0.001)             (0.0003)      (0.001) (0.001)
Expropriation Risk                0.009**       0.009**     0.009*              0.008        0.011** 0.011**
                                 (0.002)       (0.003)     (0.004)             (0.005)       (0.003) (0.003)
Percent Muslim                    0.0004*       0.001        ---                0.0005        0.0004
                                                                                                         ---
                                 (0.0002)      (0.0004)                        (0.0003)     (0.0004)
Percent Catholic                 -0.0001       -0.0005                         -0.0001      -0.00002
                                                             ---                                         ---
                                 (0.0001)      (0.0001)                        (0.0001)     (0.0002)
Percent Protestant               -0.0004       -0.0004                         -0.0004       -0.0003
                                                             ---                                         ---
                                 (0.0002)      (0.0003)                        (0.0002)     (0.0003)
War                               0.001                                        -0.002
                                                 ---         ---                              ---        ---
                                 (0.009)                                       (0.009)
Federal                          -0.004                                        -0.004
                                                 ---         ---                              ---        ---
                                 (0.011)                                       (0.013)
Initial GDP                      -0.002        -0.003**    -0.003**            -0.001        -0.002  -0.003
                                 (0.001)       (0.001)     (0.001)             (0.001)       (0.001) (0.001)
Average Education in 1975        -0.002        -0.002     -0.002***            -0.003        -0.003  -0.003**
                                 (0.001)       (0.001)     (0.0004)            (0.002)       (0.002) (0.001)
Constant                         -0.02         -0.017      -0.028              -0.011       -0.037** -0.033
                                 (0.019)       (0.036)     (0.033)             (0.028)       (0.009) (0.035)
No. of observations              19            19          19                  16           16           16
      Linear and quadratic corruption variables and expropriation risk are endogenous. Standard errors are
      adjusted for clustering at the region level. The mean value of Initial GDP (per capital income in 1975) in
      the sample of 19 countries is 5.47 (in $1,000s). The mean value of Average Education in 1975 is 4.15.
      The mean value of Initial GDP in the sample of 16 countries is 4.45 , and the mean of Average Education
      in 1975 is 4.14.




                                                          46
                                          References

Acemoğlu, Daron; Johnson, Simon, Robinson, James A. and Thaicharoen,
      Yunyong, “Institutional Causes, Macroeconomics Symptoms: Volatility, Crises
     and Growth,” 2003, Journal of Monetary Economics, 50, pp. 49-123.

Acemoğlu, Daron; Johnson, Simon and Robinson, James A. “The Colonial Origins of
     Comparative Development: An Empirical Investigation,” American Economic
     Review, December 2001, 91(5), pp. 1369-1401.

Ades, Alberto and Di Tella, Rafael, “Rents, Competition and Corruption,” American
       Economic Review, 1999, 89(4), pp. 982-93.

Alesina, Alberto, and Weder, Beatrice. “Do Corrupt Governments Receive Less Foreign
       Aid?” American Economic Review, 2002, 92:1126-1137.

Andreoni, James and Vesterlund, Lise. “Which is the Fair Sex? Gender Differences in
      Altruism” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2001, 116(1):293-312.

Barro, Robert and Lee, Jong -Wha, 1996 “International Measures of Schooling Years and
       Schooling Quality” American Economic Review. 86:2, pp. 218-23.

Brunetti, Aymo, and Weder, Beatrice. “A Free Press is Bad News for Corruption,”
       Journal of Public Economics, 2003, 87:1801-1824.

David, R., and Brierly, J. Major Legal Systems in the World Today, Third Edition,
       Stevens and Sons, London; 1978

Del Monte, Alfredo and Papagni, Erasmo. “ Public Expenditure, Corruption, and
      Economics Growth: the Case of Italy,” European Journal of Political Economy,
      2001, 17:1-16.

Dollar, David, Fisman, Raymond, and Gatti, Roberta. “Are Women Really the “Fairer”
        sex? Corruption and Women in Government” Journal of Economic Behavior and
        Organization, 2001, 46: 423-29.

Fisman, Raymand and Gatti, Roberta. “Decentralization and Corruption: Evidence
      Across Countries,” Journal of Public Economics, 2002, 83, pp.325-45.

Graeff, P., and Mehlkop, G., “The impact of economic freedom on corruption: Different
        Patterns for Rich and Poor Countries,” European Journal of Political Economy,
        2003, 19:605-20.


                                              47
Herzfeld, Thomas, and Weiss Christoph. “Corruption and Legal (in) Effectiveness: an
      Empirical Investigation,” European Journal of Political Economy, 2003, 19:621-
      32.

Kaufmann, Daniel; Kraay, Aart and Mastruzzi, Massimo. “Governance Matters III:
      Governance Indicators for 1996-2002,” June 2003; The World Bank.

Kaufmann, Daniel, and Wei, Shang-Jin. “Does ‘Grease Money’ Speed up the Wheels of
      Commerce?” 1999, NBER Working Paper No. 7093.


La Porta, Rafael; Lopez-de-Silanes, Florencio, and Vishny, Robert. “The Quality of
       Government,” 1998, NBER Working Paper No: 6727.

Mauro, Paolo. “Corruption and Growth,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, August 1995,
      110(3), pp. 681-712.

McArthur, John W., and Sachs, Jeffrey D. “Institutions and Geography: Comment on
      Acemoglu, Johnson and Robinson (2000)” NBER Working Paper No. 8114,
      February 2001.

Mocan, Naci H., and Rees, Daniel.“Economic Conditions, Deterrence, and Juvenile
      Crime: Evidence from Micro Data” NBER Working Paper No. 7505, 1999.

Parker, Philip M. “National Cultures of the World: A Statistical Reference” 1997,
        Greenwood Press.

Schleifer, Andrei, and Robery W. Vishny, “Coruption,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
       August 1993, 108:3, pp. 599-617.

Svensson, Jakob, “Who Must Pay Bribes and How Much? Evidence From a Cross
       Section of Firms.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, February 2003, 118, pp.
      207-30.

Swamy, Anand; Knack, Stephen; Lee, Young and Azfar Omar.” Gender and Corruption”
     Journal of Development Economics, 2001, 64, pp. 25-55.

Tanzi, V. “Fiscal Federalism and Decentralization: A Review of Some Efficiency and
       Macroeconomic Aspects” In: World Bank, Annual World Bank Conference on
       Development Economics 1995. World Bank, Washington, DC.

Treisman, Daniel. “The Causes of Corruption: A Cross-National Study,” Journal of
      Public Economics, 2000, 76, pp.399-457.

Van Rijckeghem, Carolina and Weder, Beatrice. “Bureaucratic Corruption and the Rate
      of Temptation: Do Wages in the Civil Service Affect Corruption, and by How
      Much?” Journal of Development Economics, 2001, 65, pp.307-31.


                                               48
Weingast, B.R. “The Economic Role of Political Institutions: Marked-Preserving
     Federalism and Economic Development,” Journal of Law, Economics, and
     Organization, 1995, 11:1-31

World Bank. “World Development Indicators, 2003.

World Bank. “The State in a Changing World” World Development Report, Washington,
      DC, Oxford University Press, 1997.




                                            49
