NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

BANK SUPERVISION, REGULATION,
AND INSTABILITY DURING THE GREAT DEPRESSION
Kris James Mitchener
Working Paper 10475
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10475
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2004

I am grateful for comments and suggestions provided by Charlie Calomiris, Brad DeLong, Barry
Eichengreen, Cristian Echeverria, Darren Lubotsky, Mark Rodini, Christina Romer, and seminar and
conference participants at NBER-DAE, Stanford University, University of California at Davis, and ITAM.
I also thank Richard Grossman, Joe Mason, and Gary Richardson for sharing data. The views expressed
herein are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2004 by Kris James Mitchener. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Bank Supervision, Regulation, and Instability During the Great Depression
Kris James Mitchener
NBER Working Paper No. 10475
May 2004
JEL No. N2, E44, G21
ABSTRACT
Even after controlling for local economic conditions, differences in state bank supervision and
regulation contribute toward explaining the large variation in state bank suspension rates across U.S.
counties during the Great Depression. More stringent capital requirements lowered suspension rates
while laws prohibiting branch banking and imposing high reserve requirements had the opposite
effect. States that endowed bank supervisors with the authority to liquidate banks minimized
contagion and credit-channel dislocations and experienced lower suspension rates. Those that gave
their supervisors sole authority to issue bank charters and that granted their supervisors long terms
strengthened the incentives for bank lobbyists to influence supervisory decisions and consequently
experienced higher rates of suspension.
Kris James Mitchener
Department of Economics
Leavey School of Business
Santa Clara University
500 El Camino Real
Santa Clara, CA 95053-0385
and NBER
mitchener@scu.edu

Bank Supervision, Regulation, and
Instability During the Great Depression
I. Introduction

Since the end of the Bretton Woods System, costly financial crises in developing
and industrialized countries have blemished the landscape of the international economy.1
Banking crises have disrupted credit channels and exacerbated economic contractions in
both developing and industrial economies.2 Banking crises were also a characteristic of
the 1930s. Widespread financial distress occurred in at least 12 European countries, and
across the Atlantic, the United States experienced a massive banking crisis.3 Of the
approximately 25,000 commercial banks that were in existence in the U.S. in 1929,
nearly 10,000 suspended operations between 1929 and 1933.
Although external shocks were important in triggering some of these crises,
policymakers, both past and present, have also laid some of the blame on weak
supervisory and regulatory institutions and have responded to crises by calling for
reform. For example, G-7 countries at the 1996 Lyon Summit recommended “the
adoption of strong prudential standards in emerging market economies” as well as
renewed efforts “to promote effective supervisory structures in these economies,” and in
1932, the Study Commission for Indiana Financial Institutions concluded that, during the
Depression, “most of the practices that are responsible for a large majority of these
failures could be eradicated by supervision and regulation.”4 Whether such institutions
1

See Caprio and Klingebiel (1996) for a discussion of recent crises and their costs.
For example, see Ferri and Kang (1999) and Ding, Domac, and Ferri (1998) for the operation of creditchannel effects in the Asian financial crisis and Bernanke, Gertler, and Gilchrist (1996) for a general
discussion.
3
Friedman and Schwartz (1963), Bernanke and James (1991), and Grossman (1994).
4
As quoted in Folkerts-Landau and Lindgren (1998) and Study Commission for Indiana Financial
Institutions (1932, p.79), respectively. Recent policymakers have responded to these crises with a variety of
proposals aimed at stabilizing banking systems, including uniform capital adequacy standards (Basel
Capital Accords I and II), risk-adjusted deposit insurance systems, increased prudential supervision, and
2

1

matter for banking stability is a testable empirical question. This article employs a
previously underutilized data set with information on county-level bank suspensions in
the U.S. from 1929-33 to analyze whether differences in bank regulation and supervision
across states are important in accounting for the significant regional variation in bank
suspensions during the Great Depression.
Previous scholars of the Depression have underscored the importance of bank
failures in prolonging the U.S. macroeconomic slump (Friedman and Schwartz, 1963;
Temin, 1976; White, 1984; Wicker, 1980 and 1996; and Calomiris and Mason, 2000);
however, comparatively little attention has been paid to the regional variation in bank
failures (figure 1) or to the role that prudential supervision and regulation may have
played.5 Of the banks that suspended during the Depression, approximately three quarters
of them were state-chartered financial institutions that operated under different
supervisory and regulatory regimes depending on the state in which they were located.
Rather than eliminating existing or future state banking departments, the dual banking
system, established by the National Banking Acts of the 1860s, permitted state banking
departments to co-exist alongside national regulatory agencies (such the Office of the
Comptroller of the Currency and later the Federal Reserve). By the 1920s, significant
differences in regulatory and supervisory arrangements had emerged as a result of
regional experimentation and interest-group pressure.
The analysis in this article aims to deepen our understanding of the U.S. banking
crisis from 1929-33 and shed light on the general relationship between supervision,
regulation, and financial stability by examining cross-sectional data with considerable
variation in regulatory and supervisory systems as well as rates of banking distress and by
improving on the methodology that has been used in previous empirical research. First,
since county-level data provide a much larger sample of observations than comparable
institutional reform of banking systems (including increased market discipline). For additional discussion
of current regulatory reform, see Herring and Litan (1995) and Goldstein (1996).
5
Exceptions are Gambs (1977) and Wheelock (1995).
2

cross-country data and unobserved heterogeneity is less of a problem across states than
across countries, the accuracy of the estimates of the effects of regulation and supervision
on financial stability should be improved. Second, rather than using general proxies for
institutional quality to test the relationship between supervision and bank failures (as has
been the practice in recent cross-country studies of modern banking crises), this article
draws on new information from the American Bankers Association surveys of state
banking departments of the 1920s and 1930s to construct direct measures of the quality of
bank supervision and powers granted to supervisors.6 Third, data on differences in
prudential regulations (capital and reserve requirements) and branching laws across states
are also collected to provide an integrated framework for analyzing the effects of both
bank supervision and regulation on financial stability during the Great Depression.7
Fourth, the econometric analysis makes use of the unique bifurcated nature of the
American dual banking system to control for other state-specific effects and differences
in economic conditions across localities, and to deal with simultaneous equations bias
once contemporaneous economic conditions are included.
The empirical estimates presented in this article show that differences in state
regulatory and supervisory regimes help account for the regional variation in financial
distress during the Depression. Counties located in states that permitted branching,
enacted higher capital requirements, and gave their supervisors the authority to liquidate
banks without first going through a court receivership process experienced lower bank

6

World Bank studies such as Demirguc-Kunt and Detragiache (2002) lack data on differences in the
quality of supervision across countries, and therefore rely on indirect measures (like the rule of law and the
quality of the bureaucracy) to proxy for supervisory quality. More recently, Barth, Caprio, and Levine
(2001a,b) have made some significant progress on gathering information on developing-country banking
practices, but their analysis focuses on 1999, and thus comes after many of the financial crises of the last
several decades. The ability to test how supervision and regulation affect financial stability is therefore
limited, especially if regulations have changed as a result of banking crises.
7
Previous cross-sectional studies of the Great Depression (Grossman, 1994; Wheelock, 1995; and Wicker,
1996) have neglected the role of bank supervision and failed to account for many of the estimation issues
considered herein.
3

suspension rates from 1929-33. Those that appointed their supervisors to longer terms
and gave them unlimited authority to charter banks experienced higher suspension rates.

II. Modeling Bank Failure Rates during the Great Depression

The Great Depression was a period of unparalleled financial distress.
Approximately 40% of all banks in existence in the U.S. in 1929 were suspended by 1933
and were closed during the intervening period of economic hardship (table 1). As figure 1
and table 2 show, the pattern of banking distress across the U.S. was uneven. Some
regions and states experienced a large number (or a high proportion) of suspensions and
failures, while others weathered the severe downturn much better. At a more
disaggregated level, some counties experienced a complete loss of all their commercial
state banks, while others had no suspensions during the Depression. The average annual
county suspension rate for state-chartered banks from 1929-33 (based on the number of
banks in existence in each year) was 9.5 percent, and the standard deviation was 9.3
percent. By census region, counties in the Midwest had the highest average annual
suspension rate over the five-year period (12.4 percent) while those in the Northeast had
the lowest (4.0 percent).
Since differences in business and agricultural conditions across localities may
account for much of the variation in failure rates across counties, we provide a simple
conceptual framework for testing whether, in addition to this channel, the supervisory and
regulatory environment that was in place for state-chartered banks as of 1929 contributes
to an explanation of banking distress during the Great Depression. For example, laws
permitting statewide branching may have allowed banks to diversify their portfolios or
weed out weak banks from their system prior to the Depression. Prudential regulations,
such as capital and reserve requirements, may have provided banks with a buffer for
periods of insolvency, prevented bank runs, or alternatively encouraged banks to take on
4

additional risk in their portfolios. And supervisory arrangements (such as the authority
given to supervisors and their insulation from interest-group influence) may have
influenced the stability of state banking systems.
To examine the sources of variation in banking sector distress, we can decompose
the suspension rate for non-Federal-Reserve member, state-chartered banks, SRiq, in
county q, state i into two pieces:

(1) SRiq = ai + biq,

where ai is the combined effect of all covariates common to the state and biq is the
orthogonal county-specific component that combines the effect of all factors purely
idiosyncratic to county q. Equation 1 implies that a properly specified estimation
procedure will control for both state effects, such as differences in state-chartered bank
supervision and regulation, and county-specific effects, such as differences in economic
structure. Other state-level influences, such as economic conditions during the
Depression, need to be accounted for as well; but including such information potentially
introduces simultaneous equations bias as bank failures in a particular locality may have
worsened the severity of the Depression in that area. Before estimating equation 1, the
next section describes the differences in state supervisory and regulatory regimes on the
eve of the Depression, and links them to the theoretical literature on financial stability.

III. The Regulatory and Supervisory Landscape

The National Banking Acts of the 1860s gave birth to the U.S. dual banking
system and created the possibility that banks in the same state could face different

5

regulatory regimes depending on charter status.8 All national banks were under the
supervisory and regulatory authority of the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency and
later the Federal Reserve Board, while state-chartered financial institutions were under
the jurisdiction of state banking departments. (By 1929, 35 percent of the state-chartered
banks had also opted to join the Federal Reserve System.)9 In theory, state banking
departments could have adopted the institutional framework of the national banking
system so that regulation of banking systems would have been homogeneous in 1929, but
legislative decisions about bank regulation were often driven by factors that were specific
to states – in particular, the motives of private-interest groups and differences in response
by policymakers to public interests. As previous research has emphasized, state
legislators often felt pressure to respond to earlier episodes of banking instability by
passing legislation to protect the interests of depositors, such as deposit insurance and
higher reserve and capital requirements. Hence, in states that had previously experienced
more banking instability, regulators sometimes responded to depositor concerns by
passing new banking laws. But outcomes were also influenced by the lobbying efforts of
well-organized interest groups.10 For example, Economides, Hubbard, and Palia (1996)
and Mitchener (2001) draw attention to the role of small, unit banks that lobbied for
restrictions on branch banking laws; Calomiris and Ramirez (2002) also stress the
importance of borrowers in shaping branching outcomes (in particular, the role of
landholders in wealthy states). And with the emergence of financial conglomerates in the
1920s, non-bank financial service providers, such as insurance companies, were

8

Many states in existence in the 1860s had already passed laws regulating their banking systems, although
not all of them had organized state banking departments with supervisory authority at this time.
9
This subset of state banks was also under the influence of Federal regulators, although regulation was
carried out at the regional level by the Reserve Banks. Since state member banks faced additional
regulation and supervision, they are removed from the empirical analysis, which focuses exclusively on
those differences in regulation and supervision resulting from state banking departments and state laws. We
thank Joe Mason and Gary Richardson for providing some of the data on state member bank suspensions.
County data on state member banks and suspensions are from Rand McNally (various years).
10
As Stigler (1971) and Peltzman (1976) have emphasized, this can make regulators and their agencies
susceptible to capture.
6

interested in impeding the growth of these new, larger financial institutions by lobbying
legislatures to impose higher regulatory burdens on them. Finally, White (1983)
emphasizes that competition between federal and state regulators existed. State banking
authorities often justified their existence on the grounds that they were more sensitive to
the specific concerns of bankers and bank customers in their areas. To ensure
membership in state banking systems, regulators often encouraged legislatures to offer a
different menu of regulations that would be seen as more favorable to banks. As a result
of these factors, substantial differences in prudential regulation and supervision had
emerged across states by 1929; in turn, these differences may have influenced the pattern
of state bank suspensions during the Great Depression.

A. Prudential Regulation and Branching Laws

Branching laws, capital requirements, and reserve requirements differed
considerably across states in 1929 (figures 2 and 3). Interstate branching was forbidden in
the U.S., and national banks were severely restricted from opening branches, but statechartered banks were allowed to operate branches if their state banking codes authorized
them.11 Counties located in states where branch banking was permitted may have
experienced fewer bank suspensions because banks in these locations could potentially
diversify their loans and deposits over a wider geographical area or customer base and
insulate themselves from shocks particular to certain regions or sectors of the economy
(Wacht, 1968; Lauch and Murphy, 1970; and Laderman, Schmidt, and Zimmerman,
1991). Moreover, just as foreign banks have brought increased competition to inefficient
domestic markets (Folkerts-Landau and Lindgren, 1998), states with laws allowing
11

The McFadden Act of 1927 permitted national banks to establish local branches in the city of their home
office if a state law allowed branching, but the number of branches was also restricted. They could open no
new branches in cities with fewer than 25,000 people, only two branches in cities with populations between
50,000 and 100,000, and at the discretion of the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency for cities of over
100,000 (Tippetts, 1929).
7

branch banking may have eroded local monopolies and driven weak banks from the
system through merger and voluntary liquidation.12 As a result of consolidation, the
stability of the banking system may have been improved. Studies using state-level or
country-level data on the 1920s and 1930s have found some evidence that branching
stabilizes banking systems (Grossman, 1994 and Wheelock, 1992, 1995), although those
using individual bank data find less support for the hypothesis.13 By 1929, 25 states and
the District of Columbia permitted some form of branching or did not explicitly prohibit
it by law. More narrowly, 8 states and Washington, D.C. allowed statewide branching in
1929. (The other states restricted branching to the city or county of the home office of a
bank.) To test the effects of branch banking on financial stability, we consider two
different specifications, the number of states forbidding branching and the number of
branches as a percent of state banks.
Prudential regulations also differed across states. Prior to the enactment of federal
deposit insurance in the U.S., capital was the main form of protection for depositors and
minimum capital requirements (the amount of capital required to receive a bank charter)
and double liability laws were the main tools used by state banking departments to induce
banks to hold more capital (Benston and Kaufman, 1994).14 Capital requirements cushion
depositors against banks’ losses due to normal business operations; the larger the
contributions of the owners of the bank, the greater can be the shrinkage of assets without
12

For evidence that this took place when states deregulated their banking systems beginning in the 1980s,
see Stiroh and Strahan (2003). However, it is also possible that the expansion of branching increased
competition, resulting in reduced bank profits and a system more vulnerable to crises.
13
Wicker (1980) argues that Caldwell and Company, which had over 100 branches in the South, was a
primary force behind the bank failures of 1930. Carlson (2001) finds that branched banks in three states had
a lower probability of surviving the Great Depression than those without branches and Calomiris and
Mason (2000) report that state-member banks and national banks were more likely to fail if they belonged
to a branching network. It may be that branch banking provides stability at the state or county level by
introducing competition into the banking system and weeding out weak banks from the system without
actually improving the survivability of individual banks. Previous studies using state or country data do not
control for differences in the supervisory environment.
14
Grossman (2001) shows that, during the first quarter of the century, differences in liability laws across
states were important for explaining bank risk taking, but argues that these laws did not eliminate banking
instability in times of widespread distress. By 1929, all but eight states had implemented at least double
liability for bank shareholders. The remainder had single liability or voluntary liability laws.
8

impairing depositors’ claims (Dewatripont and Tirole, 1994). Since charter capital
represents the contribution from owners, higher capital requirements can also serve to
chasten owners (and their managers) from taking on excessively risky loan portfolios,
thus reining in moral hazard.15 Finally, capital requirements affect entry into banking.
Many states had set very low capital requirements prior to the Depression, and some
contemporaries argued that these had encouraged the formation of too many small unit
banks and “excess competition” (Study Commission for Indiana Financial Institutions,
1932). As figure 3 shows, in 1929, 21 states had capital requirements lower than the
requirement of $25,000 that applied uniformly to national banks located in cities of fewer
than 3,000 people.16 Thus, the theoretical and historical literature suggests that states with
higher capital requirements may have experienced fewer suspensions during the
Depression.17
Reserve requirements are an additional prudential regulation that could have
influenced financial stability by reducing the risk of liquidity crises. As of 1929, all states
had instituted reserve requirements for state-chartered non-member banks, and many had
rates higher than the required rate of 7% for national banks or for Fed members (figure
3). Without reserve requirements, banks may be prone to holding too few reserves since
they are driven to compete over depositors to increase the returns on assets. Such
behavior can increase systemic risk, suggesting that a socially superior outcome is
possible through regulation (Cothren and Waud, 1994). On the other hand, reserve
requirements can potentially reduce monitoring incentives and result in lower quality
bank portfolios (Besanko and Kanatas, 1993; Boot and Greenbaum, 1993). Further, since
15

The theoretical evidence on this point is mixed. For example, Kahane (1977), Kim and Santomero
(1988), and Blum (1999) argue that capital requirements could increase risk.
16
Capital requirements are difficult to quantify during the 1920s and 1930s, in part because both state and
federal regulators applied different requirements to banks depending on the size of the municipality in
which the bank was located. Some states had one population-based requirement, while others had multiple.
In states that had multiple capital requirements, this paper uses the requirement that applied to the smallest
municipality, which was usually for 3,000 people.
17
Hunter, Verbrugge, and Whidbee (1996) provide some empirical support that minimum capital
requirements reduced the likelihood of failure for de novo Savings and Loans in the 1980s.
9

they operate as a tax on bank liabilities, reserve requirements can induce banks to take on
more portfolio risk to offset their reduced profits. The theoretical literature thus suggests
that reserve requirements affect financial stability, but the predicted sign of their effect is
ambiguous.

B. Supervision

Mishkin (2001) has emphasized that prudential supervision can work in
conjunction with regulation to mitigate asymmetric information problems between
depositors and banks and reduce financial instability. However, reconfiguring the powers,
policies, and structure of supervisory agencies is complicated by the tradeoffs between
transparent rules and supervisory discretion.18 Supervisory systems are also influenced by
politics, including decisions about who should be appointed to oversee the examination
of banks, how long their terms of service should last, and whether those who appoint
them can override their decisions. Because the supervisory authority and political
autonomy granted to state banking departments differed considerably, it is likely that
some states’ regulators operated with more discretion than others. Moreover, unlike
national banks (which had a uniform system of bank examinations and reports and which,
under the direction of the Office of the Comptroller of Currency, had improved the
handling of the liquidation of failed banks), the quality of supervision across state
banking departments also varied. Financial stability may therefore have been influenced
by the institutional quality, the political autonomy, and the powers given to state banking
departments.
18

As Folkerts-Landau and Lindgren (1998, p.42) state, “The justification for discretion is that bank
supervision is as much about making quantitative judgments about the integrity and competence of
management as it is about maintaining compliance with quantitative rules or prudential ratios. However,
one major problem with allowing supervisors discretion is that there is no guarantee it will be used
impartially and objectively. Much depends on the integrity, public credibility, and competence of the
supervisor, which can only be earned over time, as well as on the broader political and institutional
environment.”
10

In the 1920s and 1930s, many state bank commissioners were particularly
concerned that their ability to monitor banks or make chartering decisions was
compromised by a lack of insulation from the governors who appointed them (44 of the
48 state banking superintendents were appointed by the state’s governor).19 For example,
when queried about weaknesses in the statutory provisions related to the office of bank
commissioner, the superintendent for the state of Arkansas wrote, “The bank
commissioner is appointed by the Governor, which in some instances is bound to have a
political influence upon the operation of the bank department” (American Bankers
Association, 1929). Lengthening the appointment of the supervisor beyond the election
cycle of the governor might have provided a more effective shield from the political
motives of the state’s governor. On the other hand, as the theoretical literature
emphasizes (Laffont and Tirole, 1991 and Martimont, 1999), more autonomy could also
induce bankers and their shareholders to attempt to increase their influence over the
decisions of superintendents, such as the granting of charters or the timing of bank
examinations. State bank supervisors granted more independence could have also been
more susceptible to corruption and more concerned with implementing their own
objectives rather than the public’s (Chapman and Westerfield, 1942; Barth, Caprio, and
Levine 2001b; and Djankov, La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, and Shleifer, 2002). Because
the degree of insulation of the supervisor may have affected decisions about chartering,
receivership, and the timing of bank examinations, and in turn influenced stability,
differences in term lengths of state supervisors are included as an additional regressor.
States also differed in terms of the quality of supervision. Folkerts-Landau and
Lindgren (1998) and Neal (1942) have noted that the quality of supervision depends on
having sufficient resources to hire and train competent bank examiners. If the ratio of
examiners to banks in a state were small, it may have been difficult for the state
19

In the four other states, they were either appointed by the state bank board or a commission of
corporations, or elected. Two of the 44 are first selected by banks and then appointed by the governor
(American Bankers Association, 1929).
11

supervisory agency to identify non-performing banks and intervene before banks became
insolvent.20 Even the most competent examination staff would have a limited capacity to
monitor bank behavior effectively, so differences in the number of examiners per bank
across states may account for some of the observed geographical variation in county
suspension rates.
State banking departments also differed in the authority and powers they granted
to their supervisors, which in turn could have limited their effectiveness.21 The authority
of the state bank supervisor to expedite the resolution of failed banks is one such power
that varied across state banking departments and could have influenced bank failure rates
during the Depression. States that granted their supervisors the authority to liquidate
banks without having a court appoint a receiver may have reduced uncertainty and
limited contagion from the failing institution to the rest of the system by leading to a
faster resolution of claims (including those of correspondent banks). Faster resolution
may have also been important in limiting credit-channel effects that resulted from assets
being tied up in failed institutions and reducing the incentives for banks to gamble for
resurrection (Anari, Mason, and Kolari, 1999 and Fry, 1995).
A second power that varied across states is whether the state bank supervisor was
given sole authority to deny or grant charters or whether it was placed in the hands of a
board.22 On the one hand, many state bank supervisors believed that the “overbanking”

20

If the decision to suspend a bank is viewed as a regulatory outcome, it is also possible that more vigilant
supervision (as characterized here by state banking departments having more supervisors per bank) may
have actually increased failures if examiners were concerned about negative spillovers.
21
Folkerts-Landau and Lindgren (1998, p.43) have argued that “Ideally, the supervisory authority is
endowed by law with a clear mandate and powers to carry out its function. The law defines the scope of
authority of the supervisor and confers authority to license and to withdraw licenses of financial
institutions, approve new owners, issue prudential regulations, obtain periodic prudential reports, conduct
on-site inspections, take corrective actions (including the imposition of restrictions on a bank’s business
activities), and close and liquidate banks.”
22
In contrast to the situation for state banks, the Comptroller of Currency’s office had established a system
that permitted a great degree of control over the granting of new charters for national banks. Its office
reviewed charter applications and based chartering decisions on economic surveys of the community where
the proposed bank was to be set up. These surveys included an examination of the existing banks in the
service area, the local population of businesses and depositors, and regional economic conditions. Rules
12

situation of the 1920s resulted not only from low capital requirements, but also from the
lack of adequate power for supervisors to restrict charters (Gruchy, 1937 and Neal, 1942).
When state bank supervisors were surveyed in 1934, several commented that having the
authority to limit bank charters would have “aided in preventing many state bank failures
in the last five years.”23 On the other hand, concentrating chartering decisions in the
hands of a single individual may have had counterproductive consequences for financial
stability if it increased the incentives for banking industry lobbyists to attempt to bribe
supervisors or for supervisors to make decisions based on personal rather than public
interest (Barth, Caprio, and Levine, 2001b and Djankov, La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, and
Shleifer, 2002). Since insufficient control of licensing authority has been linked to
banking instability (Mishkin, 2001 and American Bankers Association, 1935), a variable
indicating whether a state’s banking supervisor had the sole authority to charter banks is
included in the regression analysis.

IV. Accounting for Differences in Bank Suspension Rates across U.S. Counties

A. Estimating State Bank Suspensions

Perhaps the biggest hurdle standing in the way of identifying the relationship
between bank failures, regulation, and supervision has been obtaining reliable data from
periods when there was sufficient distress in banking systems. To meet this challenge,
this paper draws on a previously underutilized data set of bank suspensions occurring in
U.S. counties during the Great Depression. (Existing research on bank regulation during
formulated to limit chartering were codified as early as 1909 in the Comptroller’s Instructions Relative to
the Organization and Powers of National Banks.
23
The state bank supervisor of Maryland stated in 1933, “A number of failures might have been prevented
by greater care in granting new charters.” Likewise, the Virginia Superintendent wrote, “The damage which
existed began more than five years ago. We were over-banked but had no authority to prevent the
organization of new banks until six years ago” (American Bankers Association, 1934).
13

the Great Depression has used either aggregate state-level data on all commercial banks
or individual bank data from a few states, and has not considered the role of bank
supervision).24 The county data not only provide a larger sample relative to cross-country
or state-based studies for conducting empirical tests, but they also closely approximate
the competitive environment in which banks in the U.S. (especially rural ones) operated
in the 1920s and 1930s.25 The data are derived from information collected by the Federal
Deposit Insurance Corporation and compiled in computer format by the Inter-university
Consortium for Political Science Research (FDIC, 1960). The computer files contain
county-level information of bank suspensions, total number of banks, and total bank
deposits for 47 states on a yearly basis.26 In addition, the data on commercial banks are
further disaggregated by charter status, permitting an analysis of the relationship between
state-chartered financial institutions and regulations that varied for these institutions
across state borders.
Following equation 1, the dependent variable is the suspension rate from 1929-33
for non-Fed-member, state-chartered banks located in county q, state i, computed as the
sum of the bank suspensions between 1929-33 divided by the number of banks in
existence on December 31st, 1928.27 We regress the county suspension rate for state24

Wheelock (1995) and Gambs (1977) use Federal Reserve data on all commercial bank failures at the
state level to analyze the effects of bank regulation; however, they use a series that contains both national
and state banks even though national and state banks had different regulatory regimes and significantly
different failure rates during the Depression (As table 1 shows, state banks had an average suspension rate
that was approximately 4 percentage points higher than national banks). Moreover, as Calomiris and Mason
(2001) have pointed out, using the data on all commercial banks mixes the state bank suspension data with
the national bank receivership data. Carlson (2004) and Ramirez (2003) use limited, individual bank
balance sheet data to examine the effects of branching laws, but many state banking departments did not
systematically gather this sort of information, and those that did collect it only did so infrequently (every
one or two years). Their results are thus based on a limited sample of only a few states using data at low
frequencies, making it difficult to pinpoint the factors that contributed to individual bank failures.
25
There were approximately 25,000 banks operating in the U.S. at the end of the 1920s, 80 percent of
which were located in towns of less than 10,000 people and 43 percent of which had a capital stock of
$25,000 or less (National Industrial Conference Board, 1932, pp.13-14). Given the fact that the automobile
had only gained more widespread use in the 1920s, most depositors did not travel beyond the largest town
in their area to conduct banking. In rural areas, this range likely encompassed counties as well.
26
There are no data on Wyoming.
27
To be sure, there are differences between suspended and closed banks. This paper follows the Federal
Reserve’s convention: state bank suspensions comprise “all banks closed to the public, either temporarily
14

chartered financial institutions on the state bank regulations and supervisory practices
that were described in section III and an additional set of conditioning variables. Rather
than relying on characteristics of a country’s institutional environment to proxy for
supervision (e.g., Demirguc-Kunt and Detragiache (2002)), previously unused survey
data from the American Bankers Association (1929) on the authority and quality of state
banking departments permit the construction of direct measures of prudential
supervision. Indicator variables for whether the state bank supervisor had the sole
authority to license or charter state banks and whether the supervisor could liquidate
failing banks without first having a court appoint a receiver are included. The number of
banks per examiner and the length of the supervisor’s term (in years) are used to measure
the quality of state supervision and political insulation, respectively.
In contrast to previous research, which likely suffers from omitted variables bias,
the supervisory data are combined with differences in state bank regulation in order to
provide an integrated analysis of the effects of supervision and regulation on financial
stability. In particular, we include a branch banking dummy variable, which takes on a
value of 1 in states where branching was prohibited. Data on the number of state bank
branches (and branching laws) are from the Federal Reserve Bulletin (February and

or permanently by supervisory authorities or by the banks’ boards of directors on account of financial
difficulties, whether on a so-called moratorium basis or otherwise, unless the closing was under a special
bank holiday declared by civil authorities. If a bank closed under a special holiday declared by civil
authorities and remained closed only during such holiday or part thereof, it has not been counted as a bank
suspension” (Federal Reserve Bulletin, September 1937, p.866). Banks that become insolvent and are
placed under receivership or that liquidate their assets voluntarily due to distress might properly be termed
failures, and are a subset of suspensions. The county data do not permit one to distinguish between failures,
temporary suspensions, or banks that later merged as a result of distress. Mergers induced by banks failing
no doubt occurred although bankruptcy laws of the period did not give receivers any responsibility to
resuscitate banks through actions such as mergers (Mason, 1996.). Unfortunately, detailed information for
state, non-member banks at the county level is scarce; such data would permit one to extend the analysis
presented in this paper to consider post-suspension outcomes. While the data used here potentially overstate
the true number of failures for state-chartered banks, unless there is some systematic reason to believe that
there are important regional differences between failures and suspensions, the hypotheses tested should not
be adversely affected if suspended banks are included. In their study of contagion effects during the
Depression, Calomiris and Mason (2000, p.30) point out that this distinction in theory can be important, but
they do not find that their results for the 1930-32 sample period are sensitive to the choice of failure data
versus suspension data.
15

December, 1929). To capture differences in quantitative regulations across states, we
include the minimum capital requirement for state-chartered banks in small
municipalities (measured in thousands of dollars) and the reserve requirement applying to
country-bank demand deposits (expressed as a percentage of total deposits). Data on
capital and reserve requirements are from Polk’s Bankers Encyclopedia Co. (1929) and
the Federal Reserve Bulletin (November 1928, September 1930), respectively. All the
regulations and characteristics of state bank supervision are those that were in existence
at the start of 1929; they are treated as time invariant over the sample period in order to
identify the impact of regulations that were in place at the start of the Depression.28 The
identifying assumption is that the regulatory and supervisory aspects of banking are
uncorrelated with the random element of bank failures.29
As suggested by equation 1, county-specific covariates, biq, are also included in
order to disentangle the effects of regulatory and supervisory variables from local factors
that may have influenced suspension rates. In particular, we include the percentage of a
county’s population that is rural and farm-based and the percentage of population that is
employed in each of three different sectors (manufacturing, retail, and wholesale
occupations). The percentage change in the average value of farms between 1920 and
1930 is also included to account for the fact that bank failures in the 1930s may have
been a continuation of ongoing rural banking distress that started in the 1920s – a

28

Changes in regulatory and supervisory regimes were relatively infrequent until the second half of 1933,
when the banking crisis had subsided. For example, no additional states legalized statewide branching from
1929-32, and only one state had changed its capital requirement by 1931 (six had done so prior to 1933).
29
Although it is theoretically possible that there is simultaneity bias resulting from an endogenous publicinterest response to bank failures, it is likely to be quite small in a study where the regulatory variables are
determined at the state level and the dependent variable is based on county-level suspensions. To test
whether the assignment of a county’s regulatory and supervisory system is exogenous, I eliminated from
the sample any border counties with populations that make up more than 20 percent of the state’s
population – those that might be regarded as potentially having a very strong influence on legislative
outcomes. There were 37 counties that fit this criterion. When these “influential” counties are removed, the
coefficients on the regulatory and supervisory variables were not significantly different from those reported
in the regressions shown; this is consistent with the assumption that the particular regulatory and
supervisory regime is predetermined by historical factors.
16

question that has been widely debated by economic historians.30 Since declining farm
values are associated with declining land prices, falling farm incomes, and agricultural
bank failures, they are a reliable proxy for local agricultural distress (Kliesen and Gilbert,
1996). These county characteristics are calculated using U.S. census files on counties
(U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census, 1920, 1930). To account for
differences in the size of banks in each county, a factor that has been negatively
associated with the probability of failures in previous studies (White, 1984 and Calomiris
and Mason, 2000), we include the average deposits per bank in each county. Summary
statistics and sources for the variables in the regressions are shown in Appendix Table
1.31

B. Cross-Sectional Results

Table 3 presents cross-sectional OLS estimates (with clustered and robust
standard errors) based on 2,315 county-level observations.32 The estimated coefficients
provide evidence that supervisory and regulatory differences across states affected
financial stability during the Great Depression. Counties located in states where
supervisors were appointed to longer terms experienced higher state commercial bank
suspension rates: an additional year in office raised the county suspension rate from
1929-33 by a little more than 2 percentage points. (The range of term lengths varied from
2 to 6 years and the average suspension rate over the Depression was 42.4%.) Consistent
with the theoretical literature reviewed in section II, even though longer terms for
30

See, for example, Temin (1976) and White (1984).
A correlation matrix of the key regulatory and supervisory variables is shown in Appendix Table 2.
32
There are 3,051 counties in the full sample of 47 states, but due to missing data and counties with no
state non-Fed member banks only 2,315 counties are included in the regressions. Of the 3051, 372 do not
report data on state bank suspensions. In three states (Arizona, Nevada, and New Mexico), the percentage
of counties with missing values for suspensions is greater than 40 percent. When all the observations from
these states are dropped from the sample, the regression results for the remaining counties are very similar
to those reported here.
31

17

supervisors insulated them from the governors who appointed nearly all of them, they
also increased the incentives for lobbyists to expend more resources to influence
supervisory decisions. Supervisors with longer terms may have responded to industry
lobbying by acting with less independence and more discretion in timing on-site
examinations, granting forbearance, and issuing charters or banking licenses – all of
which potentially undermined financial stability.
Although longer terms of appointment do not necessarily result in unfavorable
outcomes for the banking system, decision-making rests more heavily on the integrity of
the banking authorities in such systems since supervisors are endowed with greater
autonomy. As the Massachusetts banking superintendent remarked in 1929, “Statutes of
this state give commissioners ample authority to supervise banks. Quality of supervision
depends on the character of the incumbent of the office of the commissioner.”33 The
statistical evidence presented here suggests that, in some states, the discretion that went
along with longer supervisory term lengths was counterproductive to stability, and the
historical record provides some corroborating evidence. Vickers (1994, pp.34-5)
describes the situation in Florida in the 1920s as one where bankers knew how to prey on
Comptroller Amos’s “weakness and greed” by providing him and his examiners with
unsecured loans. “Promoters eagerly sought bank charters, which regulators willingly
provided. The newly sanctioned bankers then used depositors’ money to fund their own
projects. And with their new source of money, they bought regulatory protection by
making loans to bank officials.” Comptroller Amos was eventually indicted by a Palm
Beach County grand jury for gross malpractice. Meanwhile, Florida experienced
numerous failures throughout the 1920s and eventually a severe panic in 1929.

33

American Bankers Association (1929). A similar concern was expressed in 1934 by the head of bank
supervision from Pennsylvania in the wake of the banking crisis: “Honest, experienced department heads,
provided with means to thoroughly examine and supervise, can do more to improve the state banking
system throughout the country than more restrictive banking laws.” (American Bankers Association, 1934).
18

Counties located in states that granted supervisors the sole authority to issue
charters also experienced suspension rates that were around 6 percentage points higher, a
result that is both economically and statistically significant (p value = 0). The positive
sign on this coefficient is consistent and complementary with the positive sign on the
supervisor’s term length and the theoretical literature on corruption. Supervisors with full
discretionary authority over licensing decisions destabilized the state banking system by
granting charters to banks whose applications had been rejected by the Office of the
Comptroller of the Currency or to cronies in the banking industry who would not have
otherwise had their applications approved, but who could focus their lobbying on
persuading the single individual with authority over chartering decisions. It is difficult to
find historical evidence of regulators admitting to “being on the take” – issuing charters
in exchange for personal benefit – but some former bank superintendents have in fact
admitted that their departments were corruptible to this sort of industry influence. As the
state bank supervisor of Oklahoma described, superintendents in his state were indeed
influenced by industry lobbyists in the 1920s. “For a period of about 3 years from 1919
until 1922 graft and corruption played a dominant role in the operation of the State
Banking Department. Charters were to be had at a price.”34
In contrast to chartering authority, granting the supervisor sole authority to
liquidate banks without first having a court appoint a receiver significantly reduced
county suspension rates (by approximately 17 percentage points). There are several
explanations for this negative association. Providing supervisors with the authority to
liquidate banks resulted in a speedier liquidation process than using the court system and
potentially limited contagion effects from failing institutions to the rest of the system
(Folkerts-Landau and Lindgren, 1998). As the Colorado state superintendent wrote in
1929, “The administration of banks in liquidation may be handled at less expense and
more diligently wherein it is not necessary to constantly refer matters to the courts, which
34

Neal (1942).
19

in many instances are extremely slow in the determination of important matters.”35 With
the average liquidation time for banks around six years during the Great Depression,
granting supervisors liquidation authority also allowed depositors to realize partial claims
more quickly and limited credit channel effects that operate through the assets tied up in
failed banking institutions.36 As the banking supervisor from the state of Mississippi
commented in 1929, “The bank commissioner having authority to appoint liquidating
agents in failed banks and being responsible for the liquidation of these banks, has
materially improved the efficiency of the department in this respect, thereby enabling the
liquidation of banks to function in a businesslike way; enabling the commissioner to
realize more from the assets of failed banks than would ordinarily be possible.”37 Finally,
speeding up bank liquidation potentially reduced the incentives for managers to engage in
perverse behavior, such as gambling for resurrection before a receiver is appointed.38
Since many of those who held claims against failing banks were correspondent banks that
also wanted their deposits returned, supervisors with this authority were not necessarily
given the incentive to act only in the interests of the failing institution. Even if
supervisors were apt to respond to bank-industry influence, the fact that other banks held
claims with each other forced banking authorities to take into account the effects that
bank liquidation decisions would have on the entire system; this likely aligned their
private motives with public interest and resulted in improved stability.
Differences in state regulations also account for the variation in county
suspension rates during the Great Depression. As column 1 shows, suspension rates were

35

American Bankers Association (1929).
As Anari, Mason, and Kolari (1999) show, when banks failed and were not resolved during the Great
Depression, liquid deposits were involuntarily transformed into illiquid securities; this slowed down the
ability to rehabilitate insolvent debtors or liquidate their collateral, and affected bank depositors’
consumption decisions and the banking sector’s ability to make loans.
37
American Bankers Association (1929). Similarly, the head of bank supervision in Montana commented
that “less interference should be had from the courts, however, where liquidation is carried on by the
banking departments.” (American Bankers Association, 1929).
38
In Chile, for example, managers of troubled banks began engaging in Ponzi-type lending schemes (Fry,
1995, p.458).
36

20

nearly 8 percentage points higher in counties located in states that prohibited branching.
Prohibitions on branching limited the ability of banks to diversify their loan portfolios
and depositor base. As many firms located in the same area became distressed during the
Depression, the credit quality of banks located in counties where branching was illegal
suffered more than in counties where branching enabled banks to disperse credit across
economic markets. Moreover, liquidity risk was higher in geographically concentrated
banks because these banks relied on deposits from less economically diverse entities. In
counties where branching was permitted, banks could attract deposits from a broader base
of individual and business customers, and therefore realized reductions in the variance in
deposits and withdrawals – those factors that can lead to bank runs.39 By limiting
competition from banks with home operations located in other counties, restrictions on
branching also may have allowed more inefficient banks to persist until 1929 rather than
driving them out of business or forcing them to merge; when the Depression hit,
suspension rates were higher in these areas.
The results in table 3 also show a negative and statistically significant relationship
between the minimum capital required to receive a bank license and bank failure rates. A
$10,000 increase in the minimum capital requirement on average reduced the county
suspension rate for state-chartered banks by approximately 3 percentage points.40 The
negatively-signed coefficient is consistent with the theoretical literature, which
emphasizes that capital requirements stabilize banking systems by reducing moral hazard
(by putting more of the owners’ capital at stake) or by serving as a buffer against shocks
by creating a short-run cushion for banks.41

39

See Liang and Rhoades (1988) for a discussion of this point.
A one standard deviation change in charter capital requirements is $16,300.
41
We also tested whether nonmember state banks located in states with single liability laws experienced
higher suspension rates. Although the positive sign on the coefficient is consistent with the interpretation
that single liability may have increased bank risk taking, the result was statistically insignificant at the 10percent level.
40

21

County characteristics were also included so that more precise estimates of the
regulatory and supervisory variables could be obtained. Several of these covariates are
also statistically significant in the regressions. As might be predicted, those counties with
a more diversified economic base had lower failure rates; banks in these counties would
have typically been able to hold more diversified portfolios of assets and would have had
a depositor base that was less homogeneous. The percentage of a county’s population
engaged in manufacturing is negatively associated with county bank failure rates (with a
point estimate of –0.33) and is statistically significant with a p value of 0.04 (not reported
in table 3). Banks in counties that had a mix of both industry and agriculture were thus
more likely capable of coping with idiosyncratic shocks.42 The negative and statistically
significant coefficient on the percentage change in farm land values suggests that those
counties that had more significant reduction in land values for farms between 1920 and
1930 experienced higher bank failure rates during the Great Depression. This is contrary
to Temin (1976), but consistent with Stauffer (1981) and White (1984), who emphasize
that banks in the 1920s, especially small ones, had slow adjustment processes and were
left vulnerable to a further decline in asset values or shocks to the money supply.

C. Specification Tests

Although the regressions in Table 3 account for differences in economic structure
at the county level, they are predetermined and do not take into account differences in the
economic conditions that prevailed during the Great Depression. Omitted variables bias is
42

One covariate that was not statistically significant was the rural, farm population of a county – a result
that is perhaps surprising since literature on bank failures during the Depression has emphasized that they
were overwhelmingly rural and agricultural (Friedman and Schwartz, 1963; Temin, 1976; Stauffer, 1981;
Thies and Gerlowski, 1983). This was true even when an alternative measure (the number of farms per
1,000 people in a county) was substituted for the measure used here. Differences in regulation and
supervision across states are likely also explaining why many banks failed in rural areas. For example,
states that were rural may have also been states that forbid branch banking, had low capital requirements, or
did not give their supervisors sole authority to liquidate banks, and therefore experienced higher failure
rates.
22

potentially a problem if contemporaneous economic conditions are not also included in
the analysis.43 This suggests including a broad-based measure such as changes in state
personal income in the regressions (results shown in column 2).44 The coefficient on
personal income is negative and statistically significant, but including this
contemporaneous measure likely introduces simultaneous equations bias (economic
conditions can influence bank failures and vice versa) – an econometric issue that has
proved vexing in previous studies.45 It is possible to find instruments for bank failures in
the income equation (e.g., the regulatory and supervisory variables), but it is difficult to
find measures using historical data that are correlated with changes in state income but
uncorrelated with the error term in the bank failure equation. Without these, the system of
equations would not be identified.
As an alternative strategy to the instrumental variables approach, we exploit the
unique bifurcated nature of regulation and supervision in the U.S. dual banking system,
and include the average annual failure rate for national banks at the state level as a
regressor in column 3 so that differences in contemporaneous economic conditions can be
taken into account.46 Since national banks were regulated and supervised by the Office of

43

Finding data to address the regional differences in economic conditions has been a significant
impediment to research on the feedback effects during the Depression. Broad-based measures of economic
decline during the 1930s are difficult to assemble. They are nonexistent at the county level and problematic
at the state level. Estimates of state GDP are constructed starting in 1929, and since these figures were
constructed ex post, they may suffer from significant measurement error. Alternative series such as state or
county unemployment statistics are unavailable for this period.
44
The percentage change in state personal income between 1929 and 1933 is computed using data from
U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis (1995).
45
For example, Wheelock (1995, p.30) suggests that his results do not account for the feedback between
the severity of the Great Depression in a state and bank failures in that state, and therefore likely suffer
from simultaneous equations bias. In his analysis, he controls for differences in the severity of the
Depression by including either state-level changes in farm land prices and industrial production figures or
the decline in a state’s personal income, but he does not allow bank failures to in turn affect these
macroeconomic indicators.
46
We condition on state economic conditions rather than those at the county level because county-level
economic information such as county unemployment statistics, employment growth, and changes in
personal income have been shown to be poor predictors of banking conditions such as profitability,
whereas state business cycle variables have been shown to be reliable predictors of bank profitability
(Meyer and Yeager, 2001 and Neely and Wheelock, 1997). Data on national bank failure rates are
computed using data from the Federal Reserve Bulletin, September 1937. However, the size and statistical
23

the Comptroller of Currency, the estimated coefficients for the regulatory and supervisory
variables for state-chartered commercial banks will be largely unaffected by its inclusion;
and since a county’s failure rate contributes only a portion of a state’s average failure
rate, simultaneity bias is likely to be quite limited.47 Including this measure has the
additional advantage of conditioning state-chartered bank suspensions on a wider set of
potential influences than a single measure such as personal income. (Consequently, the
R-squared rises from 0.11 to 0.17.) In the framework of equation 1, including the national
bank failure rate at the state level controls for differences in ai not attributable to
supervisory and regulatory policy.
As might be expected, the coefficient on the average annual national bank failure
rate is strongly statistically significant and large in magnitude, indicating that differences
in the severity of the Depression across states (or other regional differences that affected
national bank performance) are an important determinant of variation in state bank
suspensions. A one-percentage-point increase in the average annual national bank failure
rate raises the county failure rate by approximately 3 percentage points (column 3, Table
3). However, what is impressive about the results is that, with the exception of the
coefficient on the dummy variable for chartering authority, the regulatory and
supervisory variables maintain their statistical significance even though the national bank
failure rate absorbs some of the identifying variation across counties and potentially
imparts a small downward bias on these coefficients (as reflected in the somewhat
smaller size of the coefficients). Moreover, the coefficient on reserve requirements is now
also statistically significant at the 4-percent level. The positive sign is consistent with the
hypothesis that, ceteris paribus, higher reserve requirements can induce banks to increase

significance of the regulatory and supervisory variables do not appear that sensitive to using county-level
failure rates for national banks instead of state-based ones.
47
The coefficients on regulation and supervision will be biased to the extent that the county failure rate for
state-chartered financial institutions affects the overall failure rate for national banks at the state level.
24

the share of risky assets (relative to riskless ones) in order to increase return, which could
potentially increase the probability of suspension.48
One somewhat surprising result shown in column 1 is that supervisory resources
are negatively related to suspension rates, implying that states with more banks per state
examiner had lower suspension rates. This might indicate that states with more resources
identified more troubled banks and suspended their operations (and that they were more
concerned with potential spillovers to the banking system)49; however, when the failure
rate for national banks is included, this effect is no longer statistically significant. We
further tested the effects of differences in supervisory resources on suspension rates by
including assets per bank examiner ($1000s) in a regression to control for the fact that
larger banks may have required more attention by supervisors; the coefficient (not
reported) was statistically insignificant and had the wrong predicted sign, and banks per
examiner was also statistically insignificant.50 These results suggest that state-level
differences in the quantity and the quality of the supervisory departments had little effect
on the stability of state banking systems during the Depression once other supervisory
and regulatory characteristics are taken into account.
Table 4 displays regressions for alternative sample periods in order to test the
robustness of the findings. Some scholars define the start of Depression-era banking
distress as beginning in 1930 and view 1929 as a continuation of the banking distress of
the 1920s. The statistically significant coefficient on the percentage change in farm land
values between 1920 and 1930 provides some evidence that the starting date may not be

48

A regression that also included a quadratic term for the reserve requirement was used to test for
nonlinearities. The negatively and statistically significant coefficient on the quadratic term suggests that the
effect on suspensions decreases as the reserve requirement rises; the linear term remained positive and
statistically significant. For their joint significance, we can reject the null hypothesis that the coefficients
are zero. The F statistic (2, 2352) is 4.43 and Prob > F = 0.012.
49
A lack of qualitative information on whether supervisors could issue “cease and desist” orders or force
banks to shed risky or non-performing loans does not permit one to formally test this hypothesis.
50
We also considered the differential in pay between examiners or supervisors and banking-industry
executives or managers, which, if large, might influence turnover and experience of supervisory staffs. This
variable was also statistically insignificant and had the wrong predicted sign.
25

driving the results. Nevertheless, to test whether this is the case, the dependent variable in
column 1 of Table 4 is redefined to be the suspension rate for the period 1930-33. The
size of the coefficients on the regulatory and supervisory variables is somewhat smaller,
but the signs do not change and they retain their statistical significance (perhaps with the
exception of supervisory term length which is only statistically significant at the 13percent level).
Another concern is that the suspensions of 1933 may be considered anomalous
because of the federal banking holiday declared by President Roosevelt in March of that
year. The cross-sectional regression results where the dependent variable is defined as the
county suspension rate from 1929-32 are shown in the second column of Table 4. The
estimated coefficients on regulation and supervision are quite similar to the full-sample
results. The reported coefficients for a few of the variables are smaller, suggesting that
suspensions may have operated somewhat differently in 1933, but the signs on these
variables and others do not change. We also considered the period up through the first
banking panics of 1930. As column 3 shows, the coefficients for the regulatory and
supervisory variables are similar to those reported for the other sample periods (although
branching laws appear to be unimportant early in the Depression). Moreover, the
coefficient on the dummy variable indicating that state bank supervisors had been given
the sole authority to charter banks is again statistically significant. If weak or marginal
banks were granted charters by regulators who were given the sole authority to license
banks, it appears that these banks had suspended operations prior to 1931. Finally, in
considering model specification, the results do not appear to be sensitive to the estimation
procedure. The signs and statistical significance for the regulatory and supervisory
variables do not change measurably using either a log proportions model or count data
analysis (Appendix Table 3).51
51

Although the weighted least squares estimates are easy to interpret, it is possible for some of the
predicted proportions to be greater than 1 or less than zero. A log proportions model can correct for this.
Column 1 of the appendix table estimates this model using maximum likelihood and the Newton Raphson
26

Finally, since branch banking has attracted considerable attention in the literature,
the last column of Table 4 addresses the issue of whether an alternative measure that
computes the extent of branching within a state (relative to total state banking activity)
changes the results. The positive and statistically significant coefficient suggests that
states with a higher fraction of branched banks relative to all banks had lower suspension
rates. A 10-percentage-point increase in state-chartered banks with branches resulted in a
suspension rate that was around 2 percentage points lower for a county in that state.52

V. Concluding Remarks

Influenced by interest groups (including banks, their customers, other financial
service providers, and legislators and regulators) seeking to shape the competitive
landscape of banking, states had adopted different regulatory and supervisory regimes.
These regulations and supervisory practices often conflicted with those imposed by the
Comptroller of the Currency on national banks or with those of Fed member banks. More
importantly, however, they affected the incentives and behavior of banks and regulators,
which in turn had important implications for the stability of state banking systems during
the Great Depression.

method for optimization. So that counties with no bank failures or with all their banks failing are not
excluded from the data set, we use the standard technique of redefining these values as 0.0001 and 0.9999,
respectively. Alternatively, count data analysis has the advantage over other estimation procedures of
treating the zero values as containing meaningful information; it also recognizes the “granularity” in the
data – that suspensions are whole numbers. This is important in our data set because 851 of the 3051
counties experience no state bank suspensions between 1929 and 1933. Moreover, count data analysis is
preferred to Tobit since the data are truncated rather than censored at zero (Tobit produces biased estimates
in this case). Because of overdispersion in the data, we estimate the count data with a negative binomial
distribution and control for the “at risk” population by including an additional regressor, the number of
state commercial banks in each county.
52
Six states had no law explicitly forbidding branching: New Hampshire, Vermont, North Dakota, South
Dakota, Wyoming, and Oklahoma. However, many of these states effectively prohibited branch banking.
Redefining the branching indicator variable so that positive values indicate states that allowed any
branching (at the city, county, or state level), but excluding the states without laws, or redefining it to
include only those states that permitted statewide branching yielded negative and statistically significant
coefficients in both cases.
27

A simple model provided an empirical strategy for identifying the sources of
variation in failure rates arising from both county and state effects, and the estimation
took advantage of previously underutilized data on county bank failures as well as
previously untapped information on measures of bank supervisory practices. Even after
controlling for differences in the severity of the Depression and county economic
characteristics, supervisory and regulatory practices contribute toward explaining the
large differences in suspension rates for state-chartered banks at the county level. More
stringent capital requirements resulted in lower rates of suspension for state-chartered
commercial banks, while laws prohibiting branching and higher reserve requirements led
to greater banking instability. Supervisors, given the sole authority to liquidate banks,
could do so quickly, minimizing contagion effects across banks and credit-channel
dislocations. However, those states that granted their supervisors sole power to license
new banks or gave them long tenure strengthened the incentives for bank lobbyists to
influence supervisory decisions and experienced higher rates of suspension.
Arming governments with “best-practice” supervisory and regulatory policies can
potentially improve the stability of banking systems, but the experience of U.S. states
during the Depression also shows that implementing such practices may be difficult.53
Even if policymakers are able to win the support for reform from vested interests, some
institutional design decisions involve trade-offs that complicate policymakers’ abilities to
choose optimal regulations. In the 1920s and 1930s, policymakers in U.S. states had to
choose between granting supervisors greater discretionary power and accepting the lack
of oversight and outside influence that came with it, or restricting supervisory powers and
acknowledging that it would be more difficult for banking authorities to act decisively,
quickly, or flexibly.
53

It is interesting that, with the creation of a common currency and the European Central Bank, EMU
members now have a single monetary authority, but supervision and regulation remain decentralized. Each
national government has its own prudential regulations and supervisory institutions for monitoring financial
institutions, just as U.S. states had during the Depression.
28

References
American Bankers Association. (1929). Survey on State Bank Supervision. Washington:
ABA, State Bank Division.
American Bankers Association. (1934). Survey on State Bank Supervision. Washington:
ABA, State Bank Division.
American Bankers Association. (1935). The Bank Chartering History and Policies of the
United States. New York: Economic Policy Commission, ABA.
Anari, Ali, Joseph Mason, and James Kolari. (2000). “The Speed of Bank Liquidation
and the Propagation of the U.S. Great Depression.” In Bank Structure and Competition
Conference Proceedings Chicago: Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago.
Barth, James R., Gerard Caprio, and Ross Levine. (2001a). “The Regulation and
Supervision of Banks around the World: A New Database.” In Brookings-Wharton
Papers on Financial Services, edited by Robert E. Litan and Richard Herring, pp. 183240. Washington: Brookings Institution Press.
Barth, James R., Gerard Caprio, and Ross Levine. (2001b). “Bank Regulation and
Supervision: What Works Best?” World Bank Working Paper.
Benston, George J. and George C. Kaufman. (1994). “The Intellectual History of the
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation Improvement Act of 1991.” In Reforming
Financial Institutions and Markets in the United States: Towards Rebuilding a Safe and
More Efficient System, edited by George G. Kaufman. Boston: Kluwer Academic
Publishers.
Bernanke, B.S., M. Gertler, and S. Gilchrist. (1996). “The Flight to Quality and the
Financial Accelerator.” Review of Economics and Statistics 78(1): 1-15.
Besanko, David and George Kanatas. (1993). Credit Market Equilibrium with Bank
Monitoring and Moral Hazard.” Review of Financial Studies 6(1): 213-32.
Blum, Jurg. “Do capital adequacy requirements reduce risks in banking?” Journal of
Banking and Finance 23(5): 755-71.
Board of Governors, Federal Reserve System. (1959). All-Bank Statistics: United States,
1896-1955. Washington: Federal Reserve System.
Board of Governors, Federal Reserve System. (various issues). Bulletin. Washington:
Federal Reserve System.
Boot, A. and S. Greenbaum. (1993). “Bank Regulation, Reputation, and Rents Theory
and Policy Implications.” In Capital Markets and Financial Intermediation, edited by C.
Mayer and Xavier Vives. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Calomiris, Charles W. and Joseph R. Mason. (2000). “Causes of U.S. Banking Distress
during the Depression.” NBER Working Paper 7919, September.

29

Calomiris, Charles and Carlos Ramirez. (2002). “The Political Economy of Bank Entry
Restrictions: Theory and Evidence from the U.S. in the 1920s.” Unpublished manuscript.
Caprio, Gerard and Daniela Klingebiel. (1996). “Bank Insolvency: Bad Luck, Bad Policy,
or Bad Banking?” in Annual World Bank Conference on Development Economics.
Washington: World Bank.
Carlson, Mark. (2004). “Are Branch Banks Better Survivors? Evidence from the
Depression Era.” Economic Inquiry 42(1): 111-126.
Chapman, John M. and Ray B. Westerfield. (1942). Branch Banking: Its Historical and
Theoretical Position in America and Abroad. New York, NY: Harper and Brothers.
Cothren, Richard D and Roger N. Waud. (1994) “On the Optimality of Reserve
Requirements.” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 26(4): 827-38.
Demirguc-Kunt, Asli and Enrica Detragiache. (2002). “Does Deposit Insurance Increase
Banking System Stability? An Empirical Investigation.” Journal of Monetary Economics
49(7): 1373-1406.
Dewatripont, Mathias and Jean Tirole. (1994). The Prudential Regulation of Banks
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Ding, W., I. Domaç, and G. Ferri. (1998), “Is There a Credit Crunch in East Asia?”
World Bank, PolicyResearch Working Paper, No. 1959, Washington, DC.
Djankov, Simeon, Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer.
(2002). “The Regulation of Entry.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 117(1): 1-37.
Economides, Nicholas, R. Glenn Hubbard, and Darius Palia. (1996). “The Political
Economy of Branching Restrictions and Deposit Insurance: A Model of Monopolistic
Competition among Small and Large Banks.” Journal of Law and Economics 39(2): 667704.
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation. (1960). “Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation
Data on Banks in the United States, 1920-1936.” [Computer file]. ICPSR ed. Ann Arbor,
MI: Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social Research [producer and
distributor].
Ferri, Giovanni and Tae Soo Kang. (1999). “The Credit Channel at Work: Lessons from
the Republic of Korea’s Financial Crisis.” World Bank, PolicyResearch Working Paper,
No. 2190, Washington, DC.
Folkerts-Landau, David and Carl-Johan Lindgren. (1998). Toward a Framework for
Financial Stability Washington: International Monetary Fund.
Friedman, Milton and Anna J. Schwartz. (1963). A Monetary History of the United
States, 1867-1960. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Fry, Maxwell J. (1995). Money, Interest, and Banking in Economic Development.
Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.
30

Gambs, Carl M. (1977). “Bank Failures: An Historical Perspective.” Monthly Review,
Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City 62 (June): 10-20.
Goldstein, Morris. (1996). The Case for an International Banking Standard Washington,
DC: Institute for International Economics.
Grossman, Richard S. (1994). “The Shoe That Didn’t Drop: Explaining Banking Stability
During the Great Depression.” Journal of Economic History 54(3): 654-82.
Grossman, Richard S. (2001). “Double Liability and Bank Risk Taking.” Journal of
Money, Credit, and Banking 33(2): 143-59.
Gruchy, Allan. (1937). Supervision and Control of Virginia State Banks. Charlottesville,
VA: University of Virginia.
Herring, Richard and Robert C. Litan. (1995). Financial Regulation in the Global
Economy Washington, DC: Brookings Institution.
Hunter, William C., James A. Verbrugge, and David A. Whidbee. (1996). “Risk Taking
and Failure in De Novo Savings and Loans in the 1980s.” Journal of Financial Services
Research 10(3): 235-71.
Kahane, Yehuda. (1977). “Capital Adequacy and the Regulation of Financial
Intermediaries.” Journal of Banking and Finance 1: 207-18.
Kim, D. and A. M. Santomero. (1988). “Risk in Banking and Capital Regulation.”
Journal of Finance 35(5): 1219-33.
Kliesen, Kevin L. and Gilbert, R. Alton. (1996). “Are Some Agricultural Banks Too
Agricultural?” Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review 78(1): 23-35.
Laderman, Elizabeth S., Ronald H. Schmidt, and Gary C. Zimmerman. (1991).
“Location, Branching, and Bank Portfolio Diversification: The Case of Agricultural
Lending.” Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Economic Review: 24-38.
Laffont, Jean-Jacques and Tirole, Jean. (1991). “The Politics of Government DecisionMaking: A Theory of Regulatory Capture.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 106(4):
1089-127.
Lauch, Louis H. and Neil B. Murphy. (1970). “A Test of the Impact of Branching on
Deposit Variability.” Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 5(September): 32327.
Liang, Nellie and Stephen A. Rhoades. (1988). “Geographic Diversification and Risk in
Banking.” Journal of Economics and Business 40(4): 271-84.
Martimont, David. (1999). “The Life Cycle of Regulatory Agencies: Dynamic Capture
and Transaction Costs.” Review of Economic Studies 66(4): 929-47.

31

Mason, Joseph (1996). The Determinants and Effects of Reconstruction Finance
Corporation Assistance to Banks During the Great Depression. Ph.D. Dissertation,
University of Illinois.
Meyer, Andrew P. and Timothy J. Yeager. (2001). “Are Small Rural Banks Vulnerable to
Local Economic Downturns?” Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review 83(2): 25-38.
Mishkin, Frederic S. ( 2001). “Prudential Supervision: Why Is It Important and What Are
the Issues?” In Prudential Supervision: What Works and What Doesn’t, edited by
Frederic S. Mishkin. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Mitchener, Kris James. (2001). Supervision, Regulation, and Financial Instability: The
Political Economy of Banking during the Great Depression. Ph.D. Dissertation,
University of California, Berkeley.
National Industrial Conference Board. (1932). The Banking Situation in the United
States. New York: NICB.
Neal, Linwood O. (1942). The History and Development of State Bank Supervision in
Oklahoma. New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University.
Neely, Michelle Clark and David C. Wheelock. (1997). “Why Does Bank Performance
Vary Across States?” Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review 79(2): 27-40.
Peltzman, Sam. (1976). “Toward a More general Theory of Regulation.” Journal of Law
and Economics 19: 211-40.
Polk’s Bankers Encyclopedia Co. (1929). Polk’s Bankers Encyclopedia, March 1929.
Detroit, MI.: Polk’s Bankers Encyclopedia Co.
Ramirez, Carlos D. (2003). “Did Branch Banking Restrictions Increase Bank Failures?
Evidence from Virginia and West Virginia in the Late 1920s.” Journal of Economics and
Business 55(4): 331-52.
Rand McNally. (various years). Rand McNally International Bankers Directory. Chicago:
Rand McNally & Co.
Stauffer, Robert F. (1981). “The Bank Failures of 1930-1931.” Journal of Money, Credit,
and Banking 13(1): 109-13
Stigler, George J. “The Theory of Economic Regulation.” Bell Journal of Economics 2
(1971): 3-21.
Stiroh, Kevin J.and Philip E. Strahan. (2003). “Competitive Dynamics of Deregulation:
Evidence from U.S. Banking.” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 35(5): 801-28.
Study Commission for Indiana Financial Institutions. (1932). Report. Indianapolis, Ind.:
Seventy-Seventh General Assembly.
Temin, Peter. (1976). Did Monetary Forces Cause the Great Depression? New York:
W.W. Norton.

32

Thies, Clifford and Daniel Gerlowski. (1993). “Bank Capital and Bank Failure, 19211932: Testing the White Hypothesis.” Journal of Economic History 53(4): 908-15.
Tippetts, Charles S. (1929). State Banks and the Federal Reserve System. New York: D.
Van Nostrand Company.
U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis. State Personal Income:
1929-33. Washington: GPO, 1995.
U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census. Census of the Population.
Washington: U.S. Department of Commerce, 1920 and 1930. [Computer file]. ICPSR ed.
Ann Arbor, MI: Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social Research [producer
and distributor].
Vickers, Raymond B. (1994). Panic in Paradise: Florida’s Banking Crash of 1926.
Tuscaloosa, AL.: University of Alabama Press.
Wacht, Richard F. (1968). “Branch Banking and Risk.” Journal of Financial and
Quantitative Anaylsis 3(March): 97-107.
Wheelock, David C. (1992). “Regulation and Bank Failures: New Evidence from the
Agricultural Collapse of the 1920s” Journal of Economic History 52(2): 806-825.
Wheelock, David C. (1995). “Regulation, Market Structure, and the Bank Failures of the
Great Depression.” Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review 77(2): 27-38.
White, Eugene N. (1983). The Regulation and Reform of the American Banking System,
1900-1929. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
White, Eugene N. (1984). “A Reinterpretation of the Banking Crisis of 1930.” Journal of
Economic History 44(1): 119-38.
Wicker, Elmus. (1980). “A Reconsideration of the Causes of the Banking Panic of 1930.”
Journal of Economic History 40(3): 571-83.
Wicker, Elmus. (1996). The Banking Panics of the Great Depression. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.

33

Figure 1. Bank Failure Rates during the Great Depression

Average Failure Rate 1929-33 - All Commercial Banks

Commercial Bank Failure Rates
(percent)
20.1
15.3
10.5
5.7
0.9

to
to
to
to
to

24.9 (3)
20.1 (6)
15.3 (15)
10.5 (13)
5.7 (11)

Average Failure Rate 1929-33 - State Banks

State Bank Failure Rate
(percent)
21.1 to 25.8
16.2 to 21.1
11.3 to 16.2
6.4 to 11.3
1.5 to 6.4

(6)
(6)
(13)
(10)
(13)

34

Figure 2. State Branching Regulations in 1929

Statewide Branching in 1929

Branching Laws, 1929
Statewide branching permitted or no law (14)
Branching restricted or prohibited
(34)

States Permitting Branching, 1929

Branching Laws, 1929
Statewide, county, city, or no law
Branching Prohibited

(25)
(23)

35

Figure 3. Capital and Reserve Requirements for State Banks
Capital Requirements in 1929

Minimum Charter Capital
(small municipalities)
100,000
(1)
50,000to 100,000 (5)
20,000to 50,000 (23)
15,000to 20,000 (7)
0 to 15,000 (12)

Reserve Requirements in 1929

Reserve Requirements on Demand Deposits
(percent)
20
17.5 to 20
15 to 17.5
12.5 to 15
7 to 12.5

(5)
(1)
(26)
(1)
(15)

36

Table 1. Commercial Bank Suspensions by Charter Status, 1929-33
All Commercial Banks
Total Suspensions, 1929-33

State Banks

9440

National Banks

7429

2011

79%

21%

9.2%

10.2%

6.8%

Standard Deviation of Suspension Rate

10.1

11.2

8.9

Total Deposits ($billions), 1929

49.4

27.8

21.6

56%

44%

17440

7530

70%

30%

1.59

2.87

Share of Total Bank Suspensions (%)
Average Annual Suspension Rate (1929-33)

Share of Total Deposits, 1929
Total Banks in 1929

24970

Share of Total Banks
Deposits per bank ($millions), 1929

1.98

Notes: Calculations for bank suspensions use state-level aggregate data from Federal Reserve Bulletin,
September 1937; deposit, asset, and charter data from Board of Governors, Federal Reserve System,
All Bank Statistics. The average annual suspension rates are calculated by state and then averaged across all
states and years. The annual state level suspension rate for a state is defined as the number of banks that failed
in a year divided by the number of banks in existence as of June 30th of that year. The standard deviation
shows the average variation in failure rates across states and years.

Table 2. County Bank Suspensions for State-Chartered Commercial Banks
(Percent)
All Counties

West

Northeast

Midwest

South

1929-33

9.47
(9.31)

7.47
(8.17)

3.96
(4.90)

12.41
(8.55)

8.32
(9.94)

1929-32

6.86
(8.38)

5.83
(8.91)

2.44
(4.02)

8.23
(7.86)

6.68
(8.89)

1930-33

11.10
(11.15)

9.15
(10.18)

4.90
(6.05)

14.60
(10.30)

9.59
(11.81)

Average Annual Suspension Rate

Notes: Standard deviation shown in parentheses. In contrast to table 1, suspension rates for
state-charted banks are computed using county suspension data from FDIC, “Federal Deposit
Insurance Corporation Data.” However, for comparison with table 1, the average annual
suspension rate is defined similarly as the number of state-chartered banks suspended during a
year divided by the number of banks in existence at the end of the previous year. Regions are
are defined according to census definitions.
37

38

39

Appendix Table 1. Summary Statistics on Suspensions, Regulation, Supervision, and County Characteristics

Mean

Variable
Capital Requirement in 1929 ($1000)
Reserve Requirement, 1929
Branching Banks as a Percent of All Banks, 1929
Number of States with Statewide Branching, 1929
Number of States Explicitly Prohibiting Branching, 1929
Length of State Bank Supervisor's Term (years)
Banks per Bank Examiner, 1929
Assets per Bank Examiner, 1929 ($1000s)
Percent of States Whose Supervisors Have Sole Power to Charter Banks
Percent of States Whose Supervisors Have Sole Power to Liquidate Banks
Average County Suspension Rate for State Commercial Banks, 1929-33
Average Deposits per Bank, December 31, 1928 ($1000s)
Percentage Change in Farm Land Value (1920 - 1930)
Percent of Population Rural, Farm
Percent Employed in Retail
Percent Employed in Wholesale
Percent Employed in Manufacturing

Standard
Deviation Minimum Maximum

25
15%
5%
8
23

16.3
3.20%
9%

0
7%
0%

100
20%
46%

3.8
29.4
33
41.7%
60.4%

1
19
23

2
1.5
7

6
75.7
129

35.8%
0.0%
2.75
0.00
29.7% -100.0%
22.7%
0.0%
1.1%
0.0%
0.7%
0.0%
5.0%
0.0%

100.0%
87.92
193.8%
97.0%
10.7%
11.0%
75.2%

42.6%
0.77
-25.8%
49.2%
1.8%
0.5%
3.9%

Notes: Medians rather than means are given for minimum charter capital and reserve requirements. Capital
requirements are those that applied to the smallest municipality in the state and represent the minimum capital
required to receive a state bank charter. Reserve requirements are for the demand deposits of country banks.
The suspension rate for state banks in a county is defined as the sum of the failures from 1929-33 divided by
the number of banks on December 21, 1928.

Appendix Table 2. Correlation Matrix for Regulatory and Supervisory Variables
Chartering Liquidation States prohibiting Supervisor's Banks per Capital
Reserve
authority authority branching
term length examiner requirement requirement
Chartering authority
1.00
Liquidation authority
0.29
1.00
States prohibiting branching
0.05
0.19
1.00
Supervisor's term length
-0.02
-0.02
0.05
1.00
Banks per examiner
-0.01
0.00
0.37
0.38
1.00
Capital requirement
-0.16
0.04
0.06
-0.37
-0.22
1.00
Reserve requirement
-0.23
0.01
0.19
-0.27
-0.07
0.22
1.00

40

41

