NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

HOW CONFIDENT CAN WE BE IN CGE-BASED
ASSESSMENTS OF FREE TRADE AGREEMENTS?
Thomas Hertel
David Hummels
Maros Ivanic
Roman Keeney
Working Paper 10477
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10477
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2004

Hertel is a Professor and Director, and Ivanic and Keeney are Graduate Research Assistants with the Center
for Global Trade Analysis, and Hummels is an Associate Professor of Economics at Purdue University, West
Lafayette, IN 47907-1145. The authors thank participants in the Empirical Trade Analysis Conference at the
Woodrow Wilson Center, participants in the Sixth Annual Conference on Global Economic Analysis, and
Volodymyr Lugovskyy and Alexandre Skiba for helpful comments and suggestions. The views expressed
herein are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2004 by Thomas Hertel, David Hummels, Maros Ivanic, and Roman Keeney. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

How Confident Can We Be in CGE-Based Assessments of Free Trade Agreements?
Thomas Hertel, David Hummels, Maros Ivanic, and Roman Keeney
NBER Working Paper No. 10477
May 2004
JEL No. C15, C68, F11, F15
ABSTRACT
Computable General Equilibrium models, widely used for the analysis of Free Trade Agreements
(FTAs) are often criticized for having poor econometric foundations. This paper improves the
linkage between econometric estimates of key parameters and their usage in CGE analysis in order
to better evaluate the likely outcome of a FTA for the Americas. Our econometric work focuses on
estimation of the elasticity of substitution among imports from different countries, which is
especially critical for evaluating the positive and normative outcomes of FTAs. We match the data
in the econometric exercise to the policy experiment at hand. Then we sample from the distribution
of parameter values given by our econometric estimates in order to generate a distribution of model
results, from which we can construct confidence intervals. We conclude that there is great potential
for combining econometric work with CGE-based policy analysis in order to produce a richer set
of results that are likely to prove more satisfying to the sophisticated policy maker.
Thomas Hertel
Purdue University
hertel@purdue.edu
David Hummels
Krannert School of Management
403 West State Street
Purdue University
West Lafayette, IN 47907-1310
and NBER
hummelsd@purdue.edu
Maros Ivanic
Purdue University
ivanicm@purdue.edu
Roman Keeney
Purdue University
rkeeney@purdue.edu

“The econometric cat was set among the pigeons when a second government-commissioned
modelling study on the FTA was finally released… The second reason for the contradictory
results is differing assumptions about an arcane economic relationship known as Armington
elasticity.” (Financial Review, 2003)
1. Introduction
With the proliferation of Free Trade Agreements (FTAs) over the past decade, demand for
quantitative analysis of their likely impacts has surged. The main quantitative tool for performing such
analysis is Computable General Equilibrium (CGE) modeling. Yet these models have been widely
criticized for performing poorly (Kehoe, 2002) and having weak econometric foundations (McKitrick,
1998; Jorgenson, 1984). FTA results have been shown to be particularly sensitive to assumptions on
the price elasticity of export demand (henceforth, the trade elasticity). As will be demonstrated in
Section 2, small trade elasticities generate large terms of trade effects by reducing the responsiveness
of export demand. On the other hand, small trade elasticities reduce the likelihood of trade diversion,
as import sourcing becomes less sensitive to relative prices. Of course, large trade elasticities lead to
the opposite results. Critics are understandably wary of results being determined largely by the
authors’ choice of trade elasticities. Indeed, the sensitivity of welfare results to the choice of trade
elasticities has even surfaced in the popular press as witnessed in the opening quotation to this paper.1
Where do these trade elasticities come from? CGE modelers typically draw the elasticities
from econometric work that uses time series price variation to identify an elasticity of substitution
between domestic goods and composite imports (Alaouze, 1977; Alaouze, Marsden, and Zeitsch,
1977; Stern et al., 1976; Gallaway, McDaniel and Rivera, 2003). This approach has three problems:
the use of point estimates as “truth”, downward bias in the magnitude of the point estimates created by
problems in the estimation technique, and a mis-match between the data sample and source of
variation in the econometric exercise and the policy experiment explored in the CGE exercise.
1

In this article, two studies of the Australia-USA FTA are discussed, one which reports a gain, and one which
reports a loss. Differing assumptions about the benefits of services liberalization was the first reason identified,
while the second difference for the contradictory results was identified as the assumptions about the Armington
elasticities.

1

First, modelers take point estimates drawn from the econometric literature, while ignoring the
precision of these estimates. As we will make clear below, the confidence one has in various CGE
conclusions depends critically on the size of the confidence interval around parameter estimates.
Standard “robustness checks” such as systematically raising or lowering the substitution parameters
fail to properly address this problem because they ignore information about which parameters we
know with some precision and which we do not.
A second problem with most existing studies derives from the use of import price series to
identify home vs. foreign substitution. This approach tends to systematically understate the true
elasticity because these estimates take price variation as exogenous when estimating the import
demand functions, and ignore quality variation. When quality is high, import demand and prices will
be jointly high. This biases estimated elasticities toward zero. A related point is that the fixed-weight
import price series used by most authors are theoretically inappropriate for estimating the elasticities
of interest. CGE modelers generally examine a nested utility structure, with domestic production
substituting for a CES composite import bundle. The appropriate price series is then the
corresponding CES price index among foreign varieties. Constructing such an index requires
knowledge of the elasticity of substitution among foreign varieties (see below). By using a fixedweight import price series, previous estimates place too much weight on high foreign prices, and too
small a weight on low foreign prices. In other words, they overstate the degree of price variation that
exists, relative to a CES price index. Reconciling small trade volume movements with large import
price series movements requires a small elasticity of substitution. This problem, and that of
unmeasured quality variation, helps explain why typical estimated elasticities are very small.
The third problem with the existing literature is that estimates taken from other researchers’
studies typically employ different levels of aggregation, and exploit different sources of price
variation, from what policy modelers have in mind. Employment of elasticities in experiments illmatched to their original estimation can be problematic. For example, estimates may be calculated at
2

a higher or lower level of aggregation than the level of analysis than the modeler wants to examine.
Estimating substitutability across sources for paddy rice gives one a quite different answer than
estimates that look at agriculture as a whole. In addition, when analyzing Free Trade Agreements, the
principle policy experiment is a change in relative prices among foreign suppliers caused by lowering
tariffs within the FTA. Understanding the substitution this will induce across those suppliers is critical
to gauging the FTA’s real effects. Using home vs. foreign elasticities rather than elasticities of
substitution among imports supplied from different countries may be quite misleading. Moreover,
these “sourcing” elasticities are critical for constructing composite import price series to appropriate
estimate home vs. foreign substitutability.
In summary, the history of estimating the substitution elasticities governing trade flows in
CGE models has been checkered at best. Yet they are central to the welfare results of such studies.
Clearly there is a need for improved econometric estimation of these trade elasticities that is wellintegrated into the CGE modeling framework. This paper provides such estimation and integration,
and has several significant merits. First, we choose our experiment carefully. Our CGE analysis
focuses on the prospective Free Trade Agreement of the Americas (FTAA) currently under
negotiation. This is one of the most important FTAs currently “in play” in international negotiations. It
also fits nicely with the source data used to estimate the trade elasticities, which is largely based on
world-wide imports into North and South America. Our assessment is done in a perfectly competitive,
comparative static setting in order to emphasize the role of the trade elasticities in determining the
conventional gains/losses from such an FTA. As highlighted by the quotation at the start of this paper,
this type of model is still widely used by government agencies for the evaluation of such agreements.
In fact, the GTAP model (Hertel 1997) which we employ in this paper is actively used in dozens of
public research institutions around the world. Extensions to incorporate imperfect competition are
straightforward, but involve the introduction of additional parameters (markups, extent of unexploited
3

scale economies) as well as structural assumptions (entry/no-entry, nature of inter-firm rivalry) that
introduce further uncertainty.
Since our focus is on the effects of a preferential FTA we estimate elasticities of substitution
across multiple foreign supply sources. We do not use cross-exporter variation in prices or tariffs
alone. Exporter price series exhibit a high degree of multicolinearity, and in any case, would be
subject to unmeasured quality variation as described previously. Similarly, tariff variation by itself is
typically unhelpful because by their very nature, Most Favored Nation (MFN) tariffs are nondiscriminatory, affecting all suppliers in the same way. Tariff preferences, where they exist, are often
difficult to measure – sometimes being confounded by quantitative barriers, rules of origin, and other
restrictions. Instead we employ a unique data set drawing on not only tariffs, but also bilateral
transportation costs for goods traded internationally (Hummels, 1999). Transportation costs vary much
more widely than do tariffs, allowing more precise estimation of the trade elasticities that are central to
CGE analysis of FTAs. We have highly disaggregated commodity trade flow data, and are therefore
able to provide estimates that precisely match the commodity aggregation scheme employed in the
subsequent CGE model. We follow the GTAP Version 5.0 aggregation scheme which includes 42
merchandise trade commodities covering food products, natural resources and manufactured goods.
With the exception of two primary commodities that are not traded, we are able to estimate trade
elasticities for all merchandise commodities that are significantly different form zero at the 95%
confidence level.
Rather than producing point estimates of the resulting welfare effects, we report confidence
intervals instead. These are based on repeated solution of the model, drawing from a distribution of
trade elasticity estimates constructed based on the econometrically estimated standard errors. There is
now a long history of CGE studies based on SSA: Systematic Sensitivity Analysis (Harrison and
Vinod, 1992; Wigle, 1991; Pagon and Shannon, 1987) However, to date, all of these studies have
taken their parameter distributions “from the literature”. None of these studies has been accompanied
4

by an econometric study in which the key parameters and their distributions are estimated using data
samples and variation that closely match the policy experiment considered in the CGE analysis.
For this paper, we use the Gaussian Quadrature (GQ) approach to SSA, which has proven to
be the most efficient and unbiased approach to systematically assessing the sensitivity of model results
to parametric uncertainty (DeVuyst and Preckel, 1997; Arndt, 1996). We find that many of the results
are qualitatively robust to uncertainty in the trade elasticities. In those cases where our findings are not
robust, we explore the source of underlying uncertainty. In this way, the paper addresses the
fundamental question: How Robust Are CGE Analyses of Free Trade Agreements?

2. Explaining Welfare Changes: The Role of Trade Elasticities
Due to the centrality of the trade elasticities to our argument, we begin by specifying the
nested CES import demands. Expenditure on each composite commodity i in region s, Eis, is
determined in general equilibrium by a combination of demand for the composite commodity in
private consumption, public consumption, investment demand and intermediate input demand.
Therefore, for purposes of partial equilibrium estimation, we treat this expenditure level as exogenous,
and focus on changes in its composition. The composite commodities are modeled as being a constant
elasticity of substitution (CES) function of domestic and imported goods (1), and, at the second level
of this preference structure, imports from different countries are combined in a CES function (2):

QC is

QM

is

ϕ i −1

=  β Dis QD is ϕ i + β Mis QM


 R
=  ∑ b irs QMS
 r = 1

σ i −1
σi

irs

ϕ i −1
ϕi

is

ϕi

 ϕ i −1



(1)

σi

 σ i −1



(2)

5

Here, the index s denotes the importing region, QCis is utility of consuming composite commodity i in
this region, while QDis is utility from domestically produced i, and QMis is utility from composite
imports (obtained from equation (2)). The parameters βDis and βMis represent import-specific
preference weights on domestic versus imported goods, and ϕi is the elasticity of substitution between
domestic and imported sources of good i in region s. We assume that this elasticity is equal across
regions. In a similar fashion, the composite demand for imports (2) is a CES function of bilateral
imports of i, sourced from different exporting regions r: QMSirs where the birs is the associated
preference weight and σi is the elasticity of substitution among imports from different exporters.
Again, we assume that this elasticity is identical across regions.
To determine aggregate demand for imports of commodity i into region s, the importing
region maximizes (1), conditional on aggregate commodity expenditure for each commodity Eis,
giving rise to the following import expenditure equation:

I is =

ϕ
β Mis
is

ϕ is −1

PMis

1
E is
Pis

(3)

where the composite commodity price index is given by:
ϕ is
Pis = β Dis
PD

1 −ϕ is
is

ϕ is
+ β Mis
PM

1 −ϕ is
is

.

(4)

The optimal sourcing of imports from different exporters is obtained by maximizing (2), conditional
on composite import spending Iis, given the import prices from different sources, PMSirs:
QMS

irs

σi

= b irs I is PM

−1
is

 PMS irs 


 PM is 

−σ i

(5)

The price index over the imported commodities is given by:
PM

is

 R σi
(PMS
=  ∑ b irs
 r =1

1− σ
irs )

i





1 / 1− σ i

(6)

6

Changes in welfare in response to an FTA may be decomposed using the method of Huff and
Hertel (1996), who provide an analytical decomposition of the Equivalent Variation (EV) for the
representative household in region s. 2 It is similar in spirit to that of Baldwin and Venables (1995),
however, unlike the latter decomposition, it allows for non-homothetic preferences, domestic taxes
and subsidies, and, most importantly, it assumes products are differentiated by origin (the Armington
assumption). This decomposition is also implemented numerically to decompose non-local welfare
changes. For the sake of brevity, we focus on the case where there are no export taxes, and domestic
taxes are applied only to consumption and production. (This assumption will be relaxed in the
empirical analysis.) As we will show, the elasticity of substitution is a key parameter determining
both positive responses to the FTAA as well as their normative implications.
The EV decomposition is given by the following equation:
R
 N

 ∑ ∑ (τ Mirs PCIF irs dQMS irs )
 i =1 r =1

 N

 + ∑ (τ CDis PD is dQD is )

 i =1

 N

 + ∑ (τ CMis PM is dQM is )

 i =1

EV s = (ψ s ) N

+

(τ Ois PD is dQO is )
 ∑

i =1
 N

R
+
(QMS irs dPFOB irs ) 
∑
 ∑
i =1
r =1
 N

R
−

(
)
QMS
dPCIF
∑
irs
irs
 ∑

i =1
r =1

(7)

where the subscript ί is indexed over the traded commodities, r denotes source region and s refers to
the importing region.

ψs

is a scaling factor which is normalized to one initially, but changes as a

2

The Huff-Hertel EV decomposition is obtained by starting with the equation for regional income as a function
of endowment income, plus taxes less subsidies. Into this equation, they substitute the general equilibrium
conditions for zero profits, price linkages, and market clearing for tradeables and non-tradeables. They deflate
income by deducting the appropriate price index from both sides of the equation, thereby obtaining equation (3)

7

function of the marginal cost of utility in the presence of non-homothetic preferences (McDougall,
2002).
The first four summations on the right-hand side (RHS) of (7) measure the changes in
efficiency of resource utilization in region s. These involve the interaction of tax/subsidy distortions
with the change in associated quantities. Consider what happens when we eliminate the bilateral tariff
on imports of commodity i from one of the FTAA partner countries. The relevant term appears in the
first summation:

WQMSirs = (τ Mirs PCIFirs dQMSirs )

(8)

Here, ( τ Mirs PCIFirs ) is the per unit tariff revenue on imports of good i from r into s, associated with
the ad valorem tariff rate

τ Mirs .

This is multiplied by the change in the volume of imports of i from r

into s: dQMSirs . The “Harberger triangle” that we are measuring with this term may be seen in Figure
1. In order to evaluate the area of this triangle as the tariff is eliminated, we must consider both the
“base” ( τ MirsPCIFirs ) and the “height” ( dQMSirs ). By continually reevaluating the base of this triangle
as we solve the CGE model, we track the diminishing gap between PCIF and PMS. In this way, we
are able to accurately measure its area, which is then added to the aggregate welfare measure.
In order to properly perform the numerical integration depicted in Figure 1, equation (7) must
be solved in conjunction with the CGE model, using appropriate solution procedures. We use version
8 of the GEMPACK software suite (Harrison and Pearson, 1996; 2002) which is ideally suited to this
problem, as it solves the non-linear CGE model using a linearized version of the behavioral equations,
coupled with updated equations that link the change (e.g., dQMS irs ) and levels (e.g., QMS irs )

8

variables. Standard extrapolation techniques can be used to obtain arbitrarily accurate solutions to any
well-posed problem (Harrison and Pearson, 1996; 2002).3
Note from equation (7) we see that, in addition to tariffs, we consider volume interactions with
consumption taxes on household purchases of both domestic goods ( τ CDis ) and imported goods
( τ CMis ). Taxes (or subsidies) on output also play a role. If τ Ois < 0, then the production of commodity
i in region s is subsidized and an expansion of output ( qois > 0) will contribute negatively to efficiency
and hence to EV. The absence of terms associated with intermediate input taxes, as well as primary
factor taxes, mean that we are assuming these taxes are zero in this stylized example. (In the empirical
section below, this assumption will be relaxed.)
The final two terms on the RHS of (7) refer to the terms of trade (TOT) effects for region s.
These determine how the global efficiency gains are shared amongst regions. If region s’s exportweighted FOB prices rise, relative to her import -weighted CIF prices, then the TOT will improve.
Since one region’s export prices are another region’s import prices, the improved TOT for region s
translates into a TOT deterioration in the rest of the world (taken as a group).
In summary, each region’s welfare gains can be decomposed into a terms of trade and an
allocative efficiency component. The essence of the FTAA experiment involves eliminating the trade
taxes within the block, i.e., τ MikA = 0, ∀i and ∀k , A ∈ FTAA . This, in turn, induces a shift in the
sourcing of imports, away from exporters outside the block and towards exporters within the block.
As seen from (5), the extent of this shifting depends on the Armington elasticity of substitution, σ i .
Log differentiating (5) and (6), and converting to percent changes (lower case denotes the percentage
change in the associated upper case levels variables), we obtain the following two equations
describing import sourcing in region s:
3

For purposes of this paper, we require that 95% of the variables and levels variables are accurate to four digits.
Another useful check is to compare EVs computed from equation (3) with that computed directly from the utility
function. These match, to machine accuracy.

9

qms irs = qm is − σ i [ pms irs − pm is ]

(9)

R

pmis = ∑ Θ irs pmsirs

(10)

r =i

where pmsirs = (tmirs + pcif irs ) , and tmirs is the percentage change in (1 + τ Mirs ) . The coefficient
and Θ irs is the expenditure share of total imports of i into s that is sourced from region r.
Now, if we assume, for the sake of exposition, that there are no domestic taxes whatsoever,
then we can convert the simple changes in equation (7) into percentage changes, thereupon
substituting in equations (9) – (10) to obtain the following decomposition of the local change in
welfare of region s:

N R

∑ ∑ (TRirs )(qmsirs − σ i [(tmirs + pcif irs ) − pmis ])
 i =1 r =1

 N R

EVs = (ψ s / 100)+ ∑ ∑ (PFOBisr QMS isr ) pfobisr

 i =1 r =1

 N R

− ∑ ∑ (PCIFirs QMS irs ) pcif irs

 i =1 r =1


(11)

where TRirs = (τ Mirs PCIFirs QMS irs ) = tariff revenue on commodity i imported from r into s. Provided
region s is small, relative to supplier markets, it will have little impact on import prices (pcifirs ≅ 0).
However, even a small country can have a substantial impact on its own export prices in this
differentiated product framework, so pfobisr ≠0. The size of the export price changes will be
determined by the export demand elasticity, which approaches -σi for a country that is small in its
export markets (Θisr ≅ 0) (recall equations 9 and 10).

10

This decomposition makes clear why, in our econometric exercise, we focus so intently on σi , the
elasticity of substitution among imports. The welfare consequences of a single, small economy’s FTA
measures will depend first and foremost on the value of σi , . Large values of σi will cause the elements
of the first term in (11) to become larger in absolute value, as the shift in import sourcing becomes
more pronounced. On the other hand, large values for σi serve to increase the export demand elasticity
facing region s, thereby dampening the change in export price.4
It is the first term in equation (11) which determines whether or not trade diversion or trade
creation takes place in this FTA. If, for example, σi= 0 , then the pattern of import sourcing will
remain unchanged and the sole effect of lower tariffs will be to lower the cost of composite imports
(equation (10)), thereby leading to an increased demand for imports (qmsirs = qmis > 0) , by equation
(9), and the efficiency gain collapses to: ψ s qmis

N

R

i =1

r =1

∑ ∑ (τ

Mirs

PCIFirs QMSirs ) . This is the case of

pure trade creation.
In practice, we expect the value of σi to be quite large—a point confirmed by the econometric
work reported below. This means that the second part of equation (9) will be dominant in the
determination of qms irs . In this situation, the key issue is how the changes in bilateral imports,

qmsirs , correlate with bilateral tariff revenues. Clearly, if the preferential FTA eliminates tariffs on
flows that are already lightly taxed (lower average tariff revenue), then there will be potential for trade
diversion, as the bilateral import changes will be negatively correlated with tariff revenue (i.e.,

qmsirs > when TRirs ≅ 0 and qmsirs < 0 for TRirs >> 0 ). In the ensuing empirical analysis of the
FTAA, we will examine this trade creation/diversion effect in all participating countries. We will also
explore its sensitivity to the econometrically estimated uncertainty in σi, a topic to which we now turn.
4

Since in the FTAA one country’s exports represent another country’s imports, and the terms of trade for any
specific country will be determined by the complex interaction between the specific pattern of bilateral tariff cuts
and the existing pattern of bilateral trade flaws.

11

3. Econometric Specification and Estimation of Trade Elasticities
Our econometric estimation focuses on the second level of the two-level, Armington structure,
since we will be examining the impact of a proposed preferential FTA, and the key parameter is σi, the
elasticity of substitution among imports from different sources for a given commodity.5 We begin by
introducing the power of the trade cost for an imported commodity, Tirs, which equals one plus the ad
valorem rates for freight, insurance and tariff, which are all commodity- and route-specific:

Tirs = (1 + τ Firs + τ Mirs ) = 1 + freightirs + tariffirs , so the domestic cost of imports is given by
PMS irs = Tirs PFOBirs . Because it is difficult to observe the quantity of demand, we multiply both
sides of (5) by end-user prices TirsPFOBir to get the amount of bilateral trade in value terms, Virs:
σ

V irs = b irs I irs
i

 PFOB

PM


T irs 

is


1− σ

i

(12)

ir

which by taking natural logarithm results in an easily estimated equation (13).

ln V irs = ln I irs + (1 − σ i ) ln PFOB ir − (1 − σ i ) ln PM is + (1 − σ ) i ln Tirs + σ i ln birs

(13)

It is commonly observed that countries with similar languages and cultures trade more with
one another than would be predicted solely on the basis of trade costs. The preference parameters birs
are intended to capture these effects. To reduce the number of unobserved variables in the estimating
equation, we model these preference biases explicitly, treating them as a function of physical distance:
Dist, similarity of language: Lang, and adjacency of the trading countries: Adj. The specific functional
relationship is as follows:
β

birs = Distrs1,s e

β 2 ,s Lang ri + β 3 ,s Adjri

(14)

5

It is also the case that the data set that we have available only covers imports, and therefore does not lend itself
to estimation of the upper level nest.

12

Substituting (14) into (13), we obtain the following:

ln V irs = ln I irs + (1 − σ i ) ln PFOB ir − (1 − σ i ) ln PM is
+ (1 − σ i ) ln(1 + freight

irs

+ tariff irs ) + β 1,i ln Dist ri + β 2 ,i Lang

rs

+ β 3 ,i Adj rs

(15)

Data on prices, the price index, output, and expenditure shares are difficult to obtain, and in
any case, endogenous. All of these variables are therefore omitted in the model and replaced with
importer and exporter of commodity i intercepts a: air = 1 if country r is an exporter of commodity i,
otherwise it is 0; ais = 1 if country s is an importer of commodity i, otherwise it is 0. The final
estimating equation is (16):

lnVirs = a0 + ais + air + βi ln(1 + freightsri + tariffsri ) + β1,i ln Distrs + β2,i Langrs + β3,i Adjrs + ε irs
(16)
where

βi = 1 − σ i .

4. Data and Elasticity Estimates

The data used in estimation are taken from Hummels (1999). Given the emphasis in this study
on the FTAA, it is appropriate that these data are a compilation of detailed customs information on
imports into six FTAA countries (Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Paraguay, USA, and Uruguay) and one
non-FTAA economy (New Zealand). In order to estimate equation (16) we also require data on
physical distance among the countries as well as comprehensive tariff data6. The final dataset contains
187,000 observations with the following variables: 5-digit SITC code of the commodity traded, fob
and cif values for each trade flow, applied tariff rates, trade distance and two dummy variables to
indicate common language or countries’ adjacency. In addition, we dropped extreme observations
where trade costs were either non-positive or greater than 4 times the fob value of the product traded.

6

For more information see the appendix in Hummels (1999).

13

At this point we face an interesting choice. We could aggregate the 5-digit, SITC trade flows
and trade costs according to the 42 GTAP merchandise commodity groups used in our CGE model
(Table 1). The advantage of this aggregation approach is that it exactly matches the data variation
contained in the CGE exercise (i.e. a single value of trade for each bilateral pair in each of the 42
commodity groups). An alternative approach retains the variation across bilateral pairs and 5-digit
level commodities within each of the 42 GTAP categories, constraining the elasticity of substitution to
be equal within each broad sector. The main advantage of the pooling approach is that it provides
greater within-sector variation in tariffs and transport costs which is critical for identifying the relevant
substitution elasticities. We employ the pooling technique in order to yield more precise estimates.

7

The results of Ordinary Least Squares estimation of equation (14) are presented in Table 1.
Note that all of these estimates are positive and are significantly different from zero. Based on a
simple t-test, each of the 40 estimated elasticities of substitution allow us to reject the hypothesis that
the estimated elasticity is zero at the 95% confidence level.
Table 1 also contrasts these estimates with the original elasticities of substitution among
imports from the GTAP database.8 (Note that estimates are not available for two GTAP products
which are non-traded: raw sugar and raw milk. We assign these GTAP commodities the estimated
elasticity of substitution associated with trade in processed sugar and milk, respectively.) As noted
previously, the GTAP parameters are widely used in the analysis of FTAs.9 If we compute the simple
average of the 40 estimates it is 7.0, which is somewhat larger than the average for the 42 GTAP
parameters (5.3). Although these two averages are fairly similar, there is much greater sectoral
variation in the econometrically estimated elasticities. In fact, the most striking thing about the GTAP
parameters is that they show no variability within broad sectors such as food and agriculture, and
7

In the results section, we also discuss the results obtained from using the aggregation approach.
The GTAP parameter file was taken from the SALTER project (Jomini et al., 1994). These trade elasticities are
based on a synthesis of estimates from the literature and original econometric work for one country – New
Zealand
9
For a sampling of these applications, visit the GTAP web: www.gtap.org).
8

14

metal products. This is because the source studies were not conducted at a sufficiently disaggregate
level.10
5. Application to the FTAA
Background: The recent growth of free trade agreements in the Western Hemisphere began in

the 1980s as Latin American countries initiated significant trade and economic policy reforms. It was
accelerated in the 1990’s with the advent of the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA).
Over the past two decades, more than forty regional or bilateral trade agreements have been
implemented within the hemisphere. In fact, every country except Cuba has been party to at least one
such agreement. With the rapid growth of free trade agreements among countries, the idea for the
FTAA arose as a logical next step in the economic integration of the hemisphere. A more
encompassing agreement also provides a way of simplifying the complex network of existing FTA and
bilateral agreements in place (Diao and Somwaru, 2001). Two of these, the NAFTA and the Common
Market of the South (MERCOSUR) are among the largest FTAs in the world.
The FTAA effort was initiated in December of 1994 as leaders of the thirty-four democracies
in the Western Hemisphere met in Miami for the “Summit of the Americas”. After a four year
preparatory process, negotiations were launched in April 1998 in Santiago Chile, with the goal of
achieving substantial progress by 2000 and completing the negotiations by 2005. The most recent
ministerial meeting of the FTAA was held in Miami in November 2003, and the deadline of
September 30, 2004 was established for conclusion of the negotiations over market access. This
resulted in ministerial declarations that largely reaffirmed the FTAA and its commitment to be
implemented on time and in a consistent manner with WTO rules (FTAA Tri-Partite Commission
2002; 2003).

10

It is also striking to observe that the largest elasticity of substitution is for natural gas (34.4) and the lowest is
for other mineral products (1.8), yet for the GTAP model, both of these products are assigned the value of 5.6,
corresponding to the generic estimate for natural resource products.

15

Given the focus on merchandise trade in the Americas, and in light of the large dimensions of
the GTAP data base, which we use as the empirical basis for our simulations, we begin by aggregating
the sixty-six regions of the version 5.0 GTAP database to seventeen regions. (See Appendix Table
A.1). Full GTAP country detail is preserved in the Western Hemisphere, while composite regions are
formed for the rest of the world, including: Asia-Oceania (ASOC), the fifteen-member European
Union (EU15), rest of Europe (OEUR), and Middle East and Africa (MEAF). In order to further
reduce the dimensions of this model, services activities are also aggregated into four broad categories.
A fair assessment of the changes that occur due to liberalization under the FTAA requires updating the
GTAP 5.0 database benchmark data to account for the pre-existing applied tariff structure in the
liberalizing regions – in particular taking account of preferential trade agreements in the Western
Hemisphere (see Appendix Table A2).
Simulation and SSA: The simulation experiment undertaken here is a stylized representation

of an FTAA scenario. It involves reducing all tariffs on intra-regional trade for the forty-two
merchandise trade commodities to zero. While this is not likely to be a politically feasible scenario,
this serves as a useful benchmark that represents an upper bound on the potential gains from
liberalization (Young and Huff, 1998).
As noted in the introduction, the centerpiece of this study involves the systematic sensitivity
analysis of the results with respect to the estimated trade elasticities. This is most commonly done via
Monte Carlo analysis, where, the model is solved many times using a random sample of substitution
elasticities, drawn from the empirical distribution of estimated trade elasticities. In many cases Monte
Carlo is impractical for a large CGE model owing to the large dimension of a multiregional model and
the large number of solutions required to approximate the distribution of the uncertain parameters
(Arndt, 1996). The recently developed Gaussian Quadrature approach of DeVuyst and Preckel (1997)
provides an attractive alternative. These authors show that an approximate distribution can be obtained
based on known lower order moments of the parameters of a model, and that selectively solving the
16

model based on the moments of this approximate distribution generates sensitivity results consistent
with those of the Monte Carlo approach, with much more efficient use of computing time. The
Gaussian Quadrature technique is employed here for generating sensitivity results to the trade
elasticities.
We must now invoke some assumptions about the underlying parameter distributions. First,
we assume that they are independently and normally distributed. Secondly, the elasticity of
substitution in the domestic-import substitution nest (recall ϕi in equation 1) is assumed to be tied to
σi via the “rule of two” so that these elasticities vary together and by the same proportion in repeated
solutions of the model.11

6. Results

The results of our simulation may be reported in a number of ways. First of all, since we use
distributions, rather than point estimates for the trade elasticities, our results also come in the form of
distributions. Therefore, the most natural thing to look at is the mean value for each variable of
interest, along with the associated standard deviation, or the coefficient of variation (standard
deviation/mean). This information, accompanied with an assumption regarding the shape of the
underlying distribution of endogenous variables (we assume normality as with the parameters) allows
formation of confidence intervals for welfare changes as well as other model results, and thus the
ability to address the question at the focus of this paper: How confident can we be in the CGE-based
analyses of Free Trade Agreements?
Our approach to analyzing the results in this paper will be to investigate the elements of
equation (7) individually, thereafter examining their combined impact on welfare. We begin with the
The “rule of two” links ϕs with the estimated value for σi as follows: σi = 2ϕi. This rule was first proposed by
Jomini et al. (1994) and was retained in the GTAP parameter file. Recently this rule was tested by Liu, Arndt and
Hertel (2002) in a back-casting exercise with a simplified version of the GTAP model. While those authors reject
the validity of the GTAP trade elasticities, they fail to reject the rule of two, thereby lending additional support to
this approach.
11

17

tariff-related efficiency effect. Since this is driven by changes in import volume, let us first consider
what happens to imports. Table 2 reports the mean percentage change in regional import volume as a
result of the FTAA experiment. Aggregate import volume increases in all FTAA regions, while falling
in the non-FTAA regions. Furthermore, 95% confidence intervals, constructed based on the
assumption of normality, show that we can be confident in all of these increases. The largest increases
are for Colombia and the Other Central America. Our 95% confidence intervals for these two
countries do not overlap with that of Peru, which shows the third largest increase in total imports.
These large increases in imports may be directly attributed to the relatively larger tariff rates for these
countries. Most of the aggregate import volume changes are between +4% and +9%, with some
exceptions. The US and Canada, which already enjoy free trade with one another, show a smaller
increase in imports. Also, there is a very low import volume increase for Uruguay. This can be
attributed to the relative loss of preferential access that occurs under FTAA when partners in
MERCOSUR liberalize with other regions in the Americas.
One interesting question that arises in the context of our SSA is whether there is greater
certainty about more aggregate variables than about disaggregate variables produced by this model.
The last two columns in Table 2 address this issue in the case of import volumes. First we report the
coefficient of variation (the ratio of the standard deviation divided by the mean) for the change in
national imports (this is the change reported in column 4 of Table 2). When this ratio is small, we can
infer a relatively higher level of confidence in the result. Note that it is quite small for Chile, whereas
it reaches its maximum value in the case of the rest of the Andean Pact (XAP). The final column in
Table 2 reports the average coefficient of variation for the percentage change in national imports, at
the sector level. This gives an indication of the average degree of precision for the more disaggregate
results. As can be seen by comparing these two entries for each country, the more disaggregate results
are less precise. This is intuitive in that we often expect a certain degree of offset at the aggregate level
(when one sector’s imports are low, another’s may be high).
18

Next, turn to the allocative efficiency effects associated with the import volume changes.
These are reported in the first column of Table 3, which gives both the mean and the coefficient of
variation (CV) associated with the tariff-related allocative efficiency component of equation (3).
Recall that this is the (welfare-scaled) summation of the tariff revenue-weighted import quantity
changes. From the mean values of this variable, we see that there is net “trade creation” for 10 of the
13 FTAA partners. In the cases of Venezuela, Chile and the Other South America, this import
efficiency term is negative, despite the fact that aggregate import volume rises (recall Table 2). This is
due to the fact that the welfare contribution of the trade volume change depends on the interaction
between tariff rates and trade flows. As tariffs are eliminated on intra-FTAA flows, the associated
welfare weight is eliminated. If the remaining tariffs on extra-FTAA imports are large, and if the
associated FTAA-driven decline in the trade volume is also large, these negative numbers can
dominate the overall welfare effect, leading to trade diversion.
Table 4 explores this trade diversion phenomenon in detail for the case of machinery and
equipment imports into Chile. Chile is notable for is its uniform tariff structure (8% across all
sources/products in 2001). This is efficient in that it promotes the sourcing of imports from the least
cost supplies of any given product, as well as discouraging substitution across import categories in
response to differential tariffs by product. Of course, there remains the distortion of import/domestic
choices, as with any tariff regime. We focus the discussion here on other machinery and equipment
imports because this contributes the largest share of the aggregate efficiency loss in column one of
Table 3 (one-third of the total).
The individual columns in Table 4 correspond to different parts of equation (4). The first
entry reports the non-linear solution value for EVs ( τ Mirs ) for i = ome , s = Chile and r = all regions.12

12

Note that the non-linear solution to equation (9) requires that we incorporate it individually into the model’s
solution (as apposed to it being a part of equation (3)). This permits us to capture the interaction between
changes in the levels of τM irs and PCIFirs on the one hand, and the volume changes, dQMS irs , on the other.

19

The driving force behind each of these entries is the underlying change in bilateral import
volume, dQMS irs reported in column two of the table. This is measured in $US 1997, where one unit
of the good is the amount that could be purchased in the source country for $1.00 in the initial (i.e.,
pre-FTAA) equilibrium. Since these goods are differentiated products, the sum of these trade volumes
is not particularly meaningful. But if we did perform this summation, we would find that this crude
estimate of import volume showed an increase of $214 million, with the rises in intra-FTAA imports
of machinery and equipment into Chile more than offsetting the declines in extra-FTAA imports. This
naïve estimate of increased import volume stands in sharp contrast to the negative welfare outcome
share in the first column total.
The difference between the simple volume summation and the welfare change derives from
the bilateral weights applied to these volume changes: τ Mirs PCIFirs. In this regard, it is instructive to
consider both the initial (0) and ending (1) values for the tariff rate and import price. These are also
reported in Table 4. Note that the proportional PCIFirs changes (typically less than 10%) are an order
of magnitude smaller than the changes in intra-regional tariffs (-100%), so we focus our attention on
the latter. While the initial reductions in the tariff on intra-FTAA imports bring fairly large welfare
gains, (recall Figure 1), the final reductions bring almost nothing. Yet, the final reduction in τ Mirs
continues to lead to substantial displacement of extra-FTAA imports (recall equation (5)). Given the
absence of reductions on the extra-FTAA tariffs, these volume reductions come to dominate the
welfare story. This is why the welfare loss due to reduced imports of machinery and equipment from
the EU is nearly twice as large as the gain due to increased imports from USA, even though the
absolute value of the trade volume change with respect to USA is nearly twice that of the EU.
Recall from our earlier analysis (e.g., equation 11) that the elasticity of substitution among
imports, by source, is a critical determinant of the allocative efficiency effect associated with tariff
changes. Yet these elasticities are uncertain, and we have characterized this uncertainty in our
20

systematic sensitivity analysis. So it is of some interest to explore the relationship between uncertainty
in the trade elasticities and uncertainty in these welfare contribution terms themselves. We examine
this issue statistically for the welfare changes associated with FTAA flows in the model. Consider the
welfare term in equation (8), WQMSirs . In a typical CGE analysis, there is but one value of this term
for each commodity i, exporter r, and importer s. However, in our approach, we have a value for this
term for each solution of the model, every time with a different set of trade elasticities. To better
understand the standard error in WQMSirs across model solutions, we regress the standard error in this
variable on the depth of the associated bilateral tariff cut, τ irs , which is the same across model
solutions), and an interaction between the depth of the tariff cut and SEσi , the standard error of the
substitution elasticity among imports by source, for commodity i. We include the depth of the tariff cut
as an explanatory variable to control for differences in relative dispersion in the welfare contribution
variable, because larger tariff cuts will increase variability of the welfare variable for a constant
standard error for the elasticity. Estimates are reported in equation (17)13, along with the associated Tstatistics (in parentheses):

SEWQIMirs = 0.020 τ irs + 0.023 τ irs SEσi
( 6.464 )

(17)

( 6.936 )

The OLS coefficients in (17) are significant and positive indicating that both the depth of the
tariff reduction and the interaction of the tariff with the variability of the elasticity are important in
explaining variability in the allocative welfare effects. The positive relationship is as we would expect,
since we hypothesize that uncertainty in the model parameter should be carried over to the allocative
welfare component as demonstrated in section 2.
13

The regression is based on 5,337 non-zero bilateral trade flows in the FTAA region. The R2 for the regression
is 0.040, indicating fairly low explanatory power as we would expect given the large number of omitted
variables (in the regression model) that affect the welfare term in the GE model. Since our primary concern is to
characterize the relationship between uncertainty in the welfare term and the trade elasticity we feel the
regression model is serviceable as it controls for the dominant effect of size of the tariff cut, and shows the
significant positive relationship between the two measures of uncertainty.

21

The coefficient levels indicate that we predict a change of 0.043 in the standard error of the
welfare variable when the tariff cut is increased by one percent and the standard error of the
substitution elasticity is increased by one. The mean standard error for the allocative welfare effect is
0.163, so this predicted change represents about twenty-five percent of the mean for the dependent
variable.
We now return to Table 3 to discuss the remaining elements of the efficiency story. For Chile,
the next most important efficiency change relates to the consumption taxes,14 which apply equally to
consumption of imports and domestic goods. Thus, the increased consumption of imported goods
boosts overall consumption and results in positive contributions to aggregate welfare in all of the
FTAA regions where good consumption taxation data are available.15 Production taxes (subsidies)
also play a big role in the welfare decomposition in some regions. In USA, the strong expansion of
subsidized grains output leads to a negative welfare contribution, whereas in Mexico, the expansion of
taxed manufacturing activity at the expense of untaxed fuel and agriculture improves efficiency in that
country.
The final column in Table 4 reports the combined efficiency impacts of intermediate import
taxes, primary factor taxes (subsidies), and export taxes (subsidies). (These were suppressed in
equation (7) for the sake of brevity.) The negative efficiency contribution in the US derives from land
and capital subsidies for program crops and dairy export subsidies, whereas agricultural export taxes
in Brazil play a key role in the positive welfare contribution in that country.
Next, turn to Table 5, which reports the aggregate welfare effects, by country, decomposed
into their efficiency and terms of trade components. The aggregate efficiency effect is simply the
summation of the results reported in Table 3. This permits us to explain the efficiency loss in the USA

14

This includes the Chilean value-added taxes which are most naturally modeled as a consumption tax.
The negative number for Argentina results from the apparent exemption of imported oil products from
consumption taxation. This appears to be an error in the original data base for that country.

15

22

and Venezuela. In Venezuela, this is caused by net trade diversion, whereas in the USA it is due to
expansion of the subsidized agriculture sector.
We turn next to the terms of trade effects (the second pair of columns in Table 5).16 Ceteris
paribus, expect these effects to be largest (relative to export volume) in those countries where exports
surge the most. Thus it is no surprise that the terms of trade deteriorate for Colombia and Peru, as
these are countries with very high average tariffs that must export more to affect the large increase in
import volume. The terms of trade also deteriorate for Canada, Mexico, Argentina and Other South
America. The TOT deterioration for Mexico and Canada may be understood by the fact that these
countries currently enjoy tariff free access to the largest market in the region for many of their
products. When the FTAA is introduced, other countries obtain the same benefit and they displace
Mexican and Canadian imports. The same general phenomenon explains why Argentina’s terms of
trade decline. Of course, one region’s TOT loss is another’s gain, and Other Central America is one of
the regions showing a strong TOT gain. In this case, it is the strong increase in exports that is driving
the import growth reported in Table 2.
Another dimension of this analysis of uncertainty in the terms of trade effect can be observed
in Figure 2. In this figure, we show how uncertainty in each FTAA region’s average export demand
elasticity translates into uncertainty in the export price component of their terms of trade (see
McDougall, 1992 for details on the terms of trade decomposition). Countries that rely heavily on
exports of commodities whose substitution elasticities of trade are highly uncertain (e.g., Colombia)
are exposed to a great deal of uncertainty in the size of their average export demand elasticity
(horizontal axis of Figure 2) and tend to experience more uncertainty in the export price component of
their terms of trade (vertical axis). Venezuela is an exception to this rule. It exhibits a high degree of
uncertainty in export demand elasticities due to a heavy reliance on oil and gas exports, which are
16

For purposes of this table, we have expanded the terms of trade effect to include the effect of changes in the
prices of the savings and investment goods in addition to the traditional changes in the prices of merchandise and
services.

23

large and rather uncertain (recall Table 1). On the other hand, the variation in the export price
component of its terms of trade is relatively small, due perhaps to the relative homogeneity of this
product and the generally low tariffs on oil.
We are now in a position to answer the question: Which countries gain from the FTAA? We
see from the final two pairs of columns in Table 5 that ten of the thirteen FTAA countries gain from
this free trade agreement based on the 95% confidence interval. On the other hand, Argentina and
Other South America are shown to lose from the FTAA. In the case of Argentina, this is driven by a
dominant, adverse terms of trade effect. For Other South America, both the terms of trade and
allocative effects are negative.
The welfare impact of the FTAA on the final country: Colombia is uncertain. This is an
interesting case, since the component parts of their aggregate welfare impacts are “certain” in the
sense that the 95% confidence intervals do not include zero. However, the positive allocative
efficiency component is offset by an equally large negative terms of trade effect. So while the
components of the welfare change are certain, the sign of their summation – the aggregate welfare gain
– is uncertain. This type of uncertainty is not inherited from uncertainty about the model parameters
governing substitution in trade. Rather, it relates to the presence of competing economic forces at
work in the determination of the change in national welfare.
There are many other variables in addition to the change in aggregate welfare that we could
examine, particularly at the sector level. Here we focus our attention on employment, since the
displacement of unskilled workers is often one of the most sensitive topics surrounding any free trade
agreement. Table 6 summarizes the directional changes in unskilled employment, by sector, for each
region. The first column reports the total number of sectors in which employment of unskilled labor
rises and the second column reports the number in which employment falls. Since total employment
remains unchanged, by assumption, the relative size of these two numbers is not very meaningful.
However, it is interesting to ask how many of these changes are significantly different from zero at the
24

95% level. This is reported in the next column of Table 5. Here we see that the changes in
employment are generally robust to the estimated variation in trade elasticities. We able to sign the
change in sectoral employment at the 95% confidence level for every region in over 75% of the
sectors.
Table 7 reports the same employment results as Table 6, with the focus shifted to employment
by sectors across all of the model regions. This allows us to evaluate how the uncertainty in sectoral
trade elasticities translates into uncertainty about the employment effects for a given sector. Here we
see that for all but five of the forty-two sectors, we are confident in the direction of change in
employment for a given sector in seventy percent or more of the regions. The exceptions here are four
primary commodities: paddy rice, wheat, other grains, and coal, as well as for processed rice. Not
surprisingly, these sectors have some of the largest standard deviations relative to the size of the
estimated elasticity (recall Table 1).

25

7. Summary and Conclusions

Computable General Equilibrium analysis is often criticized for its lack of econometric
foundations (McKitrick, 1998). The goal of this paper is to show that it is indeed possible to provide
substantial statistical underpinning to policy analyses conducted using the CGE framework. We focus
our attention on analysis of Free Trade Agreements – specifically, the Free Trade Agreement of the
Americas – for which the key behavioral parameter is the elasticity of substitution among imports
from different countries. This governs the extent to which non-FTAA regions will be displaced by the
preferential reduction in tariffs on imports from FTAA countries.
Historically, estimation of the import substitution elasticity has been difficult, due to
insufficient observed variation in relative prices. In this paper, we capitalize on a unique data set and
approach developed by Hummels (1999), in which variation in bilateral transport costs is combined
with bilateral tariff variation in order to enhance the observed variability of relative prices for imports
from different sources in six FTAA countries and one non-FTAA country. Elasticities are estimated at
the GTAP commodity level to facilitate subsequent incorporation into our CGE model. The resulting
estimates of the elasticity of substitution among imports are all significant at the 95% level. These
estimates, together with their standard errors, are used in the subsequent policy simulations.
The FTAA analysis takes explicit account of the fact that we do not know the true trade
elasticities with certainty. Rather, we sample from a distribution of parameter values, constructed
based on our econometric results. The outcome of this systematic sensitivity analysis is a distribution
of model results, from which we can construct confidence intervals with which to answer the basic
question posed in the title of this paper. We find that imports increase in all regions of the world as a
result of the FTAA, and this outcome is robust to variation in the trade elasticities. Ten of the thirteen
FTAA regions experience a welfare gain in which we are more than 95% confident. Two regions,
Argentina and rest of South America experience welfare losses as they are displaced from existing
markets in which they currently enjoy preferential access. Finally, the welfare impact of the FTAA on
26

Colombia is uncertain due to offsetting efficiency and terms of trade effects. We also examine the
robustness of our employment effects. With the exception of several primary products, where the trade
elasticity is relatively uncertain, we can be confident in the sign of the sectoral employment effects in
the majority of regions.
Of course all of these findings are conditional on the underlying model structure, as well as the
other parameters employed in the CGE analysis. Variations in that structure will change both the
econometric procedures as well as the CGE model itself. Given the uncertainty surrounding the
appropriate structure for international trade modeling, and the diversity of outcomes that such changes
in structure can engender, we must view the confidence intervals in this paper as being on the
conservative side. Future work should focus on discriminating among these alternative model
structures for purposes of establishing a firmer foundation for CGE analysis of trade policies (e.g.,
Hummels and Klenow, 2002).
In summary, we conclude that there is great potential for combining econometric work with
CGE-based policy analysis in order to produce a richer set of results that are likely to prove more
satisfying to the sophisticated policy maker. In the end, decision makers and their advisors
increasingly ask: How robust are the policy findings? In this paper we have found that some of the
FTAA conclusions are robust, while others are not. This is important information for those seeking to
make key political decisions based in part on results from quantitative economic models.

27

References

Alaouze, C.M. (1977). Estimates of the elasticity of substitution between imported and domestically
produced goods classified at the input-output level of aggregation, IMPACT Working Paper No. O13, Industries Assistance Commission, Canberra.
Alaouze, C.M., J.S Marsden, and J. Zeitsch (1977). Estimates of the Elasticity of Substitution between
Imported and Domestically Produced Commodities at Four digit ASIC Level, IMPACT Working
Paper No. O-11, Industries Assistance Commission, Canberra.
Armington, P.S. (1969). A Theory of Demand for Products distinguished by Place of Production, IMF
Staff Papers vol. 16, no. 2, pp. 179-201.
Arndt, C. (1996). An Introduction to Systematic Sensitivity Analysis via Gaussian Quadrature, GTAP
Technical Paper No. 2, Center for Global Trade Analysis, Purdue University,
http://www.agecon.purdue.edu/gtap/techpapr/tp-2.htm
Baldwin, R.E. and A.J. Venables (1995), ‘Regional Economic Integration,’ in G.M. Grossman and
Rogoff, K. (Eds.), Handbook of International Economics, volume III (North-Holland/Elsevier).
Bouët, Antoine, Lionel Fontagné, Mondher Mimouni, and Friedrich von Kirchbach. 2002. “Market
Access Maps for GTAP: A Bilateral Measure of Merchandise Trade Protection,” Draft Version
Prepared for the GTAP Conference, Taipei.
DeVuyst, E.A. and P.V. Preckel (1997). “Sensitivity Analysis Revisited: A Quadrature-Based
Approach,” Journal of Policy Modeling, 19(2):175-85.
Diao, X., and A. Somwaru. (2001). “A Dynamic Evaluation of a Free Trade Area of the Americas—
An Intertemporal, Global General Equilibrium Model,” Journal of Regional Integration, 16:21-47.
Financial Review of Australia (2003). “Out for the Count on Free Trade”.
FTAA Tri-Partite Committee. (2002). “Overview of the FTAA Process,” available at Internet URL:
http://www.ftaa-alca.org/View_e.asp
FTAA Tri-Partite Committee. (2003). “Ministerial Declaration of Miami,” available at Internet URL:
http://www.ftaa-alca.org/ministerials/miami/minist_e.asp.
Gallaway, M.P., C. A. McDaniel and S.A. Rivera (2003). “Short-run and Long-run Industry-level
Estimates of U.S. Armington Elasticities”, North American Journal of Economics and Finance, 14:4968.
Harrison, G.W., and H.D. Vinod (1992). “The Sensitivity Analysis of General Equilibrium Models:
Completely Randomized Factorial Sampling Designs”, Review of Economics and Statistics, 74:357362.
Harrison, W.J. and Pearson, K.R. (1996), ‘Computing solutions for large general equilibrium models
using GEMPACK,’ Computational Economics 9: 83-127.
28

Harrison, W.J. and Pearson, K.R. (2002), GEMPACK User Documentation: Release 8.0, Melbourne,
Australia, Center of Policy Studies and IMPACT Project.
Hertel, Thomas W. (editor) (1997). Global Trade Analysis: Modeling and Applications, New York;
Cambridge University Press.
Huff, K. and T. Hertel. (1996). “Decomposing Welfare Changes in GTAP,” GTAP Technical Paper
No. 5, Center for Global Trade Analysis, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN. (revised 2001).
Hummels, D. (1999). Towards a Geography of Trade Costs, GTAP Working Paper No. 17, Center for
Global Trade Analysis, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN,
http://www.gtap.agecon.purdue.edu/resources/working_papers.asp
Hummels, D., and P. Klenow (2003). “The Variety and Quality of a Nation’s Exports, mimeo, Dept.
of Economics, Purdue University:
http://www.mgmt.purdue.edu/faculty/hummelsd/research/variety_quality_short.pdf.
Jorgenson, D. (1984). Econometric Methods for Applied General Equilibrium Analysis. Scarf, Herbert
E. and Shoven, John B. (eds.) Applied General Equilibrium Analysis. New York, Cambridge
University Press.
Jomini, P., R. McDougall, G. Watts, and P.S. Dee (1994). The SALTER Model of the World Economy:
Model Structure, Database and Parameters. Industry Commission, Canberra, Australia.
Kehoe, T.J. (2002). “An Evaluation of the Performance of Applied General Equilibrium Models of the
Effects of NAFTA on CGE analysis of NAFTA”, paper presented at the Fifth Annual Conference on
Global Economic Analysis, Taipei, Taiwan,
http://www.gtap.agecon.purdue.edu/resources/download/1100.pdf
Liu, J., T.C. Arndt and T.W. Hertel (2003). “Parameter Estimation and Measures of Goodness of Fit in
a Global General Equilibrium Model”, Journal of Economic Integration (forthcoming).
Malcolm, Gerard. (1998). “Adjusting Tax Rates in the GTAP Data Base,” GTAP Technical Paper No.
12, Global Trade Analysis Project, Purdue University, West Lafayette, Indiana, U.S.A.
McDougall, R. A. (1993). "Two Small Extensions to SALTER," SALTER Working Paper No. 12,
Industry Commission: Canberra, Australia.
McDougall, R. A. (2003). “A New Regional Household Demand System for GTAP,” GTAP
Technical Paper No. 20, Global Trade Analysis Project, Purdue University, West Lafayette, Indiana,
U.S.A.
McKitrick, R. Ross (1998). “The Econometric Critique of Computable General Equilibrium Modeling:
The Role of Parameter Estimation.” Economic Modeling 15: 543-573.
Pagan, A.R., and J. Shannon, (1987). “How Reliable are ORANI Conclusions?”, Economics Record,
1:33-45.
29

Stern, R.M., J. Francis, and B. Shumacher (1976). Price Elasticities in International Trade: an
Annotated Bibliography, MacMillan, London.
Whalley, J. (1985). Trade Liberalization among Major World Trading Areas, MIT Press, Cambridge,
Massachusetts.
Wigle, R. (1991). “The Pagan-Shannon Approximation: Unconditional Systematic Sensitivity in
Minutes”, Empirical Economics, 16:35-49.
Young, L.M., and K.M. Huff. (1997). “Free Trade in the Pacific Rim: On What Basis?” in Global
Trade Analysis: Modeling and Applications. ed. T.W. Hertel. Cambridge University Press:
Cambridge.

30

Figure 1. Allocative Efficiency Gains from Tariff Elimination

Price
PMS0

S

PCIF1=PMS1

τMirs PCIFirs

allocative
efficiency
effect

D

PCIF0

Quantity
QMS0

QMS1
dQMS
31

Figure 2. Uncertainty Comparison: Trade Elasticity and TOT Export Price Effect
0.25

COL

Std. Error of Terms of Trade (Exports)

0.20

0.15

XAP

URY
MEX

0.10
BRA

XSM

XCM

ARG

PER

VEN

0.05
CHL

CAN

USA
0.00
0.00

0.50

1.00

1.50

Wtd. Std. Error Elasticity

32

2.00

2.50

Table 1. Elasticities of Substitution among Imports from Different Sources
Code
PDR
WHT
GRO
V_F
OSD
C_B
PFB
OCR

Description

Paddy rice
Wheat
Cereal grains nec
Vegetables, fruit, nuts
Oil seeds
Sugar cane, sugar beet
Plant-based fibers
Crops nec
Bovine cattle, sheep and goats,
CTL
horses
OAP
Animal products nec
RMK
Raw milk
WOL
Wool, silk-worm cocoons
FOR
Forestry
FSH
Fishing
COL
Coal
OIL
Oil
GAS
Gas
OMN
Minerals nec
CMT
Bovine meat products
OMT
Meat products nec
VOL
Vegetable oils and fats
MIL
Dairy products
PCR
Processed rice
SGR
Sugar
OFD
Food products nec
B_T
Beverages and tobacco products
TEX
Textiles
WAP
Wearing apparel
LEA
Leather products
LUM
Wood products
PPP
Paper products, publishing
P_C
Petroleum, coal products
CRP
Chemical, rubber, plastic products
NMM
Mineral products nec
I_S
Ferrous metals
NFM
Metals nec
FMP
Metal products
MVH
Motor vehicles and parts
OTN
Transport equipment nec
ELE
Electronic equipment
OME
Machinery and equipment nec
OMF
Manufactures nec
*Estimate Significant at 95% Confidence Level.

Original
Elasticity
4.4
4.4
4.4
4.4
4.4
4.4
4.4
4.4

Estimated
Elasticity
10.1*
8.9*
2.6*
3.7*
4.9*
N/A
5.0*
6.5*

4.0
4.2
1.1
0.4
0.8
N/A
2.4
0.4

Num
Obs
26
32
131
1,199
239
3
71
1,796

5.6

4.0*

0.7

156

5.6
4.4
4.4
5.6
5.6
5.6
5.6
5.6
5.6
4.4
4.4
4.4
4.4
4.4
4.4
4.4
6.2
4.4
8.8
8.8
5.6
3.6
3.8
3.8
5.6
5.6
5.6
5.6
10.4
10.4
5.6
5.6
5.6

2.6*
N/A
12.9*
5.0*
2.5*
6.1*
10.4*
34.4*
1.8*
7.7*
8.8*
6.6*
7.3*
5.2*
5.4*
4.0*
2.3*
7.5*
7.4*
8.1*
6.8*
5.9*
4.2*
6.6*
5.8*
5.9*
8.4*
7.5*
5.6*
8.6*
8.8*
8.1*
7.5*

0.3
N/A
2.7
0.7
0.6
2.4
3.8
14.3
0.3
1.9
0.9
0.7
0.8
2.6
2.0
0.1
0.3
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.2
0.2
1.1
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.2
0.1
0.2

813
76
529
527
71
56
8
1,584
211
411
717
547
62
156
6,917
998
14,375
9,090
3,457
4,120
6,597
344
61,603
6,240
5,524
3,194
9,926
2,238
1,843
8,916
44,386
7,586

33

SD

Table 2. Percentage Change in Aggregate Imports: Mean, 95 % Confidence Interval, and Coefficient
of Variation
.
Coefficient
of
Variation
Confidence Interval
Total
Sector
Region
Lower
Mean
Upper
Imports
Average

Canada
USA
Mexico
Central
America
Colombia
Peru
Venezuela
Other
Andean
Pact
Argentina
Brazil
Chile
Uruguay
Other
South
America
AsiaOcenia
European
Union
Other
Europe
Mid-East
and Africa

1.07
2.07
7.36

1.32
2.19
8.38

1.57
2.31
9.39

0.10
0.03
0.06

1.17
0.10
0.06

10.76
9.22
7.93
4.69

11.16
10.37
8.41
4.81

11.56
11.51
8.89
4.93

0.02
0.06
0.03
0.01

0.01
0.22
0.16
0.18

4.65
4.13
8.07
5.39
2.04

5.39
4.26
8.33
5.51
2.24

6.12
4.39
8.58
5.64
2.45

0.07
0.02
0.02
0.01
0.05

0.24
0.12
0.18
0.17
0.80

5.68

5.98

6.27

0.03

0.01

-0.32

-0.31

-0.31

-0.01

-0.11

-0.23

-0.23

-0.23

-0.01

2.01

-0.15

-0.15

-0.15

-0.01

-0.10

-0.29

-0.27

-0.25

-0.04

-0.10

34

Table 3. Components of Allocative Efficiency Effects Due to FTAA ($US million): Mean
and Coefficient of Variation (CV)
Region

Canada
USA
Mexico
Central
America
Colombia
Peru
Venezuela
Other
Andean
Pact
Argentina
Brazil
Chile
Uruguay
Other
South
America
AsiaOcenia
European
Union
Other
Europe
Mid-East
and Africa

Imports
Mean
CV

Consumption
Mean
CV

Production
Mean
CV

Other
Mean

760.60
545.25
975.35

0.12
0.06
0.19

246.40
-0.01
2.50

0.11
-0.23
0.29

40.78
-74.44
174.80

0.21
-0.09
0.23

-212.06
-495.42
103.37

322.05
508.55
9.35
-10.50

0.05
0.10
0.15
-0.09

217.79
15.38
23.68
2.83

0.05
0.08
0.08
0.08

-10.58
4.22
-2.69
0.00

-0.15
0.23
-0.38
-0.13

-8.56
98.54
123.03
1.44

17.26
32.61
148.88
-15.69
1.57

0.17
0.08
0.04
-0.06
0.36

11.48
-0.19
431.82
33.40
3.88

0.13
-0.80
0.02
0.03
0.10

-5.12
-0.23
-10.62
-5.46
0.22

-0.39
-0.02
-0.17
-0.04
0.73

22.83
-29.45
788.52
9.40
-4.16

-0.60q

-1.04

7.64

0.19

-1.56

-0.03

-2.72

-252.95

-0.07

-34.53

-0.03

46.53

0.09

-362.48

-226.71

-0.06

-120.41

-0.05

60.52

0.03

-407.48

-49.62

-0.04

-15.67

-0.04

6.17

0.08

-42.99

-66.17

-0.07

-10.27

-0.10

1.91

0.17

-14.03

q

Results in italics indicate a result for which the confidence interval encompasses zero, i.e. it is not robust
to direction of change under parametric uncertainty.

35

Table 4. Analysis of Trade Diversion in Chile: Machinery and Equipment

Canada
USA
Mexico
Central
America
Colombia
Peru
Venezuela
Other
Andean
Pact
Argentina
Brazil
Chile
Uruguay
Other
South
America
AsiaOcenia
European
Union
Other
Europe
Mid-East
and Africa
Total

( dQMSirs )

Initial
Tariff
Rate
0
( τ Mirs
)

Updated
Tariff
Rate
1
( τ mirs
)

Price
Initial
0
( PMS irs
)

Price
Updated
1
( PMS irs
)

1.00
18.20
2.70

25.54
450.01
71.77

0.08
0.08
0.08

0.00
0.00
0.00

0.93
0.93
0.93

0.93
0.93
0.93

0.01
0.30
0.04
0.07

0.28
8.12
1.19
1.82

0.08
0.08
0.08
0.08

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

0.93
0.99
0.81
0.93

0.92
0.96
0.97
0.81

0.01
1.28
4.54
0.00
0.02

0.42
33.31
106.97
0.00
0.58

0.08
0.08
0.08
0.00
0.08

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

0.81
0.93
0.96
1.00
0.93

0.91
0.81
0.92
0.96
1.00

0.00

0.11

0.08

0.00

0.94

0.93

-16.14

-189.46

0.08

0.08

0.94

0.93

-23.41

-284.15

0.08

0.08

0.93

0.92

-1.19

-14.50

0.08

0.08

0.93

0.92

-0.80

-9.72

0.08

0.08

0.93

0.93

-13.356

202.303

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

Welfare
Change

Volume
Change

($US mill.)

($US mill.)

( EVs )

36

Table 5. Welfare Effects of FTAA Outcome ($US million)

Region

Canada
USA
Mexico
Central
America
Colombia
Peru
Venezuela
Other
Andean Pact
Argentina
Brazil
Chile
Uruguay
Other South
America
AsiaOcenia
European
Union
Other
Europe
Mid-East
and Africa

Allocative EV
Mean
CV

Terms of Trade EV
Mean
CV

EV Total
Mean

Welfare (% Change)
Mean
CV

CV

835.71
-24.61
1256.02

0.13
-2.87
0.19

-620.78
6244.82
-1241.76

-0.12
0.04
-0.12

167.18
6845.20
78.02

0.26
0.04
1.29

0.03
0.09
0.02

0.26
0.04
1.29

520.70
626.70
153.37
-6.23

0.05
0.09
0.03
-0.18

855.32
-514.99
-73.39
82.92

0.04
-0.07
-0.06
0.16

1385.57
41.95
62.72
110.38

0.04
0.60
0.11
0.11

1.70
0.05
0.11
0.15

0.04
0.60
0.11
0.11

46.45
2.73
1358.59
21.64
1.52

0.08
1.56
0.03
0.04
1.80

22.10
-30.69
548.33
189.57
22.32

0.57
-0.51
0.10
0.03
0.22

63.94
-74.50
1921.85
200.41
16.71

0.27
-0.28
0.06
0.03
0.44

0.27
-0.02
0.28
0.29
0.09

0.27
-0.28
0.06
0.03
0.44

2.75

0.30

-42.78

-0.06

-82.85

-0.04

-0.89

-0.04

-603.43

-0.04

-2625.12

-0.01

-3577.75

-0.01

-0.05

-0.01

-694.09

-0.05

-2383.01

-0.01

-3171.74

-0.02

-0.05

-0.02

-102.12

-0.04

-246.90

-0.05

-390.04

-0.03

-0.03

-0.03

-88.55

-0.07

-232.27

-0.18

-340.07

-0.14

-0.04

-0.14

37

Table 6. Regional Employment Effects Due to FTAA
Number of Sectors with:
Region

Canada
USA
Mexico
Central
America
Colombia
Peru
Venezuela
Other
Andean
Pact
Argentina
Brazil
Chile
Uruguay
Other
South
America
AsiaOcenia
European
Union
Other
Europe
Mid-East
and Africa

Employment
Increase

Employment
Decrease

Pct Results with 95%
Confidence

29
31
28

13
11
14

83%
88%
79%

9
20
18
22

33
22
24
20

93%
88%
88%
88%

18
22
23
21
13

24
20
19
21
29

76%
90%
86%
88%
79%

19

23

83%

19

23

81%

17

25

88%

16

26

86%

17

25

81%

38

Table 7. Sectoral Employment Effects Due to FTAA
Number of Sectors with:
Sector
Paddy rice
Wheat
Cereal grains
Vegetables, fruit, nuts
Oil seeds
Sugar
Plant-based fibers
Other Crops
Cattle
Animal products
Raw milk
Wool
Forestry
Fishing
Coal
Oil
Gas
Minerals
Bovine meat products
Other meat products
Veg. oils and fats
Dairy products
Processed rice
Processed sugar
Food products
Bev. and tobacco
Textiles
Wearing apparel
Leather products
Wood products
Paper products
Petroleum, coal
products
Chemical, rubber,
plastic products
Mineral products
Ferrous metals
Metals
Metal products
Motor vehicles and
parts
Transport equipment
Electronic equipment
Machinery

Employment Increase

Employment
Decrease

Pct Results with
95% Confidence

9
6
9
6
10
9
4
7
12
9
8
7
8
9
4
8
8
12
13
7
11
6
8
10
8
10
7
9
11
7
8

8
11
8
11
7
8
13
10
5
8
9
10
9
8
13
9
9
5
4
10
6
11
9
7
9
7
10
8
6
10
9

65%
59%
65%
71%
76%
82%
71%
76%
76%
94%
94%
88%
82%
94%
59%
82%
82%
76%
82%
88%
94%
100%
35%
76%
100%
88%
94%
88%
100%
82%
100%

8

9

71%

6
9
5
9
7

11
8
12
8
10

100%
88%
100%
100%
94%

5
12
7
6

12
5
10
11

100%
100%
100%
94%

39

