NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

CAN PORTFOLIO REBALANCING EXPLAIN THE DYNAMICS
OF EQUITY RETURNS, EQUITY FLOWS,
AND EXCHANGE RATES?
Harald Hau
Hélène Rey
Working Paper 10476
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10476
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2004

We are grateful to Fabio Canova, Bernard Dumas, Rich Lyons and Gregorios Souriounis for very helpful
comments. We thank also the Fondation Banque de France for financial support. The paper is part of the
project “Exchange Rates, International Relative Prices, and Macroeconomic Models”, funded by the ESRC
(grant no.L138 25 1043), and of the RTN programme “The Analysis of International Capital Markets:
Understanding Europe's Role in the Global Economy” , funded by the European Commission contract no.
HPRN-CT-1999-00067).The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of
the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2004 by Harald Hau and Hélène Rey. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

Can Portfolio Rebalancing Explain the Dynamics of Equity Returns, Equity Flows, and
Exchange Rates?
Harald Hau and Hélène Rey
NBER Working Paper No. 10476
May 2004
JEL No. F30, F31
ABSTRACT
We explore whether the pattern of international equity returns, equity portfolio flows, and exchange
rate returns are consistent with the hypothesis that (unhedged) global investors rebalance their
portfolio in order to limit their exchange rate exposure when there are (1) relative equity return and
(2) exchange rate shocks. We also explore whether (3) equity flow shocks influence the exchange
rates and relative equity prices. In the estimation of the VAR system we do not impose any causal
ordering upon the primitive shocks, but instead identify the system based on theoretical priors about
the contemporaneous conditional correlations between the three variables. International data for the
five largest equity markets are consistent with a theory in which equity returns and portfolio
rebalancing are an important source of exchange rate dynamics.
Harald Hau
Department of Finance
Boulevard de Constance
77305 Fontainebleau Cedex
France
harald.hau@insead.edu
Helene Rey
Department of Economics
Woodrow Wilson School
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544
and NBER
hrey@princeton.edu

1

Introduction

Portfolio rebalancing motives are an old topic in exchange rate theory (Kouri (1982), Branson and
Henderson (1985)). While the earlier literature mostly lacks modern microfoundations, its emphasis
on capital markets resonates more than ever with the stylized facts of international finance. Gross
capital flows and particularly equity flows have grown tremendously over the last two decades.1 And
these equity portfolio flows have arguably become an important determinant of the short-run supply
and demand of foreign exchange (FX) balances.
This paper examines whether the data on equity returns, equity flows, and exchange rate returns
are supportive of a portfolio rebalancing channel. We argue that the portfolio rebalancing channel
implies a set of conditional correlations between these variables which can be confronted with the
data. Equity return and exchange rate data are straightforward to obtain. The best public data
on international equity flows come from the U.S. Treasury (TIC data) and measure bilateral flows
between the U.S. and a large number of foreign countries. We focus here on the 5 largest equity
markets outside the U.S., namely France, Germany, Japan, Switzerland and the U.K. for the period
January 1990 to September 2003.
A basic econometric problem with any system of simultaneously determined variables is the identification of primitive shocks. Frequently this problem is addressed by imposing a causal ordering
between variables. It is assumed that shocks to variables of lower ordering do not contemporaneously
influence variables of higher order (Choleski decomposition). But for a monthly data frequency and
the inclusion of two price processes, namely equity returns and exchange rate returns, any such a
causal structure is highly implausible. We therefore take a new identification approach which does
not impose any zero restrictions. This method was previously used by Uhlig (2001) and Canova and
De Nicolo (2002). Identification is achieved by a grid search over the space of all feasible decompositions of the variance-covariance matrix and selection of the particular one which is most in accordance
with our theoretical priors. In other words we search for the moving average MA representation of
the data process which accords best with the conditional correlations obtained under the hypotheses
of the portfolio rebalancing channel.
We find that the data are consistent with an important role for the portfolio rebalancing channel.
Our preferred variance-covariance decomposition shows that global investors repatriate foreign equity
wealth after its appreciation either because of foreign equity excess returns (H1) or after an unexpected
appreciation of the foreign currency (H2). Moreover, these equity flows move the exchange rate in
line with a price inelastic supply of foreign exchange balances. Portfolio flow shocks appreciate the
foreign exchange rate and create foreign equity market excess returns (H3).
1 While gross cross-border transactions in bond and equity for the U.S. were equivalent to only 4 percent of GDP in
1975, this share increased to 100 percent in the early 1990s and has grown to 245 percent by 2000.

1

2

Literature

The empirical analysis here is closely related to recent theoretical work by Hau and Rey (2002), which
provides microfoundations to the portfolio balance theory.2 Their dynamic equilibrium framework
characterizes the joint dynamics of equity returns, equity flows and exchange rate returns induced
by realistic constraints on the FX risk trading possibilities of international investors. According
to survey evidence, international investors hedge only a minor proportion of their actual FX risk.
Diﬀerential equity market performance then induces dynamic portfolio rebalancing, which in turn can
move exchange rates. Hau and Rey (2002) also document that the unconditional correlation structure
between relative equity returns, exchange rate returns and equity flows is supportive of such a portfolio
rebalancing channel.3 The present paper extends this work to the conditional correlation structure in
a VAR framework.
Similar work features in a recent study by Souriounis (2003), who uses data on net equity and
bond flows, equity returns, interest rates and exchange rates to uncover dynamic links between capital
flows and exchange rate movements. Souriounis (2003) documents that equity flows rather than bond
flows are important in explaining exchange rates. However, his identification assumptions are not
grounded in theory. Other empirical work by Froot and Ramadorai (2002) uses proprietary data
on daily institutional investor currency flows. They find that these flows are highly correlated with
contemporaneous and lagged exchange rate changes.
The recent empirical literature on exchange rates has highlighted a variable called currency order
flow (purchaser initiated trades minus seller initiated trades) as strongly correlated with exchange rate
returns (Evans and Lyons (2002), (2003a), Hau et al. (2002), Killeen et al. (2002), Rime (2001)).
Order flow is sometimes interpreted as the variable through which dispersed information is aggregated
and impounded in the price (Lyons (2001), Evans and Lyons (2003b)). Yet simple portfolio shifts
could also give rise to order flow without any role for information asymmetries. Within the portfolio
rebalancing framework and conditional on exogenous equity return and exchange rate shocks, it is
plausible that net capital flows and order flows are closely aligned. Conditional on an exogenous
appreciation of his foreign wealth for example, the home investor is likely to initiate the selling of
foreign assets as well as the selling of foreign currency balances.

3

Theoretical hypotheses

The following section outlines three hypotheses with respect to the dynamics of equity returns, equity
portfolio flows and exchange rate returns. Equity returns are measured as the monthly equity return
diﬀerential (in local currency) between the foreign equity market index and the U.S. (home) equity
market index, namely y1 = ER = R(f ) − R(h). We define equity portfolio flows as the net purchase of
2 See also Pavlova and Rigobon (2003) for related work on optimal dynamic international equity holdings. Exchange
rate determination in their setup is based on relative good prices and not on equity flows itself.
3 See Tables 2 to 6 in Hau and Rey (2002).

2

foreign equity by home residents minus the net purchases of home equity by foreign residents. We scale
this net portfolio flow by the total equity transaction volume between home and foreign residents in
both markets, and denote it by y2 = F L. Finally, exchange rate return y3 = F X is defined as positive
for a dollar appreciation.
Our first hypothesis concerns equity price innovations:
H1: Portfolio rebalancing due to equity price shocks
Foreign equity market appreciations relative to the home equity market induces a portfolio
rebalancing in which the home investor reduces his foreign equity holdings in order to
reduce his exchange rate risk exposure. This results in foreign equity outflows and a dollar
appreciation.
Important for this portfolio rebalancing eﬀect under diﬀerential return shocks is that exchange
rate risk matters for the global investor. In a world in which all exchange rate risk is perfectly hedged
(and eliminated), the global investor generally holds the world equity market and any increase in the
value of foreign equity in this world market portfolio should not trigger any portfolio rebalancing.
But exchange rate exposure under imperfect risk trading reduces the benefit of foreign investment.
If the share of wealth in foreign asset increases, the home resident may seek to reduce his increasing
FX risk exposure by selling foreign shares to foreign residents who do not face the corresponding
FX risk. This aspect is formally modeled in Hau and Rey (2002), where the exchange rate and
equity returns are endogenously determined under optimizing investor behavior. Their model implies
a negative contemporaneous correlation between the foreign excess returns in the equity market, and
the portfolio inflows into the foreign country. Formally, let s1 , s2 and s3 denote three primitive shocks
to the vector y = (y1 , y2 , y3 ), then the contemporaneous correlation between y1 and y2 conditional on
shock s1 can be signed as ρ12|s1 < 0. The equity portfolio flow from the foreign to the home country
may also impact the equilibrium exchange rate. Repatriation of foreign equity wealth will tend to
increase the demand for dollar balances and should appreciate the dollar if the currency supply is
price inelastic. We can interpret the strong correlation between the exchange rate changes and FX
order flow as supporting a relatively low supply elasticity in the FX market. Such a limited supply
elasticity may reside in limits to intertemporal arbitrage even in a relatively liquid market as the FX
market. The portfolio balance eﬀect should therefore produce a positive correlation between foreign
excess equity returns and exchange rate (dollar) appreciations, hence ρ13|s1 > 0.
The second hypothesis concerns exchange rate innovations:
H2: Portfolio rebalancing due to exchange rate shocks
A foreign country currency appreciation increases the dollar share of assets in the foreign
market. The higher overall FX risk exposure for home (U.S.) residents may induce foreign

3

equity market outflows. Also, the foreign outflows should produce negative foreign equity
excess returns (where returns are measured in local currency).
Like for the first hypothesis, the portfolio rebalancing eﬀect here relies again on imperfect FX risk
trading. The portfolio weights shift here not because of diﬀerential equity market performance, but
because of the exchange rate change itself. Otherwise the logic is identical. The home resident holds
an increasing amount of FX risk exposure after the foreign appreciation. He may therefore be less
willing to hold these foreign assets and therefore we should observe foreign equity outflows. Hence,
conditional on primitive shocks to the exchange rate (s3 ), we should observe a positive correlation
between portfolio flows and exchange rate returns or ρ23|s3 > 0. The second part of the hypothesis
consists of this price pressure eﬀect on relative equity market returns. Foreign equity index returns
(measured in foreign currency) should be lower than U.S. (home) index returns. Formally, we obtain
(conditional on an exchange rate shock) a positive contemporaneous correlation between the exchange
rate returns and the foreign market excess return, that is ρ13|s3 > 0.
The third hypothesis concerns net equity flow innovations:
H3: Exchange rate and excess return changes due to equity flow innovations
Equity flow innovations change the demand for currency balances and for equity. Foreign
equity market inflows appreciate the foreign currency relative to the home currency and
induce excess returns in the foreign equity market.
This hypothesis depends again on a price inelastic supply of currency balances and equity. Such
limited supply elasticity can be the consequence of limited arbitrage in the FX and equity markets.
Conditional on an equity flow shock, s2 , we expect a negative correlation between the net foreign
equity flow and the exchange rate return as well as a positive correlation between the equity flow and
the foreign excess returns. Formally, we have ρ23|s2 < 0 and ρ21|s2 > 0.

4

Identification based on correlation priors

Identification of a VAR is typically achieved by imposing a causal relationship between the variables of
the data vector. Assume for example that for a particular ordering of the variables, primitive shocks
to one variable aﬀect only those higher up in the ordering, but not the reverse. Then the appropriate
decomposition into primitive shocks is given by a lower triangular matrix (Choleski decomposition).
But imposing such a structure is often inappropriate. It is particularly inappropriate if two or more of
the variables are financial price variable like equity returns and exchange rate returns. Any equilibrium
system will typically feature a reciprocal interaction between price variables even in the short run.
Moreover, the equity flows data is available only at the monthly frequency. This makes any causal
ordering even more problematic. Even capital flows may react to price changes over a monthly
frequency. Following Uhlig (2000) and Canova and De Nicolo (2002), we therefore choose to adopt a
4

less restrictive approach to the identification problem. Instead of imposing any particular identification
structure, we search over all feasible MA representations of the data and choose the particular one
which is most aligned with a set of theoretical correlation priors.
Formally, let the Wold MA representation of the system be
yt = φ + B(L)η t ,

η t ∼ (0, Σ),

where yt is the 3 × 1 vector, φ a constant and B(L) a matrix polynomial in the lag operator. All
orthogonal decompositions of a Wold MA representation with contemporaneously uncorrelated shocks
featuring a unit variance-covariance matrix are of the form
yt = φ + C(L)et ,

et ∼ (0, I),

where C(L) = B(L)Pe, et = Pe−1 ηt , and Pe Pe0 = Σ. One such matrix Pe is the lower triangular matrix
P of the Choleski decomposition. But we can certainly generate other orthogonal decompositions of

the matrix Σ and therefore other MA representations in primitive shocks et . To search for all feasible
MA representations, we define 3 elementary Jacobi rotations Rθ1 , Rθ2 and Rθ3 with respect to three
lower triangular elements (for −π/2 < θi < π/2). The first of these rotations (with respect to matrix
element (2,1)) is given by

⎛

cos(θ1 ) − sin(θ1 ) 0

⎜
⎜
Rθ1 = ⎜ sin(θ1 )
⎝
0

cos(θ1 )
0

⎞

⎟
⎟
0 ⎟.
⎠
1

The two other elementary rotation Rθ2 and Rθ3 place the sin function in matrix elements (3,1) and
(3,2), respectively. More details are provided in the appendix. Any joint rotation R = Rθ1 Rθ2 Rθ3
fulfills RR0 = I. Hence, P R also represents a decomposition of Σ into primitive shocks and C(L) =
B(L)P R the corresponding MA representation of yt . We implement a grid search over all feasible
combinations of Jacobi rotations and retain the particular representation C ∗ (L) = B(L)P R∗ which
corresponds best to our theoretical priors.
The theoretical considerations of the previous section imply diﬀerent sign restrictions k = 1, 2, ...6
for the conditional correlations of the yt variables. The conditional contemporaneous correlation
ρij|s (R) between variables yit and yjt follows directly from the MA representation in orthogonalized
errors as
(C i (L)s)(C j (L)s)
ρij|s (R) = p
(C i (L)s)2 (C j (L)s)2

In order to measure correspondence with the theoretical priors, we define a penalty function f (k, R)
which assigns a penalty term whenever the empirical conditional correlation does not correspond to
the theoretical one. For simplicity, we choose a linear penalty function which takes on the value
of f (k, R) = −ρk (R) if the predicted conditional correlation is positive and f (k, R) = ρk (R) if the
predicted conditional correlation is negative. Opposite signs for the theoretical and the empirical

5

correlation therefore carry a strong penalty. A particular rotation matrix R∗ provides the most
successful identification with an MA representation C ∗ (L) = B(L)P R∗ if R∗ minimizes the sum of
P6
the penalty terms k=1 f (k, R).
The identification approach here based on theoretical priors is not without circularity. We start

out by postulating 6 contemporaneous conditional correlations which we sign. We then choose a
decomposition of the variance-covariance matrix which maximizes the signed sum of the correlations
subject to the constraint that the elementary shocks still have to generate the variance-covariance
matrix of the data process. In this sense we pick the “most theory favorable” identification. But this
does not predetermine the results. The decomposition of the variance-covariance matrix uses only
three free parameters (three rotation angles) to fit a total of 6 theoretical moments. Rejection of one
or more of the 6 conditional correlation implications by the data is therefore possible.
As a robustness check, we also examine if each conditional moment in the penalty function is
necessary for obtaining the corresponding empirical moment. We therefore drop consecutively one of
the 6 conditional moments in the penalty function and reproduce the impulse response on the reduced
set of priors. The impulse response functions do not change qualitatively.4 In particular, each sign of
the conditional moment which is excluded from the penalty function is confirmed empirically in the
data based on the remaining priors.

5

Data

We focus our empirical analysis on bilateral equity flows between the U.S. and the 5 biggest equity
markets, namely France, Germany, Japan, Switzerland and the U.K. Our portfolio flow data comes
from the so-called TIC data base produced by the U.S. Treasury department. Available on a monthly
frequency, the TIC data record equity transactions between U.S. residents and residents of foreign
countries. The data have been carefully described by Griever et al. (2001) and allow us to compute
(for each of the above countries) net purchases of foreign equity by U.S. residents, as well as net
purchases of U.S. equity by foreign residents. Furthermore, we can calculate the gross transaction
volumes between U.S. (home) and foreign residents for both the home and foreign equity market.
Since portfolio flows have enormously increased over the last decade, we use the combined bilateral
gross equity trading volumes in both the home and the foreign markets as a denominator to scale net
flows.5 Net equity flows from the U.S. are therefore stated in percentages of the gross bilateral equity
transaction volume. The standard deviations for the net capital flows are 0.076 for France, 0.091 for
Germany, 0.091 for Japan, 0.073 for Switzerland and 0.04 for the UK.
The monthly equity return data also come from the MSCI index and are calculated for end of the
month prices in local currency. Similarly, exchange rate returns are calculated based on U.S. dollar
4 The exception is Japan, for which the impulse responses of the equity excess return to the exchange rate innovation
changed from positive to negative when the correlation ρ12|s3 is droped from the penalty function.
5 Average monthly bilateral gross equity volume for the period 1990 to 2003 amounts to $19.8 bn for France, $9.8 bn
for Germany, $24.1 bn for Japan, $11.8 bn for Switzerland and $95.8 bn for the U.K.

6

exchange rates at the end of each month where we use again MSCI data. A positive exchange rate
return corresponds to a dollar appreciation relative to the foreign currency. We focus on the sample
period January 1990 to September 2003. Underlying this sample selection is the fact that global
equity flows became very important in magnitude only in the 1990s. Due to the creation of the euro
in 1999, the last 4 years of exchange rate data coincide for France and Germany. Figure 1 provides
time series plots of the three VAR variables, namely monthly foreign equity excess returns (ER), the
standardized U.S. equity outflows into the foreign country (F L) and the exchange rate returns (F X).

6

Results

We consecutively provide the results for innovations to the foreign equity excess return, to the equity
flows and finally the exchange rate return. All graphs represent cumulative impulse response functions
over 10 months for a shock of one standard deviation. Shocks and impulse response functions are
always relative to the U.S., where each of the 5 countries is represented by a diﬀerent row. Using the
standard criteria, we found that an AR(2) process provided a good fit to the data. A confidence band
of 2 standard deviations was constructed based on 250 simulations of the data process.
Figure 2 provides the results for equity return shocks. The first column plots the impulse response
of the equity return shock on the excess return itself. The second column plots the impulse response
on the equity flows from the U.S. into the respective country and the third column characterizes the
impulse response on exchange rate returns. Excess return shocks are persistent over the 10 month
period for all countries. Only for the U.K. is the persistence of the equity return shock unclear. The
role of foreign excess return shocks on equity portfolio flows is depicted in column 2. Higher foreign
equity market returns compared to the U.S. market come with negative equity flows or equity flows
from the foreign country to the U.S. This evidence is in line with the portfolio rebalancing channel
where investors reduce their exchange rate exposure if the foreign wealth share increases. This portfolio
rebalancing occurs for all 5 countries and occurs slowly over a few months. The exchange rate impact
by contrast is immediate and positive in each case (column 3). This means that the dollar appreciates
as equity funds flow into the U.S. Only with respect to the British Pound can we not assert a long-run
dollar appreciation. It is also interesting to look at the magnitude of the exchange rate eﬀect. For
example a 4 percent French equity excess return over a month (1 standard deviation) comes with
an average 5 percent equity outflow from France to the U.S., which amounts to approximately 1
billion dollar (relative to a monthly gross volume of 20 billion dollars) and leads to a 2 percent dollar
appreciation.
It is also interesting to examine the impulse response functions for an equity flow innovation into
the foreign country (Figure 3). The flow innovations produce persistent foreign equity market excess
returns in each of the 5 countries. The flow innovations are persistent as shown in the second column
and so is their impact on the exchange rate. Portfolio outflows from the U.S. into the foreign equity

7

market depreciate the dollar persistently and significantly in all 5 country cases. This result supports
the idea that international equity portfolio shocks move exchange rates and influence equity excess
returns.
The third type of shock concerns exchange rate innovations. Figure 4 features the respective
impulse response functions. A dollar appreciation relative to the foreign currency leads to U.S. equity
outflows into each of the 5 countries as shown in column 2. This is again consistent with a portfolio
balancing channel, where equity is reallocated away from the appreciating foreign market. At the
same time the foreign market registers an excess return.
Finally, we can undertake a variance decomposition for the three variables. Equity flow shocks
and relative equity return shocks explain between 10 and 20 percent of the exchange rate variance.
Moreover, this rate increases to 20 percent for all 5 countries in the subsample period 1998 to 2004
as shown in Figure 5. This amounts to an astonishingly high rate given the widespread failure of
traditional macro variables in explaining exchange rate variations over the monthly horizon. The
variance decomposition does not depend on the identification procedure adopted here and highlights
the new important role of equity markets for exchange rate dynamics.

7

Conclusions

The paper investigates whether the international data on equity market returns, equity portfolio flows
and exchange rate returns are consistent with a dynamic rebalancing of foreign equity positions on
the part of global investors. We hypothesized that a larger wealth share held in foreign assets after
either foreign equity market excess returns (H1) or a foreign currency appreciation (H2) may trigger
a reallocation of equity funds away from the foreign country to the U.S. and a simultaneous dollar
appreciation. Underlying this mechanism is the increased FX exposure of the global investor if FX
risk trading is imperfect. Moreover, portfolio flow shocks into the foreign country directly depreciates
the dollar and creates foreign equity excess returns (H3).
We find that the data are consistent with all three of these hypotheses. To arrive at this conclusion,
we use an identification procedure which does not require any causal ordering of the primitive shocks.
The low frequency nature of the portfolio flows and the inclusion of two price variables in the VAR appear inconsistent with any particular causal ordering. Instead, we undertake the variance-covariance
decomposition in accordance with our theoretical priors concerning 6 diﬀerent contemporaneous conditional correlations of the data process. We choose the particular MA representation in orthogonal
shocks which is “most favorable” to the theory. This most favorable MA representation fulfills all
three hypotheses for each of the 5 countries. The data are therefore consistent with an important
role of the portfolio rebalancing channel to explain exchange rate and equity returns. They are also
consistent with a persistent exchange rate and equity price impact of equity flow innovations.

8

References
[1] Branson, William H.; and Dale W. Henderson. “The specification and influence of asset markets”,
in Jones, R. and P. Kenen, eds., Handbook of International Economics, North-Holland, 1985.
[2] Canova, Fabio; and Gianni De Nicolo. “Monetary disturbances matter for business fluctuations
in the G-7”, Journal of Monetary Economics, 2002, 49, pp. 1131-1159.
[3] Evans, Martin; and Richard Lyons. “Order flow and exchange rate dynamics’, Journal of Political
Economy, 2002,
[4] Evans, Martin; and Richard Lyons. “How is macro news transmitted to exchange rate”, 2003a,
NBER WP 9433.
[5] Evans, Martin; and Richard Lyons. “A New Micro Model of Exchange Rate Dynamics”, 2003b,
mimeo, UC Berkeley and Princeton University.
[6] Froot, Kenneth; and Tarun Ramadorai. “Currency Returns, Institutional Investors Flows, and
Exchange Rate Fundamentals”, 2002, NBER WP 9101.
[7] Griever, William L.; Lee, Gary A.; Warnock, Francis E.; and Chad Cleaver. “The U.S. System
for Measuring Cross-Border Investment in Securities: A Primer with a Discussion of Recent
Developments”, Federal Reserve Bulletin, October 2001, Vol. 87(10), pp. 633-651.
[8] Hau, Harald; William Killeen; and Michael Moore. “How has the euro changed the foreign exchange market?”, Economic Policy, 2002, 34, April, 151-177.
[9] Hau, Harald; and Hélène Rey. “Exchange Rates , Equity Prices and Capital Flows”, 2002, NBER
WP 9398.
[10] Killeen, William; Richard Lyons; and Michael Moore. “Fixed versus flexible: lessons from the
EMS order flow”, 2002, NBER WP 8491.
[11] Kouri, Pentti J. K. “Balance of Payment and the Foreign Exchange Market: A Dynamic Partial
Equilibrium Model”, in Jagdeep Bhandari and Bluford Putnam, eds., Economic Interdependance
and Flexible Exchange Rates, MIT Press, 1982, pp. 116-156.
[12] Lyons, Richard. “The Microstructure Approach to Exchange Rates”, MIT Press, 2001.
[13] Pavlova, Anna; and Roberto Rigobon. “Asset Prices and Exchange Rates”, 2003, NBER WP
9834.
[14] Rime, Dagfinn. “Trading in foreign exchange markets”, 2001, PhD Thesis, Norwegian School of
Management.

9

[15] Souriounis, Gregorios. “Uncovering the Dynamic Links of Capital Flows and Exchange Rates”,
2003, mimeo LBS.
[16] Uhlig, Harald. “What are the eﬀects of monetary policy on output? Results from an agnostic
identification procedure”, 2001, mimeo Humboldt University.

10

Appendix
Assume the vector yt = (ER, F L, F X)0 has an AR representation
A(L) (yt − φ) = ηt ,
with A(L) = 1 + A1 L + A2 L2 + ...Aq Lq , and 3 × 3 matrices A1 , A2 , ...Aq . Furthermore, E(ηt η 0t ) = Σ.
Let the Wold MA representation be given by
yt = φ + A(L)−1 η t = φ + B(L)ηt
b
b One possible decomposition of the matrix
We first estimate the coeﬃcients B(L)
and the matrix Σ.

b = P P 0 is the Choleski decomposition where P is a lower triangle matrix. For orthogonal innovations,
Σ

et ∼ (0, I) with et = P −1 ηt , we have E(η t η0t ) = E(P et e0t P 0 ) = E(P P 0 ) = Σ, and C(L) = B(L)P is

one possible MA representation of yt .
yt − φ = B(L)η t = B(L)P P −1 η t = B(L)P et = C(L)et
Generally, we want to search over the set of all matrices Pe = P R which form a valid MA representation

b This search is carried out through a combination of Jacobi rotations. We can
with P R(P R)0 = Σ.
define three distinct Jacobi rotations matrices (for −π/2 < θi < π/2) as

Rθ1

Rθ2

Rθ3

⎛

cos(θ1 ) − sin(θ1 ) 0

⎜
⎜
= ⎜ sin(θ1 ) cos(θ1 ) 0
⎝
0
0
1
⎛
cos(θ2 ) 0 − sin(θ2 )
⎜
⎜
= ⎜
0
1
0
⎝
sin(θ2 ) 0 cos(θ2 )
⎛
1
0
0
⎜
⎜
= ⎜ 0 cos(θ3 ) − sin(θ3 )
⎝
0 sin(θ3 ) cos(θ3 )

⎞
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎠

⎞
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎠
⎞
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎠

b0
Any joint rotation R = Rθ1 Rθ2 Rθ3 fulfills RR0 = I. Hence, P R also represents a decomposition of Σ
into primitive shock and C(L) = B(L)P R the corresponding MA representation of yt .

These diﬀerent MA representations imply diﬀerent impulse response functions and diﬀerent correlation structures between the variables of yt . Let s be a vector picking the impulse response to a
particular primitive shock et (for example s1 = (1, 0, 0) for e1t ). The correlation of variable yit and
yjt conditional on a shock of type s follows as
(C i (L)s)(C j (L)s)
ρij|s (R) = p
(C i (L)s)2 (C j (L)s)2
11

where C i (L) denotes the row i of C(L). Given the definition of the vector yt , correlations conditional
on return shocks have s1 = (1, 0, 0), those conditional on flow shocks have s2 = (0, 1, 0), and those
conditional on exchange rate shocks have s3 = (0, 0, 1).
Economic theory provides prior information about k = 1, 2, ..6 conditional correlations ρk . In
particular it allows us to restrict the sign of ρk . We can therefore define a penalty function f (.)
which assigns a positive weight to MA representations in violation of theoretical sign restrictions
and a negative weight if they are fulfilled. We concentrate here on a linear penalty function which
gives a penalty of f (k, R) = −ρij|s (R) whenever a positive correlation is predicted and a penalty of

f (k, R) = ρij|s (R) if a negative correlation is predicted. We then define m3 grid points (with m = 90)

for rotation angles (θ1 , θ2 , θ3 ) ∈ [−π/2, π/2]3 and find the rotation R∗ on the grid which minimizes
the overall penalty. Formally,
R∗ = arg min
{R}

6
X

f (k, R).

k=1

We then report the impulse response for the MA representation given by C(L) = B(L)P R∗ .

12

Figure 1: Shown are the monthly foreign equity excess returns (foreign market index return minus
U.S. index return), the standardized U.S. equity outflows into the foreign country and the exchange
rate returns (dollar appreciation is a positive return) for 5 countries, namely France, Germany, Japan,
Switzerland and the U.K. The data period is January 1990 to September 2003.

13

Figure 2: Shown are cumulative impulse response functions over 10 months of a foreign equity excess
return shock on equity excess returns (column 1), U.S. equity outflows into the foreign country (column
2), and the exchange rate return (column 3) for the 5 sample countries (by row). Confidence intervals
of 2 standard deviations are added.

14

Figure 3: Shown are cumulative impulse response functions over 10 months of an equity outflow shock
on foreign equity excess returns (column 1), U.S. equity outflows into the foreign country (column 2),
and the exchange rate return (column 3) for the 5 sample countries (by row). Confidence intervals of
2 standard deviations are added.

15

Figure 4: Shown are cumulative impulse response functions over 10 months of a FX return shock on
foreign equity excess returns (column 1), U.S. equity outflows into the foreign country (column 2), and
the exchange rate return itself (column 3) for the 5 sample countries (by row). Confidence intervals
of 2 standard deviations are added.

16

Figure 5: A variance decomposition is shown for shocks to relative equity returns (ER) (column 1),
to U.S. equity outflows into the foreign country (FL) (column 2), and the exchange rate return (FX)
(column 3) for the 5 sample countries (by row) over the period 1998 to 2003. In each case we plot
the percentage contribution to the standard deviation of the relative equity return innovations (solid
line), of the equity flow innovations (slashed line), and the FX return innovations (dotted line).

17

