                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                               EDUCATION, WORK, AND CRIME:
                                A HUMAN CAPITAL APPROACH

                                             Lance Lochner

                                         Working Paper 10478
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w10478


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       May 2004




I would like to thank seminar participants at the PIER-IER Conference on Crime and Public Policy for their
comments. Betsy Caucutt, Antonio Merlo, Chris Taber, and an anonymous referee also offered useful advice
and comments. This paper is the result of countless discussions with many others over the past few years on
the general topics of human capital and crime. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and not
necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2004 by Lance Lochner. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Education, Work, and Crime: A Human Capital Approach
Lance Lochner
NBER Working Paper No. 10478
May 2004
JEL No. J2, K4
                                     ABSTRACT

This paper develops a model of crime in which human capital increases the opportunity cost of crime
from foregone work and expected costs associated with incarceration. Older, more intelligent, and
more educated adults should commit fewer street (unskilled) crimes. White collar crimes decline less

(or increase) with age and education. Predictions for age-crime and education-crime relationships

receive broad empirical support in self-report data from the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth

and arrest data from the Uniform Crime Reports. The effects of education, training, and wage

subsidies, as well as enforcement policies on criminal behavior are discussed.

Lance Lochner
University of Western Ontario
Department of Economics
Faculty of Social Sciences
1151 Richmond Street N.
London, ON N6A 5C2
Canada
and NBER
llochner@uwo.ca
1        Introduction

Property and violent crime rates typically increase with age during adolescence, reach a peak during

the late teenage years, then decline thereafter. Nearly two centuries ago, Quetelet observed this

general pattern (Beirne, 1993), and it holds today for both official arrest rates and self-reported

offending rates. The age-crime profile is one of the most documented relationships in criminology.

While less studied, the relationship between education and crime is equally interesting. More

than two-thirds of all incarcerated men in 1993 had not graduated from high school (Freeman,

1996). Dramatic differences in property and violent crime across education groups also exist in

both self-report and arrest data as we show below.1

        These patterns suggest that studying crime within a human capital framework may be useful,

and this paper develops such a framework. This approach recognizes that education and training

increase human capital levels and market wage rates, which raises the costs of planning and engaging

in crime. Human capital investments also increase the costs associated with incarceration, since

they increase the value of any time foregone. The fact that training and learning occur throughout

life implies that the opportunity costs of crime should generally rise with age just as they rise

with educational attainment. For crimes that require little market skill (e.g. larceny, assault, drug

dealing), a human capital approach suggests that both age and education should be negatively

correlated with crime among adults. (We use the terms ‘skills’ and ‘human capital’ interchangeably.)

Of course, market skills may also increase the returns to crime, especially for white collar crimes

like forgery, fraud, and embezzlement. Participation in these crimes should peak at later ages and

should decline more slowly with age after the peak than in crimes that do not offer a skill premium.

(Crimes that substantially reward skill may actually increase with age throughout life.) While

unskilled crimes should be negatively correlated with education, this need not be true for white

collar crimes. The human capital approach offers some interesting and testable implications for

the age-crime and education-crime relationships depending on the skill content of a crime. These

predictions are empirically examined in this paper and generally supported by the data.
    1
    Tauchen, Witte, and Griesenger (1994) estimate a negative relationship between education and crime in a cohort
of young men born in 1945 and living in Philadelphia between ages 10 and 18. Lochner and Moretti (2004) further
establish that education has a significant causal (negative) impact on the subsequent criminal activity of men as
measured by self-reports, arrests, and incarceration.



                                                        2
    The idea that education and training raise skill levels and wage rates, which then lowers crime,

is not a new one; however, a formal theoretical framework for studying these relationships does

not yet exist. Ehrlich (1975) empirically examines a number of predictions from an intuitive model

which relates education to crime. Flinn (1986) introduces criminal behavior to a ‘learning-by-doing’

model of human capital, which assumes that workers accumulate skills as a by-product of work.2

While his model is useful for studying post-school crime and work decisions, it does not incorporate

schooling or other costly human capital investment (e.g. training) decisions. This paper is the first

to explore crime within the more standard Becker (1964) - Ben Porath (1967) investment model

of human capital formation. This approach explicitly models decisions to work, to commit crime,

and to make costly investments in human capital (e.g. education and training). It is well-suited for

studying the dynamic interaction of education and crime choices, something that cannot be studied

within the learning-by-doing framework of Flinn (1986). Furthermore, the inherent difference in

assumptions about the learning process and the tradeoffs associated with learning, work, and crime

(compared with Flinn’s model) can lead to very different policy conclusions.

    The human capital approach, in its simplest form, stresses the role of wages and opportunity

costs in determining criminal activity, arguing that older, more intelligent, and more educated in-

dividuals commit less crime because they have more human capital and can earn higher wages.3

However, many things change as an individual ages, and education influences much more than a

person’s potential wage rate. Sociologists and criminologists stress biological development, matu-

rity, and/or the establishment of social networks, families, and norms as other channels through

which age and education may affect decisions to engage in crime (e.g. see Hirschi and Gottfredson

1995, or Riley 1986). But, these theories do not offer a convincing explanation for differential

age-crime and education-crime patterns observed across white collar, property, and violent crimes.4
   2
     Mocan, Billups, and Overland (2000) extend the basic approach of Flinn (1986) to include learning in the criminal
sector. Imai and Krishna (2004) estimate a lifecycle model with exogenous wage growth and employment but with
endogenous criminal choices and criminal skill accumulation. Huang, Liang, and Wang (2004) incorporate a first
stage education decision in an equilibrium search framework with both legitimate and criminal opportunities.
   3
     There is growing empirical evidence that higher wages, both at the individual and aggregate levels, reduce crime
(e.g. Freeman 1996, Gould, et al. 2002, Grogger 1998, Machin and Meghir 2000, and Viscusi 1986). Unfortunately,
this evidence is difficult to interpret when wages are endogenously determined through the process of human capital
investment. We discuss these difficulties below.
   4
     As we discuss below, a purely mechanical explanation for the age-crime profile resulting from increased incar-
ceration rates (or an increase in the probability of arrest) among older criminals cannot explain the sharp decline in
arrests or self-reported crime among young adults.



                                                          3
   The interaction of investment and crime decisions can cause the long-term effects of policy or

other economic changes to differ substantially from the short-term effects. For example, a policy

that subsidizes schooling or job training is likely to reduce crime more in the long-run than the

short-run by increasing skill levels. In contrast, a short-term wage subsidy targeted at younger

workers may reduce crime among subsidized workers for the duration of the subsidy, but it may

actually increase crime after the subsidy ends because it discourages investment in human capital.

Human capital theory also offers insights useful for analyzing traditional law enforcement policies

by recognizing that these policies can affect education and training decisions in addition to criminal

behavior. Increases in skill investment associated with a crackdown on criminal activity will feed

back into subsequent criminal decisions, reducing crime more in the long-run than the short-run.

Lifecycle models of crime with exogenous wage growth (e.g. Grogger 1998) do not capture these

important dynamics.

   This paper proceeds as follows. The next section develops a lifecycle model of work, crime, and

human capital investment. The joint decisions for work, crime, and investment are characterized

and briefly discussed. Section 3 studies the relationship between human capital and different types

of crime. The predicted relationship between observed wages and crime is discussed, and other

implications of the theory are empirically examined using self-report data from the National Lon-

gitudinal Survey of Youth (NLSY). In particular, we estimate the relationship between educational

attainment and both property and violent crime. We also estimate how criminal participation

decisions depend on individual characteristics that are likely to reflect differences in learning abil-

ity, initial skill levels, and criminal opportunities. Because micro data sets typically lack data

on white collar crimes, we turn to data from the Uniform Crime Reports (UCR) to estimate the

relationship between average cohort education levels and cohort arrest rates for forgery and coun-

terfeiting, fraud, and embezzlement. The theory’s predictions for age-crime profiles are discussed

and empirically examined with the NLSY and UCR data in Section 4.

   Section 5 discusses important implications for potential crime-reducing policies, including wage

and skill investment subsidies and traditional law enforcement policies. The roles of early and

adolescent interventions are also discussed. We stress the difference between short-run and long-

run impacts on crime as well as expected differences in responses across heterogeneous types of


                                                  4
individuals and crimes. The role of criminal experience in determining lifecycle decisions and

policy analysis is discussed in Section 6, while Section 7 concludes.


2        A Human Capital-Based Model of Crime

This section develops a time allocation model of crime, work, and human capital investment.

Following Becker (1964) and Ben-Porath (1967), assume that skills can only be acquired through

costly time investments (e.g. education and job training) and that those skills increase the return

to work. Market skills may or may not raise the net return to crime. Individuals optimally choose

how much time to allocate each period to investment in human capital, legitimate work, and crime

with the goal of maximizing their expected lifetime income.5 If they engage in crime, they face

some probability of future incarceration. If incarcerated, they are provided a minimal level of

consumption and cannot invest, work, or engage in crime again until they are released.

        Individuals are endowed with an initial skill level H0 , learning ability A, and criminal ability

θ. They can choose to work, invest in their skills, and commit crime for the first T years of life.

Denote skill levels at age t by Ht , time investment in skills, It , and time spent committing crime, kt .

Total time each period is normalized to h, so time spent working is simply h − It − kt . Individuals

can earn wt Ht + ǫt per unit of time spent working, where wt represents the after-tax rental rate or

price of human capital and ǫt is a mean zero iid shock. If they invest in their human capital, they

produce future skills according to


(1)                                      Ht+1 = Ht + f (It , Ht ; A),


where f (·) is increasing and concave in each of its arguments. Education and job training are the

most obvious forms of human capital investment, but a more general interpretation recognizes that

individuals may take jobs paying low current wages if they offer greater learning opportunities that

may lead to higher paying jobs in the future (see Rosen, 1972). The key assumption about learning

here is that it is costly in terms of current earnings. Individuals with a higher learning ability
                                                   ∂2f
receive a higher return on investments, so        ∂A∂I   > 0. We allow for direct costs of investment, λ,
    5
    The assumption of expected income maximization rather than expected utility maximization does not play an
important role in any of the results below, but it greatly simplifies the exposition. The discussion assumes that
criminal returns are financial, but this can easily be generalized to include non-monetary rewards from crime by
simply translating those gains into a consumption value.


                                                         5
which may reflect tuition or tastes for/against school and are assumed to be net of any government

subsidy.

       Time spent committing crime earns a net return of N (kt , Ht , θ, ηt ) in that period, where ηt is

a mean zero iid shock to criminal returns. These returns are assumed to be strictly increasing and

concave in kt and θ and non-decreasing in Ht . More able criminals earn a higher return on their
                           ∂2N                                                          ∂2N
criminal activity (i.e.    ∂θ∂k   > 0), and the shock is normalized so that             ∂η∂k   > 0. Individuals that

engage in crime may be caught, fined F , and imprisoned at the beginning of the next period with

probability Π(kt ) where Π(0) = 0, Π(h) ≤ 1, and Π′ (k) > 0.6 Convicted criminals must spend

J years in prison receiving consumption c each year they are there. (It is assumed throughout

this paper that c is low relative to the potential earnings from work. It is straightforward to

allow the punishment, probability of incarceration, or sentence length to depend on an individual’s

incarceration history or age. For simplicity, these possibilities are ignored here.) While in prison,

skills may depreciate, either from lack of use or through a stigma effect caused by prison, at the

rate δ ∈ [0, 1] per year.7 After a prison sentence ends, individuals are released, and they resume

making investment, work, and crime decisions.

       The state variables for someone who is not incarcerated include his human capital, Ht , and his

current shocks, Ξt = (ǫt , ηt ). Let Vt (Ht , Ξt ) represent the expected value function for an individual

who is not incarcerated at the beginning of period t conditional on his current state. For those just

incarcerated, no decisions are made and shocks are irrelevant. The only relevant state variable is the

current level of human capital. Let Ωt (Ht ) represent the expected value function for someone who

has just entered prison. These functions represent expected lifetime earnings at age t conditional on

incarceration status, current human capital, and current shocks. An individual not in prison at the

beginning of period t ≤ T must decide how to allocate his time to work, investment in skills, and

crime to maximize expected discounted lifetime earnings (with time discount factor β) as described
   6
      We do not distinguish between the probability of arrest and incarceration, though they certainly differ empirically.
In our notation, the probability Π(k) best represents the probability that someone committing a crime is punished.
    7
      We do not model decisions to invest during incarceration periods; although, most prisons and jails offer some type
of training or General Educational Development (GED) certification program. In 1997, 52% of state prison inmates
and 56% of federal prison inmates had participated in at least one education program during their incarceration
period (U.S. Department of Justice, 2003). Most estimates suggest that earnings and employment decline following
an arrest or prison term; although, there has been some debate about the magnitude and duration of any effects
(e.g. see Grogger, 1995, Kling, 2003, Nagin and Waldfogel, 1995, and Waldfogel, 1994). This suggests that losses in
earnings power due to stigma effects and/or human capital depreciation outweigh any gains from new skills that may
be acquired in prison.


                                                            6
by the Bellman equation

            Vt (Ht , Ξt ) = max {(wt Ht + ǫt )(h − It − kt ) + N (kt , Ht , θ, ηt ) − λIt − Π(kt )F
                                It ,kt

(2)                             +β [Π(kt )Ωt+1 (Ht+1 ) + (1 − Π(kt ))E(Vt+1 (Ht+1 , Ξt+1 ))]} ,

subject to the human capital accumulation equation (1) and time constraints

                                   It , kt ≥ 0       and         0 ≤ It + kt ≤ h,    ∀t.

The expectation E(Vt+1 (Ht+1 , Ξt+1 )) is over the distribution of unknown shocks, Ξt+1 .

      Since someone entering prison just receives consumption c until he is released J years later,
                     J−1
                     X
                           β j c + β J Vt+J Ht (1 − δ)J = ψ(β, J)c + β J E Vt+J (Ht (1 − δ)J , Ξt+J ) ,
                                                                                                    
(3)     Ωt (Ht ) =
                     j=0

where the constant

                                                                 1 − β x−1
(4)                                               ψ(β, x) =                .
                                                                   1−β

      From ages T + 1 to T̄ , the final period of life, individuals are assumed to earn a certain in-

come proportional to their human capital (φ is the proportionality factor) if they are not already

incarcerated. We assume that they do not invest or commit crime in this period, which may reflect

retirement (with a pension proportional to their earnings at the end of their careers) or simply

a late stage in their careers at which time they are finished with crime and human capital in-

vestment. Since individuals do not commit crime, they will never face a new arrest during this

period; however, they may enter this stage of life in prison, in which case we assume that they serve

out their sentence and then begin earning in proportion to their human capital. We assume that

T̄ > T + J such that individuals do not die before they have served out their full sentences – this

avoids a sharp reduction in costs associated with imprisonment as individuals reach the end of their

criminal/working lives. The value function for someone not currently in prison at age t ≥ T + 1 is
                                                  T̄ X
                                                     −t−1
(5)                                  Vt (Ht ) =             β j φHt = ψ(β, T̄ − t)φHt ,
                                                   j=0

where ψ(·, ·) is defined by equation (4). Wage and criminal return shocks are irrelevant from age

T + 1 on, so they are suppressed in the value function here. When φ = wh, this represents the

discounted lifetime earnings for someone who devotes all of his remaining time to work.

                                                                7
       Equations (1)-(5) describe the individual’s problem over the full lifecycle. Decisions are only

made through age T and by individuals not currently in prison. We now characterize the optimality

conditions for decisionmaking non-prisoners. At an interior (individuals engaging in work, crime,

and investment),8 investment must satisfy the following first order condition:
                                                                                            
                                     ′                          ∂E(Vt+1 (Ht+1 , Ξt+1 ))    ∂f
(6)        wt Ht + ǫt + λ = β Π(kt )Ωt+1 (Ht+1 ) + (1 − Π(kt ))                                  .
                                                                      ∂Ht+1                ∂It

The marginal cost of investment (left hand side) is given by potential wage rates plus any direct

costs of investment. The marginal value of investment (right hand side) depends on the productivity

of investment as well as the probability of arrest through the expected marginal value of human

capital (the term in brackets).

       The marginal value of human capital for someone who is not currently in prison at age t ≤ T̄

is given by the envelope condition:

       ∂Vt (Ht , Ξt )                         ∂N
                        = wt (h − It − kt ) +
           ∂Ht                                ∂Ht
                                                                                             
                                       ′                       ∂E(Vt+1 (Ht+1 , Ξt+1 ))      ∂f
(7)                       +β Π(kt )Ωt+1 (Ht+1 ) + (1 − Π(kt ))                           1+       .
                                                                     ∂Ht+1                  ∂Ht

As an individual ages, there are fewer years to reap the rewards from higher skill levels. Conse-

quently, the marginal expected value of human capital tends to decline with age for those who stay

out of prison. This, combined with rising opportunity costs (due to increases in Ht ), generally
                                                                ∂E(Vt (H,Ξt ))               (H,Ξt+1 ))
causes investment to decline with age. As long as                   ∂H           ≥ β ∂E(Vt+1∂H          for all H and

t, the marginal value of human capital for new prisoners will be less than that for non-prisoners
                   ∂E(Vt (H,Ξt ))
(i.e. Ω′t (H) <        ∂H         )   at all ages. We assume that this condition is met, since it is only likely

to be violated in rare cases.9 Thus, human capital offers a higher marginal payoff for those who

avoid incarceration. This feature of the decision problem generates a discouraging affect of crime

on contemporary investment. And, since the marginal value of human capital depends on future
   8
     Empirically, most criminals contemporaneously engage in legitimate work and/or school. While nearly 80%
of males ages 16-23 reported no income from crime in the 1980 NLSY, more than 90% of those engaged in crime
reported earning more than $100 from work during the year. Most males that are not working or in school report no
involvement in crime either. The fact that most criminals also participate in the labor market is also borne out in
surveys of prison inmates. In 1986, 69% of all State prison inmates were employed at the time of their arrest (U.S.
Department of Justice, 1988).
   9
     While this condition holds for all ages T and above, it may not hold for some ages less than T . Problems may
arise for a limited set of ages when the value function is convex in H, which may occur if f (·) is approximately linear
in H.



                                                            8
returns from work and crime, investment decisions will also depend on subsequent work and crime

decisions.

      The interior first order condition for crime,

          ∂N (kt , Ht , θ, ηt )
(8)                             = wt Ht + ǫt + Π′ (kt )F + βΠ′ (kt ) [E(Vt+1 (Ht+1 , Ξt+1 )) − Ωt+1 (Ht+1 )] ,
                 ∂kt

reveals the balance of present returns from crime against the current loss in earnings from work

foregone, expected fines, and the potential future earnings losses associated with an increased prob-

ability of incarceration. Human capital (as determined by past investments and initial endowments)

discourages crime by raising the direct opportunity costs of time and the indirect costs through

potential lost opportunities associated with prison. To the extent that human capital makes indi-

viduals better criminals, it may also encourage crime. The balance of these forces will determine

how criminal decisions depend on past investment choices.

      We consider two cases for the criminal returns to skill. On average, street criminals are quite

young, have low IQ levels (Kandel, et al., 1988, and White, Moffitt, and Silva, 1989), and acquire

little formal education. This suggests that the returns to traditional market skills are substan-

tially lower for common street crimes (e.g. larceny, robbery, auto theft, drug dealing) than in the

legitimate labor market. On the other hand, the returns to white collar crimes like forgery, fraud,

and embezzlement would seem to depend heavily on market skill levels. We, therefore, distinguish
                                                          ∂N
between unskilled crimes, for which we assume             ∂H    = 0 and white collar crimes for which we expect
       ∂N               ∂2N
that   ∂H   > 0 and    ∂H∂k    > 0.10 The human capital approach taken in this paper implies differ-

ent patterns for the education-crime and age-crime relationships for these two broad categories of

crime. Much of the discussion and empirical analysis below will focus on this distinction.

      How do individual endowments (A, H0 , θ) influence decisions about investment and crime?

Learning ability, A, largely influences crime through past investments and their effects on current

skill levels – more able individuals will generally invest more in their skills and accumulate more

skills per unit of investment. Learning ability also affects the cost of imprisonment through its

role in determining future earnings potential. Thus, more able individuals should commit fewer
  10
     We do not distinguish between two possible ways in which human capital may affect the returns to crime: (i)
human capital may raise the marginal value of each crime, or (ii) it may increase the rate at which ‘good’ criminal
opportunities arise. The structure of the model is more closely aligned with the first, but the latter is also reasonable.
Both should produce similar patterns for behavior.


                                                            9
unskilled crimes at older ages (than their less able counterparts), because they will have accumulated

more human capital. At younger ages, more able individuals should commit less crime (than the

less able) because incarceration is more costly due to the high marginal productivity of foregone

learning opportunities. For low incarceration probabilities, the latter effect is relatively unimportant

and differences in crime by ability will grow with age as human capital profiles diverge. Because

differences in skill levels will tend to persist over time for a cohort, individuals who begin life with

more human capital (H0 ) will tend to commit fewer unskilled crime at all ages. However, it is

difficult to say whether differences in crime across individuals with heterogeneous initial skill levels

will grow or decline with age, since the effect of skill on investment behavior is ambiguous. Criminal

ability directly affects the returns to crime. Ceteris paribus, those with higher θ are more likely to

engage in crime at any age due to the higher marginal return from crime. But criminal ability (in

unskilled crimes) also has a reinforcing indirect effect on crime at older ages through its effect on

human capital investment decisions – by directly encouraging crime over work, θ indirectly reduces

the return to investment in skills causing high θ individuals to accumulate less skill. Altogether,

factors that reflect high A and H0 or low θ should be negatively correlated with unskilled crime.

All of these relationships are likely to be muted (or even perverse) for more skill-intensive white

collar crimes.

       Due to their effects on the accumulation of skills, temporary shocks to wages or criminal returns

will have lasting impacts on crime. A positive shock to wages will cause individuals to substitute

their time from crime and skill investment into work that period. While current crime is reduced by

a positive labor market shock, future unskilled crime may increase due to reductions in investment.

The long-term effects on white collar crime depend on whether or not their returns to human capital

are greater than the labor market returns.11

       A positive shock to criminal returns causes individuals to substitute some of their time from work

and investment to crime. Investment declines among workers not because the current opportunity

cost of investment has risen – this is determined by the wage rate for workers. But, investment
  11
    Recessions characterized by temporary declines in skill prices should reduce the opportunity cost of investment
and crime, leading to short-term increases in both. (Studying the relationship between college enrollment and the
business cycle, Betts and McFarland (1995) and Dellas and Sakellaris (2003) estimate that a one percent increase in
the unemployment rate increases enrollment in college by 2-4%.) This implies that post-recession human capital levels
should be higher and unskilled crime rates lower than they would otherwise have been. The effects on post-recession
white collar crimes are ambiguous.


                                                         10
declines because an increase in current crime raises the probability of incarceration next period,

which reduces the return on investment. Among non-workers (i.e. student-criminals), the current

opportunity cost of investment does increase with ηt , since the opportunity cost is simply the

marginal return to crime.12 In general, a positive shock to criminal returns will increase both

current and future crime, where the latter effect will be larger among student-criminals than working

criminals.


3         The Relationship between Human Capital and Crime

A number of recent studies (e.g. Freeman, 1996, Gould, et al., 2002, Grogger, 1998, Machin and

Meghir, 2000, and Viscusi, 1986) have empirically estimated a significant negative correlation be-

tween wages and crime using both cross-sectional variation in individual wages and time series

variation in average wages across locations. To the extent that wages measure the opportunity

costs of crime, this would seem to be strong evidence in favor of a human capital theory of crime.

Unfortunately, opportunity costs and human capital are not necessarily well-measured by observed

wages. Instead, observed wages represent a combination of skill prices, human capital levels, and
                                                                                       It
on-the-job investment. For someone spending the fraction It∗ ≡                        1−kt   of their time on the job in-

vesting in new skills, his observed wage rate will be Wt = wt Ht (1 − It∗ ). Compared with the right

hand side of equation (8), this clearly does not reflect the opportunity cost of crime even when

potential punishments are ignored. In general, observed wages are less than potential wages and

understate the opportunity cost of crime when some time on the job is spent learning new skills

rather than producing output.

         How important is unobserved investment, and what are the implications of ignoring it? Heck-

man, Lochner, and Taber (1998) estimate that at early ages as much as 50-60% of time on the job

is spent investing in new skills, and that the most skilled also invest the most. Thus, cross-sectional

differences in observed wage are compressed relative to human capital differences among young
    12
         The first order condition for investment/crime when It + kt = h is given by
                       ∂N
                           − Π′ (kt )F − βΠ′ (kt ) [E(Vt+1 (Ht+1 , Ξt+1 )) − Ωt+1 (Ht+1 )]
                       ∂kt
                                                                                                       
                                                                           ∂E(Vt+1 (Ht+1 , Ξt+1 ))    ∂f
                           = −λ + β Π(kt )Ω′t+1 (Ht+1 ) + (1 − Π(kt ))                                      .
                                                                                   ∂Ht+1              ∂It




                                                                11
workers. Lochner (1998) shows that this distinction is empirically important when studying crime.

While average wage rates for males age seventeen are remarkably similar across AFQT quartiles,

crime rates are nearly three times higher for those in the lowest quartile relative to those in the

highest. To account for unobserved on-the-job training, Lochner (1998) estimates a lifecycle human

capital model and finds that human capital levels are about 50% higher for young males in the

highest AFQT quartile than for those in the lowest quartile. In this light, the dramatic differences

in crime are not surprising.

       This calls into question the value of estimating the wage-crime relationship without accounting

for unobserved differences in investment. Since most crime is committed by young males, estimates

tend to focus on them. But, this is precisely the group for which skill investments are important

and for which wages least accurately measure skill levels and the actual price of time. When

investment is positively correlated with human capital levels (i.e. the most skilled also invest the

most), cross-sectional estimates of the wage-crime elasticity will tend to understate the elasticity

of crime with respect to human capital since differences in observed wages are compressed relative

to differences in skill levels. The difference between observed and potential wage rates implies that

estimated wage-crime relationships do not provide a measure of the impact of an increase in human

capital or an increase in skill prices (e.g. through lower tax rates or wage subsidies) on crime.13

       We do not attempt to directly estimate the relationship between human capital levels and crime.

Instead, we proceed by examining a number of important predictions of the theory for education-

crime and age-crime relationships to see whether they are supported by the data. We establish

that education-crime correlations should be negative (both unconditionally and conditional on

permanent factors affecting investment decisions) for unskilled crimes, while they should be less

negative or may even be positive for white collar crimes. Determinants of learning ability should

also be negatively correlated with unskilled crimes but not necessarily with white collar crimes.

We empirically examine these predictions using data from the NLSY and UCR. In the following

section, we examine predicted differences in age-crime patterns across unskilled and white collar
  13
    Wages do not represent the opportunity cost of time in a learning-by-doing framework like Flinn (1986) either.
In that environment, work generates current earnings and increases future skill levels. Thus, the opportunity cost of
crime includes both current wage rates and the increase in future earnings that would result from an extra hour of
current work. As long as skills are acquired endogenously, observed wage rates do not reflect the marginal value of
time.



                                                         12
crimes.

       Before we discuss education-crime relationships, it is important to understand what drives hu-

man capital-crime relationships. First, consider unskilled crimes, which offer no reward for human

capital. Conditional on ability and other permanent characteristics, adults with high current skill

levels face low opportunity costs of crime and should, on average, commit less crime. As such,

past investments and education should be negatively correlated with current unskilled crime rates

conditional on ability and initial skill levels. Of course investments and education are endoge-

nous. Individuals that expect to commit a lot of unskilled crime in the future regardless of their

current investments in skill (e.g. individuals with a high θ) have little incentive to make any invest-

ment. Thus, variation in criminal opportunities can also generate a negative correlation between

educational attainment and unskilled crime.

       Since a higher A and a lower θ cause individuals to invest more and commit less unskilled

crime, their joint distribution is important for determining the correlation between educational

attainment and unskilled crime in the population. Holding either of these endowments constant in

the population, we should expect a negative correlation between schooling and unskilled crime.14

A positive correlation between education and unskilled crime is, therefore, only likely to arise if

A and θ are strongly positively correlated, in which case the best criminals are also the brightest.

Given the lower than average IQ levels of most criminals (Kandel, et al., 1988, and White, Moffitt,

and Silva, 1989), this seems unlikely.

       The correlation between white collar crime and education will typically be less negative (and

may even be positive). This is because a high A leads to greater investment, but that investment

need not cause individuals to commit less white collar crime. And, while a high θ encourages white

collar crime, it need not cause individuals to invest less in their skills if those skills pay off in both

the legitimate and criminal sectors. Thus, two important forces generating a negative correlation

between unskilled crime and educational attainment are less powerful for white collar crime.

       While individual endowments are important determinants of investment, work, and crime deci-

sions, they are not the only factors affecting the education-crime relationship. As discussed earlier,

shocks to wage earnings, ǫt , and criminal returns, ηt , will influence both current and future deci-
  14
    While H0 should be negatively correlated with unskilled crime, it is more neutral with respect to investment
since human capital increases both the returns and costs of investing.


                                                      13
sions. A strong positive wage or crime shock during the teenage years may cause some individuals

to drop out of school, which should then affect subsequent decisions about crime. These exogenous

shocks only affect subsequent crime through differences in accumulated human capital levels. Vari-

ation in the costs of or tastes for schooling (embodied in λ) may also affect the education-crime

relationship among adults. To the extent that these costs or tastes are largely related to formal

schooling and not informal on-the-job investment in skills, they only affect this relationship through

accumulated skill levels.

   We are interested in both the unconditional correlation between education and crime as well

as the direct effect of educational attainment on current crime. The former is easily examined

empirically, but the latter is more difficult to estimate when individual endowments vary in the

population. To facilitate discussion of the empirical analysis that follows, we consider a number

of simplifications that map the criminal decision embodied in equation (8) into a standard probit

framework. While some of these assumptions are strong, they incorporate the main insights of the

theory and are useful for interpreting the empirical findings. We begin by specifying a quadratic

criminal return function,
                                                                           
                                                                           φ
                            N (kt , Ht , θ, ηt ) = (θ + ηt )kt + χHt kt −     kt2 ,
                                                                           2

and a linear apprehension function, Π(k) = πk. From the first order condition for crime (equation

8), an individual will engage in crime (i.e. kt > 0) if and only if

             ǫt − ηt < θ + (χ − wt )Ht − πF − βπ [E(Vt+1 (Ht+1 , Ξt+1 )) − Ωt+1 (Ht+1 )] .

   Now, suppose Ai = βA Zi + ξiA , Hi0 = βH Zi + ξiH , and θi = βθ Zi + ξiθ , where Zi represents a

vector of observed characteristics and the ξij terms represent unobserved determinants of the three

main endowments in the model (assume that these unobservables are mean zero and independent

of Zi ). We specifically include individual i subscripts to make clear which parameters/variables are

individual-specific. Further, assume that human capital for adults at age t can be approximated

by the following linear function:

   Hit (Si , Ai , θi , Hi0 ) = α0 + α1 t + α2 Si + α3 Ai + α4 Hi0 + α5 θi

                         = α0 + α1 t + α2 Si + (α3 βA + α4 βH + α5 βθ )Zi + α3 ξiA + α4 ξiH + α5 ξiθ

                                                      14
where Si represents total years of acquired schooling. Investments in human capital are reflected

in acquired schooling as well as age (empirically, we allow for a more general relationship between

age and human capital), which is assumed to account for on-the-job learning. Abilities and initial

skill levels may also affect human capital levels. While the model implies that endowments are

likely to interact with investments (schooling and age), these interactions are suppressed here for

simplicity.15 Theory suggests that α1 , α2 , α3 , and α4 should all be positive while α5 is likely to

be negative. Finally, assume that the expected cost of incarceration is linear in human capital and

sentence length, Ji , within an individual’s jurisdiction, so


                     E(Vi,t+1 (Hi,t+1 , Ξi,t+1 )) − Ωi,t+1 (Hi,t+1 ) = γ0 + γ1 Hi,t+1 + γ2 Ji ,


where theory suggests that γ1 ≥ 0 and γ2 ≥ 0. This specification makes the effects of sentence

length on incarceration costs explicit and allows for the fact that individuals may face different

sentencing guidelines depending on where they live.16

       These approximations (along with the assumption that wt = w for all t) produce the following

decision rule for criminal participation: an age t individual will engage in crime if and only if


(9)                        ǫit − ηit < δ0 + δ1 t + δ2 Si + δ3 Zi − π(Fi + βγ2 Ji ) + ξi ,


where δ1 = (χ−w −πβγ1 )α1 , δ2 = (χ−w −πβγ1 )α2 , δ3 = βθ +(χ−w −πβγ1 )(α3 βA +α4 βH +α5 βθ ),

and ξi = ξiθ + (χ − w − πβγ1 )(α3 ξiA + α4 ξiH + α5 ξiθ ). The reduced form parameters represent the

causal effects of age, schooling, and individual characteristics on criminal participation through their

effects on human capital and the expected cost of incarceration. If human capital provides a higher

payoff in the labor market than the criminal sector, then w > χ. In this case, theory implies that

δ1 and δ2 should be negative (i.e. criminal participation declines with age and education). Factors

that reflect higher learning ability and initial skill levels and lower criminal abilities should reduce

crime. More generally, the coefficient on an individual Zi characteristic (e.g. parental education or

family composition) will depend on the relative strength of that factor in determining A, H0 , and
  15
      The suppression of interaction terms does not eliminate a role for observed and unobserved endowments in
determining crime or education decisions. Because schooling decisions depend on individual endowments, it is likely
to be correlated with both Zi and the ξi terms. The endogeneity of educational attainment is discussed further below.
   16
      Theory further suggests that the costs of incarceration may be increasing more in sentence length for more skilled
individuals (i.e. the expected costs specification should include an interaction between J and Ht+1 ). This interaction
is assumed to be zero here to keep the estimating equation simple, but this assumption is not rejected empirically.


                                                          15
θ, as well as the relative strength of those endowments in determining human capital levels.17

    With data rich in measures of individual ability, family background, and the local environment,

we can hope to capture the variation in A, H0 , and θ with observable Zi characteristics. In this case,

probit estimation of equation (9), assuming ǫit and ηit are both distributed normally, will produce

unbiased estimates of the δ’s (up to scale). We, therefore, use data from the NLSY, which contains

rich measures of cognitive ability, family background, schooling, and geographic location (which

can be used to link individuals with their state-level law enforcement parameters) to estimate the

reduced form δ parameters (up to scale) for both violent and property crimes.

    Unfortunately, there is no guarantee that we can capture all of the relevant variation in indi-

vidual characteristics (determining A, H0 , and θ) and enforcement policies. When unobservable

heterogeneity remains (in the form of ξi ), it is likely that estimates of δ2 will be negatively biased.18

This is because individuals with a higher A or lower θ are likely to invest more in their human cap-

ital and to commit less crime. Thus, ξi is likely to be negatively correlated with schooling choices.

Fortunately, results from Lochner and Moretti (2004) suggest that this may not be too important

empirically. They obtain similar estimates of the effects of education on arrests and incarceration

whether or not they instrument for schooling (using compulsory schooling laws as an instrument)

once adequate efforts have been made to account for important observable factors.19 We return to

this issue below.

    An individual-level analysis is not possible for white collar crime given the lack of micro data

related to the issue. Therefore, we turn to the FBI’s Uniform Crime Report (UCR) data on arrests

for forgery and counterfeiting, fraud, and embezzlement by age and state to examine the relationship

between education and white collar crime. We follow the approach of Lochner and Moretti (2004),

generating estimates comparable to theirs for violent and property crime.

Self-Reported Violent and Property Crime in the NLSY

The NLSY has followed 12,686 individuals since 1979 and contains information on annual earnings

from work, educational attainment, and numerous variables reflecting the family and environment
  17
     Allowing π to vary across individuals would produce a random coefficient model. Alternatively, one could use
state-level measures of the probability of arrest, interacting this with schooling and individual characteristics. We
simply consider differences in expected prison sentences, Ji , across states.
  18
     Of course, estimates for other parameters are also likely to be biased when unobserved heterogeneity exists.
  19
     They use Census and UCR data, which contain far fewer covariates than used here.


                                                         16
in which individuals grew up. The survey also reports scores on the Armed Forces Qualifying Test

(AFQT), which measures combined math and verbal aptitude.20 In 1980, when most respondents

were ages 15-22, the survey asked a number of questions about participation in crime and delin-

quent activities. We examine whether or not an individual reported any income from crime21 and

whether or not they engaged in thefts of at least $50 in value or shoplifting. Because the theory

easily generalizes to cases for which crime provides utility rather than income (simply re-interpret

N (k, H, θ, η) as the utility from crime in monetary value), we also analyze violent crimes, which

consist of using force to get something or attacking with intent to injure or kill (i.e. robbery and

assault). Table 1 reports criminal participation rates for 20-23 year old men in 1980 according to

their education background. By all measures, high school dropouts are much more likely to engage

in crime than are high school graduates and individuals attending college. Nearly 30% of young

men with less than 10 years of schooling reported earning some income from crime and 33% of

those with 10 or 11 years of education earned an income from crime. Among high school graduates,

only 24% of those not continuing on in school earned some income from crime while 17% of those

continuing to college did.

       These results strongly support the prediction that education and unskilled crime are negatively

correlated in the population. We now turn to estimation of the direct effects of educational at-

tainment on criminal participation, accounting for differences in observable characteristics. We are

also interested in the extent to which factors that may affect ability, initial skill levels, and crimi-

nal opportunities affect crime. We, therefore, estimate equation (9) using standard probit models

for criminal participation controlling for high school graduation status, age and age-squared (in

months), race and ethnicity, parental education, family income at age 14, whether or not the re-

spondent lived with both parents at age 14, residence in an SMSA, local unemployment rates, and

the ratio of total incarcerated adults to the total number of reported violent index crimes in the

respondent’s state of residence (a measure of state law enforcement punitiveness used by Levitt,

1998). We interpret the latter as differences in effective sentence lengths, J, although it may also

reflect differences in the probability of incarceration or arrest across states.
  20
    The battery of tests that make up AFQT scores were administered to respondents as part of the NLSY survey.
  21
    Non-responses are coded as if they earned an income from crime, since their subsequent incarceration rate from
1981-93 is even higher than those reporting an income from crime. (The results are very similar if non-respondents
are omitted.)


                                                       17
       Table 2 reports the results of these probit models for three different subsamples of males in the

NLSY using criminal income as a measure for criminal participation. (Results are quite similar for

other measures of crime.) Column 1 is based on a sample of all men ages 18-23; column 2 restricts

the sample to those not enrolled in school; and column 3 uses only males living in a central city.

Both high school graduation and AFQT are strongly negatively correlated with crime even when

controlling for race, rich measures of family background, and local conditions. The fact that AFQT

reduces crime both directly and indirectly by increasing schooling attainment strongly suggests

that it largely reflects learning ability A and initial skill levels H0 .22 If human capital investments,

along with math and verbal skills, do increase the return to property crime (θ), their effects on

market skills appear to be substantially greater. Restricting the sample to those who are no longer

enrolled in school (column 2) or those living in a central city (column 3) has little effect on the

estimates. For respondents living in a central city, where crime is most rampant, we find very

similar patterns for the coefficient estimates; however, the large reduction in sample size leads to

substantial increases in standard errors.

       As one might expect, young men from an intact family (both parents present at age 14) and with

more educated mothers are significantly less likely to commit crime. This may reflect the fact that

children growing up in intact families with more educated mothers have higher learning abilities

or initial market skill levels, or they may face worse criminal opportunities. It is impossible to

disentangle the effects of background characteristics on A, H0 , and θ from these results. Hispanics

are significantly less likely to commit crime than whites, but there is little difference between

black and white rates of criminal participation after controlling for other factors. There is little

effect of age on crime, but this is not necessarily surprising given the small variation in age in

our sample.23 Stricter state punishments significantly reduce criminal participation, suggesting

that law enforcement policies play an important role in criminal decisions. Unlike estimates using

aggregate arrest or crime rates, these estimates capture the deterrent effects of an increased expected

incarceration period since they are based on self-reported participation in the free population.24
  22
     Using indicator variables for AFQT quartiles rather than assuming a linear relationship yields similar conclusions.
  23
     Furthermore, it is well-known that AFQT scores are increasing in age (e.g. see Neal and Johnson, 1996). These
results are, therefore, consistent with the model in that reductions in crime with age (among young adult males, at
least) are largely due to the growth in ability/skill with age.
  24
     In specifications that control for education-punishment and AFQT-punishment interactions, the coefficients on
those regressors are not statistically significant and other estimated coefficients are qualitatively similar to those


                                                          18
    Table 3 reports the average difference in self-reported criminal participation between high school

graduates and dropouts using probit specifications to control for background, ability, and local

conditions (specifications identical to those of column 1 in Table 2). The first column reports the

average probability that a young man commits each crime. Columns 2 and 3 report estimates of

the coefficients and standard errors for high school graduation, while column 4 uses the coefficient

estimates to calculate the average difference in the probability of criminal participation for high

school graduates relative to dropouts. High school graduates are much less likely to engage in

property, drug, and violent crimes even after controlling for AFQT, family background, and local

conditions. On average, graduates are nine percentage points less likely to earn an income from

crime than are dropouts – this difference is about 30% of the average probability of dropouts.

When compared with a dropout, a high school graduate has about a ten percentage point lower

probability of committing a violent or property crime. The final row reports the graduate-dropout

difference in the probability of incarceration in any year from 1981-1985 (the five years following

the self-report measures).25 As with the self-reported measures of crime, this shows a substantial

difference by education. High school graduates are 2.8 percentage points (or 81%) less likely to be

incarcerated over a five year period than are drop outs. This provides additional confidence in the

self-report measures, and suggests that schooling is strongly correlated with crime at all margins

of criminal involvement.

    These estimates suggest that education is negatively correlated with violent and property crimes

even after controlling for a number of important individual, family, and community characteristics.

Still, the model outlined above suggests that education is not likely to be exogenous, and one should

be cautious in interpreting these findings. Figure 1 shows that differences in criminal participation

by final education status emerge at young ages when respondents are still in school. Because the

NLSY has followed respondents since the 1980 survey, it is possible to determine their final schooling

attainment. Figure 1 uses this measure of schooling (not current schooling levels) to separate the

sample into those who complete high school and those who do not. For all self-reported measures of

crime, participation is higher from ages 15-22 for those who finish high school. Most interestingly,
reported in Table 2.
  25
     A person is considered incarcerated if they were interviewed in jail.




                                                          19
dramatic differences in criminal activity are already apparent at age fifteen.26 (Panel data from

the National Youth Survey reveals that these differences are apparent as early as age 13.)

       In an effort to account for unobserved heterogeneity, Lochner and Moretti (2004) use changes

in compulsory schooling laws over time as an instrument for education. They examine the effects of

schooling on the probability of incarceration and on arrest rates, finding that education significantly

reduces both. More interestingly, their estimates are quite similar whether or not they instrument

for schooling, which suggests that endogeneity of schooling decisions does not appear to bias es-

timates of the impact of education on crime.27 How can this be reconciled with Figure 1, which

suggests that differences in criminal behavior emerge at early ages for those choosing different levels

of final schooling attainment? Put another way, what unobserved factors cause some individuals

to engage in crime at young ages and drop out of school early but do not directly cause them to

commit more crime at later ages?

       Strictly speaking, the latter condition (that the unobserved factors do not directly affect crime

at later ages) rules out explanations that are based on characteristics that affect individual endow-

ments A, H0 , and θ.28 Instead, consider two alternative possibilities. First, individuals may face

(unobserved) differences in the costs of schooling or may have different tastes for schooling (both

embodied in λ). If differences in these tastes/costs are largely associated with formal schooling and

not informal post-schooling investment, then they will affect schooling and early criminal decisions

without having any direct effect on post-school criminal behavior. To the extent that these differ-

ences have an important effect on high school dropout, they could generate the patterns observed

in Figure 1 and would not induce any bias in probit estimates of equation (9). A second possibility

is that positive shocks to criminal returns cause some youth to engage in crime and quit school

early to take advantage of lucrative criminal opportunities. As long as these shocks are temporary,

they will only affect adult crime through schooling choices and should not bias probit estimates of
  26
      We also explored probit specifications like those reported in Tables 2 and 3 for NLSY respondents ages 17 and
less, using final educational status rather than current status. For all but violent crimes, the estimated high school
graduate - dropout differences were negative but smaller than those in Table 3.
   27
      It is also worth noting that their results for incarceration suggest similar effects to those shown in Table 3.
   28
      However, to the extent that A largely affects crime through past investments, especially among individuals who
have finished school, failure to adequately account for differences in A might cause little bias in probit estimates of
the effect of educational attainment on crime among adults finished with school. At the same time, youth with higher
A may choose to engage in less crime while in school, consistent with Figure 1.




                                                          20
equation (9).29 Both of these scenarios rely on dynamic effects of early decisions on future crime

through schooling decisions.

Education and White Collar Crime

The implication that education and unskilled crime are negatively correlated receives empirical

support in the NLSY as well as in arrest data from the Uniform Crime Reports (see Lochner and

Moretti 2004). But, human capital theory suggests a less negative, or even a positive, correlation

between white collar crime and schooling. Is this empirically true?

    Unfortunately, we cannot analyze white collar crime in the NLSY. However, we can follow

the approach of Lochner and Moretti (2004), who study arrests for violent and property crime,

to examine the relationship between schooling and arrests for white collar crime (defined here as

forgery and counterfeiting, fraud, and embezzlement) using the UCR data on arrests and Census

data on schooling and population characteristics.30 More specifically, we estimate the relationship

between average educational attainment and arrest rates across different cohorts of men from

each state, controlling for state-specific year effects, state-specific age patterns, offense-specific

year effects, offense-specific age effects, and the fraction of a cohort in each state that is black.31

Identification of the effects of education on crime comes from differences in education levels and

crime rates across cohorts within a state over time.

    While estimates from Lochner and Moretti (2004) imply that a one-year increase in average

schooling levels would reduce both violent (murder, rape, robbery, and assault) and property (bur-
  29
     The data suggest that few youth drop out of school because they become incarcerated, an impact that would
bias probit estimates.
  30
     For violent and property crimes, Lochner and Moretti (2004) establish a strong correlation between arrests and
crime rates by state and year, which suggests that variation in arrest rates closely tracks variation in actual crimes
committed. This check is more difficult to implement for white collar crime given the lack of incident reports for
these crimes.
  31
     Arrests by state (plus Washington, DC), criminal offense (forgery and counterfeiting, fraud, and embezzlement),
and age (ages 20-24, 25-30,...,60-64) are taken from the 1960, 1970, and 1980 UCR. Education and the fraction black
by age and state are taken from the corresponding U.S. Censuses. Estimates are based on the following regression
specification:
                                ln Acast = βEast + γBast + dst + dsa + dct + dac + εcast
where ln Acast is the logarithm of the male arrest rate (number of arrests per person) for crime c, age group a, in state
s in year t; East is average years of schooling and Bast is the percent black among males in age group a in state s at
time t. The d’s represent indicator variables that account for unobserved heterogeneity across states, years, cohorts,
and criminal offense types: dst is a state×year effect that absorbs time varying, state-specific shocks or policies; dsa
terms absorb long-term state×age heterogeneity in arrest rates; dct terms absorb crime-specific time trends in arrests;
and dac account for crime-specific age patterns. Each observation is a crime-age-state-year cell, and all observations
are weighted by cell population size.



                                                           21
glary, larceny, motor vehicle theft, and arson) arrest rates by slightly more than 10% (both estimates

are statistically significant at 0.05 levels), our estimates suggest that white collar arrest rates would

increase by 11% (standard error of 7.3%).32 Across cohorts, increases in average education are

associated with significant declines in property and violent crime and with insignificant increases

in white collar crime. These relationships are consistent with our human capital theory of crime if

white collar crimes offer a high reward to human capital but unskilled crimes do not.33


4         Explaining Age-Crime Profiles

As human capital accumulates with age, opportunity costs from foregoing legitimate work tend to

increase. The cost of spending time in prison is also likely to increase. Consequently, age-crime

profiles (for unskilled crimes) will tend to be declining for individuals engaged in work, crime, and

investment. This, of course, abstracts from the unlucky outcome of imprisonment, which can cause

human capital to decline rather than increase. We discuss depreciation of skills associated with

incarceration in Section 5.

         While unskilled crime should decline, on average, with age among working individuals, criminal

activity may increase with age for youth who have not yet begun to work. For those whose returns

to investment and crime are so high that they choose not to work (at young ages), it is optimal to

choose investment and crime such that the net marginal returns to each are equated. If the returns

to investment decline relative to the returns to crime as a young individual ages and accumulates

human capital, investment may decline while criminal activity increases prior to entry into the labor

market. But, once an individual begins working, both investment and crime are determined by the

marginal value of work (wt Ht ), which generally increases with age as human capital accumulates.

Thus, the model can produce a single-peaked age-crime profile (even for unskilled crimes), with the

peak at or before the age of labor market entry. Moreover, since engagement in unskilled crime

depends negatively on human capital levels (among those who work), the model predicts that
    32
      Lochner and Moretti (2004) also include data from 1960 in their regressions, but they estimate otherwise identical
specifications to that presented here. When we use the same sample as is used here to estimate the effects of cohort
schooling levels on violent and property crime rates, we obtain slightly larger estimated effects for violent crime and
slightly smaller estimates for property crime – both are statistically significant.
   33
      As with the NLSY estimates, one should interpret these results with caution due to the endogeneity of schooling.
The fact that Lochner and Moretti (2004) find little difference in estimated effects on arrest rates using ordinary least
squares or instrumental variables techniques suggests that this is not an important concern.



                                                           22
unskilled crime rates should decline most quickly at ages when human capital levels are increasing

at their fastest rate – early in work careers.

       Figure 2 shows a peak in arrests rates for both property and violent crimes at ages 16-18,

roughly the age most males (especially those of lower ability) enter the labor market. The decline

in property crime is rapid in the few years after the peak, tapering off after age 25. Similar patterns

are observed over ages 15-22 for self-reported crime in the NLSY as seen in Figure 3. Patterns for

self-reported crime suggest that the decline in arrest rates shown in Figure 2 is not simply the

result of high incarceration rates and incapacitation effects among criminally active young adults

as discussed in Leung (1994). Crime declines with age even in the general population.34 Levitt

(1998) shows that crime declines more (or increases less) at the age of majority in states with more

severe punishments for adults relative to juveniles. Dramatic differences in relative punitiveness in

some states may contribute to the peak in violent and property crime around age 17; however, it

seems unlikely that they account for much of the overall decline that occurs after age 18.

       To the extent that human capital increases the marginal returns to white collar crimes, the

model predicts that those crimes should decline more slowly with age. Skilled crimes may even

increase with age among workers if their returns to human capital are high enough. Figure 2 shows

that white collar crimes do indeed peak at a later age and decline more slowly with age. To the

extent that human capital also reduces the probability of arrest among white collar criminals, the

age-crime profile should be even flatter and may peak later than the age-arrest profile for these

crimes.

       Differences in learning ability, A, and criminal ability or opportunities, θ, can lead to different

age-crime profiles. Those with higher learning ability and/or lower criminal ability should exhibit

steeper age-crime profiles for unskilled crime but not necessarily for white collar crime. This

suggests that we may observe unskilled criminal activity among teenagers across a wide range of

abilities, but we are less likely to find more intelligent adults engaged in such crimes. Variation in

criminal opportunities across communities is likely to lead to heterogeneity in age-crime profiles.

Neighborhoods with lucrative criminal opportunities should contain more aging criminals than less

crime-friendly neighborhoods, even if they have similar crime rates among adolescents.
  34
    Very few NLSY respondents are incarcerated over these ages, so self-reported crime rates are representative of
the full population.


                                                       23
         We have stressed the role of skill accumulation in determining age-crime patterns.35 Other

theories of crime stress individual maturity or biological factors as a reason for decreased criminal

activity with age, or they posit that individuals become more attached to the rest of society as they

become older, building social networks through activities like work or marriage (e.g. see Hirschi and

Gottfredson, 1995, or Riley, 1986). It is difficult to reconcile these theories with the later peak and

slower decline in age-crime profiles for white collar crimes than for lesser skilled property or violent

crimes. The human capital approach presented here offers a useful and intuitive explanation.

         In environments with little skill formation (i.e. low A societies), human capital theory predicts

that age-crime profiles should be relatively flat. Comparing arrest rates for index property crimes

by age in 1980 with property crime rates measured by Quetelet (Beirne, 1993) in the late 1820s

(when skill investments were presumably much lower), we find that property crime rates decline

substantially faster with age today. Quetelet found that property crime rates among males fell

by less than 7% as they aged from their late teenage years into their early thirties; whereas in

recent years, arrest rates for property crime among males declined by more than 75% over the same

age range. Rates of self-reported property crime also fall faster with age in the NLSY as seen in

Figure 3. It would be difficult to argue that individuals mature much faster today or that they

are integrated into society at a younger age than in the early 1800s. In fact, conventional thinking

might suggest the opposite. One might also expect flatter age-crime profiles in countries with less

education and training than in the U.S. To date, however, it has been difficult to find reliable and

comparable data on age-crime profiles across a wide range of countries.


5         Policy Lessons

When skills are endogenously determined, it is important to distinguish between the long-run and

short-run effects of a change in policy. The long-run effects take into account the impacts policies

have on skill acquisition, while short-run effects do not. Because many policies that affect crime
    35
    In the NLSY, it is possible to estimate wage growth rates for young males no longer enrolled in school based on
their criminal status in 1980. Controlling for years of schooling, race, and AFQT percentiles, estimated wage growth
rates over the 1980-85 period were positive for males (ages 20-23 in 1980) that committed a property crime (wage
growth rate of 4.3% per year) or a violent crime (1.3% growth rate), although they were lower than wage growth
rates for males who did not report participation in crime (4.7% growth rate). Similar growth rates are estimated
when background variables are not controlled for. These patterns are consistent with the theory developed in this
paper and the fact that violent crime tends to decline more slowly with age than does property crime.



                                                        24
or work decisions will also affect investment decisions, their short-term and long-term impacts may

differ substantially. We begin by discussing the effects of wage taxes and subsidies, followed by

a discussion of education and training subsidies. Then, we explore the effects of traditional law

enforcement strategies while accounting for their impacts on skill formation. Finally, we briefly

discuss the potential for intervention programs that may affect early skill levels, abilities, and

criminal opportunities.

Tax and Subsidy Policies

Consider the immediate effects of a permanent reduction in wage taxes (or a wage subsidy) –

captured by a proportional increase in wt for all current and future periods. As can be seen from

the first order conditions for investment and crime, such a policy would raise the direct opportunity

costs for both. While not immediately clear from equation (6), a permanent wage subsidy would

also increase the returns to investment by increasing the marginal value of human capital.36 It will

also raise the costs associated with prison, since work foregone while incarcerated would pay more.

In the traditional human capital literature, a change in flat wage tax rates has no affect on human

capital because both the returns and costs change at the same rate. Here, this neutrality result no

longer holds since tax rates also affect crime. By raising the opportunity cost of crime (as well as the

cost of incarceration), a wage subsidy should directly discourage crime at all ages (even assuming

human capital investments are unaffected). The tendency for individuals to commit less crime and

to work more in the future increases the marginal value of human capital and tips the scale in

favor of increased investment. Increases in investment raise human capital levels, which further

discourages unskilled crimes. Thus, the long-term effects on unskilled crime among older workers

should be greater than the short-term effects. The endogeneity of both crime and investment leads

to even larger long-term effects from permanent tax changes than one would expect if either were

exogenous.

       These results are important for the design of tax and welfare policy. For example, the current

structure of U.S. tax code and welfare system can impose extremely high effective marginal tax

rates (sometimes above 50%) for the unskilled.37 Since criminal earnings are not reported, they do
  36
     We assume throughout this discussion that φ is proportional to w so that subsidies/taxes proportionally affect
earnings/consumption both before and after age T .
  37
     Combining benefit reductions associated with welfare, the phase-out region of the Earned Income Tax Credit


                                                        25
not reduce welfare benefit levels, nor are they taxed. As a result, traditional welfare and general

assistance programs may encourage crime among the unskilled by encouraging individuals to earn

unreported criminal income (or to not report legitimate income – a different form of crime).38

    Since violent and property crime rates peak during the late teenage years, it might seem cost-

effective to target wage subsidies to adolescents and young adults if reductions in crime are an

important policy objective. While a targeted wage subsidy should increase work and decrease

crime for the duration of the subsidy, it is also likely to reduce skill investment by raising the

opportunity costs of investment more than the returns. After all, if earnings are heavily subsidized

for a few years, students on the margin of dropping out may decide to work rather than stay in

school. Students that remain in school may spend more time working at the expense of studying.

These reductions in investment can leave individuals with less human capital at the the end of

the subsidy period, which can cause them to commit more unskilled crime thereafter than they

otherwise would have.39 In this case, the long-term effects on crime go in the opposite direction as

the short-term effects. The net lifetime effect on crime is ambiguous.

    Education and training subsidies (represented by a reduction in λ) indirectly affect criminal

behavior among youth by increasing the costs of imprisonment – by encouraging investment in

human capital, they increase the marginal value of staying out of prison where the returns to that

investment can be reaped. Furthermore, investment spurred on by subsidies causes human capital

to accumulate faster, which raises the direct opportunity costs of crime later on. As a result, the

full impacts of investment subsidies will only be realized over time as human capital levels rise.

Unskilled crime should decline more with age in response to education and training subsidies, but

their effects on white collar crimes should be smaller. (They may even increase white collar crimes

that offer substantial returns to skill.)
for families with two or more children, and federal and state income taxes can generate effective marginal tax rates
above 50% (e.g. see Meyer and Rosenbaum, 2000).
  38
     Most discussions of welfare program impacts on crime focus on the potential wealth effects of income maintenance,
which suggests that welfare may reduce crime. These discussions neglect the income-offset feature of welfare programs,
which leads to the high effective marginal tax rates discussed here. Alternatively, generous benefits may discourage
recipients from engaging in crime, since those benefits are not generally extended to prisoners.
  39
     A targeted wage subsidy could reduce crime at all ages if there are substantial returns to experience in the
criminal or legitimate sector. See Flinn (1986) for a model of crime in which market skills are acquired through work
rather than investment. We briefly discuss the role of learning in the criminal sector in Section 6.




                                                         26
Law Enforcement

Law enforcement policies that increase fines, prison sentences, or the probability of arrest will

deter crime. The approach taken here allows one to determine how these policies affect investment

decisions and what effect that has on criminal responses. Like a decrease in criminal ability, θ,

an increase in expected punishments will tend to encourage work over crime and will, therefore,

encourage education and training. This generates larger long-run impacts than those observed

immediately after a change in policy.

       Increases in fines are largely skill-neutral; increases in the probability of incarceration or sentence

lengths are not. An increase in the probability of arrest or sentence lengths will raise the costs

of crime more for more skilled individuals and those with a higher learning ability, which should

further stratify the population into criminals and non-criminals by cognitive ability.

       Empirically, how costly is expected incarceration? Not surprisingly, the answer depends on the

type of crime. The expected value of earnings from full-time work lost if incarcerated provides a

good approximation to the expected cost of incarceration for individuals planning to spend most

of their future time working, if they receive negligible utility from imprisonment and experience

no depreciation of human capital while in prison (δ = 0).40 Table 4 reports the probabilities of

arrest, conviction, and incarceration along with expected prison sentences for a number of violent

and property crimes. The final column translates the expected time spent in jail for each crime

committed into lost earnings using the federal minimum wage of $5.15 per hour for eight hour work

days. There is a tremendous amount of heterogeneity in expected costs. Aggravated assault entails

an expected 63 days in prison costing $2,603 for a minimum wage worker, while murder entails an

expected 4,102 days (about 11 years, 2 months) in prison costing nearly $170,000 for that same

worker. Expected punishments from property crime are substantially smaller, averaging only three

days in prison for a loss of $130. In general, expected prison times are likely to be longer than

the amount of time it takes to plan and carry out most crimes, suggesting that the marginal cost

of committing a crime is largely determined by foregone opportunities associated with expected
  40
     More generally, the expected cost of incarceration is likely to be larger than this (assuming negligible c), since the
total value of lost opportunities while incarcerated must be at least as large as the potential earnings from working
full-time during that period. Depreciation of human capital while in prison further adds to the cost of imprisonment
by reducing earnings potential after release.




                                                            27
imprisonment. In this respect, deterrence is important. Still, Table 4 suggests that criminal returns

to most property crimes need not be very high for low skill workers to engage in them (if they do

not have a strong psychic aversion to prison).

       The model predicts high rates of recidivism, since individuals committing crime in the first

place have abilities and skills making crime a more attractive alternative. Getting caught does

little to alter those inherent abilities. In fact, depreciation in skills and negative stigma associated

with incarceration can reduce the returns to legitimate opportunities following release. In this case,

criminals just released from prison will commit more crime, work less, and earn lower wages than

they would have if they had never been caught. This highlights the tension between the deterrence

and incapacitation effects of imprisonment (which serve to reduce crime among would-be offenders)

with the potential negative effects of incarceration on skills and marketability (which serves to

increase crime among those just released). On the one hand, policies that increase sentence lengths

or enhance the negative stigma of prison raise the expected costs associated with crime, which should

help reduce crime via the deterrence mechanism. On the other hand, they may encourage recidivism

by lowering the returns to legitimate work among ex-prisoners. Rehabilitation efforts through

training and GED certification pose the opposite dilemma. While they may help reduce recidivism,

they make imprisonment less costly.41 The tension between rehabilitation and deterrence makes

for interesting policy analysis and suggests that a policy which combines severe penalties and long

sentences for convicted criminals with prisoner training programs or employment subsidies after

release may be an efficient way to maintain deterrence while also discouraging recidivism. It also

suggests that sentences should be more severe for individuals who have already been incarcerated

in order to offset the reduction in opportunity costs associated with the depreciation in market

skills while in prison.

Influencing Early Skills, Tastes, and Opportunities

Thus far, we have discussed the characteristics A, H0 , and θ as though they were immutable.

Yet, these tastes and abilities are almost certainly shaped at early ages by families, schools, and

neighborhoods.

       Early preschool interventions can help make up for deficits in learning or alter tastes for crime
  41
       Freeman (1999) notes that most studies have found weak, if any, effect of these types of programs on recidivism.


                                                           28
among disadvantaged children, which can substantially reduce subsequent participation in crime.

For example, the Perry Preschool Program for disadvantaged minority children reduced lifetime

arrests through age 27 by 50% for program participants (Schweinhart, and Barnes, and Weikart,

1993). The Syracuse University Family Development Program showed an even larger reduction

in delinquency (Lally, Mangione, and Honig, 1998). These findings led Donohue and Siegelman

(1998) to conclude that small, rigorous early intervention programs may pay for themselves through

reduced crime rates alone, if they can be targeted to high crime groups.

    Programs targeted at high-crime adolescents have also shown promise. In their study of the

Job Corps, which entailed 6-7 months of basic educational and vocational training for economically

disadvantaged adolescents, Long et al. (1981) estimated the social benefits attributed to reduced

criminal activity to be $4,500 (in 1990 dollars) per participant – almost 30% of the total social

benefit of the program. Taking a different approach, the Quantum Opportunity Program provided

entering high school students with a mentor/tutor (25 students per mentor) that aided them in

schoolwork and community activities for four years. Financial incentives designed to encourage high

school graduation and college enrollment were provided for educational, service, and developmental

activities. Two years after program completion, randomly assigned participants were 34% more

likely to have received their high school diploma or GED and had half the number of total arrests

as non-participants (Taggart, 1995).


6     Criminal Experience

If the returns to crime rise with criminal experience, then the full benefits from early criminal

activity include both current financial rewards and any resulting increases in earnings from future

criminal activity. For sufficiently large returns to experience, crime may increase with age. Given

that we observe sharp declines in most property and violent crimes over early years of the lifecycle,

it seems unlikely that there are substantial returns to criminal experience for those activities. Still,

this is a topic which has seen little research.42
  42
     Imai, Katayama, and Krishna (2002) estimate the effect of lagged criminal activity on current participation
in crime controlling for unobserved heterogeneity. They interpret their positive estimates as a return to criminal
experience; although, they do not account for responses in market human capital investments, which would also
generate a positive relationship. Bayer, Pintoff, and Pozen (2003) provide some provocative evidence suggesting that
(social) learning may be important for crimes like burglary and drug dealing. They find that juvenile offenders in
prison with other offenders of the same crime are more likely to be re-arrested for that crime. Strictly speaking, this


                                                          29
    If experience with crime raises the returns to crime, investment subsidies should have stronger

effects than discussed above. As before, increases in early investment raise human capital levels

and reduce crime in subsequent periods. Any reductions in crime limit criminal experience, which

further discourages future crime. This creates a feedback which further encourages investment, since

more time will be spent working in the future. Adding learning in the criminal sector strengthens

the conditions that generate an early choice between a life of crime or a life of school and work.

    The impacts of wage subsidy policies also differ when criminal experience is important. Perma-

nent wage subsidies will have even greater effects on crime at all ages by slowing the acquisition

of criminal experience. Short-term wage subsidies have much more complex effects when criminal

experience affects the returns to crime. Holding investment constant, reductions in crime associ-

ated with a short-term subsidy will reduce criminal experience. This suggests that a youth wage

subsidy may actually increase future work and reduce future crime. Now, consider the response

of investment. On the one hand, a wage subsidy directly encourages work over investment. On

the other hand, it discourages crime, which reduces the accumulation of criminal experience. This

discourages future crime and encourages future work, which indirectly raises the returns to current

investment. The net effect on investment will depend on the increase in opportunity costs relative

to the increase in returns. Of course, all of these effects interact making it difficult to determine

the net effect on investment during subsidized periods and crime after the subsidy ends. It is worth

noting that even if a short-term wage subsidy discourages investment, it may reduce crime at all

ages. This is because declines in market skill resulting from reductions in investment may be more

than offset by declines in criminal skill resulting from a lack of criminal experience. In general, the

higher the return to criminal experience, the more effective will be wage subsidies (permanent or

temporary) in reducing lifetime crime rates.


7     Conclusions

Violent and property crimes are mostly a problem among young uneducated men. The human capi-

tal approach developed in this paper argues that this can be explained by their low skill levels, which

imply low opportunity and incarceration costs for committing crime. A human capital framework
is not evidence in favor of a return to criminal experience, but it may suggest that some form of crime-specific skill
can be acquired or enhanced.


                                                         30
also suggests that the relationships between white collar crime and both age and education should

differ from those for lesser-skilled crimes. Crimes for which the returns are increasing in human

capital levels are more likely to be committed by educated and older workers with more human

capital than are crimes which offer no return to skill. The empirical patterns for age-crime and

education-crime relationships across different types of crime support these predictions. In general,

age-crime profiles have a less pronounced and later peak for white collar crimes. Using self-report

data from the NLSY, we estimate a strong negative effect of education on both property and vi-

olent crime. Additionally, we estimate a strong negative correlation between cognitive ability and

unskilled crime, another prediction of the theory. In contrast, the empirical relationship between

education and white collar crime is quite different. Our estimates from UCR data suggest that

arrest rates for white collar crime are increasing in average educational attainment.

   Given the general accordance of a human capital-based theory of crime with the data, it seems

reasonable to consider its implications for government policy. We discuss a number of interesting

policy insights that cannot be learned from models of crime that abstract from the learning process

by exogenously specifying wage rates and opportunity costs. For example, the long-term impacts

of education and training subsidies, permanent wage subsidies, and law enforcement policies on

crime tend to be greater than the short-term impacts due to the cumulative effects of changes in

human capital investment. More interestingly, policies that target wage or employment subsidies

to younger workers may look good in the short-run (while workers are subsidized); however, they

may have perverse long-term consequences on crime that result from reductions in human capital

investment.

   Most previous economic research on crime has focused on the deterrent and incapacitation

effects of stricter law enforcement. This study suggests that increases in public spending on en-

forcement should cause individuals to increase their investments in market skills. Furthermore,

policies that promote skill investment and work will reduce crime. The optimal mix of enforce-

ment, education, training, and wage subsidy policies has yet to be determined. The human capital

approach developed here suggests that all of these initiatives are likely to be important components

of an effective crime-fighting strategy.




                                                31
References

 [1] P. Bayer, R. Pintoff, and D. Pozen. Building Criminal Capital Behind Bars: Social Learning

    in Juvenile Corrections. Working Paper, Yale Univeristy, 2003.

 [2] G. Becker. Human Capital. Columbia University Press, New York, 1964.

 [3] P. Beirne. Inventing Criminology: Essays on the Rise of Homo Criminalis. State University

    of New York Press, Albany, 1993.

 [4] Y. Ben-Porath. The Production of Human Capital and the Life Cycle of Earnings. Journal of

    Political Economy, 75:352–65, 1967.

 [5] J. Betts and L. McFarland. Safe Port in a Storm: The Impact of Labor Market Conditions on

    Community College Enrollments. Journal of Human Resources, 30:741–65, 1995.

 [6] H. Dellas and P. Sakellaris. On the Cyclicality of Schooling: Theory and Evidence. Oxford

    Economic Papers, 55:148–72, 2003.

 [7] J. Donohue III and P. Siegelman. Allocating Resources Among Prisons and Social Programs

    in the Battle Against Crime. The Journal of Legal Studies, 27:1–44, 1998.

 [8] Durose, M. and Langan, P. Felony Sentences in State Courts, 2000. U.S. Dept. of Justice,

    2003.

 [9] I. Ehrlich. On the Relation Between Education and Crime. In F. T. Juster, editor, Education,

    Income, and Human Behavior, chapter 12. McGraw-Hill Book Co., New York, 1975.

[10] C. Flinn. Dynamic Models of Criminal Careers. In A. Blumstein, editor, Criminal Careers

    and ‘Career Criminals’, volume 2, pages 356–379. National Academy Press, Washington DC,

    1986.

[11] R. Freeman. Why Do So Many Young American Men Commit Crimes and What Might We

    Do About It? Journal of Economic Perspectives, 10:25–42, 1996.

[12] Freeman, R. The Economics of Crime. In O. Ashenfelter and D. Card, editors, Handbook of

    Labor Economics, volume 3, chapter 52. Elsevier, Science B.V., 1999.

                                               32
[13] E. Gould, D. Mustard, and B. Weinberg. Crime Rates and Local Labor Market Opportunities

    in the United States: 1977-1997. Review of Economics and Statistics, 84:45–61, 2002.

[14] J. Grogger. The Effect of Arrests on the Employment and Earnings of Young Men. Quarterly

    Journal of Economics, 110:51–71, 1995.

[15] J. Grogger. Market Wages and Youth Crime. Journal of Labor Economics, 16:756–91, 1998.

[16] J. Heckman, L. Lochner, and C. Taber. Rising Wage Inequality: Explorations with a Dynamic

    General Equilibrium Model of Labor Earnings with Heterogeneous Agents. Review of Economic

    Dynamics, 1:1–58, 1998.

[17] T. Hirschi and M. Gottfredson. Control Theory and the Life-Course Perspective. Studies on

    Crime Prevention, 4:131–42, 1995.

[18] C. Huang, D. Laing, and P. Wang. Crime and Poverty: A Search-Theoretic Approach. Inter-

    national Economic Review, 45, 2004.

[19] S. Imai, H. Katayama, and K. Krishna. Crime and Young Men: The Role of Stigma, Skill and

    Heterogeneity. Working Paper, Concordia University, 2002.

[20] S. Imai and K. Krishna. Employment, Dynamic Deterrence and Crime. 2004.

[21] E. Kandel et al. IQ as a Protective Factor for Subjects at High Risk for Antisocial Behavior.

    Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 56:224–6, 1988.

[22] J. Kling. The Effect of Prison Sentence Length on the Subsequent Employment and Earnings

    of Criminal Defendants. Working Paper, Princeton University, 2002.

[23] J. Lally, P. Mangione, and A. Honig. The Syracuse University Family Development Research

    Program: Long-Range Impact of an Early Intervention with Low-Income Children and Their

    Families. In D. Powell, editor, Parent Education as Early Childhood Intervention: Emerging

    Directions in Theory, Research, and Practice, pages 79–104. Ablex, Norwood, 1988.

[24] S. F. Leung. An Economic Analysis of the Age-Crime Profile. Journal of Economic Dynamics

    and Control, 18:481–97, 1994.

                                               33
[25] S. Levitt. Juvenile Crime and Punishment. Journal of Political Economy, 106:1156–85, 1998.

[26] L. Lochner. A Life-Cycle Model of Human Capital and Crime: Estimating Deterrent Effects

    of Wage and Education Subsidies. PhD thesis, University of Chicago, 1998.

[27] L. Lochner and E. Moretti. The Effect of Education on Crime: Evidence from Prison Inmates,

    Arrests, and Self-Reports. American Economic Review, 94, 2004.

[28] D. Long, C. Mallar, and C. Thorton. Evaluating the Benefits and Costs of the Job Corps.

    Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 1:55–76, 1981.

[29] S. Machin and C. Meghir. Crime and Economic Incentives. Working Paper, Institute for Fiscal

    Studies, 2000.

[30] B. Meyer and D. Rosenbaum. Making Single Mothers Work: Recent Tax and Welfare Policy

    and Its Effects. NBER Working Paper No. 7491, 2000.

[31] H. N. Mocan, S. Billups, and J. Overland. A Dynamic Model of Differential Human Capital

    and Criminal Activity. Working Paper, University of Colorado, 2000.

[32] D. Nagin and J. Waldfogel. The Effects of Criminality and Conviction on the Labor Market

    Status of Young British Offenders. International Review of Law and Economics, 15:109–26,

    1995.

[33] D. Neal and W. Johnson. The Role of Premarket Factors in Black-White Wage Differences.

    Journal of Political Economy, 104:869–95, 1996.

[34] Riley, M. Overview and Highlights of a Sociological Perspective. In A. Sorenson, F. Weinert,

    and L. Sherrod, editors, Human Development and the Lifecourse. Erlbaum, 1986.

[35] S. Rosen. Learning and Experience in the Labor Market. Journal of Human Resources, 7:326–

    42, 1972.

[36] L. Schweinhart, H. Barnes, and D. Weikart. Significant Benefits: The High/Scope Perry

    Preschool Study Through Age 27. High/Scope Press, Ypsilanti, 1993.



                                               34
[37] R. Taggart. Quantum Opportunity Program. Opportunities Industrialization Center of Amer-

    ica, Philadelphia, 1995.

[38] H. Tauchen, A. D. Witte, and H. Griesinger. Criminal Deterrence: Revisiting the Issue with

    a Birth Cohort. Review of Economics and Statistics, 76:399–412, 1994.

[39] U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics. Profile of State Prison Inmates,

    1986. 1988.

[40] U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics. Education and Correctional Popula-

    tions. 2003.

[41] W.K. Viscusi. Market Incentives for Criminal Behavior. In R. Freeman and H. Holzer, editors,

    The Black Youth Employment Crisis, chapter 8. University of Chicago Press, Chicago, 1986.

[42] J. Waldfogel. The Effect of Criminal Conviction on Income and the Trust ‘Reposed in the

    Workmen’. The Journal of Human Resources, 29:62–81, 1994.

[43] J. White, T. Moffitt, and P. Silva. A Prospective Replication of the Protective Effects of

    IQ in Subjects at High Risk for Juvenile Delinquency. Journal of Consulting and Clinical

    Psychology, 57:719–24, 1989.




                                               35
     Table 1: Self-Reported Criminal Pariticpation Rates by Education Status in NLSY
                                (Males Ages 20-23, 1980)


                                                    More than 1/2
                                Any Income          Income from
Years of School                 from Crime             Crime             Violent Crime Property Crime
Less than 10 years                  0.297                0.041                0.115               0.129
                                   (0.035)              (0.016)              (0.024)             (0.026)
10-11 years                         0.337                0.042                0.139               0.218
                                   (0.029)              (0.013)              (0.022)             (0.026)
12 years                            0.244                0.014                0.068               0.118
                                   (0.017)              (0.005)              (0.010)             (0.013)
More than 12 years                  0.174                0.007                0.063               0.160
                                   (0.015)              (0.003)              (0.010)             (0.015)

Notes: Violent cimes include using force to get something or attacking with intent to injure or kill. Property
crimes include thefts of at least $50 or shoplifting. Drug sales include sale of marijuana or hard drugs. Any
crime includes participation either a violent, property, or drug crime. Standard errors in parentheses.
    Table 2: Coefficient Estimates from Probits for Self-Reported Criminal Income
                                  (Males, 1980 NLSY)

                                                   Full           Not Enrolled        Living in a
                                                  Sample           in School          Central City
                                                    1                  2                   3
HS Graduate                                        -0.304             -0.325              -0.327
                                                  (0.088)            (0.125)             (0.227)
Black                                              -0.079             0.092               0.123
                                                  (0.119)            (0.171)             (0.226)
Hispanic                                           -0.480             -0.304              -0.363
                                                  (0.170)            (0.249)             (0.299)
Highest Grade Completed                            -0.034             -0.028              -0.002
 by Mother                                        (0.017)            (0.026)             (0.031)
Highest Grade Completed                            0.025              0.026               -0.008
 by Father                                        (0.012)            (0.019)             (0.024)
Intact Family                                      -0.201             -0.244              -0.271
                                                  (0.087)            (0.124)             (0.190)
Teenage Mother (at Birth)                          0.059              0.150               -0.317
                                                  (0.086)            (0.116)             (0.204)
Family Income (in $1,000)                          -0.004             -0.005              -0.004
                                                  (0.002)            (0.003)             (0.005)
Living in an SMSA                                  0.096              0.045
                                                  (0.084)            (0.120)
Local Unemployment Rate                            0.000              -0.040              -0.046
                                                  (0.016)            (0.022)             (0.038)
State Punishment Rate                              -0.943             -1.550              -2.252
                                                  (0.348)            (0.504)             (1.004)
AFQT                                               -0.008             -0.005              0.002
                                                  (0.001)            (0.002)             (0.004)
Enrolled in School


Sample Size                                        1,901               812                 370
Log Likelihood                                    -947.89            -438.35             -195.66


Notes: All specifications use men ages 18-23 in the 1980 NLSY and control for region of residence.
Individuals are considered criminal participants if they reported any income from crime or do not
respond to that question. All respondents without missing data are used (including blac, hispanic, and
poor white oversamples) with 1980 sample weights. Standard errors in parentheses.
        Table 3: HS Graduate - Dropout Difference in Criminal Participation and Incarceration
                                        (Males, 1980 NLSY)

                                                                         Effect of High School Graduation:
                                         Participation
Crime Indicator                              Rate                 Coefficient        Std. Error        Mean Effect
Criminal Income                             0.224                   -0.304             0.088             -0.090
Violent Crime                               0.078                   -0.536             0.115             -0.087
Property Crime                              0.162                   -0.392             0.097             -0.101
Incarcerated from 1981-85                   0.017                   -0.741             0.187             -0.028

Notes: Sample includes all men at ages greater than or equal to 18 in 1980. Estimates based on probit regressions that
include the following regressors: age (in months), age-squared, high school graduation status, black and hispanic
indicators, AFQT percentiles, whether the individual lived with both his natural parents at age 14, region of current
residence, SMSA status, local unemployment rates, and state punishment rate (number of adults incarcerated divided by
number of reported property and violent index crimes). Violent cimes include using force to get something or attacking
with intent to injure or kill. Property crimes include thefts of at least $50 or shoplifting.
Table 4: Expected Punishment Associated with Incarceration (Uniform Crime Reports)


                                                                                                                                                                    Expected Lost
                                                                   Probability of Probability of                                    Estimated           Expected    Earnings from
                                                                    Conviction    Incarceration               Unconditional           Months           Days Served Incarceration for
                                                       Probability Conditional Conditional on                 Probability of         Served if          per Crime    a Minimum
Crime                                                   of Arrest    on Arrest     Conviction                 Incarceration        Incarcerated        Committed    Wage Worker

Violent Crimes                                             0.25             0.22               0.79                0.043                  91               119.4              $4,920
 Murder and Non-Negligent Manslaughter                     0.85             0.67               0.95                0.544                 248              4,102.4            $169,019
 Forcible Rape                                             0.15             0.39               0.90                0.051                 136               212.2              $8,742
 Robbery                                                   0.15             0.36               0.89                0.047                  94               134.8              $5,554
 Aggravated Assault                                        0.30             0.17               0.71                0.035                  59                63.2              $2,603

Property Crimes                                            0.06             0.11               0.68                0.004                 24                  3.2                $130
 Burglary                                                  0.07             0.27               0.76                0.015                 29                 13.2                $542
 Larceny-Theft (except motor vehicle theft)                0.05             0.08               0.61                0.002                 20                  1.4                 $59
 Motor Vehicle Theft                                       0.10             0.08               0.73                0.006                 17                  3.1                $129

Notes:

Probability of arrest computed from crimes and arrests in the U.S. (Uniform Crime Reports, 2000) adjusted for non-reporting to the police (National Criminal Victimization Survey, 2000).
It is assumed that all murders are reported to the police. Probability of conviction conditional on arrest divides total arrests in the U.S. by total State and Federal convictions for 2000.
Probability of incarceration conditional on conviction is based on reporting of State courts. Estimated months served if incarcerated applies to State prisoners and is estimated by the U.S.
Department of Justice based on sentence lengths handed out that year and the average percent of sentences served by prisoners released that year. Unless otherwise noted, all criminal
justice figures are for 2000 and are taken from Durose and Langan (2003) "Felony Sentences in State Courts, 2000". In computing expected lost earnings from incarceration, the number
of days served per crime was multiplied by $41.20, which represents the earnings for someone working 8 hours per day at the minimum wage of $5.15.
Figure 1: Self-Reported Criminal Participation by Age and Final Schooling Attainment
                                (Males, 1980 NLSY)

                                             a) Any Income from Crime
                                0.5
           Participation Rate



                                0.4


                                0.3


                                0.2


                                0.1
                                       15   16      17        18         19   20    21       22
                                                                   Age


                                                    b) Violent Crime
                                0.25
           Participation Rate




                                0.20

                                0.15

                                0.10

                                0.05

                                0.00
                                       15   16       17       18         19   20    21       22
                                                                   Age

                                                   c) Property Crime
                                0.35
           Participation Rate




                                0.30
                                0.25
                                0.20
                                0.15
                                0.10
                                       15   16       17       18         19   20    21       22
                                                                   Age

                                                 HS Dropout                    HS Graduate
                                   Figure 2: Arrest Rates (per 100,000 persons) by Age for Males
                                                  (1999 Uniform Crime Reports)

                      5,000

                      4,000
Arrests per 100,000




                      3,000

                      2,000

                      1,000

                         0
                              10- 13- 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25- 30- 35- 40- 45- 50- 55- 60-
                              12 14                                 29 34 39 44 49 54 59 64
                                                                 Age

                                                  White Collar         Violent      Property
                              Figure 3: Self-Reported Criminal Participation by Age in NLSY
                                                       (Males, 1980)

                     0.40
Participation Rate




                     0.30


                     0.20


                     0.10


                     0.00
                              15       16       17     18         19      20       21       22
                                                            Age
                            Income from Crime                     More than 1/2 Income from Crime

                            Violent Crime                         Property Crime
