                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




           CORPORATE TAX AVOIDANCE AND HIGH POWERED INCENTIVES

                                           Mihir A. Desai
                                        Dhammika Dharmapala

                                         Working Paper 10471
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w10471


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       May 2004




We would like to thank Alan Auerbach, Amy Dunbar, Alexander Dyck, Austan Goolsbee, Dirk Jenter, John
Phillips, Luigi Zingales and various conference and seminar participants for valuable discussions and
comments on an earlier version of this paper. Desai acknowledges the financial support of the Division of
Research of Harvard Business School and Dharmapala acknowledges the financial support of the University
of Connecticut Research Foundation. Michael Park provided excellent research assistance. The views
expressed herein are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

©2004 by Mihir Desai and Dhammika Dharmapala. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.
Corporate Tax Avoidance and High Powered Incentives
Mihir Desai and Dhammika Dharmapala
NBER Working Paper No. 10471
May 2004
JEL No. G30, H25, H26, J33
                                     ABSTRACT

This paper analyzes the links between corporate tax avoidance, the growth of high-powered

incentives for managers, and the structure of corporate governance. We develop and test a simple

model that highlights the role of complementarities between tax sheltering and managerial diversion

in determining how high-powered incentives influence tax sheltering decisions. The model generates

the testable hypothesis that firm governance characteristics determine how incentive compensation

changes sheltering decisions. In order to test the model, we construct an empirical measure of

corporate tax avoidance - the component of the book-tax gap not attributable to accounting accruals

- and investigate the link between this measure of tax avoidance and incentive compensation. We

find that, for the full sample of firms, increases in incentive compensation tend to reduce the level

of tax sheltering, suggesting a complementary relationship between diversion and sheltering. As

predicted by the model, the relationship between incentive compensation and tax sheltering is a

function of a firm's corporate governance. Our results may help explain the growing cross-sectional

variation among firms in their levels of tax avoidance, the "undersheltering puzzle," and why large

book-tax gaps are associated with subsequent negative abnormal returns.

Mihir A. Desai
Graduate School of Business Administration
Harvard University
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
mdesai@hbs.edu

Dhammika Dharmapala
University of Connecticut
dhammika.dharmapala@uconn.edu
1.       Introduction

         As reviewed in Graham (2003), the extensive literature on how taxes influence firm
financial decision-making has considered the effect of taxes on financing choices, organizational
form and restructuring decisions, payout policy, compensation policy and risk management
decisions. In this literature, taxes are viewed as one of many factors that shape these decisions.
In contrast, firms also appear to engage in a variety of transactions that, in the words of Michael
Graetz, are deals “done by very smart people that, absent tax considerations, would be very
stupid.” These activities, broadly labeled corporate tax shelters, are believed to have proliferated
so greatly that, according to some observers, they now constitute “the most serious compliance
issue threatening the American tax system today.”1

         What induces firms and managers to engage in transactions exclusively designed to
minimize taxes? Alternatively, given the low perceived probabilities of detection, why don’t all
firms engage in these transactions? How are shareholders affected by transactions that are
nominally motivated by tax savings? Previous analyses of tax avoidance and evasion have
emphasized the behavior of individuals (as in the literature reviewed in Slemrod and Yitzhaki
(2002)), rather than corporations. Recently, Slemrod (2004) has stressed the need to consider the
differences between individual and corporate tax compliance, arguing that the latter should be
analyzed in a principal-agent framework. Our paper develops a simple theoretical framework
that embeds the sheltering decision within a managerial agency context, and emphasizes the
importance of interactions between rent diversion and tax sheltering. In order to test this model,
we construct an empirical measure of corporate tax avoidance – the component of the book-tax
gap not attributable to accounting accruals – and investigate its determinants, linking sheltering
decisions by US firms to their incentive compensation and corporate governance arrangements.

         In order to approximate the conditions facing managers of U.S. firms, our model analyzes
the decisions of a manager who chooses levels of income to report to shareholders and to the tax

1
  “Tackling The Growth of Corporate Tax Shelters”; Treasury Secretary Lawrence H. Summers, in remarks to the
Federal Bar Association, Washington, DC, February 28, 2000. For a review of typical tax shelter transactions and
the policy issues, see U. S. Treasury (1999). One very crude metric of the possible magnitude of such activities is
provided by the U.S. General Accounting Office (2004), which documents that (i) from 1996 to 2000,
approximately one-third of large U.S. corporations reported zero tax liability, (ii) that share increased steadily over
the period, and (iii) by 2000, 53% of large U.S. corporations reported tax liabilities lower than $100,000. For these
purposes, large corporations are those with a minimum of either $250 million in assets or $50 million in gross
receipts.


                                                           1
authorities. The manager is also assumed to be able to divert some of the firm’s (potential)
earnings in the form of rents. The impact of an increased use of incentive compensation depends
on the extent of the “technological complementarities” between diversion and sheltering. The
activities are complementary if the costs to the manager of diversion are lower when the level of
sheltering is higher and vice versa (for instance, when income that is sheltered from the tax
authorities thereby becomes less visible to shareholders, and can be more easily diverted).2 If
these complementarities are not too strong, higher-powered incentives will induce the manager
to not only reduce her diversion of rents, but also to engage in more tax sheltering activity. In
short, greater incentive compensation helps align the incentives of agents and principals and
leads managers to be more aggressive about increasing firm value through tax avoidance. On the
other hand, if the complementarities are strong, then the manager’s reduced diversion of rents
may be accompanied by a reduction in tax sheltering activity.

        While the model’s predictions for the effect of higher-powered incentives on tax
avoidance are ambiguous, it generates a testable hypothesis about the interaction between
higher-powered incentives and governance. Specifically, the impact of higher-powered
incentives in leading to greater tax avoidance should be greater in well-governed firms than in
firms with weaker governance structures. The intuition is that while increased incentive
compensation will increase sheltering for all firms as managers place more weight on firm value,
the offsetting effects of reduced sheltering are a function of the governance of the firm.
Specifically, for a given complementarity between diversion and sheltering, better governed
firms will provide less scope for offsetting reductions of sheltering as diversion levels will be
lower for such firms. As such, the model is consistent with either a positive or negative
relationship between high-powered incentives and tax avoidance on average, but is unambiguous
about the role of the governance environment in mediating those effects.

        In our empirical analysis, we estimate the levels of tax sheltering activity for a large
sample of corporations, using financial accounting data from the Compustat database. We first
generate estimates of the book-tax gap for these firms, following the methodology of Manzon
and Plesko (2002). Then, we use data on accruals to isolate the component of the book-tax gap


2
 This complementarity between diversion and sheltering is the premise that motivates the analysis of the links
between corporate governance and corporate taxation in Desai, Dyck and Zingales (2003). They discuss a number of
examples of this phenomenon in detail.


                                                       2
that is attributable to earnings management activity. The residual book-tax gap is identified as
the level of tax sheltering activity for each firm in each year of our sample period. We use a
variety of proxies, from the Execucomp database, for the prevalence of incentive compensation
at these firms, but our primary measure is the ratio of the Black-Scholes value of stock option
grants to total managerial compensation. The quality of corporate governance is measured by the
index constructed by Gompers, Ishii and Metrick (2003); this is based on the degree to which
managers are entrenched through corporate charter provisions. Clearly, our empirical analysis
requires the use of three proxies – for tax sheltering, managerial compensation structure, and
governance characteristics – that are inherently imperfect. We have sought, however, to use
measures that are widely accepted within each of the relevant literatures.

         Merging the data on tax sheltering, managerial compensation, and corporate governance
yields a panel of 943 firms over the period 1993-2002. Focusing on within-firm variation, we
find that for the full sample of firms, increases in incentive compensation tend to reduce the level
of tax sheltering, in a manner that is consistent with complementarity between sheltering and
diversion. As predicted by the model, the link between incentive compensation and sheltering is
mediated by the corporate governance characteristics of the firm. The observed average
relationship does not hold for the subsample of well-governed firms, as the evidence suggests a
minimal (or a weak positive) relationship between incentive compensation and sheltering for
these well-governed firms.

         Our analysis suggests that the simple intuition that increased alignment of shareholder
and manager interests would lead to greater tax sheltering activity is theoretically only a special
case, and empirically not operative. While the result that increased alignment between
shareholders and managers leads to reduced sheltering appears counterintuitive initially, the
underlying rationale within our model – that sheltering and diversion are complementary – is
consistent, as discussed below, with anecdotal evidence about sheltering and diversion. The
results in the paper are also consistent with a notable aggregate feature of our tax sheltering
measure – the growing cross-sectional variation among firms in their levels of tax avoidance
over our sample period.3 It would appear that while the growth of incentive compensation has


3
 Cross-sectional variation across firms in their use of tax shelters has been noted in the accounting literature (e.g.
Hanlon, 2003a, p. 10, fn. 3), though primarily based on legal and practitioner-based evidence.


                                                            3
affected virtually all firms, its effects on tax sheltering are different for different firms; this can
potentially explain the divergence across firms that we observe.

        Our results may also shed some light on what Weisbach (2002) calls the “undersheltering
puzzle” - why firms do not use tax shelters more extensively, given the ease and low expected
costs of such activities. It may well be the case that shareholders do not want managers to engage
in tax sheltering, despite the obvious gains in after-tax firm value, because doing so may also
create greater opportunities for managerial diversion of rents. Indeed, the evidence in Lev and
Nissim (2002) and Hanlon (2003a) that large book-tax gaps are associated with subsequent
negative abnormal returns similarly indicates that tax-motivated activities by firms do not
necessarily lead to greater shareholder value.

        This paper makes a number of contributions. First, it provides a simple theoretical
framework for understanding the interaction between tax avoidance and corporate governance. It
also constructs a quantitative measure of the inherently elusive phenomenon of tax avoidance.
Using this measure, it presents empirical results that further our understanding of how incentive
compensation affects tax sheltering, and how this relationship is mediated by governance
institutions. More generally, we provide new evidence in favor of the emerging paradigm that
links taxation and corporate governance as proposed in Desai, Dyck and Zingales (2003), and in
particular we find evidence for the existence of complementarities between diversion and
sheltering. We also contribute to the large and growing literature on the effects of incentive
compensation. Finally, like Crocker and Slemrod (2003), we extend the traditional tax avoidance
and evasion literature on individuals to encompass the corporate sector.

        The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 reviews the related literature on
incentive compensation and corporate tax avoidance. Section 3 develops a model that relates
incentive compensation to tax avoidance, and provides the motivation for the empirical work that
follows. Section 4 describes the data, methodology and empirical framework. Section 5 describes
the results and considers alternative interpretations and problems of causality. Section 6
concludes.

2.      Related Literature

        This paper is related to the very substantial body of research on various aspects of
incentive compensation, the literature on firm’s reporting responses to tax incentives and the


                                                    4
emerging analysis of the interactions between taxation and corporate governance. In this section,
we briefly review these literatures, emphasizing recent work that is most closely related to our
paper.

         The growth of stock-based incentive compensation is among the most notable
developments in corporate practices in recent years (see Hall and Murphy (2003) for an
overview), and a vast literature has developed on its determinants and effects. As one example of
the beneficial effects of incentive compensation, Mehran (1995) finds that firms with a larger
fraction of outside directors on the board are more likely to use incentive compensation, and that
its use improves firm performance.4 More recently, concerns have arisen about the potentially
negative aspects of the use of high-powered incentives, as reviewed in Bebchuk and Fried
(2003). For example, Erickson, Hanlon and Maydew (2003) analyze firms that were accused of
accounting fraud by the SEC during 1996-2003 and find that incentive compensation
significantly increases the likelihood that a firm is accused of fraud. Our paper extends this
literature on how incentive compensation shapes manager and firm behavior, particularly with
respect to tax planning. As one example of such an interaction, Gupta and Swenson (2003) find
that incentive compensation encourages lobbying by firms for tax benefits.5

         The tremendous growth in incentive compensation during the 1990s coincided with an
increased disconnect between the profits reported to capital markets and the profits reported to
tax authorities. Manzon and Plesko (2002) conclude that the explanatory factors relevant for
explaining this gap have not changed over time. In contrast, Desai (2003) argues that the
growing divergence between the two during the 1990’s is not attributable to the factors that
account for the book-tax gap in the earlier part of this period – the differential treatment of
depreciation, foreign source income, and employee option grants in the reporting of book and tax
income – and that it cannot be fully explained by increased levels of earning management over
this period.6 Lev and Nissim (2002) and Hanlon (2003a) analyze the link between book-tax gaps


4
  See Core, Holthausen and Larcker (1999) for an alternative view of the relationship between board structure and
compensation.
5
  More generally, Beatty (1995), Core and Guay (2001) and Graham, Lang and Shackelford (2004) all consider how
a firm’s tax characteristics shape incentive compensation plans. This paper turns this question on its head and
considers how incentive compensation plans shape a firm’s tax characteristics.
6
  For studies on earnings management, see e.g. Healy (1985), Jones (1991) and Dechow, Sloan and Sweeney (1995);
for a recent theoretical perspective, see Goel and Thakor (2003). Other studies on the discrepancies between book
and tax reporting include Plesko (2002) and Mills and Newberry (2001).


                                                       5
and future returns in a further effort to understand if these gaps represent earnings manipulation,
finding that book-tax gaps predict future negative abnormal returns. Our paper extends this
literature by developing a measure of the tax sheltering component of the book-tax gap, and
investigating its determinants. Of course, this literature is a subset of the much larger literature
on how tax factors interact with reporting decisions.7

         Finally, the issue of corporate tax avoidance has previously been linked to the structure of
corporate governance. Specifically, Desai, Dyck and Zingales (2003) analyze and test a model of
the interaction between tax sheltering activity and the diversion of rents by managers. They
argue that strong complementarities between the two activities may exist, so that increased levels
of tax enforcement may raise firm value, despite the firm’s increased tax payments, and that a
corporate Laffer curve may exist that is a function of the governance environment and levels of
insider ownership. Evidence from a recent crackdown in tax enforcement in Russia supports the
former prediction and cross-country evidence on the revenue effects of tax rate changes supports
the latter prediction. The model presented below demonstrates that this interaction between
sheltering and diversion is critical to understanding how the increased use of incentive
compensation may be linked to tax sheltering and may be operative in the U.S. setting.8

3.       A Simple Model

         The effects of high-powered incentives on tax sheltering activity can be analyzed using a
simple model of managerial behavior. The aim here is to present a reduced-form specification of
the manager’s objective function, and to derive the conditions under which increasing the power
of the manager’s incentives will induce the manager to engage in increased or decreased levels
of tax sheltering.9 A theoretical literature has recently begun to analyze the nature of the optimal


7
  There are two somewhat distinct bodies of work on this issue. The accounting literature (reviewed in Shackelford
and Shevlin (2001) and Maydew (2001)) has emphasized the interaction of tax costs or benefits and other reporting
costs or benefits. Separately, a large literature (reviewed in Hines (1999)) exists on how multinationals distort
reported profits and investment in response to tax rate differences.
8
  There are a variety of ways in which tax policy influences ownership structures and governance outcomes in the
U.S. setting. For example, Morck (2003) investigates the role of the tax treatment of intercorporate dividends in
shaping the structure of business groups, and Desai and Gentry (2003) and Maydew, Schipper and Vincent (1999)
examine how corporate cross-holdings and divestiture decisions are influenced by tax factors. Aside from cross-
holdings, incorporation and reincorporation decisions can also reflect tax considerations, as in Mackie-Mason and
Gordon (1997) and Desai and Hines (2002).
9
  One of the thorny questions we sidestep in our model is precisely what a tax shelter is. We rely on the intuition
provided by Graetz in the quote at the start of the paper and that is now embodied in the “economic substance”
doctrine – specifically, a transaction that has no associated business purpose. In the stark setting of the model, that


                                                           6
incentive contract when managers can engage in tax evasion or avoidance (Crocker and Slemrod,
2003; Chen and Chu, 2003). Our formulation does not address these issues in detail, but is
sufficiently flexible to capture in reduced form any kind of employment contract that may be
feasible.

3.1.     Assumptions

         We assume that a firm generates exogenous earnings of Y > 0, observable only to the
manager. The manager chooses a level of income to reveal to shareholders (denoted YS), and a
level of income to report to the tax authorities (denoted YT), where YS, YT є [0, Y].10 We restrict
attention to the case where YS ≥ YT (i.e. where the book-tax gap (YS – YT)) is nonnegative). This
constraint simplifies the analysis, but does not fundamentally affect the qualitative response of
the manager to changes in the structure of compensation. The manager is assumed to gain utility
w(D) from the amount of earnings D = Y – YS diverted (i.e. not reported to shareholders), and
consumed by the manager as rents:

A1: w′(D) > 0, w′′(D) < 0 (i.e. w(D) is increasing and concave)

The manager is also assumed to care about firm value as represented by the after-tax cum
dividend value of the firm, or (YS – tYT), where t is the corporate tax rate. The manager places a
weight θ on firm value; θ captures the extent to which the manager’s outcomes are tied to firm
performance (e.g. through incentive compensation).

         Engaging in diversion and sheltering activity involves costs for the manager, captured in
reduced-form by a loss function L(Y – YS, Y – YT), or equivalently, L(D, Z), where Z = Y – YT is
the amount of income sheltered from the tax authorities:

A2: LS(·,·), LT(·,·) < 0 and LSS(·,·), LTT(·,·) > 0 (i.e. L(·,·) is increasing and convex in each
argument)

where LS(·,·) denotes the derivative of L with respect to YS and LT(·,·) denotes the derivative of L
with respect to YT.These costs to the manager may be either ex ante (e.g. the effort and resources

corresponds to underreporting of true profits to tax authorities without any particular emphasis on the means by
which this is accomplished. The definition of a shelter is obviously a legal question and our interest lies in
understanding managerial motivations for transactions that serve fundamentally to reduce tax liabilities.
10
   There are several interesting issues associated with reporting artificial profits to shareholders, i.e. settings where
Ys>Y (as explored in Erickson, Hanlon and Maydew, (2004)) Given that our emphasis is on the interaction of
sheltering and diversion, the model follows the convention of the private benefits literature (e.g. Zingales (1995) and
Shleifer and Wolfenzon (2002)), where insiders divert income.


                                                            7
expended in diverting and sheltering the firm’s earnings) or ex post (e.g. sanctions imposed upon
managers when sheltering or diversion are detected).11

         The formulation here allows for interdependencies between the costs of sheltering and the
costs of diversion. Desai, Dyck and Zingales (2003) argue that in some circumstances,
technological complementarities between sheltering and diversion may exist. Income that is
sheltered from the tax authorities may be less visible to shareholders, and hence more easily
diverted. It is also possible that there is a lower probability that diversion will be detected if the
income in question has been sheltered. In such cases, LST(·,·) < 0. Alternatively, sheltering and
diversion may be substitutes. For example, the two activities may require distinct forms of effort
from managers, or penalties for diversion may be larger when levels of sheltering are large, and
vice versa. In such cases, LST(·,·) > 0. We return below to the significance of the assumptions
about the cross-partial LST(·,·).

         Assuming an additive form for these various components, the manager’s payoff can be
represented as follows:

                           U = w(Y – YS) + θ(YS – tYT) – L(Y – YS, Y – YT)                                         (1)

The manager’s program can be expressed as:

                                                       Max U                                                       (2)
                                                       Y S ,Y T


i.e. the manager chooses YS and YT to maximize the payoff in Eq. (1), subject to the constraints
that YS, YT є [0, Y] and YS ≥ YT.

3.2.     Results

         We begin by deriving how changes in the parameter θ influence the level of diversion
and sheltering. The manager’s optimal choices of YS and YT can be characterized using the first
order conditions with respect to YS and YT, respectively:

                           - w´(D*) + LS(D*, Z*) + θ = 0                                                           (3)

                           - tθ + LT(D*, Z*) = 0                                                                   (4)

11
  The latter costs may, for example, include civil, criminal and/or reputational sanctions resulting from the detection
of diversion by shareholders and/or regulators. The detection of tax sheltering activity by the tax authorities through
audits may also lead to pecuniary sanctions or adverse professional consequences, if the legality of the shelter is
successfully challenged by the tax authorities.


                                                            8
where D* and Z* are the equilibrium levels of diversion and sheltering, respectively. Our
primary interest is in the comparative static analysis of small changes in θ in the neighborhood of
the equilibrium values D* and Z*.12 Differentiating the first order conditions above (Eqs. (3) and
(4)) with respect to YS and YT, and expressing this in matrix form leads to:

                                   ⎡ ∂Y S ⎤                                     −1
                                   ⎢ ∂θ ⎥ ⎡w´´(·) - LSS (·,·)       -LST (·,·)⎤ ⎡ 1 ⎤
                                   ⎢ T⎥=⎢                                                                     (5)
                                   ⎢ ∂Y ⎥ ⎣ -LST (·,·)              -LTT (·,·) ⎥⎦ ⎢⎣− t ⎥⎦
                                   ⎢⎣ ∂θ ⎥⎦

The second order condition for D* and Z* to maximize the manager’s objective function is
satisfied (i.e. the Hessian matrix is negative semidefinite) if:

                          [LST(D*, Z*)]2 > – [w´´(D*) – LSS(D*, Z*)]LTT(D*, Z*)                               (6)

Applying Cramer’s Rule,

                                            ∂Y S
                                   sign (        ) = – sign [– LTT(·,·) – tLST(·,·)]                          (7)
                                             ∂θ

                                            ∂Y T
                                   sign (        ) = – sign [– t(w´´(D) – LSS(·,·)) + LST(·,·)]               (8)
                                             ∂θ

        As such, the following condition must apply to ensure that increases in θ to lead to both
reduced diversion and increased sheltering:

Condition 1: LST(D*, Z*) > min {– (1/t)LTT(D*, Z*), t(w´´(D*) – LSS(D*, Z*))}

This entails that LST(·,·) is “sufficiently large” in the following sense: either there are no
technological complementarities between sheltering and diversion, or if they exist, they are not
too large in magnitude. Note that both expressions on the right-hand side are negative. Thus, any
nonnegative LST(·,·) satisfies Condition 1, which requires only that LST(·,·) not be too negative.
The result can be stated as follows:

Proposition 1: If the second-order condition (Eq. (6)) is satisfied and assumptions A1 and A2
and Condition 1 hold, then an infinitesimal increase in θ leads to a decrease in diversion, an
increase in sheltering, and an increase in the book-tax divergence (YS – YT):
12
   Monotone comparative static results, using lattice-theoretic methods, would apply for all values of θ. However,
such results cannot be obtained here, because USθ = 1 and UTθ = - t have different signs, so that U does not have
“increasing differences” in (YS, YT, θ).


                                                         9
                                        ∂Y S      ∂Y T          ∂(Y S − Y T )
                                   i.e.      > 0,      < 0, and               >0
                                         ∂θ        ∂θ               ∂θ

Proof: Follows directly from the assumptions, and Eqs. (7) and (8). As YS increases and YT
decreases, it follows straightforwardly that (YS – YT) must increase.

        It is not surprising that the creation of higher-powered incentives leads, through a greater
weight on firm value in the manager’s objective function, to a decrease in diversion. This,
indeed, is presumably the direct and intended consequence of the use of high-powered
incentives.13 The novel element in our analysis is the inclusion of the possibility of tax sheltering
activity by the manager. In such circumstances, an increase in θ will also lead to an increase in
the sheltering of income from the tax authorities under these conditions as this provides the
manager with an alternative means of increasing after-tax firm value. Consequently, under these
conditions, the measurable book-tax divergence (YS – YT) clearly increases in response to an
increase in θ.

        An important corollary to Proposition 1 is that, when Condition 1 does not hold, it is
possible that an increase in θ may lead to a decrease in sheltering:

Proposition 2: Assume that the second-order condition (Eq. (6)) is satisfied, and that
assumptions A1 and A2 hold. Suppose also that t(w´´(D*) – LSS(D*, Z*)) > – (1/t)LTT(D*, Z*),
and that:

                 LST(D*, Z*) є (– (1/t)LTT(D*, Z*), t(w´´(D*) – LSS(D*, Z*)))                                  (9)

Then an infinitesimal increase in θ leads to decreases in diversion and sheltering (the effect on
the book-tax divergence is ambiguous):

                                        ∂Y S         ∂Y T
                                   i.e.      > 0 and      >0
                                         ∂θ           ∂θ

Proof: Follows directly from the assumptions, and Eqs. (7) and (8).

Technological complementarities between diversion and sheltering will tend to lead to decreases
in sheltering when θ rises. Intuitively, when θ rises, the manager’s optimal choice of YS*
increases in response. If the costs of sheltering are higher when the level of diversion is lower,

13
  At least, this is true within the standard “optimal contracting” approach to managerial compensation. Alternative
“managerial power” perspectives would indicate otherwise.


                                                        10
then the manager’s optimal choice of YT* will rise (i.e. the level of sheltering will fall) on
account of the increase in YS*. A sufficiently large degree of complementarity can lead to a fall
in both diversion and sheltering in response to high-powered incentives.

        As this discussion makes clear, our model conceptualizes the conditions under which
high-powered incentives can lead to either higher or lower tax sheltering. It does not provide an
unambiguous prediction concerning the effects of changes in θ on the level of tax sheltering,
given the importance of an unobservable technological relationship. However, an unambiguous
testable prediction can be derived for the relative effects of changes in θ on tax sheltering that
depends on the governance characteristics of firms. We identify stronger governance
characteristics (i.e. a higher initial level of θ) with lower levels of diversion: that is, a manager
who places greater weight on firm value will tend to divert less income.

        In order to conceptualize the role of the governance of firms, it is useful to consider a
polar example. Consider a firm with a governance environment that is sufficiently strong that
the manager finds any diversion to be prohibitively costly (so that D = 0). Now suppose that
there is an increase in the power of managerial incentives (i.e. a higher θ). The manager will
respond by seeking to increase firm value. Given that there is no scope to further reduce D, the
manager will engage in a higher level of tax sheltering regardless of the value of LST(·,·). In other
words, sheltering and diversion cannot locally be strong complements around the neighborhood
of D = 0, regardless of the global shape of the L(.) function. More formally, we can assume in
such circumstances that lim L ST ( D , Z ) ≥ 0 .
                          D→0


        In contrast, consider the same firm (with an identical L(.) function) in a relatively weak
governance environment (where D > 0). An increase in θ will induce the manager to increase
firm value, and thus have the direct effect of increasing both D and Z. If the L(.) function exhibits
complementarities in the relevant range of D, then there will also be an indirect effect on Z: the
reduction in diversion will be associated with reduced sheltering. This indirect effect will tend to
counteract the direct effect, leading to a smaller net increase (or a larger net decrease) in Z in the
weak governance environment, relative to the strong governance environment (where there is no
indirect effect to counter the direct effect of an increase in Z).

        If we assume that all firms face the same L(.) function (or at least that this function is
independent of the firm’s governance characteristics), the argument above implies that the

                                                   11
response of tax sheltering activity by well-governed firms to increases in θ will be greater than
the analogous responses of less well-governed firms. Intuitively, while the direct effect of
increases in θ is to induce managers to increase Z, the manager of a well-governed firm does not
face (at least to the same degree) the counteracting tendency created by the complementarities
between D and Z. This logic extends beyond this polar example. Note that, if D is not close to
zero even in relatively well-governed firms, than the effect of increases in θ on Z may be
negative even for these firms; even so, it can be expected to be less negative than for firms with
relatively worse governance characteristics.

         As such, the differential response of sheltering to changes in incentive compensation
based on the governance of environment provides a testable hypothesis of the relevance of the
model:

Hypothesis 1: A small increase in θ will lead to a larger positive (or smaller negative) effect on
Z for well-governed firms, relative to the effect for less well-governed firms.

It is important to stress that we are not claiming that the structure of corporate governance per se
will have any particular effect on Z. As noted above, improvements in governance (i.e. lower
levels of D) are consistent with either higher or lower levels of Z, depending on the nature of the
L(.) function. Rather, our hypothesis is about the mediating effect of governance on how changes
in θ influence tax sheltering activity.

4.       Data and Methodology

         In order to analyze the phenomenon of corporate tax avoidance empirically, and to test
the hypothesis we have derived about the effects of the interaction between incentive
compensation and governance on tax sheltering, we integrate several different data sources. We
begin by simulating the book-tax gap for a large sample of firms from Standard and Poor’s
Compustat database, using a procedure developed by Manzon and Plesko (2002). Then, we
construct an empirical measure of tax sheltering activity, by adjusting the book-tax gap for
measures of earnings management arising from accrual accounting. Next, we construct measures
of managerial incentives, using data from Standard and Poor’s Execucomp database. Then, this
data is linked to an index of the quality of corporate governance, developed by Gompers et al.
(2003). In this section of the paper, we describe each of these steps in detail, and discuss the data
and the empirical specifications.


                                                 12
4.1.     Measuring Tax Sheltering

         By its very nature, tax sheltering activity is extremely difficult to measure. In order to
construct a proxy, we begin with the book-tax gap (YS – YT), operationalized as the difference
between the book income reported by a firm to its shareholders and the SEC (using Generally
Accepted Accounting Principles (GAAP)), and the tax income reported to the IRS. Because
firms’ tax returns are confidential, it must be estimated using simulations based on the available
data. A methodology for doing so is developed in Manzon and Plesko (2002). We follow their
approach, as described below. We use current Federal tax expense (hereafter, CFTE; Compustat
data item #63) to estimate YT. Assuming that each firm faces a tax rate t that is given by the top
statutory Federal corporate income tax rate (which was 35% during our sample period), it
follows that CFTE = tYT. 14 Thus, the firm’s estimated taxable income Yˆ T is simply:

                                                     CFTE
                                              Yˆ T =                                                               (10)
                                                       t

The (domestic US) taxable income estimated in Eq. (10) can be subtracted from the firm’s
(domestic US) financial statement income, to obtain what Manzon and Plesko (2002, p. 192)
term the “unadjusted SPREAD”:

                                     Unadjusted SPREAD = YS – Yˆ T                                                 (11)

This measure of the book-tax gap can be refined further by adjusting the reported YS to deduct
expenses that are tax-deductible (e.g. state and other income taxes), and to subtract income that is
tax-exempt (e.g. equity in income of nonconsolidated subsidiaries). Subtracting these from YS
yields an adjusted SPREAD measure. We denote the book-tax gap estimated for firm i in year t
as BTi,t (as described below, this is scaled by the lagged value of the firm’s assets when we
construct the tax sheltering measure).

         Obviously, estimating taxable income in this manner is fraught with several important
measurement problems that are well-known in the literature.15 For our purposes, it is very


14
   The account in the text is somewhat simplified, as we adjust for the different tax rates resulting from the
progressivity of the corporate income tax rate structure; the effect of this, however, is very minor for large firms.
15
   First, financial income and tax reporting are subject to different rules for determining when related entities can be
consolidated for reporting purposes. Thus, the entity that files a tax return need not correspond to the entity that
reports financial income. Second, for firms that have net operating losses (NOLs), the current tax benefit from these
NOLs is limited to the tax paid in the previous three years. Thus, if current operating losses exceed these potential


                                                           13
important to stress that the use of nonqualified stock options (NQO’s) by firms does not affect
the book-tax gap estimated using this methodology. The accounting treatment of NQO’s entails
that the deduction taken by firms for this form of employee compensation reduces tax liability,
but does not reduce the reported tax expense (instead, there is an increase in contributed capital).
As a result, the approach outlined above will overestimate taxable income for firms that use
NQO’s. However, reported financial income is not reduced by the use of NQO’s; thus, our
estimate of the book-tax gap is not affected by the use of NQO’s. Consequently, there is no
mechanical reason why a firm’s use of incentive compensation in the form of stock options will
affect the BTi,t estimated by this methodology (see Manzon and Plesko (2002) for more details).
In our analysis below, we include a measure of the value of stock option grants as an explanatory
factor, but this is intended to capture a behavioral, not a mechanical effect.

         The book-tax gap BTi,t has grown in recent years beyond the levels that would be
expected purely on the basis of differences in tax and GAAP rules. However, this gap need not
represent increasing levels of tax sheltering. Specifically, earnings management – the smoothing
of reported income over time in order to reach bonus targets, to avoid reporting losses, and to
achieve other aims – might have contributed to the growing gap. Research analyzing earnings
management has focused on accruals – adjustments to realized cash flows that are used in
calculating the firm’s net income. In order to quantify the degree to which earnings management
is responsible for the gap, we adopt the following approach. We use data on accruals to isolate
the component of BTi,t that is attributable to earnings management. The remaining, orthogonal
component of BTi,t, which cannot be explained by earnings management, is inferred to be a
measure of tax avoidance activity. In the results that follow, we use total accruals as a proxy for
earnings management activity (as in e.g. Healy (1985)), but the results are consistent when
“abnormal” (or discretionary) accruals (e.g. Jones, 1991; Dechow, Sloan and Sweeney, 1995) are
employed.

         In deriving our measure of tax sheltering activity, we first construct a measure of total
accruals for each of the firms in our sample for each year over this period, using the approach
sketched above. Compustat data is used, with the sample restricted to those firm-years for which


tax benefits, then the above procedure will underestimate current taxable loss. Finally, the estimated book-tax gap
may be understated for firms that repatriate foreign-source income when the foreign tax credit limit is not binding.
For more discussion of the difficulties of inferring taxable income from financial statements, see Hanlon (2003b).


                                                          14
Execucomp data on managerial compensation is also available (this constrains the time period to
1993-2002). We obtain values of total accruals TAi,t for each firm i in each year t. To account for
the component of the book-tax gap that is attributable to earnings management, we then run the
following OLS regression, using firm fixed effects:

                                    BTi,t = β1TAi,t + µi + єi,t                              (12)

where:

         BTi,t: book-tax gap for firm i in year t, scaled by the lagged value of assets
         TAi,t: total accruals for firm i in year t, scaled by the lagged value of assets
         µi: the average value of the residual for firm i over the sample period 1993-2002
         єi,t: the deviation in year t from firm i’s average residual µi

         The residual from this regression can be interpreted as a measure of tax sheltering
activity. We will denote this measure by TSi,t, where:

                                         TSi,t = µi + єi,t                                          (13)

Essentially, TSi,t is a measure of the component of BTi,t that cannot be explained by variations in
total accruals (and hence by earnings management). We take this residual book-tax gap as a
more precise measure of tax sheltering activity.

         The approach we have outlined is somewhat analogous to the “Cross-sectional Modified
Jones Model” (Jones, 1991) that seeks to isolate the discretionary component of TAi,t. As
accruals perform a valuable function by providing a more informative portrayal of the firm’s
economic circumstances than would realized cash flows alone, some component of TAi,t is likely
to be “normal” even in the absence of earnings management. To isolate discretionary accruals,
the Jones model estimates the nondiscretionary component of TAi,t as a function of assets,
revenues, and the gross value of plant, property and equipment in the firm’s industry. The
residual generated by this estimation (using OLS within each industry) is inferred to be the
discretionary component of accruals (i.e. the discretionary accruals measure for firm i in year t is
the component of that firm’s total accruals in year t that cannot be explained by these industry-
level variables). In a parallel fashion, we estimate the fraction of the book-tax gap that is not
associated with normal accruals in order to construct a measure of tax sheltering.




                                                      15
         Because it is estimated as a residual, TSi,t is constrained by the regression procedure to
sum to zero over all firms and all years (while єi,t is constrained to sum to zero for firm i over all
years). Thus, neither TSi,t, nor its components µi and єi,t, can be interpreted as the dollar amount
of income sheltered from taxes by firm i in year t. Similarly, it is not possible to aggregate TSi,t
across all firms to obtain a measure of aggregate tax sheltering in the economy in year t. For our
purposes, this does not matter. As described below, we use panel data regressions with firm fixed
effects, so we only require a measure that proxies adequately for variations in tax sheltering
activity within a firm over time. Note also that these fixed effects control for unobserved
heterogeneity across firms, so that, although TSi,t consists of two components, one time-varying
(єi,t) and the other time-invariant (µi), the time-invariant, firm-specific component µi becomes
part of the fixed effect. Thus, when analyzing variation over time within a firm, only the time-
varying residual єi,t is used as a measure of tax sheltering.

        Figure 1 plots TSi,t, averaged across all firms in the sample for each year from 1993-2002
(summary statistics for the tax sheltering measure are provided in Table 1). Because TSi,t is
derived as a residual, Figure 1 cannot be used to address questions about whether the aggregate
amount of tax sheltering has grown over this period. The variability of TSi,t across firms in each
of these years is also represented, using measures of TSi,t for firms one standard deviation from
the mean in each of these years. The most notable feature is the substantial increase in the
variation of this measure across firms since the mid-1990’s. One of the aims of our analysis is to
provide an explanation for this increase in variation across firms. Although our analysis relies
only on within-firm variation, the explanatory factors for tax sheltering that we identify within
firms over time can also shed light on the determinants of cross-sectional variation across firms.

4.2.    Measures of Managerial Incentives

        Our analysis requires some empirical proxy for the parameter θ (the degree to which
managerial incentives are aligned with shareholder interests). Data on the structure of executive
compensation is available for a large sample of firms from Standard and Poor’s Execucomp
database for the period 1993-2002.16 Execucomp data is provided at the manager-year level –
i.e. the unit of observation is an individual manager in a particular year. Typically, the data


16
  The Execucomp data begins in 1992, but we choose 1993 as our starting point to ensure more complete coverage
of firms.


                                                     16
includes observations on 5 top managers for each firm in the sample, although the precise
number differs across firms. As our focus is on the tax sheltering activity of firms, rather than the
behavior of individual managers, we aggregate the managerial compensation measures across all
managers in a given firm in a given year, to obtain a measure of the structure of managerial
compensation at that firm.

       The literature on incentive compensation has used a variety of measures of managerial
incentives. For example, Mehran (1995) measures the prevalence of incentive compensation by
the fraction of the firm owned by managers, and by the fraction of equity-based compensation in
managers’ total compensation. We essentially follow the latter approach here; there is relatively
little time-series variation in the overall level of managerial stock ownership, and so it appears
inappropriate for our longitudinal analysis. Moreover, it has also been argued (Morck, Shleifer
and Vishny, 1988) that high levels of managerial share ownership may lead to “entrenchment” –
i.e. managers in firms with high levels of insider ownership may have greater freedom to divert
rents. If so, then higher levels of managerial share ownership may be associated with lower,
rather than higher, values of θ.

        Instead, we use a measure of stock-based compensation similar to that of Erickson,
Hanlon and Maydew (2003). We emphasize the value of stock option grants to executives, as a
fraction of total compensation. This variable, which we denote by STKMIXGRANTi,t, is
calculated as follows: for firm i in year t, we take the Black-Scholes value of stock options
granted that year to executive j (Execucomp variable Blk_value, which we denote by
BLKVALj,i,t), and sum this across all the firm’s managers. We do the same for the salary and
bonus for that firm’s executives in that year (Execucomp variables Salary and Bonus, which we
denote SALARYj,i,t and BONUSj,i,t, respectively). Our measure is the ratio of the sum of the values
of stock options to total compensation (defined as the sum of the value of stock options, salary
and bonus). Thus,

                                                       ∑ BLKVAL
                                                       j
                                                                   j ,i ,t

        STKMIXFGRANTi ,t =                                                                       (14)
                               ∑ BLKVAL
                                   j
                                            j ,i ,t   + ∑ SALARY
                                                           j
                                                                   j ,i ,t   + ∑ BONUS j ,i ,t
                                                                                j



where j indexes executives, i indexes firms, and t indexes years. Summary statistics for this and
all the other compensation variables are shown in Table 1.


                                                       17
        A broader measure of equity-based compensation includes restricted stock grants
(Execucomp variable Rstkgrnt, which we denote by RSTKGRNTj,i,t) as well as options. We
calculate a measure of restricted stock grants as a fraction of total compensation in a manner
analogous to Eq. (14), and denote this by STKMIXRESTi,t. We also sum option grants and
restricted stock grants in order to construct an overall measure of stock-based compensation as a
fraction of total compensation, denoted by STKMIXi,t (again, as in Eq. (14)).

        We also construct a measure of the value of stock option exercises by executives as a
ratio of total compensation, denoted STKMIXEXERi,t, in a manner analogous to Eq. (14).
However, there are serious problems of interpretation associated with this variable. In particular,
an executive who exercises her stock options achieves greater diversification and thereby reduces
the degree to which she internalizes shareholder interests. Thus, exercises may be associated
with lower, rather than higher, values of θ. In addition, there is a potentially serious endogeneity
problem with STKMIXEXERi,t: when the tax sheltering residual TSi,t is exogenously large, this
will raise the firm’s market value, and induce executives to exercise their options. Because of
these issues, we focus primarily on other measures of incentive compensation, most notably on
STKMIXGRANTi,t.

        Clearly, none of these measures (including STKMIXGRANTi,t, on which we focus)
precisely captures the theoretical parameter of interest (θ). Ideally, we would require a measure
of the extent to which firm value is internalized in the objective function of managers. However,
as noted earlier, managerial ownership appears inappropriate for a panel study, and, moreover, is
subject to difficulties of interpretation. What our measures (in particular, STKMIXGRANTi,t) seek
to do is to proxy for the prevalence of incentive compensation at a particular firm at a given time.

        While the incentive measures discussed above capture the benefits to managers of
engaging in tax sheltering activity, a complete analysis would also take the costs into account.
Drawing on standard economic models of enforcement, it may be expected that changes in the
probability of audit, in the probability that tax shelters are found to be illegal, or in the associated
sanctions, would affect the level of tax sheltering. While it is difficult to find precise data on
these factors, we include firm fixed effects that can capture firm or industry level variations in
these factors. In addition, we include year dummies that can (among other things) capture the
effects of variations over time in enforcement variables.



                                                   18
4.3.       The Governance Index

           Given that Hypothesis 1 relates not to the effect of θ on tax sheltering per se but rather to
the effects of the interaction between θ and a firm’s governance characteristics, we employ the
governance index developed by Gompers et al. (2003), denoted by G, to test this hypothesis.
This index is based on listings produced by the Investor Responsibility Research Center (IRRC)
of the takeover defenses adopted by a large sample of major corporations. The IRRC tracks 22
antitakeover provisions; Gompers et al. (2003) combine this data with the coverage of these
corporations under state antitakeover statutes to produce an index that summarizes the extent to
which each firm in the sample is protected by 24 distinct corporate or state antitakeover
provisions. The index is simply the number of these provisions that apply to a given firm. Thus,
for each firm, G can take on integer values from 0 to 24. Lower values of G are associated with a
better quality of corporate governance - in particular, with a lower degree of insulation of
incumbent managers from hostile takeovers (for more details regarding these provisions, see
Gompers et al. (2003, Appendix 1)).

           Gompers et al. (2003) construct values of G for a large sample of firms for various years
beginning in 1990.17 Governance characteristics, as measured by G, have been relatively stable
for most firms over this period, providing little time-series variation in G for the typical firm.
Moreover, it is difficult to interpret what variation exists because the cardinal properties of G are
unclear: it simply represents a count of the number of antitakeover provisions that apply to a
given firm, and some of these provisions may be more important than others. Accordingly, we
simply use the values of G for 1998 (which provides the widest coverage of firms, because the
IRRC significantly expanded its coverage in that year) as our measure of governance. In our
analysis, G is thus firm-specific and time-invariant (i.e. Gi,t = Gi); because Gi is interacted with
time-varying variables, it is not absorbed by the firm fixed effects. In addition, we use G simply
to divide the sample into relatively well-governed firms and less well-governed firms. Thus, the
cardinality issue is less relevant for our analysis.

           Another potential concern is the relationship between this index and various other
characteristics of firms. Gompers et al. (2003, Table V) show that G is positively correlated with
inclusion in the Standard and Poor’s (S&P) 500, size, share price, trading volume, and

17
     This data is available on Andrew Metrick’s website, at http://finance.wharton.upenn.edu/~metrick/governance.xls


                                                          19
institutional ownership (that is, higher values of these characteristics are associated with
relatively weak governance, as measured by G). In contrast, G is negatively correlated with past
sales growth. Thus, the well-governed and less well-governed subsamples differ in a variety of
ways. It is possible that the distinctive effects for well-governed and poorly-governed firms that
we find may be due, not to their governance characteristics per se, but rather to these associated
characteristics such as firm size. To the extent that these factors are constant over time, they will
be absorbed by the firm fixed effects. In addition, we include controls for factors related to firm
size – assets, market value, and sales - in order to capture the potential effects of changes in these
characteristics over time. In the reported results below, these controls are in logs. However, as
explained in Section 5.3 below, the basic results are unchanged when the controls are included in
linear form, or excluded altogether.

5.     Results

       In order to examine the empirical relevance of our model, we first consider the links
between incentive compensation and tax sheltering, and then refine the analysis by examining
the role of governance. Then, we carry out some checks of the robustness of the results. Finally,
we address concerns about endogeneity.

5.1.   Tax Sheltering and Incentive Compensation

       Our basic empirical specification seeks to estimate the marginal effect of changes in θ on
tax sheltering. As discussed above, our model does not have an unambiguous prediction on this
coefficient. The model, however, does provide a framework in which the results can be
interpreted. As proxies for θ, we use (in separate regressions) each of the four measures of
incentive compensation defined above. We also include firm fixed effects to capture unobserved
heterogeneity across firms, and include year dummies. In some cases, we also include a vector of
control variables (assets, market value, and sales, all in logs) that capture changes in the scale or
size of the firm (and also proxy for the benefits of sheltering). The basic specification is the
following:

       TSi,t = β0 + β1ICi,t + Firm Fixed Effects + Year Dummies (+ Controls) + νi,t                (15)




                                                  20
where ICi,t is a measure of incentive compensation (STKMIXGRANTi,t, STKMIXi,t,
STKMIXRESTi,t, or STKMIXEXERi,t), and νi,t is the error term. The firm-year size controls are
LOGASSETSi,t, LOGMKTVALi,t and LOGSALESi,t, as discussed earlier.

        The results using this specification – for all firms for which we have Execucomp data on
ICi,t, a total of 6,816 observations on 1,381 firms (or 6,743 observations on 1,374 firms when all
controls are included) – are presented in Table 2. A clear pattern emerges from these results –
option grants and the overall stock-based compensation measure have negative and significant
effects on tax sheltering (Columns (1) and (2)). Restricted stock grants are insignificant, though
also negative (Column (3)), suggesting that the effect of stock-based compensation is mostly
driven by option grants. Option exercises, on the other hand, have a positive and significant
effect on tax sheltering (Column (4)). We do not interpret this as contradicting the other findings,
however; as discussed above, exercises are best understood as reductions in θ. Thus, the positive
effect of exercises reinforces the general impression that increases in θ tend to reduce the level of
tax sheltering activity. However, because of the difficulties of interpretation noted earlier, we do
not stress the results using option exercises in the subsequent analysis. The significance of option
grants and options exercises is unaffected by the inclusion of firm-year size controls (Columns
(5) and (6)). Note that these and all subsequent results use robust standard errors that are
clustered at the firm level.

        Tax avoidance activity by corporations is generally viewed as benefiting shareholders.
Thus, the negative and significant effect of incentive compensation on tax sheltering that we find
would appear to be counterintuitive. However, our model provides a framework in which we can
make sense of these results. A negative effect is consistent with a situation in which
technological complementarities between sheltering and diversion are relatively strong. That is,
the underlying quality of corporate governance is sufficiently low that any increases in the
alignment of shareholder and manager interests will have the primary effect of inducing the
manager to reduce the level of diversion. Because of the complementarities, this in turn induces
the manager to shelter less income. To the extent that our general framework is accepted, this
appears to be the case here, and is consistent with the emphasis on the complementarity of
diversion and sheltering in Desai, Dyck and Zingales (2003).




                                                 21
       Given that the evidence points toward complementarities between diversion and
sheltering, it is important to consider the degree to which either strong complementarities or
substitutability between diversion and sheltering reflect common intuition. The intuition
underlying complementarities is fairly straightforward. To the degree that a dollar of sheltered
income is more easily diverted than a non-sheltered dollar, the activities are complementary. If
any obfuscatory actions are taken to shelter income from tax authorities (e.g. the use of offshore
tax havens or the creation of complex structures involving tax-indifferent parties), then it is easy
to see how such sheltered income could be more easily diverted. Indeed, recent reports of
corporate malfeasance at Tyco and Enron both suggest that complex tax avoidance activities
generated sufficient obscurity to allow for managerial self-dealing. In contrast, substitutability
(which is required for increased high-powered incentives to lead to greater sheltering) would
require that effort associated with sheltering would detract from efforts toward diversion. While
we believe that either possibility is admissible, complementarity between diversion and
sheltering would certainly seem to be reasonable.

5.2.   The Role of Corporate Governance

       In order to test Hypothesis 1, we require some means of distinguishing well-governed
firms from other firms, and estimating the effect of incentive compensation separately for each
group of firms. One approach to doing this is to interact Gi with our incentive compensation
measures ICi,t. For example, this specification for STKMIXGRANTi,t is:

       TSi,t = β0 + β1STKMIXGRANTi,t + β2(Gi*STKMIXGRANTi,t) + Firm Fixed Effects
              + Year Dummies (+ Controls) + νi,t                                                 (16)
Hypothesis 1 implies that β2 < 0 (recalling that lower values of Gi indicate better governance).
Because of concerns about the cardinal properties of Gi, however, we primarily adopt a slightly
different approach, defining a dummy variable WELLGOVi, which takes on the value 1 for well-
governed firms and 0 for less well-governed firms. In the reported results, we use Gi ≤ 7 as our
definition of a “well-governed” firm. As discussed below, however, the main results are robust to
the use of alternative definitions with different values of Gi. We interact WELLGOVi with
STKMIXGRANTi,t and STKMIXEXERi,t, using the following specifications:

       TSi,t = β0 + β1STKMIXGRANTi,t + β2(WELLGOVi*STKMIXGRANTi,t) + Firm Fixed
              Effects + Year Dummies (+ Controls) + νi,t                                         (17)


                                                 22
       TSi,t = β0 + β1STKMIXEXERi,t + β2(WELLGOVi*STKMIXEXERi,t) + Firm Fixed
              Effects + Year Dummies (+ Controls) + νi,t                                             (18)

       The results from this analysis are presented in Table 3 (this sample only includes those
firms for which Execucomp data on incentive compensation and the governance data both exist;
this gives us 5,367 observations on 943 firms). Panel A shows the results using
STKMIXGRANTi,t, and Panel B those using STKMIXEXERi,t. The first column of each panel
simply uses the basic specification (Eq. (15)) on the restricted sample of 943 firms that we obtain
when we merge the data used earlier with the governance index Gi; the results are essentially the
same for this sample as those reported in Table 2.

       Column (2) of Table 3 reports the results using the interaction term (Eq. (17)). Note
firstly that this confirms the negative and significant effect of option grants on tax sheltering for
the typical firm. The interaction effect also enables us to test Hypothesis 1 directly. Our
hypothesis is that the effect of option grants on tax sheltering for well-governed firms differs
from (and is more positive or less negative than) that for less well-governed firms. In terms of
Eq. (17), this entails that β2 > 0. The results in Column (2) of Panel A reveal that this is indeed
the case – the coefficient on the interaction term is positive, and significant at the 10% level.

       Column (6) of Table 3 reports the corresponding results for Eq. (18). Once again, the
positive and significant effect of STKMIXEXERi,t is confirmed for the typical firm (recall that
this corresponds to a negative and significant effect of θ). The direct test of Hypothesis 1 using
the interaction term leads to the same conclusion as when the option grants measure is used.
Note that, because increases in STKMIXEXERi,t are associated with decreases in θ, Hypothesis 1
implies that β2 < 0 in Eq. (18). The coefficient on the interaction term in Column (6) is indeed
negative, and is significant at the 5% level. This implies that the effect of θ on tax sheltering for
well-governed firms differs from (and in particular is less negative than) the corresponding effect
for less well-governed firms. Thus the pattern of results in Table 3 is consistent with Hypothesis
1, even though some of these results may be of borderline significance.

       We also test Hypothesis 1 using separate regressions for well-governed and less well-
governed firms. These specifications involve running Eq. (15) on the appropriate subsample of
firms. Note that this is not identical to the procedure in Eq.’s (17) and (18), because the latter
constrain the year dummies to have the same effects for both categories of firms. The results


                                                  23
using stock option grants are presented in Column (3) (for the well-governed subsample of 317
firms, with a total of 1665 observations) and Column (4) (for the poorly-governed subsample of
626 firms, with a total of 3702 observations). Clearly, the effect of STKMIXGRANTi,t on tax
sheltering is negative and very significant for poorly-governed firms. In contrast, the coefficient
on STKMIXGRANTi,t is positive for well-governed firms (indicating that increases in θ increase
tax sheltering), but is very insignificant. Similar results are obtained in Columns (7) and (8),
using stock option exercises. The effect of STKMIXEXERi,t on tax sheltering is positive and very
significant for poorly-governed firms. In contrast, the coefficient on STKMIXEXERi,t is negative
for well-governed firms (indicating that increases in θ increase tax sheltering), but, as in Panel A,
is very insignificant.

         Our result that the generally negative effect of incentive compensation on tax sheltering
does not apply to well-governed firms is consistent with our main testable hypothesis. Increases
in incentive compensation do not affect tax sheltering for well-governed firms; if anything, there
may be a weak positive relationship. The divergent impact of incentive compensation on tax
sheltering for different types of firms may help to explain the phenomenon that we highlighted in
our discussion of Figure 1. The most notable feature of our measure of tax avoidance activity is
the growing divergence across firms. This has occurred despite the fact that the growth of
incentive compensation has been a widespread phenomenon, affecting most major firms. The
solution suggested by our results is that the growth in incentive compensation has had different
effects on different firms. For relatively well-governed firms, it has either increased tax
sheltering or had no impact. For less well-governed firms, it has reduced tax sheltering activity.
This would account for the pattern of growing divergence shown in Figure 1.18

5.3.     Some Checks for Robustness

         The basic results reported in Tables 3 and 4 may be compromised by imprecise
measurement of governance, changing incentives for tax avoidance over the period, the fact that
governance measures may reflect unobserved heterogeneity, and the possibility that option
activity and tax planning are jointly determined. We address these concerns in turn.


18
   Of course, there are alternative explanations as well. For example, a growth in foreign income among a subset of
firms over this period may be attributed to tax sheltering activity by our methodology for calculating TSi,t. However,
to the extent that our proxy captures tax sheltering, our results are at least consistent with the pattern shown in
Figure 1.


                                                          24
         The results reported in Table 3 rely on a definition of a well-governed firm as one for
which Gi ≤ 7. These basic results are robust to varying this definition (by, for instance,
categorizing firms for which Gi ≤ 5, Gi ≤ 6, or Gi ≤ 8 as well-governed). Most importantly, in no
instance is the effect of θ on tax sheltering for well-governed firms negative and significant. For
the less well-governed subsample of firms, however, the effect of θ on tax sheltering is negative
and significant in all these variations. The “less well-governed” category in Table 3 includes 626
firms, with presumably widely varying governance institutions. Thus, we also divided this
subsample further (into “moderately well-governed” firms, for which Gi є {8, 9, 10}, and the
most poorly-governed firms, for which Gi ≥ 11). No major differences between these two
subsamples were found (with the effect of θ on tax sheltering being negative and generally
significant for both), suggesting that the most important distinction is between well-governed
firms and the rest of the sample. Using the variation in G to any greater extent leads to samples
that are too small to produce significant results.19

         Our sample period (1993-2002) covers both the boom of the 1990’s, and the subsequent
years, when many firms experienced reduced profits or losses. It is possible that the incentives
for tax sheltering that existed when firms were profitable became attenuated or were reversed
during the latter part of our sample period (notwithstanding NOL carryforwards, which can make
tax savings potentially valuable even for loss-making firms). To address this concern, we
estimated our regression models using only data for the period 1993-99. The results (not shown)
are basically consistent with those in Tables 2 and 3. The effect of stock option grants on tax
sheltering is negative and significant for the typical firm. The coefficient on the interaction term
in Eq. (17) is clearly positive (although its significance becomes borderline), and the separate
regression for well-governed firms reveals an insignificant effect.20

         Some of the results in Table 2, and all those in Table 3, are obtained using controls for
firm size and related characteristics. Specifically, we include LOGASSETSi,t, LOGMKTVALi,t and
LOGSALESi,t, which are the log values of firm i’s assets, market value, and sales in year t. As
noted in Section 4.3, there is a potential concern that our results may be affected by systematic
19
   This applies a fortiori when we attempt to use all the information represented in G by including an interaction
term Gi*STKMIXGRANTi,t (as in Eq. (16)). This leads to negative coefficients on both STKMIXGRANTi,t and the
interaction term, but neither is significant. However, the negative coefficient on the interaction term
Gi*STKMIXGRANTi,t is at least consistent with Hypothesis 1, and with the results obtained in Table 3.
20
   It is difficult to find significant results for the 2000-02 period, where (bearing in mind the firm fixed effects) the
effective sample size is quite small.


                                                            25
differences between the well-governed and poorly-governed subsamples of firms that are not
related to their governance structure per se. The inclusion of these controls is intended in part to
address this concern. To explore this issue further, we estimate the models with the same
controls entering in linear form, and also estimate them with these controls completely excluded.
In neither case does the sign of any of the coefficients of interest change; moreover, the
significance of these coefficients is generally unaffected.21

         When employees exercise NQO’s, the firm is allowed a tax deduction for the value of the
compensation. Thus, option exercises reduce (or eliminate) the firm’s taxable income, and
attenuate the incentives for tax sheltering activity. Option grants per se do not give rise to a tax
deduction. However, grants that are not yet exercised may still affect current taxable income
through loss carrybacks from future years when employees exercise their options. Thus, it is
possible that the use of incentive compensation and tax shelters are alternative tax planning
strategies that may be substitutes for each other.22 This would constitute an alternative
explanation for our finding that there is a negative relationship between the two for the typical
firm. Addressing this issue is important because the tax savings from employee stock options
appear to be substantial. Graham, Lang and Shackelford (2004) find that this is the case for a
sample of Nasdaq 100 and S&P 100 firms; moreover, the marginal tax rates faced by the former
are significantly reduced (sometimes to zero) by options deductions.

         We address the concern that “tax exhaustion” may be responsible for our results by
excluding all firm-years with zero or negative estimated taxable income from our sample (recall
that taxable income is estimated using Eq. (10)). If our results are driven by tax exhaustion
reducing the desire and need for tax sheltering, then restricting the sample to firm-years with
positive taxable income should reduce the strength of the relationship. Table 4 reports the results
for the restricted sample of firm-years with positive estimated taxable income (as before, with
robust, clustered standard errors). Note that this restriction leaves a total of 3883 observations on
694 firms (of these, 211 firms are well-governed by our definition). The result that, on average,

21
   In some cases, the standard errors become slightly larger: for instance, when the controls are excluded, the
significance of the positive coefficient on the interaction term in Eq. (17) is of borderline significance, while the
negative coefficient of STKMIXGRANTi,t for the poorly-governed subsample is only significant at 10% rather than
5% (as in Table 3, Column (4)). Thus, the inclusion of the log controls for firm size (as in the reported results) in
some cases increases the precision of the estimates, but the general pattern of results is not fundamentally affected
by excluding the size controls, or including them in linear form.
22
   This is one version of the more general issue analyzed in Graham, Lemmon and Schallheim (1998).


                                                          26
option grants reduce tax sheltering activity is unchanged in sign and significance (Column (1)).
The coefficient on the interaction term in Column (2) is positive, and actually more significant
(at the 5% level) than the corresponding coefficient for the full sample (Column (2) of Table 3).
The separate regressions in Columns (3) and (4) give essentially the same results as those for the
full sample in Panel A. Overall, our results are, if anything, strengthened when attention is
restricted to firm-years with positive estimated taxable income. This suggests strongly that our
results in Table 2 and Table 3 are not being driven by the tax exhaustion effect. Rather, the
results in Table 4, and the fact that the R2’s in Table 4 are substantially higher, implies that the
omitted observations in Table 3, Panel A (i.e. firm-years with zero or negative taxable income)
were primarily adding noise.

5.4.   Some Caveats

       Our specifications assume that the various measures of incentive compensation that we
use are exogenous. However, it is possible that the level of tax sheltering may affect the form
that managerial compensation takes. For instance, suppose that when managers engage in an
especially low level of tax sheltering, boards offer them higher-powered incentives in order to
induce them to shelter more income. This would tend to create a negative relationship between
incentive compensation and tax sheltering, as we observe for the typical firm. This mechanism,
however, is unlikely to be terribly important. Tax sheltering constitutes a relatively small
component of the overall firm value that shareholders and boards are presumably concerned
about. Moreover, this story presumes that there is an underlying direct positive effect of
incentive compensation on tax sheltering. If this were not the case, then boards would not use
incentive compensation to motivate managers to avoid firm-level taxes. But then, in order to
account for our results, the reverse causality effect would have to be sufficiently large to
dominate this direct incentive effect; this seems exceedingly unlikely.

       Another issue that may bear on the causal interpretation of our findings is the role of
managerial power in setting compensation. In contrast to our focus on the agency problem
between shareholders and managers, the “managerial power” approach to incentive
compensation (see e.g. Bebchuk and Fried (2003) for an overview, and Bertrand and
Mullainathan (2001) for empirical evidence) highlights an agency problem between shareholders
and the board of directors. It is argued that boards are effectively captured by the CEO, so that



                                                  27
powerful managers are able to extract rents in the form of higher compensation.23 If managers’
personally optimal level of tax sheltering is lower than that favored by shareholders, then the
following alternative explanation of our results may be possible: an increase in managerial power
may result in both an increase in incentive compensation and a decrease in the level of tax
sheltering.

         It is entirely possible that managerial power plays an important role in corporate
decisionmaking. However, this alternative explanation for our findings requires in addition that
changes in managerial power within a firm over time can generate the substantial and significant
effects that we observe. This seems highly unlikely, especially as there is little evidence to
suggest large changes in managerial power within firms over our sample period (for example, the
governance index of Gompers et al. (2003) is very stable for most firms since 1990). Stable
differences in the level of managerial power across different firms would be absorbed by the firm
fixed effects in our model. Thus, we do not regard this alternative explanation as compelling.24

         Of course, to address the causality issues fully, we would need a valid instrument, or a
natural experiment, neither of which appears to be available. One possibility worth mentioning is
Section 162(m) of the IRC, which limited the ability of firms to deduct for tax purposes
compensation for employees in excess of $1 million per year, with an exception for
“performance-based” compensation. This provision may seem to provide a possible source of
exogenous variation in the prevalence of incentive compensation. However, the law took effect
in 1994, so there is a very limited amount of pre-162(m) data. Moreover, Rose and Wolfram
(2002) conclude that the effects of Section 162(m) on the magnitude and composition of
executive compensation were extremely small.25

5.5.     Some Implications for the “Undersheltering Puzzle”

         As noted previously, the “undersheltering puzzle” highlighted by Weisbach (2002) poses
the question of why firms have traditionally failed to use tax shelters to any significant degree.

23
   Of course, risk-averse managers would prefer to take the higher compensation in the form of cash, but it is argued
that higher compensation can only be obtained in incentive-based forms because of “outrage costs” and the desire
for “camouflage.”
24
   It is possible that there are other factors that could affect both tax sheltering and incentive compensation. For
instance, Slemrod (2004) suggests that firms’ “corporate culture” may affect both. However, this is offered as a
possible explanation for a simultaneous growth of incentive compensation and tax sheltering. It does not seem to fit
our finding of a negative relationship for the typical firm.
25
   However, see Perry and Zenner (2001) for an alternative view.


                                                         28
Our results imply that complementarities between sheltering and diversion are important for the
typical firm. Thus, while there may well exist unexploited opportunities for tax sheltering with
little or no risk of penalties from the tax authority, increasing tax avoidance would create greater
opportunities for managerial diversion. If managers cannot credibly commit to foregoing those
opportunities, then shareholders may prefer that managers not engage in tax sheltering activity.
They may indeed infer from the existence of such activity that managers are also engaging in
diversion. This may lead to the stock market discounting the value of such a firm, with negative
consequences for the manager. It may thus be better from the manager’s point of view to leave
the opportunities for tax avoidance unexploited. In effect, problems of moral hazard and lack of
commitment prevent a policy that would be mutually beneficial for managers and shareholders.

       This explanation may also help reconcile the results in this paper with recent accounting
research on the effects of book-tax gaps on earnings persistence and earnings quality. Hanlon
(2003a) and Lev and Nissim (2002) show that higher book-tax gaps are associated with a
reduced degree of earnings persistence, and hence lower future returns. In the accounting
literature, this phenomenon has been attributed to earnings management. Book-tax gaps are
explained as being due to the intertemporal smoothing of income by managers; thus, higher
current reported earnings that raise the book-tax gap lead investors to expect lower future
income. Such “managed” earnings are thus of lower quality and are less likely to persist in the
future than are “true” earnings. Our results suggest an alternative explanation of this
phenomenon. To the extent that book-tax gaps are due to tax sheltering rather than earnings
management, increases in the book-tax gap may suggest to investors that managers are also
engaging in higher levels of diversion (at least for those firms for which complementarities
between sheltering and diversion are likely to be large), and lead them to reduce expectations of
future earnings. This account is supported by our results on the effects of governance
characteristics on the relationship between tax sheltering and high-powered incentives.

6.     Conclusion

       The extensive discussions of corporate tax shelters during the last few years have taken
place largely in the absence of analysis of the level and determinants of tax sheltering activity.
Yet, as Weisbach (2002) points out, any response to the question of corporate tax shelters must
be predicated on an understanding of the determinants of these activities. Similarly, the literature



                                                 29
on taxes and financial decision-making has emphasized financing decisions where taxes are a
factor but has underemphasized the importance of purely tax-motivated transactions that appear
to be growing in importance. This paper attempts to rectify these oversights. Our simple
theoretical model highlights the link between the weight placed by managers on firm value and
their choices regarding tax avoidance, with particular emphasis on the role of corporate
governance. The empirical measure of tax sheltering activity that we construct for a large sample
of firms over the period 1993-2002, by correcting the estimated book-tax gaps to take account of
accounting accruals, allows us to investigate the relevance of our framework.

       Incentive compensation appears to be a significant determinant of tax avoidance activity.
In particular, higher-powered incentives are associated with lower levels of tax sheltering for the
typical firm, in a manner that is consistent with technological complementarities between
sheltering and diversion. This relationship, as predicted by the model, is mediated by firms’
governance institutions, and does not hold for a subsample of well-governed firms. These
findings help explain the growing cross-sectional variation among firms in their levels of tax
avoidance over our sample period. In addition, “undersheltering” may be less puzzling in light
of our results, which suggest that interactions between tax sheltering and managerial diversion of
rents are a significant issue, at least for firms that are less well-governed. Finally, the
perspective in the paper helps rationalize the seemingly anomalous evidence that book-tax gaps
predict negative abnormal returns as shareholders are unlikely to benefit from sheltering in the
presence of complementarities.

       Tax avoidance activities appear to be increasingly central to corporate financial decision-
making. Financial innovations, the integration of capital markets, and an increasingly
complicated corporate tax code provide more opportunities for firms to capitalize on differences
in tax rates, tax preferences, and tax status in more and more elaborate ways. Understanding
how such opportunities are exploited, how they interact with other financial decisions, and their
consequences for shareholder welfare represents an important challenge for academic research.
The theoretical framework and empirical measure of tax avoidance constructed in this paper
hopefully provides a foundation for such research.




                                                  30
References

Beatty, A. (1995) “The Cash Flow and Informational Effects of Employee Stock Ownership
        Patterns,” Journal of Financial Economics, 38, 211-240.

Bebchuk, L. A. and J. M. Fried (2003) “Executive Compensation as an Agency Problem”
      Journal of Economic Perspectives, 17, 71-92.

Bertrand, M. and S. Mullainathan (2001) “Are CEOs Rewarded for Luck? The Ones Without
       Principals Are” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 116, 901-932.

Chen, K.-P. and C. Y. C. Chu (2003) “Internal Control vs. External Manipulation: A Model of
       Corporate Income Tax Evasion” Working paper.

Core, J. E., R. W. Holthausen and D. F. Larcker (1999) “Corporate Governance, Chief Executive
        Officer Compensation and Firm Performance” Journal of Financial Economics, 51, 371-
        406.

Core, J. E., and W. R. Guay (2001) “Stock Option Plans for Non-Executive Employees” Journal
        of Financial Economics, 61, 253-287.

Crocker, K. J. and J. Slemrod (2003) “Optimal Policy Regarding Corporate Fraud: Tax Evasion”
      Working paper.

Dechow, P., R. Sloan and A. Sweeney (1995) “Detecting Earnings Management” The
      Accounting Review, 70, 193-225.

Desai, M. A. (2003) “The Divergence between Book and Tax Income” in J. M. Poterba (ed.) Tax
       Policy and the Economy, Vol. 17, MIT Press: Cambridge, MA, 169-206.

Desai, M. A., A. Dyck, and L. Zingales (2003) “Corporate Governance and Taxation” Working
       paper.

Desai, M. A. and W. M. Gentry (2003) “The Character and Determinants of Corporate Capital
       Gains” in J. M. Poterba (ed.) Tax Policy and the Economy Vol. 18, MIT Press:
       Cambridge, MA, forthcoming.

Desai, M. A. and J. R. Hines Jr. (2002) “Expectations and Expatriations: Tracing the Causes and
       Consequences of Corporate Inversions” National Tax Journal, 55, 409-441.

Erickson, M., M. Hanlon, and E. Maydew (2003) “Is There a Link between Executive
       Compensation and Accounting Fraud?” Working paper.

Erickson, M., M. Hanlon, and E. Maydew (2004) “How Much Will Firms Pay for Earnings that
       do not Exist? Evidence of Taxes Paid on Allegedly Fraudulent Earnings” The Accounting
       Review, forthcoming.


                                               31
Goel, A. M. and A. V. Thakor (2003) “Why Do Firms Smooth Earnings?” Journal of Business,
       76, 151-192.

Gompers, P. A., J. Ishii and A. Metrick (2003) “Corporate Governance and Equity Prices”
     Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118, 107-155.

Graham, J. R. (2003) “Taxes and Corporate Finance: A Review” Review of Financial Studies 16,
      1074-1128.

Graham, J. R., M. H. Lang, and D. A. Shackelford (2004) “Employee Stock Options, Corporate
      Taxes and Debt Policy” Journal of Finance, forthcoming.

Graham, J. R., M. L. Lemmon, and J. S. Schallheim (1998) “Debt, Leases, Taxes and the
      Endogeneity of Corporate Tax Status” Journal of Finance, 53, 131-162.

Gupta, S. and C. W. Swenson (2003) “Rent Seeking by Agents of the Firm” Journal of Law and
       Economics, 46, 253-268.

Hall, B. J. and K. J. Murphy (2003) “The Trouble with Stock Options” Journal of Economic
       Perspectives, 17, 49-70.

Hanlon, M. (2003a) “The Persistence and Pricing of Earnings, Accruals, and Cash Flows when
      Firms Have Large Book-Tax Differences”, Working paper.

Hanlon, M. (2003b) “What Can We Infer About a Firm’s Taxable Income from its Financial
      Statements?” National Tax Journal, 56, 831-863.

Healy, P. (1985) “The Effect of Bonus Schemes on Accounting Decisions” Journal of
       Accounting and Economics, 7, 85-107.

Hines, J. R., Jr. (1999) “Lessons from behavioral responses to international taxation” National
       Tax Journal 52, 305-322.

Jones, J. (1991) “Earnings Management During Import Relief Investigations” Journal of
        Accounting Research, 29, 193-228.

Lev, B. and D. Nissim (2002) “Taxable Income as an Indicator of Earnings Quality” Working
       paper.

Mackie-Mason, J. K. and R. H. Gordon (1997) “How Much do Taxes Discourage
      Incorporation?” Journal of Finance, 52, 477-505.

Manzon, G. B., Jr. and G. A. Plesko (2002) “The Relation Between Financial and Tax Reporting
     Measures of Income” Tax Law Review, 55, 175-214.




                                                32
Maydew, E. L. (2001) “Empirical Tax Research in Accounting: A Discussion” Journal of
     Accounting and Economics, 31, 389-403.

Maydew, E. L., K. Schipper and L. Vincent (1999) “The Impact of Taxes on the Choice of
     Divestiture Method” Journal of Accounting and Economics, 28, 117-150.

Mehran, H. (1995) “Executive Compensation Structure, Ownership, and Firm Performance”
      Journal of Financial Economics, 38, 163-184.

Mills, L. and K. Newberry (2001) “The Influence of Tax and Non-Tax Costs on Book-Tax
        Reporting Differences: Public and Private Firms,” The Journal of the American Taxation
        Association, 23, 1-19.

Morck, R. (2003) “Why Some Double Taxation Might Make Sense: The Case of Intercorporate
      Dividends” NBER Working Paper No. 9651.

Morck, R., A. Shleifer and R. Vishny (1988) “Management Ownership and Corporate
      Performance: An Empirical Analysis” Journal of Financial Economics, 20, 293-315.

Perry, T. and M. Zenner (2001) “Pay for Performance? Government Regulation and the Structure
        of Compensation Contracts” Journal of Financial Economics, 62, 453-488.

Plesko, G. (2002) “Reconciling Corporation Book and Tax Net Income, Tax Years 1996-1998,”
       SOI Bulletin, Spring 2002, Washington, DC: U.S. Government Press Office.

Rose, N. and C. Wolfram (2002) “Regulating Executive Pay: Using the Tax Code to Influence
       Chief Executive Officer Compensation” Journal of Labor Economics, 20, S138-S175.

Shackelford, D. A. and T. Shevlin (2001) “Empirical Tax Research in Accounting” Journal of
      Accounting and Economics, 31, 321-387.

Shaviro, D. (2000) “Economic Substance, Corporate Tax Shelters, and the Compaq Case” Tax
       Notes, 88, 1581-1604.

Shleifer, A. and D. Wolfenzon (2002) “Investor Protection and Equity Markets” Journal of
       Financial Economics, 66, 3-27.

Slemrod, J. (2004) “The Economics of Corporate Tax Selfishness” National Tax Journal,
      forthcoming.

Slemrod, J. and S. Yitzhaki (2002) “Tax Avoidance, Evasion and Administration” in A. J.
      Auerbach and M. Feldstein (eds.) Handbook of Public Economics, Vol. 3, North-Holland:
      Amsterdam, 1423-1470.




                                              33
U.S. General Accounting Office (2004) “Comparison of Reported Tax Liabilities of Foreign and
       U.S.-Controlled Corporations, 1996-2000” GAO-04-358 Washington D.C: U.S.
       Government Press Office.

U.S. Department of the Treasury (1999) “The Problem of Corporate Tax Shelters: Discussion,
       Analysis and Legislative Proposals” Washington D.C.: U.S. Government Press Office.

Weisbach, D. (2002) “Ten Truths about Tax Shelters” Tax Law Review, 55, 215-253.

Zingales, L. (1995) “Insider Ownership and the Decision To Go Public” Review of Economic
       Studies, 62, 425-448.




                                             34
                           Figure 1: The Evolution of Tax Avoidance Residuals, 1993-2001

    0.15




    0.10




    0.05




    0.00
              1993          1994          1995         1996          1997          1998         1999          2000          2001



   -0.05




   -0.10




   -0.15

                                      Average Sheltering           Plus one std. dev.         Minus one std. dev.

Note: The figure plots the mean average tax sheltering measure discussed in the text from 1993 to 2001 along with the mean plus and
minus one standard deviation of that tax sheltering measure.
                                                                   Table 1
                                                           Summary Statistics

                                                                                                         Standard             Number of
                                                               Mean                  Median              Deviation           Observations
Tax Sheltering Residual                                          (0.0001)               (0.0021)              0.0727                 6,816

Ratio of Value of Stock Option Grants to                          0.4116                 0.4032               0.2748                 6,816
Total Compensation for Top 5 Executives


Ratio of Value of Stock Option and                                0.4419                 0.4439               0.2699                 6,816
Restricted Stock Grants to Total
Compensation for Top 5 Executives

Ratio of Value of Restricted Stock Grants                         0.0729                 0.0000               0.1587                 6,816
to Total Compensation for Top 5
Executives

Ratio of Value of Stock Option Exercises                          0.2232                 0.0762               0.2825                 6,816
to Total Compensation for Top 5
Executives

Governance Index, 1998                                            9.0816                 9.0000               2.8117                 5,367


Note: "Tax Sheltering Residual" is the firm-year measure of the book-tax gap not attributable to total accruals as described in the text. The
various ratios scale components of compensation by total compensation for the top five executives as described in the text. "Governance
Index, 1998" is the index described in Gompers et al. (2003).
                                                                        Table 2

                                        Tax Sheltering and Managerial Compensation Structure

Dependent Variable:                                                                Tax Sheltering Residuals

                                               (1)                (2)                (3)                (4)                (5)                (6)

Constant                                       0.0112             0.0119             0.0069             0.0032             0.0803    **       0.0923    **

                                             (0.0075)           (0.0076)           (0.0073)           (0.0071)           (0.0365)           (0.0373)

Ratio of Value of Stock                       -0.0104 **                                                                  -0.0112 **
Option Grants to Total
                                             (0.0044)                                                                    (0.0044)
Compensation for Top 5
Executives

Ratio of Value of Stock                                          -0.0110 **
Option and Restricted Stock                                     (0.0046)
Grants to Total Compensation
for Top 5 Executives

Ratio of Value of Restricted                                                        -0.0086
Stock Grants to Total                                                              (0.0095)
Compensation for Top 5
Executives

Ratio of Value of Stock                                                                                 0.0181    ***                         0.0147    ***
Option Exercises to Total
                                                                                                      (0.0045)                              (0.0054)
Compensation for Top 5
Executives

Year Effects?                                   Y                  Y                  Y                  Y                  Y                  Y
Firm Fixed Effects?                             Y                  Y                  Y                  Y                  Y                  Y
Firm-Year Size Controls?                        N                  N                  N                  N                  Y                  Y
No. of Firms                                     1,381              1,381              1,381              1,381              1,374              1,374
No. of Obs.                                      6,816              6,816              6,816              6,816              6,743              6,743
R-Squared                                      0.3404             0.3405             0.3399             0.3421             0.3498             0.3504
Note: The dependent variable is the time-varying tax sheltering residual described in the text. All specifications include year and firm fixed effects. The
specifications in column 5 and 6 include controls for firm size as measured by the log value of sales, assets and market value. Each of the independent
variables measures a component of compensation for the top five executives of a firm in a given year as described in the text. The sample is drawn from
the merged Compustat and Execucomp databases. Robust standard errors that are clustered at the firm-level are presented in parentheses. ** and ***
denote significance at the 5% and 1% level, respectively.
                                                                                                 Table 3
                                                     Tax Sheltering, Managerial Compensation Structure and Firm Governance

Dependent Variable:                                                                                     Tax Sheltering Residuals

                                                   Panel A: Option Grants                                                                                Panel B: Option Exercises
                                      (1)               (2)              (3)              (4)                                                (5)              (6)               (7)              (8)

                                                                      Well-            Poorly-                                                                               Well-            Poorly-
                                   All Firms        All Firms        Governed         Governed                                            All Firms        All Firms        Governed         Governed
                                                                      Firms             Firms                                                                                Firms             Firms

Constant                              0.0782 *          0.0798 *         0.0684           0.0032         Constant                            0.0857 *          0.0838 *         0.0662 *         0.0971
                                     (0.0468)         (0.0467)         (0.0341)         (0.0071)                                           (0.0469)          (0.0471)         (0.0344)         (0.0683)

Ratio of Value of Stock               -0.0099 **       -0.0156 ***       0.0013          -0.0158 ***     Ratio of Value of Stock             0.0119 **         0.0195 ***      -0.0030           0.0202 ***
Option Grants to Total                                                                                   Option Exercises to Total
Compensation for Top 5               (0.0049)         (0.0061)         (0.0075)         (0.0063)         Compensation for Top 5            (0.0054)          (0.0069)         (0.0075)         (0.0072)
Executives                                                                                               Executives


Grant Ratio Interacted with                             0.0165 *                                         Exercise Ratio Interacted                            -0.0218 **
Dummy for Better                                      (0.0093)                                           with Dummy for Better                               (0.0094)
Governed Firms                                                                                           Governed Firms


Year Effects?                          Y                Y                 Y                Y             Year Effects?                        Y                Y                Y                 Y
Firm Fixed Effects?                    Y                Y                 Y                Y             Firm Fixed Effects?                  Y                Y                Y                 Y
Firm-Year Size Controls?               Y                Y                 Y                Y             Firm-Year Size Controls?             Y                Y                Y                 Y

No. of Firms                              943              943              317               626        No. of Firms                            943              943              317              626
No. of Obs.                             5,367            5,367            1,665             3,702        No. of Obs.                           5,367            5,367            1,665            3,702
R-Squared                             0.3149            0.3155           0.3447           0.3011         R-Squared                           0.3153            0.3165           0.3447           0.3026

Note: The dependent variable is the time-varying tax sheltering residual described in the text. All specifications include year effects, firm fixed effects and controls for firm size as measured by the log
value of sales, assets and market value. Each of the independent variables measures a component of compensation for the top five executives of a firm in a given year as described in the text. The sample is
drawn from the merged Compustat and Execucomp databases. The dummy for better governed firms is equal to one if the Governance Index is higher than 7 and zero otherwise. In columns 3 and 7, the
sample is restricted to firms with a Governance Index with a value lower than 7. In columns 4 and 8, the sample is restricted to firms with a Governance Index with a value higher than 7. Robust standard
errors that are clustered at the firm-level are presented in parentheses. *, ** and *** denote significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% level, respectively.
                                                               Table 4
Tax Sheltering, Managerial Compensation Structure and Firm Governance for Firms with Positive
                                      Taxable Income

Dependent Variable:                                                          Tax Sheltering Residuals

                                                         (1)                  (2)                  (3)                  (4)

                                                                                                Well-                Poorly-
                                                      All Firms            All Firms           Governed             Governed
                                                                                                Firms                 Firms

Constant                                                   0.0691               0.0718               0.1024              0.0560
                                                         (0.0471)             (0.0473)             (0.0862)            (0.0570)

Ratio of Value of Stock Option Grants to                  -0.0141 **           -0.2246 ***           0.0054             -0.0228 **
Total Compensation for Top 5 Executives
                                                         (0.0070)             (0.0086)             (0.0110)            (0.0089)


Grant Ratio Interacted with Dummy for                                           0.0264 **
Better Governed Firms                                                         (0.0129)



Year Effects?                                             Y                    Y                    Y                   Y
Firm Fixed Effects?                                       Y                    Y                    Y                   Y
Firm-Year Size Controls?                                  Y                    Y                    Y                   Y

No. of Firms                                                    694                  694                  211                 483
No. of Obs.                                                   3,883                3,883                1,078               2,805
R-Squared                                                  0.4011               0.4022               0.4387              0.3844

Note: The dependent variable is the time-varying tax sheltering residual described in the text. The sample is limited to those firm-
years with positive taxable income. All specifications include year effects, firm fixed effects and controls for firm size as measured
by the log value of sales, assets and market value. The independent variables measures a component of compensation for the top
five executives of a firm in a given year as described in the text. The sample is drawn from the merged Compustat and Execucomp
databases. The dummy for better governed firms is equal to one if the Governance Index is higher than 7 and zero otherwise. In
column 3, the sample is restricted to firms with a Governance Index with a value lower than 7. In column 4, the sample is
restricted to firms with a Governance Index with a value higher than 7. Robust standard errors that are clustered at the firm-level
are presented in parentheses. *, ** and *** denote significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% level, respectively.
