                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                RELIABILITY AND COMPETITIVE ELECTRICITY MARKETS

                                             Paul L. Joskow
                                               Jean Tirole

                                          Working Paper 10472
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w10472


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       May 2004




We are grateful to Claude Crampes, Richard Green, Stephen Holland, Bruno Jullien, Patrick Rey and the
participants at the IDEI-CEPR conference on “Competition and Coordination in the Electricity Industry,”
January 16–17, 2004, Toulouse and the ninth annual POWER conference, UC Berkeley, March 19, 2004, for
helpful discussions and comments. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and not necessarily
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2004 by Paul L. Joskow and Jean Tirole. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
Reliability and Competitive Electricity Markets
Paul L. Joskow and Jean Tirole
NBER Working Paper No. 10472
May 2004
JEL No. L1, L9, L5
                                         ABSTRACT

Despite all of the talk about "deregulation" of the electricity sector, a large number of non-market
mechanisms have been imposed on emerging competitive wholesale and retail markets. These
mechanisms include spot market price caps, operating reserve requirements, non-price rationing
protocols, and administrative protocols for managing system emergencies. Many of these
mechanisms have been carried over from the old regime of regulated monopoly and continue to be
justified as necessary responses to market imperfections of various kinds and engineering
requirements dictated by the special physical attributes of electric power networks. This paper seeks
to bridge the gap between economists focused on designing competitive market mechanisms and
engineers focused on the physical attributes and engineering requirements they perceive as being
needed for operating a reliable electric power system. The paper starts by deriving the optimal prices
and investment program when there are price-insensitive retail consumers, and their load serving
entities can choose any level of rationing they prefer contingent on real time prices. It then examines
the assumptions required for a competitive wholesale and retail market to achieve this optimal price
and investment program. The paper analyses the implications of relaxing several of these
assumptions. First, it analyzes the interrelationships between regulator-imposed price caps, capacity
obligations, and system operator procurement, dispatch and compensation arrangements. It goes on
to explore the implications of potential network collapses, the concomitant need for operating
reserve requirements and whether market prices will provide incentives for investments consistent
with these reserve requirement.
Paul L. Joskow                                         Jean Tirole
Department of Economics                                Institut d'Economie Industrielle
MIT                                                    Manufacture des Tabacs
E52-280B                                               Bureau MF529 - Bat. F
50 Memorial Drive                                      21 allees de Brienne
Cambridge, MA 02142                                    tirole@cict.fr
and NBER
pjoskow@mit.edu
1     Introduction

Despite all of the talk about “deregulation” of the electricity sector, there continue
to be a large number of non-market mechanisms that have been imposed on the
emerging competitive wholesale and retail electricity markets. These mechanisms
include: wholesale market price caps, capacity obligations placed on LSEs, frequency
regulation, operating reserve and other ancillary service requirements enforced by
the system operator, procurement obligations placed on system operators, protocols
for non-price rationing of demand to respond to “shortages”, and administrative
protocols for system operators’ management of system emergencies. Many of these
non-market mechanisms have been carried over from the old regulated regime with-
out much consideration of whether and how they might be replaced with market
mechanisms and of the eﬀects they may have on market behavior and performance
if they are not.
    In some cases the non-market mechanisms are argued to be justiﬁed by imper-
fections in the retail or wholesale markets: in particular, problems caused by the
inability of most retail customers to see and react to real time prices with legacy
meters, non-price rationing of demand, wholesale market power problems and im-
perfections in mechanisms adopted to mitigate these market power problems.
    Other mechanisms and requirements have been justiﬁed by what are perceived to
be special physical characteristics of electricity and electric power networks which
in turn lead to market failures that are unique to electricity. These include the
need to meet speciﬁc physical criteria governing network frequency, voltage and
stability that are thought to have public good attributes, the rapid speed with
which responses to unanticipated failures of generating and transmission equipment
must be accomplished to continue to meet these physical network attributes and
the possibility that market mechanisms cannot respond fast enough to achieve the



                                          2
network’s physical operating parameters under all states of nature.
       Much of the economic analysis of the behavior and performance of wholesale
and retail markets has either ignored these non-market mechanisms or failed to con-
sider them in a comprehensive fashion. There continues to be a lack of adequate
communication and understanding between economists focused on the design and
evaluation of alternative market mechanisms and network engineers focused on the
physical complexities of electric power networks and the constraints that these phys-
ical requirements may place on market mechanisms. The purpose of this paper and
of Joskow-Tirole (2004) is to start to bridge this gap.
       The institutional environment in which our analysis proceeds has competing
load serving entities (LSEs)1 that market electricity to residential, commercial and
industrial (“retail”) consumers. LSEs may be independent entities that purchase
delivery services from unaﬃliated transmission and distribution utilities or they
may be aﬃliates of these transmission and distribution utilities that compete with
unaﬃliated LSEs. Some retail consumers served by LSEs respond to real time
wholesale market prices, while others are on traditional meters which record only
their total consumption over some period of time (for instance, a quarter), and
therefore do not react to the real-time price. Retail consumers may be subject
to non-price rationing to balance supply and demand in real time. The wholesale
market is composed of competing generators who compete to sell power to LSEs.
The wholesale market may be perfectly competitive or characterized by market
power. Finally, there is an independent system operator (ISO) which is responsible
for operating the transmission network in real time to support the wholesale and
retail markets for power, including meeting certain network reliability and wholesale
market power mitigation criteria.2
   1
    Or in UK parlance “retail suppliers”.
   2
    The latter may include enforcing operating reserve and other operating reliability requirements,
enforcing longer term capacity obligations, procuring and dispatching resources to meet these



                                                 3
   Section 2 ﬁrst derives the optimal prices and investment program when there is
state contingent demand, at least some consumers do not react to real time prices,
but their LSE can choose any level of rationing it prefers contingent on real time
prices. In this model consumers are identical, possibly up to a proportionality fac-
tor, and therefore all have the same load proﬁle. While the latter signiﬁcantly
constrains the nature of consumer heterogeneity considered, it is consistent with the
existing literature (e.g., Borenstein-Holland, 2003). Joskow-Tirole (2004) analyzes
more complex characterizations of consumer heterogeneity in the presence of retail
competition. We then derive the competitive equilibrium under these assumptions
when there are competing LSEs that can oﬀer two part tariﬀs. This leads to a propo-
sition that extends the standard, welfare theorem to price-insensitive consumers and
rationing; this proposition serves as an important benchmark for evaluating a num-
ber of non-market obligations and regulatory mechanisms:
   The second best optimum (given the presence of price-insensitive consumers) can
be implemented by an equilibrium with retail and generation (wholesale) competition
provided that:
(a) The real time wholesale price accurately reﬂects the social opportunity cost of
generation.
(b) Rationing, if any, is orderly, and makes eﬃcient use of available generation.
(c) LSEs face the real time wholesale price for the aggregate consumption of the
retail customers for whom they are responsible.
(d) Consumers who can react fully to the real time price are not rationed. Further-
more, the LSEs serving consumers who cannot fully react to the real time price can
demand any level of rationing they prefer contingent on the real-time price.
(e) Consumers have the same load proﬁle (they are identical up to a scale factor).
   The assumptions underlying this benchmark proposition are obviously very strong:
requirements, and managing system emergencies that might lead the network to collapse.



                                              4
(a) market power on the one hand, and regulator-imposed price caps and other policy
interventions on the other hand create diﬀerences between the real time wholesale
market price and the social opportunity cost of generation; (b) network collapses,
unlike say rolling blackouts, have systemic consequences, in that some available gen-
eration cannot be used to satisfy load; (c) LSEs do not face the real time price for
their customers if these customers are load proﬁled; (d) price sensitive consumers
may be rationed along with everyone else that is physically connected to the same
controllable distribution circuit; and, relatedly, LSEs generally cannot demand any
level of rationing they desire; (e) consumer heterogeneity is more complex than a
scaling factor. This paper examines the implications of relaxing assumptions (a)
and (b), while Joskow-Tirole (2004), that focuses on retail competition, investigates
the failure of assumptions (c), (d), and (e).
   Section 3 studies the implications of distorted wholesale prices. It ﬁrst considers
the case where there is a competitive supply of base load generation, market power
in the supply of peak load investment and production, and a price cap is applied
that constrains the wholesale market price to be lower than the competitive price
during peak periods (section 3.1). This creates a shortage of peaking capacity in
the long run when there is market power in the supply of peaking capacity. We
show that capacity obligations and associated capacity prices have the potential to
restore investment incentives by compensating generators ex ante for the shortfall
in earnings that that they will incur due to the price cap. Indeed, with up to three
states of nature (and up to two states of nature where generators have market power),
the Ramsey optimum can be achieved despite the presence of market power through
a combination of a price cap and capacity obligations provided that : (i) both peak
and base load generating capacity are eligible to meet LSE capacity obligations
and receive the associated capacity price, and (ii) the demand of all consumers,
including price-sensitive consumers, counts for determining capacity obligations and


                                          5
the capacity prices are reﬂected in the prices paid by all retail consumers. With
more than three states of nature, a combination of spot wholesale market price caps
and capacity obligations will not achieve the Ramsey optimum unless market power
is only a problem during peak demand periods. Thus, the regulator faces a tradeoﬀ
between alleviating market power oﬀ-peak, if it is a problem, through a strict price
cap, and providing the proper peak investment incentives, and is further unable
to provide price-sensitive consumers with the appropriate economic signals. The
intuition for this result is that when more than two prices are distorted by market
power the optimality of a competitive equilibrium cannot be restored with only two
instruments — a price cap and a capacity obligation.
      Section 3.2 then examines the eﬀects of two types of behavior by an ISO that
empirical analysis has suggested may distort prices and investment (Patton 2002).
The ﬁrst involves ineﬃcient or “out-of-merit” dispatch of resources procured by the
ISO. Such dispatch in the short run depresses oﬀ-peak prices and in the long term
leads to an ineﬃcient substitution of base load units by peakers. The second involves
the recovery of the costs of resources acquired by the ISO through an uplift charge
spread over prices in all demand states or else in only peak demand states. Whether
the uplift is socialized (spread over demand states) or not, large ISO purchases
discourage the build up of baseload capacity and depresses the peak price. For small
purchases, oﬀ-peak capacity decreases under a socialized uplift, and peak capacity
decreases under an uplift that applies solely to peak energy consumption.
      Section 4 derives the implications of network collapses and the concomitant need
for network support services. As suggested above, network collapses diﬀer from other
forms of energy shortages and rationing in a fundamental way. While scarcity makes
available generation (extremely) valuable under orderly rationing, it makes it val-
ueless when the network collapses.3 Hence, system collapses, unlike, say, controlled
  3
      An analogy may help understand the distinction between orderly rationing and a collapse:



                                               6
rolling blackouts that shed load to match demand with available capacity, create a
rationale for network support services with public goods characteristics. We derive
the optimal level for these network support services, and discuss the implementation
of the Ramsey allocation through a combination of operating reserve obligations and
market mechanisms.


2       A benchmark decentralization result
2.1     Model4

There is a continuum of states of nature or periods i ∈ [0, 1]. The frequency of state
                         1
i is denoted fi (and so     fi di = 1). Let E [·] denote the expectation operator with
                            0
respect to the density fi .5 We assume that the (unrationed) demand functions of
                                                         i , are increasing in i.6
price-insensitive and price-sensitive consumers, Di and D

Price-insensitive consumers are on traditional meters that record only their aggre-
gate consumption over all states of nature, and therefore do not react to the RTP.7
Consumers are homogeneous, up to possibly a scaling factor, i.e., they have the
same load proﬁle. [Note that if consumers diﬀer in the scale of their demand, this
scale can be inferred from total consumption and need not be known by the social
planner or the LSEs.] Without loss of generality they are oﬀered a two-part tariﬀ,
with a ﬁxed fee A and a marginal price p. Their demand function in the absence
when a mattress manufacturer fails, buyers of mattresses may experience delays; competitors
however do not suﬀer and may even gain from the failure. By contrast, a farmer whose cows have
contracted the mad cow disease may spoil the entire market for beef.
   4
     See Turvey and Anderson (1977, Chapter 14) for an analysis of peak period pricing and in-
vestment under uncertainty when prices are ﬁxed ex ante and all demand is subject to rationing
with a constant cost of unserved energy when demand exceeds available capacity.
                1
   5
     E [xi ] =     xi fi di.
              0
    6
     In this paper, we do not allow intertemporal transfers in demand (demand in state i depends
only on the price faced by the consumer in state i). We could allow such transfers, at the cost of
increased notational complexity.
   7
     As in Joskow-Tirole (2004), we could also introduce consumers on real-time meters who do
not monitor the real-time price. This would not aﬀect Proposition 1 below.



                                                7
of rationing is denoted Di (p), with Di increasing in i. We let αi ≤ 1 denote the
fraction of their demand satisﬁed in state i. As αi decreases, the fraction of load
interrupted (1 − αi ) increases. The alphas may be exogenous (say, determined by
the system operator); alternatively, one could envision situations in which the LSEs
would aﬀect the alphas either by demanding that their consumers not be served as
the wholesale price reaches a certain level, or conversely by bidding for priority in
situations of rationing.8 We let Di (p, αi ) denote their expected consumption in that
state, and Si (p, αi ) their realized gross surplus, with

                      Di (p, 1) = Di (p) and Si (p, 1) = Si (Di (p)) ,

where Si is the standard gross surplus function (with Si = p). We assume that Si
is concave in αi on [0, 1]: more severe rationing involves higher relative deadweight
losses.
    In the separable case, the demand Di takes the multiplicative form αi Di (p) and
the surplus takes the separable form Si (Di (p), αi ). More generally however, the
consumer may adjust her demand to the prospect of being potentially rationed.9
    We will also assume that lost opportunities to consume do not create value to
the consumer. Namely, the net surplus

                                     Si (p, αi ) − pDi (p, αi )

is maximized at αi = 1, that is, when it is equal to Si (Di (p)) − pDi (p).
    Let us now discuss speciﬁc cases to make this abstract formalism more concrete,
and note that the social cost of shortages depends on how fast demand and supply
    8
      The latter of course assumes that the system operator can discriminate in its dispatch to LSEs
in each state, including in emergency situations that require the system operator to act quickly to
avoid a cascading blackout.
    9
      A case in point is voltage reduction. When the system operator reduces voltage by, say, 5%,
lights become dimmer, motors run at a slower pace, and so on. A prolonged voltage reduction,
though, triggers a response: consumers turn on more lights, motor speeds are adjusted. Another
example of non-separability will be provided below.


                                                 8
conditions change relative to the reactivity of consumers.10
      When the timing of the blackout is perfectly anticipated and blackouts are rolling
across geographical areas, then αi denotes the population percentage of geographical
areas that are not blacked out (and thus getting full surplus Si (Di (p))), and 1 − αi
the fraction of consumers living in dark areas (and thus getting no surplus from
electricity). With perfectly anticipated blackouts, it makes sense to assume that

                   Si (p, αi ) = αi Si (Di (p))   and Di (p, αi ) = αi Di (p) .

      An unexpected blackout may have worse consequences than a planned cessation
of consumption. For example, a consumer may prefer using the elevator to the stairs.
If the outage is foreseen, then the consumer takes the stairs (does not “consume”
the elevator) and gets zero surplus from the elevator. By contrast, the consumer
obtains a negative surplus from the elevator if the outage is unforeseen. Similarly,
consumers would have planned an activity requiring no use of electricity (going to the
beach rather than using the washing machine, drive their car or ride their bicycle
rather than use the subway) if they had anticipated the blackout; workers could
have planned time oﬀ, etc. More generally, with adequate warning consumers can
take advance actions to adapt to the consequences of an interruption in electricity
supplies. This is one reason why distribution companies notify consumers about
planned outages required for maintenance of distribution equipment.

Opportunity cost example: Suppose that the consumer chooses between an electricity-
consuming activity (taking the elevator, using electricity to run an equipment) and
an electricity-free approach (taking the stairs, using gas to run the equipment). The
latter yields known surplus S > 0. The surplus associated with the former depends
not only on the marginal price p he faces for electricity, but also on the probabil-
ity 1 − αi of not being served. One can envision three information structures: (a)
 10
      This observation is made for example in EdF (1994, 1995).


                                                  9
The consumer knows whether he will be served (the elevator is always deactivated
through communication just before the outage); this is the foreseen rolling blackouts
case just described. (b) The consumer knows the state-contingent probability αi of
being served, but he faces uncertainty about whether the outage will actually occur
(he knows that the period is a peak one and he is more likely to get stuck in the
elevator). (c) The consumer has no information about the probability of outage and
bases his decision on E [αi ] (he just knows the average occurrence of immobiliza-
tions in elevators). Letting Sin (p) ≡ max {Si (D) − pD} denote the net surplus in
the absence of rationing; then
    Si (p, αi ) − pDi (p, αi ) =
                                    αSn
                                     i i   (p) + (1 − αi ) S   in case (a)
                                                      
                                    max αi Sin (p) , S         in case (b)

                                    αi Sin (p)                 in case (c)

(provided that Sin (p) ≥ S and, in case (c), that E [αi ] is high enough so that the
consumer chooses the electricity-intensive approach).

   The value of lost load (VOLL) is equal to the marginal surplus associated with
a unit increase in supply to these consumers, and is here given by
                                                   ∂Si
                                                   ∂αi
                                    VOLLi        =     ,
                                                   ∂Di
                                                   ∂αi
since a unit increase in supply allows an increase in αi equal to 1/ [∂Di /∂αi ]. When
Di = αi Di , then
                                                    ∂Si
                                                    ∂αi
                                    VOLLi         =     .
                                                    Di
For example, with perfectly anticipated blackouts, the value of lost load is equal to
the average gross consumer surplus. It is higher for unanticipated blackouts than
for blackouts that give consumers time to adapt their behavior in anticipation of


                                             10
being curtailed.

Price-sensitive consumers are modeled in exactly the same way and obey the exact
same assumptions as price-insensitive consumers. The only diﬀerence is that they
face the real time price and react to it. Let pi denote the state-contingent price
chosen by the social planner; although we will later show that it is optimal to let
price-sensitive consumers face the RTP pi (so pi = pi ), we must at this stage allow
the central planner to introduce a wedge between the two prices. In state i their
                         i (
expected consumption is D         i ) and their gross surplus is 
                             pi , α                               Si (    i ), where α
                                                                      pi , α           i is
the rationing / interruptibility factor for price-sensitive consumers.

The supply side is described as a continuum of investment opportunities indexed by
the marginal cost of production c. Let I(c) denote the investment cost of a plant
producing one unit of electricity at marginal cost c. There are constant returns
to scale for each technology. We denote by G(c) ≥ 0 the cumulative distribution
function of plants.11 So, the total investment cost is
                                               ∞
                                                    I(c)dG(c).
                                            0


The ex post production cost is
                       ∞                                     ∞
                            cui (c)dG(c),       where              ui (c)dG(c) = Qi .
                    0                                      0


where the utilisation rate ui (c) belongs to [0, 1].

Remark : The uncertainty is here generated on the demand side. We could add an
availability factor λ (a fraction λ ∈ [0, 1] of plants is available, where λ is given by
some cdf Hi (λ)) as in Section 4 below. This would not alter the conclusions.
  11
    This distribution may not admit a continuous density. For example, only a discrete set of
equipments may be selected at the optimum.




                                                     11
2.2     Optimum

A social planner chooses a marginal price p for price-insensitive consumers, and (for
each state i) marginal prices pi for price-sensitive consumers, the extents of rationing
       i , utilisation rates ui (·) and the investment plan G(·) so as to solve:
αi and α
                                                                 ∞                            ∞
                            
        max E Si (p, αi ) + Si (    i ) −
                                pi , α                                  ui (c)cdG(c) −                 I(c)dG(c)
                                                                0                              0



s.t.
                         ∞
                                                           i (
                              ui (c)dG(c) ≥ Di (p, αi ) + D         i )
                                                               pi , α                      for all i.
                      0

Letting pi fi di denote the multiplier of the resource constraint in state i, the ﬁrst-
order conditions yield:

a) Eﬃcient dispatching:

                    ui (c) = 1 for c < pi                     and ui (c) = 0 for c > pi .                          (1)

b) Price-sensitive consumers:12

              (i)          i = D
                           D     i (pi )

              (ii)         i = 1.
                           α                                                                                       (2)
  12
    To prove condition (2), apply ﬁrst the observation that by deﬁnition Di (pi , α
                                                                                  i ) is the net-
surplus-maximizing quantity for a consumer paying price pi for a given probability α  i of being
served; and second our assumption that lost opportunities don’t create value:
                         
                         Si (
                             pi , α           i (
                                   i ) − pi D         i )
                                                  pi , α       ≤                    i (pi , α
                                                                          i ) − pi D
                                                                Si (pi , α                    i )


                                                              ≤ Si D               i (pi ) .
                                                                     i (pi ) − pi D

Hence, price sensitive consumers should not be rationed and should face price pi .




                                                              12
c) Price-insensitive consumers:
                               
                   ∂Si      ∂Di
       (i)    E        − pi       = 0.
                   ∂p        ∂p

                            ∂Si
                            ∂αi
          (ii)   Either         = pi      or αi = 1.                                              (3)
                            ∂Di
                            ∂αi
d) Investment:
                                                    
                 Either       I(c) = E max pi − c, 0                 or dG(c) = 0.                (4)


       These ﬁrst-order conditions can be interpreted in the following way: condition
(1) says that only plants whose marginal cost is smaller than the dual price pi are
dispatched in state i. Condition (2) implies that price-sensitive consumers are never
rationed and that their consumption decisions are guided by the state-contingent
dual price. Condition (3) yields the following formula for the price p = p∗ provided
that price-insensitive consumers are never rationed (αi ≡ 1):

                                    E [(p∗ − pi ) Di (p∗ )] = 0.                                 (5)

       In case of rationing (αi < 1 for some i), its implications depend on the eﬃciency
of rationing; condition (3) in the separable case yields the following formula:
                                                 
                                  ∂Si           
                            E         − αi pi Di (p) = 0.
                                  ∂Di
For example, for perfectly foreseen outages, it boils down to:13

                                   E [(p − pi ) [αi Di (p)]] = 0.                                (6)
  13
    Suppose that the regulator imposes an artiﬁcial constraint that retail customers not be vol-
untarily shut oﬀ (one may have in mind a small fraction of such customers, so that the wholesale
prices is not aﬀected). The Ramsey price would then be p∗ . Under the reasonable assumption that
αi decreases and (pi − p) |Di | increases with the state of nature and decreases with p, (6) yields a
corrected Ramsey price p∗∗ :
                                               p∗∗ < p∗ .
Intuitively, the impact of p on peak demand is reduced by rationing, and so there is less reason to
keep the marginal price high.


                                                 13
Condition (3ii) implies that in all cases of rationing

                                         VOLLi = pi .

That is, generators and LSEs should all face the value of lost load.
   Finally, condition (4) is the standard free-entry condition for investment in gen-
eration.

2.3     Competitive equilibrium

Let us now assume that price-sensitive and -insensitive consumers are served by
load serving entities (LSEs), and that LSEs face the real time wholesale price for
the aggregate consumption of the retail customers for whom they are responsible.
   The following proposition shows that, despite rationing and price-insensitive con-
sumptions, retail competition is consistent with Ramsey optimality provided that
ﬁve assumptions are satisﬁed:

Proposition 1 The second-best optimum (that is, the socially optimal allocation
given the existence of price-insensitive retail consumers) can be implemented by an
equilibrium with retail and generation competition provided that:

   • the RTP reﬂects the social opportunity cost of generation,

   • available generation is made use of during rationing periods,

   • load-serving entities face the RTP,
  By contrast, with imperfectly foreseen outages,
                                          ∂Si
                                              > αi p,
                                          ∂Di

and (3) yields a price above p∗∗ . The increase in outage cost due to unforeseeability suggests
raising the marginal price to retail consumers in order to suppress demand.




                                               14
    • price-sensitive consumers are not rationed; furthermore, while price-insensitive
      consumers may be rationed, their load-serving entity can demand any level of
      state-contingent rationing αi (pi ),14

    • consumers are homogeneous (possibly up to a scaling factor).


Proof : Suppose that competing retailers (LSEs) can oﬀer to price-insensitive con-
tracts {A, p, α· }, that is two-part tariﬀs with ﬁxed fee A and marginal price p cum a
state-contingent extent of rationing αi . Retail competition induces the maximization
of the joint surplus of the retailer and the consumer:

                               max E [Si (p, αi ) − pi Di (p, αi )] .
                              {p,α· }


The ﬁrst-order conditions for this program are nothing but conditions (3) above.
The rest of the economy is standard, and so the fundamental theorem of welfare
economics applies.
    The assumptions underlying Proposition 1 are very strong: In practice, (a) mar-
ket power on the one hand, and price caps and other policy interventions on the
other hand create departures of RTPs from the social opportunity cost of generation;
and (b) available generation does not serve load during blackouts associated with a
network collapse; (c) LSEs do not face the RTP for the power they purchase in the
wholesale market if their customers are load proﬁled; (d) technological constraints in
the distribution network imply that price-sensitive consumers may be rationed along
with everyone else; relatedly, LSEs cannot generally demand any level of rationing
they desire; (e) consumer heterogeneity is more complex than a simple scaling factor.
The paper investigates the consequences of the ﬁrst two observations.

Remark : Chao-Wilson (1987) also emphasize the use of bids for priority servicing.
  14
     Here the state and the price are mapped one-to-one. More generally, they may not be (the
state of nature involves unavailability of plants, say). The proposition still holds as long as LSEs
can select a state-contingent αi .


                                                15
Chao and Wilson show that when consumers are heterogeneous and have unit and
state-independent demands, the ﬁrst-best (hence rationing free) allocation can be
implemented equivalently through a spot market or an ex ante priority servicing
auction. Proposition 1 by contrast considers homogeneous consumers and introduces
price insensitive consumers; accordingly, markets are here only second-best optimal
and the second-best optimal allocation involves actual rationing.

2.4     Two-state example

There are two states: oﬀ-peak (i = 1) and peak (i = 2), with frequencies f1 and f2
(f1 + f2 = 1); price insensitive retail customers have demands D1 (p) and D2 (p) with
associated gross surpluses (in the absence of rationing) S1 (D1 (p)) and S2 (D2 (p)).
                                                                         1 (p) and
Price-sensitive customers (who react to real-time pricing) have demands D
 2 (p), with associated gross surpluses (in the absence of rationing) S1 D
D                                                                           1 (p) and

S2 D
     2 (p) . We assume that rationing may occur only at peak (α1 = 1 , α2 ≤ 1).

   A unit of baseload capacity costs I1 and allows production at marginal cost c1 .
Let K1 denote the baseload capacity. The unit cost of installing peaking capacity is
I2 . The marginal operating cost of the peakers is c2 .

Social optimum: Letting p∗ denote the (constant) price faced by retail consumers,
                                                              
                                              ∗           
the (second-best) social optimal solves over p , α2 , D1 , D2

                                                   
                                       1 − c 1 K 1 − I1 K 1
   max W = max f1 S1 (D1 (p∗ )) + S1 D
                                                               
                        ∗            
               +f2 S2 (p , α2 ) + S2 D2 − c1 K1 − c2 K2 − I2 K2
where

                                    1
                    K1 ≡ D1 (p∗ ) + D                                             (7)


                                                                 
                    K2 ≡                       2 − D1 (p∗ ) + D
                              D2 (p∗ , α2 ) + D                1                 (8)


                                          16
   Applying the general analysis yields (provided that the peakers’ marginal cost
c2 weakly exceeds the oﬀ-peak price p1 ):
Either Si = pi or D i = 0,                                                        (2’i)
                                          
         ∗                   ∂S2      ∂D2
   f1 (p − p1 ) D1 + f2           − p2       = 0,                                    (3’i)
                              ∂p        ∂p
and
     f1 (p1 − c1 ) + f2 (p2 − c1 ) = I1
                                                                                     (4’i)
     f2 (p2 − c2 ) = I2 .

   Note that the free entry investment conditions imply that the peak price exceeds
the marginal operating cost of peaking capacity in equilibrium.

Proposition 2 Rationing (α2 < 1) of price-insensitive consumers may be optimal.


Proof : With foreseen rolling blackouts, S2 (p∗ , α2 ) = α2 S2 (D2 (p∗ )) and so rationing
is desirable if and only if S2 (D2 (p∗ )) < p2 D2 (p∗ ), that is intuitively when the peak
price is high. Suppose for example that f2 is small (infrequent peak ); then from (4’)
f2 p2  I2 , and p1 − c1  I1 − I2 . If furthermore demand is linear and D1 = D2 , and
α2 = 1, p∗  p1 + I2 = I1 + c1 from (3’i). So p∗ remains bounded, and S2 (D2 (p∗ ))
is indeed smaller than p2 D2 (p∗ ), so rationing is optimal.
   Intuitively, rationing serves to re-create some price sensitivity of the consumption
of consumers on traditional meters. For example, for infrequent peaks, the peak price
goes to inﬁnity and so the discrepancy between the true price and the price paid by
retail consumers is too large to make it socially optimal to serve these consumers.




                                            17
3        Price distortions: capacity obligations and ISO
         procurement
3.1       Price caps and capacity obligations

A capacity obligation requires an LSE to contract for enough capacity to meet its
peak demand (plus a reserve margin in a world with uncertain equipment outages
and demand ﬂuctuations). Capacity obligations may take at least two forms. One
requires LSEs to forward contract with generators to make their capacity available
to the ISO during peak demand periods, leaving the price for any energy supplied
by this capacity15 to be determined ex post in the spot market. Alternatively, the
capacity obligations could require forward contracting for both capacity and the
price of any energy (or operating reserves) supplied by that capacity during peak
hours.16
       Proposition 1 shows that rationing alone does not create a rationale for capacity
obligations. Rather, there must be some reason why the spot price does not fully
adjust to reﬂect supply and demand conditions and diﬀers from the correct economic
signal. Leaving aside procurement by the ISO for the moment, we can look in three
directions. For this purpose, and like in section 2.4, we specialize the model in most
of this section to two states of nature.

Market power in the wholesale market
       The regulator may impose a price cap (p2 ≤ pmax ) on wholesale power prices,
which in turn are reﬂected directly in retail prices given perfect competition among
  15
     Or in a world with uncertain equipment outages and demand ﬂuctuations the prices for oper-
ating reserves provided by this capacity as well.
  16
     Another approach is for the system operator to purchase reliability contracts from generators
on behalf of the load. Vazquez et al (2001) have designed a more sophisticated capacity obligations
scheme, in which the system operator purchases reliability contracts that are a combination of a
ﬁnancial call option with a high predetermined strike price and an explicit penalty for non-delivery.
Such capacity obligations are bundled with a hedging instrument, as the consumer purchasing such
a call option receives the diﬀerence between the spot price and the strike price whenever the former
exceeds the latter.



                                                 18
retailers, in order to prevent generators from exercising market power in the whole-
sale market during peak demand periods.
       Suppose that:

       • baseload investment and production is competitive (as earlier),

       • peakload investment and production are supplied by an n-ﬁrm Cournot oligopoly.

       We have in mind a relatively short horizon (certainly below 3 years), so that
new peaking investment cannot be built in response to strategic withholding (in
this interpretation, I2 is probably best viewed as the cost of maintaining existing
peakers). The timing has two stages: First, ﬁrms choose the capacity that they will
make available to the market. Second, they supply this capacity in the market for
energy. We leave aside rationing for simplicity.
       In the absence of a price cap, an oligopolist in the peaking capacity market
chooses the amount of capacity to make available to the market K2i so as to solve:
                                                                  
                                                                j 
                                               2 (p2 ) − K1 −
           max [f2 (p2 − c2 ) − I2 ] D2 (p) + D                 K2    .
                  p2
                                                                     j=i


                 2 D
                ∂D     2
Letting η2 ≡ −     /     denote the elasticity of demand of the price sensitive cus-
                ∂p2 p2
tomers, one obtains the following Lerner formula:17
                    
                  I2                                                      
      p2 − c2 +                  D             1 (p1 ) + [D2 (p) − D1 (p)]
                                   2 (p2 ) − D
                  f2       1                                                > 0,
                        =                                                          (9)
             p2           n
                           η2                      D 2 (p2 )

or,
       p2 = p C          C
              2 , where p2 is the Cournot price.
  17
       The other equilibrium conditions are:
                                     K1 = D1 (p) + D     1 (p1 ),
                                     f1 p1 + f2 p2 = c1 + I1 ,
                              and
                                     E [(p − pi ) Di (p)] = 0.




                                                       19
       As expected, the oligopolistic relative markup decreases with the number of ﬁrms
and with the elasticity of demand of price-sensitive consumers, and decreases when
price-insensitive consumers become price-sensitive.18
       A price cap pmax = p∗2 = c2 +(I2 /f2 ) restores the Ramsey optimum. By contrast,
a price cap creates a shortage of peakers whenever pmax < p∗2 .19
       Let us now show that (i) with two states of nature, the Ramsey optimum can
nevertheless be attained through capacity obligations even if the price cap is set too
low, and (ii) with three states of nature, the combination of a price cap and capacity
obligations restores the Ramsey optimum provided that the price cap is set at the
competitive level in the lowest-demand state in which there is market power.
       With two states of nature and a price cap that is set too low, to get the same level
of investment and production in the second best as in the competitive equilibrium,
the oligopolists must receive a capacity price pK satisfying

                                                      
                                 I2 − pK = f2 pmax − c2 .

[We assume that, as in PJM, the ﬁrm must supply K2 ex post if requested to do so,
and so ex post withholding of supplies is not an issue.]
Note that
                                     pK + f2 pmax = f2 p∗2

and so
                                              
                         I1 − pK = f2 pmax − c1 + f1 (p1 − c1 ) ,
  18
     Through the installation of a communication system, say. Because price-sensitivity reduces
the consumption diﬀerential between peak and oﬀ peak, the numerator on the right-hand side of
                    2 increases) as some more consumers become price-sensitive.
(9) decreases (and D
  19
     The simple two-state example analyzed here assumes that during peak periods the price cap
has been set below p∗2 to characterize the more general case in which the price cap is, on average,
lower than the competitive market price. If the price cap were set high enough to ensure that
pmax = p∗2 it would not lead to shortages of peaking capacity. However, the $1000/MWh (or
lower) price caps that are now used in the U.S. appear to us to be signiﬁcantly lower than the
VOLL in some high demand states.




                                                20
so incentives for baseload production are unchanged, provided that oﬀ-peak plants
are made eligible for capacity payments.20
       There are at least four potential problems that may result from a policy of
applying binding price caps to the price of energy sold in the wholesale spot market:

• The price-sensitive customers then consume too much:                        They consume
 2 (pmax ) at peak. The price paid by all retail consumers must also include the
D
price of capacity pK in order to restore proper incentives on the demand side.

• The signal for penalizing a failure to deliver is lost: The ISO no longer has a
measure of the social cost associated with a supplier’s failure to deliver (pmax is an
underestimate of this cost). Similarly, there is no objective penalty for those LSEs
that underpredict their peak demand and are short of capacity obligations.21

• Ex ante monopoly behavior : If one just lets the oligopolists choose the number of
capacity contracts q2i , then the oligopolists are likely to restrict the number of these
contracts. Actually, in the absence of price-insensitive consumers and assuming
that the number of generators is the same (n) in the capacity and wholesale spot
markets,22 one can show a neutrality result: The outcome with ex post price cap and
ex ante capacity obligation is the same as that with no price cap and no capacity
obligation. The oligopolists just exploit their monopoly power ex ante.
                                                  pK
    To see this, note that consumers must pay        + pmax per unit of peak con-
                                                  f2
sumption. Oligopolist i therefore chooses to oﬀer an amount q2i of capacity contracts
  20
     Note that in New England, New York and PJM, all generating capacity meeting certain relia-
bility criteria counts as ICAP capacity and can receive ICAP payments.
  21
     In either case, there are then more than two states or nature (but see below the remark on
idiosyncratic shocks).
  22
     The ex ante market might be more competitive than the ex post market, in which capacity
constraints are binding (this is the view taken for example in Chao-Wilson 2003). If so, how much
more competitive depends on the horizon. Competition in peaking generation may be more intense
3 years ahead than 6 months ahead, and a fortiori a day ahead.




                                               21
solving
                                                                        
                     max                                       
     max           f2 p    − c 2 + p K − I2 D  2 pK + pmax − K1 −      q2j   .
      pK                                          f2               j=i


The ﬁrst-order condition is the same as (9), with

                                     pK
                                        + pmax = pC
                                                  2.
                                     f2

The analysis with price-insensitive consumers is more complex, because the oligopolists
can through the capacity market aﬀect the price p oﬀered by LSEs to price-insensitive
consumers and thereby the latter’s peak consumption, while they took D2 (p) as given
in our earlier analysis of spot markets.
   An issue involving the nature of the contract supporting the capacity obligation
has become somewhat confused in the policy discussions about capacity obligations.
If the contract establishes an ex ante price for the right to call on a speciﬁed quantity
of generating capacity in the future but the price for the energy to be supplied ex
post is not speciﬁed in the forward contract, then, as shown above, the contracts
supporting the capacity obligation are unlikely to be eﬀective in mitigating market
power unless the market for such contracts is more competitive than the spot market.
If the capacity obligation is met with a contract that speciﬁes both the capacity price
and the energy supply price ex ante then such forward contracts can mitigate market
power even if the forward market is no more competitive than the spot market.
   It is well known that when generators have forward contract positions that spec-
ify the price at which they are committed to sell electricity their incentives to exercise
market power in the spot market are reduced (Wolak 2000, Green 1999). For ex-
ample, if a generator has contracted forward to sell all of its capacity at a ﬁxed
price pf in each hour for the next three years it receives no beneﬁt from withholding
output from the spot market to drive up prices to a level greater than pf . Indeed, in
this case withholding output to drive up prices would reduce the generator’s proﬁt

                                            22
since it would now have to buy enough power to make up for the supplies from the
capacity it withheld at an inﬂated price.
    A more controversial issue is whether and under what conditions (risk sharing
considerations aside) a generator with market power in the spot market would enter
into forward contracts with an overall price level lower than what they could expect
to realize by not engaging in forward contracting and exercising market power in
the spot market. That is, why aren’t the beneﬁts of any market power generators
expect to realize in the spot market reﬂected in the forward contract prices they
would agree to sign voluntarily as well? There has been a considerable amount of
theoretical research that supports the view that except in the monopoly case forward
markets will be more competitive than spot markets for electricity. Relevant papers
include Allaz (1992), Allaz-Vila (1993), Green (1999), Newbery (1998), and Chao-
Wilson (2003).

• A capacity payment is an insuﬃcient instrument with more than three states of
nature. The capacity payment pK should compensate for the revenue shortfall (rela-
tive to the socially optimal price) created by the price cap at peak. With many states
of nature and many means of production (as in section 2.2), the capacity payment
can still compensate for the expected revenue shortfall for peakers and therefore for
non-peakers as well if the price cap corrects for market power at peak. However, the
price cap then fails to properly correct market power just below peak. Conversely,
a price cap can correct for an arbitrary number of periods/ state of nature in which
there is market power, provided that the plants be dispatchable in order to qualify
for capacity obligations;23 but, it then fails to ensure cost recovery for the peakers.
To see this, suppose that i ∈ [0, 1] as earlier, and that there is market power for
  23
     The dispatching requirement comes from the fact that (with more than three states) the price
cap may need to be lower than the marginal cost of some units that are dispatched in the Ramsey
optimum. Also, note that the ISO must be able to rank-order plants by marginal cost in order to
avoid ineﬃcient dispatching.



                                               23
i ≥ i0 . The price cap must be set so that:

                                       pmax = p∗i .
                                                 0


Cost recovery for plants that in the Ramsey optimum operate if and only if i ≥ i0
requires that:
                                                             
                             pK = E (p∗i − pmax ) 1Ii ≥ i0

(where 1Ii ≥ i0 = 1 if i ≥ i0 and 0 otherwise). But then a higher marginal cost
plant, that should operate when i ≥ k > i0 over -recoups its investment as:
                                                         
                             pK > E (p∗i − pmax ) 1Ii ≥ k .

Similarly, the combination of a price cap and a capacity payment cannot provide the
proper signals in all states of nature to price-sensitive consumers, if there are more
than three states. With three states (i = 1, 2, 3), though, the price cap can be set
at p∗2 . Then f3 (p∗3 − pmax ) = pK implies that f2 (p∗2 − pmax ) + f3 (p∗3 − pmax ) = pK .
   This reasoning has a standard “instruments vs targets” ﬂavor. When more than
two prices are distorted by market power (which, incidentally, also would have been
the case with three states of nature, had we assumed that none of the markets
was competitive), two instruments, namely a price cap and a capacity price, cannot
restore optimality of the competitive equilibrium.

Remark : We have considered only aggregate uncertainty. However, a price-sensitive
industrial consumer (or an undiversiﬁed LSE) further faces idiosyncratic uncertainty.
A potential issue then is that while the capacity payment can supply the consumer
with a proper average incentive to consume during peak (say, when there are two
aggregate states), it implies that the consumer will overconsume for low idiosyncratic
demand (as she faces a “low” price pmax at the margin) and underconsumes in high
states of idiosyncratic demand (provided that penalties for exceeding the capacity
obligation are stiﬀ). This problem can however be avoided, provided that consumers

                                            24
regroup to iron out idiosyncratic shocks (in a mechanism similar to that of “bubbles”
in emission trading programs, or to the reserve sharing arrangements that existed
prior to the restructuring of electricity systems).24

Proposition 3 Capacity obligations have the potential to restore investment incen-
tives by compensating generators ex ante for the shortfall in earnings that they will
incur due to the price cap. Suppose that baseload generation is competitive:
(i) With at most three states of nature (and hence at most two states of nature with
market power), the Ramsey optimum can be achieved despite the presence of market
power through a combination of price cap and capacity obligations, provided that

        • oﬀ-peak plants are eligible to satisfy LSE capacity obligations and to receive
          capacity payments,

        • all consumers (including price-sensitive ones) are subject to the capacity obli-
          gations, and they pay the applicable capacity prices.

(ii) With more than three states of nature (and more than two states of nature with
market power), a combination of a price cap and capacity obligations is in gen-
eral inconsistent with Ramsey optimality. The regulator faces a trade-oﬀ between
alleviating market power oﬀ peak through a strict price cap and not overincentiviz-
ing peakers; and is further unable to provide price-sensitive consumers with proper
economic signals in all states of nature.


Time inconsistency / political economy
        (Coming back to perfect competition and two states of nature), suppose that the
regulator imposes an unannounced price cap, pmax < p∗2 , once K2 has been sunk.
A regulatory rule that sets a price cap equal to the marginal operating cost of the
   24
        The consumers that regroup within a bubble must then design an internal market (with price
p∗2 )   in order to induce an internally eﬃcient use of their global capacity obligations.



                                                 25
peaking unit with the highest marginal cost is an example. Such a rule precludes
recovery of the scarcity rents needed to provide appropriate incentives for investment
in peaking capacity. Then one would want a capacity payment to oﬀset insuﬃcient
incentives:
                                                  
                                  pK = f2 p∗ − pmax .

The second best is then restored subject to the caveats enunciated in the previous
subsection (except for the one on ex ante monopoly behavior, which is not relevant
here).
       The imposition of a price cap in this case is of course a hold-up on peak-load
investments (peakers).25 In practice, what potential investors in peaking capacity
want is eﬀectively a forward contract that commits to capacity payments to cover
their investment costs to ensure that they are not held up ex post. They are com-
fortable that they have a good legal case that they can’t be forced to produce if
the price does not at least cover their variable production costs. It is the “scarcity
rents” that they are concerned will be extracted by regulators or the ISO’s market
monitors.

Absence of clearing price
                                                     2 (p∗ ) = 0 (the peak price goes up
       The third avenue is to assume a choke price: D     2

so much that no consumer under RTP ever wants to consume). Alternatively, one
could consider the very, very short run, for which basically no-one can react (even
     consumers). Either way, the supply and demand curves are both vertical and
the D
the price is inﬁnite (given D2 (p∗ ) > K2 under the ﬁrst hypothesis).
       One can set p2 = VOLL in order to provide generators with the right incentives
in the absence of capacity payment. As Stoft (2002) argues, VOLL pricing augments
  25
   Regulatory hold-ups may occur through other channels than price caps. For example, the ISO
may purchase excessive peaking capacity and dispatch it at marginal operating cost during peak.
We take up procurement issues in Section 3.2.




                                              26
market power. But again, it is unclear whether market power is best addressed
through price caps or through a requirement that LSEs enter into forward contracts
for a large fraction of their peak demand or through some other mechanism. Another
potential issue is that the regulatory commitment to VOLL pricing (that may reach
500 times the average energy price) may be weak. A third potential issue is that
the VOLL is very hard to compute: As we discussed above, the outage cost for the
consumer varies substantially with the degree of anticipation of the outage and its
length.26
      Whatever the reason, regulatory authorities most often set a price cap that
lies way below (any reasonable measure of) the VOLL. As is well-known and was
discussed earlier, the price cap depresses incentives for investment in peakers. Con-
sumers and LSEs individually have no incentive to compensate for the peakers’
shortfall in earnings to the extent that beneﬁts from capacity investment are reaped
by all (a free rider problem).
      Thus, the analysis is qualitatively the same as previously; quantitatively, though,
the eﬀects are even more dramatic due to the very large wedge between the price
cap and the socially optimal price during outages.

3.2       Procurement by the ISO

Another potential factor leading to discrepancies between wholesale prices and social
scarcity values is linked to the way system operators purchase, dispatch and charge
for energy and reserves (Patton 2002). We study the implications of two such
practices: out-of-merit dispatching and recovery of some of the capital or operating
costs of generation through an uplift charge that allocates these costs to wholesale
prices based on some administrative costs allocation procedure.
      As described by Patton, Van Schaik and Sinclair (2004, page 44) in their recent
 26
      EdF (1994, 1995).



                                            27
evaluation of the New England ISO’s real time wholesale energy market,

     “Out-of-merit dispatching occurs in real time when energy is produced
     from a unit whose incremental energy bid is greater than the LMP
     [locational marginal price] at its location. In a very simple example,
     assume the two resources closest to the margin are a $60 per MWh
     resource and a $65 per MWh resource, with a market clearing price set
     at $65. When a $100 per MWh resource is dispatched out-of-merit, it will
     be treated by the [dispatch] software as a resource with a $0 [per MWh]
     oﬀer. Assuming the energy produced by the $100 resource displaces all
     of the energy produced by the $65 resource, the [locational marginal]
     price will decrease to $60 per MWh.”

   Accordingly, the marginal cost of the most expensive resource dispatched is
greater than the market clearing price and the associated marginal value placed on
incremental supplies by consumers at its location. Note as well that in this example,
the ISO eﬀectively pays two prices for energy. It pays one price for energy dispatched
through the market and a second higher price for the resource dispatched out-of-
merit, while treating the latter in the dispatch stack as if it had a bid (marginal
cost) of zero. Out-of-merit dispatch is typically rationalized as being necessary to
deal with reliability constraints or dynamic factors related to minimum run-times
or ramping constraints that are not fully reﬂected in the “products” and associated
prices available to the ISO in its organized public markets.
   Uplift refers to a situation in which the ISO makes a payment to a generator
in excess of the revenues the generator would receive by making sales through the
ISO’s organized wholesale markets. These additional payments are then recovered
by the ISO by placing a surcharge on wholesale energy transactions based on some
administrative cost allocation formula. The costs of out-of-merit dispatch, the costs


                                         28
of voltage support in the absence of a complete set of reactive power markets, out-
of-market payments made by the ISO to ensure that speciﬁc generating units are
available during peak demand periods, and out-of-market payments made by the ISO
to certain customers to allow the ISO to curtail their demands on short notice may
be recovered through uplift charges. In what follows, however, we treat the eﬀects
of out-of-merit dispatch and recovery through uplift charges separately. Diﬀerent
sources of uplift costs may be recovered with diﬀerent allocation procedures (Patton,
VanSchaick and Sinclair, page 51.)

3.2.1     Out-of-merit dispatching

In this subsection, we assume that the ISO contracts for peak production plants and
dispatches them at the bottom of the merit order (at price 0), without regards to a
price-cost test. Assume that there are two states: State 1 is oﬀ-peak, state 2 peak.
K1 is baseload capacity (investment cost I1 , marginal cost c1 ), K2 is peak capacity,
used only during peak (investment cost I2 < I1 , marginal cost c2 > c1 ). Consumers
react to the real-time price. A fraction f1 (resp. f2 ) of periods is oﬀ peak, with
demand D1 (p) (resp. on peak, with demand D2 (p) > D1 (p)).

Competitive equilibrium (indexed by a “star”):
 Free entry conditions:
 I1     = f1 (p∗1 − c1 ) + f2 (p∗2 − c1 )


 I2     = f2 (p∗2 − c2 )

Supply = demand:

      D1 (p∗1 ) = K1∗


      D2 (p∗2 ) = K1∗ + K2∗ = K ∗




                                            29
   The competitive equilibrium is depicted in ﬁgure 1.

                    prices                             D2

                     p∗2
                                     D1

                     c2


                     p∗1

                     c1


                                                                        installed capacity
                           0   K2∗                    K1∗   K1∗ + K2∗

                                          Figure 1



ISO procurement behavior
   Suppose that the ISO contracts for K20 ≤ K2∗ units of capacity and dispatches
them at price 0 even oﬀ peak. This sounds strange, but more generally, as long
as ISO purchases are ﬁnanced externally, perverse eﬀects arising from ISO dispatch
decisions arise only if the dispatch is not economically eﬃcient as long as K20 ≤ K2∗ .
Note also that one could imagine that state 1 is an intermediate state of demand.
There would then be an oﬀ-peak state 0 with frequency f0 . As long as the oﬀ-peak
price p∗0 is unaﬀected, one can easily generalize the analysis below.
   In order to clearly separate the eﬀect studied here from that analyzed in the next
subsection, assume that ISO losses (to be computed later) are ﬁnanced externally (in
practice, there would be injection / withdrawal taxes, that would shift the curves.
Let us thus abstract from such complications).

Short-term impact. We analyze the short-term impact assuming a ﬁxed capacity K2∗ .
One may have in mind that K20 of the K2∗ units of peaking capacity are purchased
by the ISO. For given investments K1∗ and K2∗ , the short-term impact of the ISO


                                                 30
policy is depicted in ﬁgure 2, which assumes K20 = K2∗ :

                     prices                             D2

                      p∗2
                                      D1

                      c2


                      p∗1

                      c1


                                                                         installed capacity
                            0   K2∗                    K1∗   K1∗ + K2∗

                                           Figure 2



   • the peak price remains unchanged (p∗2 ),
                                                         
   • the oﬀ-peak price falls to max c1 , D1−1 (K1∗ + K2∗ ) = pST
                                                              1 ,


   • there is overproduction oﬀ-peak,

   • the ISO loses
                                    
                     f1 K2∗ c2 − pST
                                  1    .


Long-term eﬀects. Suppose that the ISO buys a quantity K20 ≤ K2∗ of peak-period
units that it dispatches at zero price. It is easily seen that prices and capacities
adjust in the following way:

              ∗
      • pLT
         2 = p2


              ∗
      • pLT
         1 = p1


      • Peak units substitute partly for oﬀ-peak units (production ineﬃciency):
         K1∗ − K1LT = K20 (or else K1LT = 0 if K20 ≥ K1∗ ).




                                                  31
Proposition 4 Suppose that ISO purchases K20 ≤ K2∗ are ﬁnanced externally (i.e.,
not through an uplift) and are dispatched out-of-merit.
(i) The short-term incidence of a purchase is entirely on oﬀ-peak price and quantity:
p1 decreases, q1 increases.
(ii) The long-term incidence of a purchase K20 ≤ K1∗ is a substitution of oﬀ-peak
units by peakers; on- and oﬀ-peak prices are unaﬀected.


Proof : To prove part (ii), note ﬁrst that p2 > p∗2 is inconsistent with the free-entry
condition. Next if p2 < p∗2 , then K = K1 + K20 > K ∗ , and so if K20 ≤ K2∗ , p1 < p∗1 ;
but then K1 = 0, a contradiction. Hence p2 = p∗2 . Next either K1 = 0 or K1 > 0.
In the latter case, p1 = p∗1 by the free entry condition. To get this price, one must
have K20 + K1LT = K1∗ (see ﬁgures 1 and 2).                                           

Remark : The analysis in this section assumes that the ISO purchases no more than
K2∗ units of peaking capacity and ﬁnances any revenue shortfalls externally. In this
case ineﬃciencies come solely from ineﬃcient dispatching. That is, there is no ineﬃ-
ciency as long as energy is dispatched only when the market price exceeds marginal
cost. Moreover, peak period prices are unaﬀected even if dispatch is ineﬃcient.
However, if the ISO were to purchase more than K2∗ units of peaking capacity it
could aﬀect the peak period price even if the dispatch were eﬃcient. Speciﬁcally if
the ISO made additional purchases of peaking capacity to increase its ownership to
more than K2∗ units and dispatched it eﬃciently only to meet peak period demand,
the peak period price would fall in the short run. If it purchased a large enough
quantity of additional peaking capacity and bid it into the market at its marginal
cost c2 it could drive the peak period price down to c2 . Clearly, such an ISO invest-
ment strategy would be ineﬃcient. Moreover, such a strategy would have signiﬁcant
adverse long run eﬀects on private investment incentives. Private investment in
peaking capacity would be unproﬁtable and the incentives to invest in base load


                                          32
capacity would also be reduced. In the long run this would lead to a substitution
of peaking capacity for base load capacity and could potentially lead to a situation
where the ISO had to purchase a large fraction of the capacity required to balance
supply and demand.

3.2.2   Recovery through an uplift

In practice, ISO purchases are not ﬁnanced through lump-sum taxation. Rather
some or all of the associated costs are often at least partially recovered through an
uplift. There is no general rule on how uplifts are recovered. They can be recovered
monthly (often) or annually. They are typically spread across all kWh, but they can
also be allocated to groups of hours (for example peak hours). In this section, we
will work with the polar case assumption that none of the associated costs of ISO
purchases are recovered from market revenues, but we recognize that some of these
costs may be recovered from market revenues rather than uplift charges. There are
several reasons for why some of the costs of ISO purchases in practice are not fully
recovered from selling the energy in the market and so an uplift is needed: existence
of a price cap; absence of a locational price allowing recovery at an expensive node;
and usage of reserves outside the market place.

a) Let us analyze the implications of an uplift, starting with the case in which
the cost recovery is spread over peak and oﬀ-peak periods (the cost is “socialized”
through the uplift).
   Suppose that the system operator purchases K20 units of peaking energy forward,
and dispatches the corresponding units only on peak (so that the ineﬃciency studied
in subsection 3.2.1 does not arise). Total capacity to meet peak demand is then
K1 + K2 , where
                   K2 = K20    if   f2 (p2 − c2 ) < I2

                   K2 ≥ K20    if   f2 (p2 − c2 ) = I2 .


                                           33
The uplift t is given by
                  t [f1 D1 (p1 + t) + f2 D2 (p2 + t)] = K20 I2

Oﬀ-peak capacity, K2 , and prices are given by:
                   D1 (p1 + t) = K1

                   f1 (p1 − c1 ) + f2 (p2 − c1 ) = I1

                       =⇒ E (p) = E (p∗ ).
Peak capacity satisﬁes:
                  D2 (p2 + t) = K1 + K2 .
And so
                  t [K1 + f2 K2 ] = K20 I2 .

   Figure 3 depicts the equilibrium outcome for linear demands (Di (p) = ai − p).
For small purchases K20 , production prices (p1 , p2 ) don’t move with the size of pro-
curement. This is because the private sector still oﬀers peaking capacity beyond
K20 and so peak and oﬀ-peak prices must remain consistent with the free-entry con-
ditions. Investment in oﬀ-peak capacity is negatively aﬀected by the uplift, while
total peaking capacity does not move (the latter property hinges on the linearity
of demand functions and is not robust). At some point, the private sector ﬁnds it
uneconomical to invest in peakers; the only available peaking capacity is then that
procured by the ISO. The peak price falls and the (before tax) oﬀ-peak price grows
with the size of purchases.




                                               34
                           p1 , p2

                                p∗2




                                p∗1

                                                                           K20
                     K1 , K2    K1∗




                                K2∗




                                                                           K20
                                      small             large
                                      purchases         purchases
                       Figure 3: Socialized uplift (dotted line: uplift levied
                                 solely on peak consumption)




   The results generalize to demand functions such that

                               D2 (p2 ) ≤ D1 (p1 ) whenever p2 ≥ p1

(this condition is much stronger than needed, though).

b) Last, let us consider the impact of an uplift levied solely in peak periods .
   The uplift, when levied on peak consumption only, is given by:

                    f2 tD2 (p2 + t) = K20 I2 ⇐⇒ f2 t (K1 + K2 ) = K20 I2 .

The oﬀ-peak conditions are
                 D1 (p1 ) = K1

 and
                      f1 (p1 − c1 ) + f2 (p2 − c1 ) = I1 ,

 or, equivalently
                      E [p] = E [p∗ ].

                                                   35
The peak conditions are, as earlier:
           K2 = K20      if     f2 (p2 − c2 ) < I2

           K2 ≥ K20      if     f2 (p2 − c2 ) = I2 ,
  and
           D2 (p2 + t) = K1 + K2 .
Hence:
                                                           
                                                K20 I2
                              D2       p2 +                     = K1 + K2 .                     (10)
                                            f2 (K1 + K2 )

        We assume that the equation in K (for an arbitrary p2 )
                                                        
                                                  K20 I2
                                         D2 p 2 +          =K
                                                  f2 K

admits a single solution K and that this solution is decreasing in K20 .27
        For small purchases, as in the case of a socialized uplift, a small purchase K20 is
complemented by private sector oﬀering (K2 > K20 ) and so p2 = p∗2 . Given that the
average price must be the same as for the free entry equilibrium, p1 is then equal to
p∗1 .
        Hence, for K20 small,
            p1 = p∗1     and p2 = p∗2

            K1 = K1∗ .

        K2 decreases as K20 increases : There is more than full crowding out of private
investment in peakers by ISO purchases.
        For larger purchases at some point K2 = K20 and private investment in peakers
disappears (f2 (p2 − c2 ) ≤ I2 ). But (10) still holds. Suppose that when K20 increases,
p2 increases; then p1 decreases (as the average price must remain constant) and so
   27
        One has                                   
                                            K 0 I2   D I2
                                     1 + D2 2 2 dK = 2 dK20 .
                                            f2 K     f2 K
Because, in this range, I2 = f2 (p2 − c2 ), a suﬃcient condition for this is that the peak elasticity
of demand −D2 p2 /D2 be equal to or less than one.



                                                     36
K1 increases (and so does K). For a given K, the left-hand side of (10) decreases as
p2 and K20 increase. So to restore equality in (10), K must decrease, a contradiction.
Hence p2 increases.

Proposition 5 Suppose that an uplift is levied in order to ﬁnance ISO purchases,
and that the latter are dispatched in merit.
(i) If the uplift is socialized, oﬀ-peak capacity is reduced, peak capacity may increase
or decrease, and prices are unaﬀected for small purchases. For larger purchases, the
oﬀ-peak price increases while the oﬀ-peak capacity decreases; the peak price decreases
while the peaking capacity increases with the size of the purchases. As ISO purchases
increase, private investment in peakers becomes unproﬁtable at some point and the
only available peaking capacity is procured by the ISO.
(ii) If the uplift applies solely to peak energy consumption, only peak capacity is
aﬀected (downward) for small purchases. For larger purchases, the characterization
is the same as for a socialized uplift. There is more than full crowding out of peakers
by ISO purchases and as ISO purchases increase a point is reached were private
investment in peakers disappears.


4     Network support services and blackouts

This section relaxes another key assumption underlying our benchmark proposition
(Proposition 1). There, we assumed that, while there may be insuﬃcient resources
and rationing, this rationing makes use of all available generation resources. This
assumption is a decent approximation for, say, controlled rolling blackouts where
the system operator sheds load sequentially to ensure that demand does not ex-
ceed available generating capacity. It is not for system collapses where deviations
in network frequency or voltage lead to both generators and load tripping out by
automatic protection equipment whose operation is triggered by physical distur-
bances on the network. For example, the August 14, 2003 blackout in the Eastern

                                          37
United States and Ontario led to the loss of power to over 50 million consumers as
the networks in New York, Ontario, Northern Ohio, Michigan and portions of other
states collapsed. Over 60,000 MW of generating capacity was knocked out of service
in a few minutes time. Most of the generating capacity under the control of the
New York ISO tripped out despite the fact that there was a surplus of generating
capacity to meet demand within the New York ISO’s control area. Full restoration
of service took up to 48 hours. (U.S.-Canada Power System Outage Task Force,
2003). The September 28, 2003 blackout in Italy led to a loss of power across the
entire country and suddenly knocked out over 20,000 MW of generating capacity.
Restoration of power supplies to consumers was completed about 20 hours after the
blackout began (UCTE, 2003).
   Conceptually, there is a key diﬀerence between rolling blackouts in which the
system operator sequentially sheds relatively small fractions of total demand to
match available supplies in a controlled fashion and a total system collapse in which
both demand and generation shuts down over a large area in an uncontrolled fashion.
Under a rolling blackout, available generation is extremely valuable (actually, its
value is VOLL). By contrast, available plants are almost valueless when the system
collapses. To put it diﬀerently, there is then an externality imposed by generating
plants (or transmission lines) that initiate the collapse sequence on the other plants
that trip out of service as the blackout cascades through the system, that does not
exist in an orderly, rolling blackout.
   It is useful here to relate this economic argument to standard engineering consid-
erations concerning operating reserves (OpRes). In addition to dispatching genera-
tors to supply energy to match demand, system operators schedule additional gener-
ating capacity to provide operating reserves (OpRes). Operating reserves typically
consist of “spinning reserves” which can be fully ramped up to supply a speciﬁed rate
of electric energy production in less than 10 minutes and “non-spinning reserves”


                                         38
which can be fully ramped up to supply energy in up to 30 minutes (60 minutes
in some places). Operating reserves are used to respond to sudden outages of gen-
erating plants or transmission lines that are providing supplies of energy to meet
demand in real time suﬃciently quickly to maintain the frequency, voltage and sta-
bility parameters of the network within acceptable ranges. Additional generation is
also scheduled to provide continuous frequency regulation (or automatic generation
control) to stabilize network frequency in response to small instantaneous variations
in demand and generation. These ancillary network support services require schedul-
ing additional generating capacity equal to roughly 10-12% of electricity demand at
any point in time. In the U.S., regional reliability councils specify the requirements
for frequency regulation and operating reserves, as well as other ancillary services
such as reactive power supplies and blackstart capabilities, that system operators
are expected to maintain. Pending U.S. legislation would make these and other
reliability standards mandatory for system operators.
   Let us use a simple model of OpRes in order to analyze the various issues at stake.
To keep modeling details to a minimum without altering insights, the demand side
is modeled as inelastic: In state i ∈ [0, 1], demand is Di . If di ≤ Di is served,
the consumers’ gross surplus is di v, where v is the value per kWh (the value of
lost load). Similarly, on the supply side, there is a single technology: capacity K
involves investment cost KI and marginal cost c, which we normalize at 0 in order
to simplify accounting.
   The key innovation relative to the benchmark model is that the extent of scarcity
is not fully known at the time that generating units with uncertain availability are
scheduled to meet the demand dispatched by the system operator. We formalize this
uncertainty as an uncertain capacity availability factor λ∈ [0, 1]. That is, a fraction
1−λ of the capacity K will break down. The distribution Hi (λ)(with Hi (0) = 0 and




                                          39
Hi (1) = 1) can be state-contingent.28 There may be an atom in the distribution at
λ = 1 (full availability), but the distribution has otherwise a smooth density hi (λ).29
We make the following weak assumption:
                                  hi (λ) λ
                                                  is increasing in λ
                               [1 − Hi (λ)]
(a suﬃcient condition for this is the standard assumption that the hazard rate
hi / [1 − Hi ] is increasing in λ, which is satisﬁed for most commonly used continuous
probability distributions.)
    The timing goes as in Figure 4: Given nominal capacity K and demand Di ,
the SSO chooses how much of this demand to dispatch , or alternatively how much
demand to curtail, and a reserve margin. More formally, once load Di is realized, the
system operator can curtail an amount Di −di ≥ 0 of load. He also chooses a reserve
coeﬃcient ri , so that a capacity (1 + ri ) di ≤ K must be ready to be dispatched.
Then, the capacity availability λi is revealed and the demand di ≤ Di is served or
the network collapses: If λi [(1 + ri ) di ] < di , the system collapses, and no energy is
produced or consumed.



     Long-term            Load Di in       Choice of             Availability λi realized
     choice of            state i
                          realized.
                                              dispatched load        if λi (1 + ri ) ≥ 1, load
     capacity K.
                                              di ≤ Di                di is satisﬁed;
                                                                       if λi (1 + ri ) < 1,
                                              reserves ri di .         system collapses.
                                       Figure 4


    We assume that scheduling generation to be (potentially) available to serve de-
mand costs s per unit (s can be either a monetary cost of keeping the plant ready
  28
     For example, if plant unavailability comes from the breakdown of a transmission line connecting
the plant and the load, the transmission line may be more likely to break down under extreme
weather conditions, for which load Di is also large.
  29
     We assume a continuous distribution solely for tractability purposes. In practice, system
operators fear foremost the breakdown of large plants or transmission lines and therefore adopt
reliability criteria of the type “n − 1” or “n − 2”. This introduces “integer problems”, but no
fundamental diﬀerence in analysis.


                                                  40
to be dispatched or an opportunity cost of not being able to perform maintenance
at an appropriate time).

a) Social optimum
    A Ramsey social planner would solve:
                                                                  
                                             1
                  max E 1 − Hi                           v − s (1 + ri ) di − KI
                {K,d· ,r· }                1 + ri

such that, for all states i ∈ [0, 1]:

      di ≤ Di                                                                        (µi )

      (1 + ri ) di ≤ K,                                                              (νi )

where µi and νi are the shadow prices of the constraints.
    For conciseness, we analyze only the case where it is optimal to accumulate
reserves in each state. The ﬁrst-order conditions with respect to ri , di and K are,
respectively:

                                         hi
                                                 v − s = νi ,                                  (11)
                                      (1 + ri )2


      [1 − Hi ] v − s (1 + ri ) ≥ µi + (1 + ri ) νi ,     with equality unless di = Di         (12)

and

                                            E [νi ] = I.                                       (13)

    Specializing the model to the case in which Hi is state-independent,30 let us ana-
lyze the optimal dispatching, as described by (11) and (12). The Ramsey optimum
is depicted in Figure 5.
  30
     We will still use state-denoting subscripts, though, so as to indicate the value taken for H in
state i. For example, Hi = H (1/ (1 + ri )).




                                                41
          Dispatched
          load di

                                                                    load curtailed
                                                                    (di < Di )




                                         di = Di




              45◦
          Reserve
          ratio


     rH



     rL


                                                                                      Di
           oﬀ-peak               K        reserve            K        load shedding
           (price:             1 + rH     reduction        1 + rL     (price:
           (1 + rH ) s )                                              v/ (1 + rL )
                                                                      when served)
          Figure 5 (prices indicated in parentheses are prices paid by consumers)


   Oﬀ-peak (Di small), there is excess capacity, all demand is served (di = Di ), and
νi = 0. Hence from (11) and (12)
                                                   r = rH

where                                       
                                            
                                       1
                                h
                                    1 + rH
                                              v = s.
                                  (1 + rH )2
We of course assume that for this value, it is worth dispatching load (µi > 0), or
                                       
                                     1
                        1−H                  v > s (1 + rH ) .
                                 1 + rH
The oﬀ-peak region is deﬁned by:

                                          (1 + rH ) Di < K.

   Peaking time can be decomposed into two regions. As Di grows, load ﬁrst keep
being satisﬁed: di = Di , and reserves become leaner (and so the probability of a

                                                      42
blackout increases as load grows):

                                          (1 + ri ) Di = K.

       Load starts being shed when µi = 0, or

                                          hi       1
                                                ·       = 1,
                                       [1 − Hi ] 1 + ri

which from our assumptions has a unique solution:

                                               rL < rH .

       The optimal investment policy is then given by:
              K                               ∞                         
                1+rL     hi                                       v
         I=                     2 v − s fi di +      (1 − Hi )            − s fi di.
                 K
               1+r
                      (1 + r i )                  K
                                                 1+r
                                                               (1 + r L )
                    H                                    L


       The ﬁrst term on the right-hand side of this equation represents the quasi-rents
in reserve reduction states: An extra unit of capacity is used to increase reserves
and thereby reduce the probability of network collapse, 1 − Hi (Di /K), then saving
value of lost load vDi ; to this term must be subtracted the cost s of scheduling
generation. And the second term represents the quasi-rents in load shedding states:
An extra unit of capacity allows a reduction in load shedding, which has value
(1 − Hi ) v/ (1 + rL ) minus the cost s of scheduling generation.

b) Implementation
       First, note that the possibility of system collapses make operating reserves a
public good. Network users take its reliability as exogenous to their own policy and
thus are unwilling to voluntarily contribute to reserves. The market-determined
level of reliability is therefore the size of the atom of the H (·) distribution at λ = 1.
Thus, the market solution leads to an insuﬃcient level of reliability. In order to
obtain a proper level of reliability, the system operator must force consumers (or
their LSE) to purchase a fraction ri of reserves for each unit of load.31
  31
       There is no point further asking generators to hold reserves.


                                                  43
   Does this market mechanism cum regulation of reserve ratios generate enough
quasi-rents to induce the optimal investment policy? Oﬀ-peak (Di < K/ (1 + rH )),
the price paid by consumers for reserves is (1 + rH ) s, and there are no quasi-rents.
   When load is curtailed (Di > K/ (1 + rL )), then consumers must pay v/ (1 + rL )
conditionally on being actually served (which has probability 1 − Hi ). Thus, gener-
ators obtain, as they should, quasi-rent:

                                              v
                                (1 − Hi )          −s
                                            1 + rL

in this region.
   The intermediate region is more complex to implement through an auction-type
mechanism. In the absence of price-responsive load, the supply curve and the to-
tal demand curve (energy plus reserves) are vertical and identical. Hence a small
mistake in the choice of reserve ratio creates wild swings in the market price (from
(1 + ri ) s to v/ (1 + ri ) conditionally on being served). In particular, the system
operator can bring price down to marginal cost without hardly aﬀecting reliability.
This has potentially signiﬁcant implications for investment incentives.
   The “knife edge” problem has been recognized by system operators. It puts a
lot of discretion in the hands of the system operator to aﬀect prices and investment
incentives as small deviations in this range can have very big eﬀects on prices. In
the end, determining when there is an operating reserve deﬁciency (or a forecast
operating reserve deﬁciency) may necessarily involve some discretion because it de-
pends in part on attributes of the network topology that are not reﬂected in a reﬁned
way in the rough requirements for operating reserves (e.g. ramp up in less than 10
minutes). So, for example, stored hydro is generally thought to be a superior source
of operating reserves than fossil plants because the former can be ramped up almost
instantly rather than in 9 minutes. If there is a lot of hydro in the OpRes portfolio
the system operator will be less likely to be concerned about a small shortfall in


                                            44
operating reserves.
    Alternatively, the system operator can compute the marginal social beneﬁt,
       
    Di
 h 2 · (Di v), of the reduction in the probability of collapse brought about
     K
by an additional unit of investment. This regulated price for reserves (and thus for
energy) then yields the appropriate quasi-rent:

                                       hi
                                               v−s
                                    (1 + ri )2
to generators in this region. Accurately computing the regulated prices in this region
also involves substantial discretion, however.


Proposition 6 Suppose that the extent of scarcity is not known with certainty at
the time of generator and load dispatch.
(i) The socially optimal policy involves, as the forecasted demand grows, three regimes:

    • Oﬀ peak: the entire load is dispatched, and operating reserves are set at a ﬁxed,
      maximum percentage of load.

    • Reserve shedding: the entire load is dispatched, and operating reserves are
      reduced as generation capacity is binding.

    • Load shedding: Load is curtailed, and operating reserves satisfy a ﬁxed, mini-
      mum ratio relative to load.

(ii) The possibility of system collapses makes operating reserves a public good. As
a result, investments in operating reserves do not emerge spontaneously as a market
outcome. The load should be forced to pay for a pre-determined quantity of operating
reserves (e.g. as a proportion of their demand) :

    • a price set at VOLL (divided by one plus the reserve ratio, conditionally on
      being served) in the load shedding region,

    • a market clearing price given the ratio requirement oﬀ peak,

                                           45
    • a price growing from marginal cost to the load-shedding-region price in the
      reserve-shedding region. Decentralization through an operating reserves market
      together with a mandatory reserve ratio is delicate as the price of reserves is
      extremely sensitive to small mistakes or discretionary actions by the system
      operator.


5     Conclusion

We derived the (second-best) optimal program for prices, output and investment for
an electricity sector in which non-price sensitive consumers may have to be rationed
under some contingencies. This allocation provides a benchmark against which the
actual performance of electricity sectors, and the eﬀects of the imposition of various
regulatory and non-market mechanisms and constraints, can be compared. We went
on to show that competitive wholesale and retail markets will support this second-
best ”Ramsey” allocation under a particular set of assumptions.
    The assumptions underpinning these results are very strong. Our research pro-
gram seeks to evaluate the eﬀects of departures from the assumptions needed to
support the benchmark allocation. In this paper we focused on relaxing the as-
sumptions (a) that wholesale electricity prices reﬂect the social opportunity cost
of generation and (b) that rationing, if any, is orderly and makes eﬃcient use of
available generation.
    To examine the eﬀects of relaxing the ﬁrst assumption, we analyzed the eﬀects
of regulator-imposed prices caps motivated either by concerns about market power
in the real time market or by regulatory opportunism. While price caps can signiﬁ-
cantly reduce the scarcity rents required to cover the costs of investment in peaking
capacity, lead to underinvestment, and distort the prices seen by consumers, with
at most three states of nature (and up to two states with market power), capacity
obligations and associated capacity payments can restore investment incentives if

                                         46
all generating capacity is eligible to meet capacity obligations and receive capacity
payments, and all consumer demand is subject to capacity obligations. We go on
to examine the eﬀects of ISO procurement strategies that involve either ineﬃcient
generator dispatch or the recovery of some generation costs through an uplift. These
ISO procurement strategies can distort prices and investment decisions in various
ways.
   Our analysis then proceeded to examine the eﬀects of relaxation of the second
assumption underpinning the benchmark allocation. We used a model of uncertain
demand and operating reserves to analyse the eﬀects of network collapses that result
in rationing of demand while generation that is potentially available to meet this
demand stands idle. Unlike the benchmark model, the extent of scarcity is not
known with certainty at the time of generator dispatch. In this model operating
reserves are a public good and without mandatory operating reserve requirements
there would be under investment in operating reserves and lower reliability than is
optimal. Moreover, under certain contingencies the market price, and the associated
scarcity rents available to support investments in generating capacity, are extremely
sensitive to small mistakes or discretionary actions by the system operator. This
“knife edge” problem and options for dealing with it requires further analysis and
attention in the development of the rules and incentive arrangements governing
system operators.
   In Joskow-Tirole (2004) we examine relaxation of the other key assumptions that
underpin the benchmark model, focusing on the impacts of load proﬁling, zonal ra-
tioning of demand for both price sensitive and price insensitive consumers, and
more general characterizations of consumer heterogeneity. Taken together, these
results suggest that the combination of the unusual physical attributes of electric-
ity and electric power networks and associated reliability considerations, limitations
on metering of real time consumer demand and responsiveness to real time prices,


                                         47
restrictions on the ability to ration individual consumers, discretionary behavior by
system operators, makes achieving an eﬃcient allocation of resources with compet-
itive wholesale and retail market mechanisms a very challenging task.




                                         48
References

 [1] Allaz, B.(1992) “Uncertainty and Strategic Forward Transactions,” Interna-
    tional Journal of Industrial Organization, 10: 297–308.

 [2] Allaz, B. and J.L. Vila (1993) “Cournot Competition, Forward Markets and
    Eﬃciency,” Journal of Economic Theory, 59(1):1–16.

 [3] Borenstein, S., and S. Holland (2003) “On the Eﬃciency of Competitive Elec-
    tricity Markets With Time-Invariant Retail Prices,” CSEM WP116.

 [4] Borenstein, S., Jaske, M., and A. Rosenfeld (2002) “Dynamic Pricing, Advanced
    Metering, and Demand Response in Electricity Markets,” Hewlett Foundation
    Energy Series.

 [5] Chao, H. P., and R. Wilson (1987) “Priority Service: Pricing, Investment, and
    Market Organization,” American Economic Review, 77: 899–916.

 [6] —– (2003) “Resource Adequacy and Market Power Mitigation via Option Con-
    tracts,” mimeo, Stanford University.

 [7] EdF (1994) “The Explicit Cost of Failure,” mimeo, General Economic Studies
    Department.

 [8] —– (1995) “A New Value for the Cost of Failure,”mimeo, General Economic
    Studies Department.

 [9] Green, R. (1999) “The Electricity Contract Market in England and Wales,”
    Journal of Industrial Economics, Vol 47(1): 107–124.

[10] Joskow, P. and J. Tirole (2004) “Retail Electricity Competition,” mimeo, MIT
    and IDEI.



                                       49
[11] Littlechild, S. (2000) “Why We Need Electricity Retailers: A Reply to Joskow
    on Wholesale Spot Price Pass-Through,” mimeo.

[12] Newbery, D. (1998) “Competition, Contracts and Entry in the Electricity Spot
    Market,” Rand Journal of Economics, 29(4): 726–49.

[13] Oren, S. (2003) “Ensuring Generation Adequacy in Competitive Electricity
    Markets,” mimeo, UC Berkeley.

[14] Patton, D. (2002) “Summer 2002 Review of the New York Electricity Mar-
    ket,” presentation to the New York ISO Board of Directors and Management
    Committee (October 15).

[15] Patton, D., VanSchaick, P. L., and R. A. Sinclair (2004) “Six Month Review of
    the SMD Markets in New England,” Potomac Economics for the New England
    ISO, February.

[16] Stoft, S. (2002) Power System Economics, Wiley.

[17] —– (2003) “The Demand for Operating Reserves: Key to Price Spikes and
    Investment,” IEEE.

[18] Turvey, R.(2003) “Proﬁling: A New Suggestion,” mimeo.

[19] Turvey, R., and D. Anderson (1977) Electricity Economics: Essays ands Case
    Studies. A World Bank Research Publication, Johns Hopkins University Press
    (Baltimore and London).

[20] Union for the Coordination of Electricity Transmission (UCTE) (2003) “Interim
    Report of the Investigation Committee of the 28 September 2003 Blackout in
    Italy,” October 27.




                                       50
[21] U.S.- Canada Power System Outage Task Force (2003) “Interim Report: Causes
    of the August 14 Blackout in the United States and Canada,” November.

[22] Vasquez, C., Rivier, M., and I. Perez-Arriaga (2001) “A Market Approach to
    Long-Term Security of Supply,” mimeo ITT, Universidad Pontiﬁcia Comillas,
    Madrid.

[23] Wolak, F. (2000) “An Empirical Analysis of the Impact of Hedge Contracts on
    Bidding Behavior in a Competitive Electricity Market,” International Economic
    Journal, 14(2): 1–39.




                                       51
