                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                           SOCIAL CAPITAL

                                            Steven N. Durlauf
                                            Marcel Fafchamps

                                          Working Paper 10485
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w10485


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       May 2004




We thank Christian Grootaert for initiating this work and for helpful suggestions. Durlauf thanks the
University of Wisconsin and John D. and Catherine T. MacArthur Foundation and Durlauf and Fafchamps
thank the World Bank for financial support. Ritesh Banerjee, Ethan Cohen-Cole, Artur Minkin, Giacomo
Rondina and Chih Ming Tan have provided excellent research assistance. Jim Magdanz has provided useful
comments on an earlier draft. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2004 by Steven N. Durlauf and Marcel Fafchamps. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.
Social Capital
Steven N. Durlauf and Marcel Fafchamps
NBER Working Paper No. 10485
May 2004
JEL No. E26, O10, O40, L14, Z13
                                        ABSTRACT
This paper surveys research on social capital. We explore the concepts that motivate the social

capital literature, efforts to formally model social capital using economic theory, the econometrics

of social capital, and empirical studies of the role of social capital in various socioeconomic

outcomes. While our focus is primarily on the place of social capital in economics, we do consider

its broader social science context. We argue that while the social capital literature has produced

many insights, a number of conceptual and statistical problems exist with the current use of social

capital by social scientists. We propose some ways to strengthen the social capital literature.

Steven N. Durlauf
Department of Economics
University of Wisconsin
1180 Observatory Drive
Madison, WI 53706-1393
and NBER
sdurlauf@ssc.wisc.edu

Marcel Fafchamps
Department of Economics
University of Oxford
Manor Road
Oxford, OX1 3UQ
United Kingdom
marcel.fafchamps@economics.oxford.ac.uk
           …in every community there seems to be some sort of justice, and
           some type of friendship, also. At any rate, fellow-voyagers and
           fellow-soldiers are called friends, and so are members of other
           communities. And the extent of their community is the extent of
           their friendship, since it is also the extent of the justice found
           there…What is just…is not the same for parents towards children
           as for one brother towards another, and the same for companions
           as for fellow-citizens, similarly with the other types of
           friendship…what is unjust towards of these is also different, and
           become more unjust as it is practiced on closer friends. It is more
           shocking, e.g., to rob a companion of money than to rob a fellow-
           citizen, to fail to help a brother than a stranger, and to strike one’s
           father than anyone else. What is just also naturally increases with
           friendship, since it involves the same people and extends over an
           equal area.

                                Aristotle, Nicomachean Ethics, Book VIII, 9.61


I.     Introduction


       Social capital represents one of the most powerful and popular metaphors in
current social science research.     Broadly understood as referring to the community
relations that affect personal interactions, social capital has been used to explain an
immense range of phenomena, ranging from voting patterns to health to the economic
success of countries. Literally hundreds of papers have appeared throughout the social
science literature arguing that social capital matters in understanding individual and
group differences and further that successful public policy design needs to account for the
effects of policy on social capital formation.
       This paper is designed to survey research on social capital. We will give primary
focus to the role of social capital in economic growth and development as suggested by
the presence of this paper in the Handbook of Economic Growth. That being said, this
survey will discuss social capital in general as there is no part of the social capital
literature that may plausibly be treated as orthogonal to the issues that arise in relating
social capital to economic growth. Our objectives are threefold. First, we provide an
overview of conceptual issues that underlie social capital studies. Second, we identify



                                                 1
some general flaws we see in the empirical social capital literature. While we would
hardly claim that every social capital study suffers from these problems, we do claim that
they are prevalent in the literature. Third, we make a number of recommendations on
how to strengthen the social capital literature. In assessing empirical work, we will focus
almost exclusively on statistical analyses of social capital. This is not because we regard
qualitative studies as unimportant (we will in fact advocate their greater use in the course
of our discussion) but because such studies raise very distinct conceptual and
interpretative questions from their quantitative counterparts.
       Much of our discussion is critical. We argue that empirical social capital studies
are often flawed and make claims that are in excess of what is justified by the statistical
exercises reported. However, this should not be taken as an indictment of research on
social capital per se. In our judgment the role of social factors in individual and group
outcomes is of fundamental importance in most of the contexts in which social capital has
been studied. Hence we regard the empirical social capital literature as addressing major
outstanding issues in many areas of social science. Our intent in this survey is to evaluate
what is currently known and to make suggestions on how to improve future research.
       The paper is organized as follows. Section II contains a discussion of how
economists and other social scientists have attempted to define social capital. The section
also reviews some of the contexts in which social capital has been argued to play an
important causal role in various sociological outcomes. Section III discusses efforts to
theorize about social capital; both heuristic and conceptual arguments are discussed as
well as formal analyses. Section IV discusses econometric issues that arise in the efforts
to develop empirical evidence of the role of social capital as a determinant of
socioeconomic outcomes. Section V reviews the empirical literature on social capital;
while this literature is far too large to cover comprehensively we believe our survey
captures the range of contexts in which social capital effects have been evaluated.
Section VI reviews empirical studies that analyze the determinants of social capital.
Section VII contains some suggestions for improving social capital research. Section
VIII concludes.




                                             2
II.     Social capital: basic concepts


II.i. Defining social capital


        Since Loury (1977) introduced it into modern social science research and
Coleman’s (1988) seminal study placed it at the forefront of research in sociology, the
term social capital has spread throughout the social sciences and has spawned a huge
literature that runs across disciplines. Despite the immense amount of research on it,
however, the definition of social capital has remained elusive.         From a historical
perspective, one could argue that social capital is not a concept but a praxis, a code word
used to federate disparate but interrelated research interests and to facilitate the cross-
fertilization of ideas across disciplinary boundaries. The success of social capital as a
federating concept may result from the fact that no social science has managed to impose
a definition of the term that captures what different researchers mean by it within a
discipline, let alone across fields.1
        While conceptual vagueness may have promoted the use of the term among the
social sciences, it also has been an impediment to both theoretical and empirical research
of phenomena in which social capital may play a role.2 In order to anchor our discussion
of social capital, we need a substantive definition. We begin our search by listing a
number of definitions that have been proposed by some of the most influential
researchers on social capital. We begin with Coleman (1990) who defines social capital
as:




1
  Even if a precise definition of social capital were attempted, it is likely to be no less
vague than other similar concepts. The term capital, for instance, is used to describe
different things – from finance to machinery to infrastructure. Human capital similarly
has many different meanings, such as education, nutrition, health, vocational skills, and
knowledge. This kind of vagueness, however, is less problematic as long as researchers
agree on some basic principles.
2
  Criticisms of the vagueness and inconsistency of various definitions of social capital
may be found in Dasgupta (2000), Durlauf (2000), Manski (2000) and Portes (1998).
Arrow (2000) goes so far as to suggest that the term social capital be abandoned.


                                            3
            …social organization constitutes social capital, facilitating the
            achievement of goals that could not be achieved in its absence or
            could be achieved only at a higher cost. (pg. 304)

Putnam et al (1993) provides a similar characterization,


            …social capital…refers to features of social organization, such as
            trust, norms, and networks that can improve the efficiency of
            society… (pg. 167)


Both definitions emphasize the beneficial effects social capital is assumed to have on
social aggregates. According to these definitions, social capital is a type of positive
group externality. Coleman’s definition suggests that the externality arises from social
organization. Putnam’s definition emphasizes specific informal forms of social
organization such as trust, norms and networks. In his definition of social capital,
Fukuyama (1997) argues that only certain shared norms and values should be regarded as
social capital:


            Social capital can be defined simply as the existence of a certain
            set of informal rules or norms shared among members of a group
            that permits cooperation among them. The sharing of values and
            norms does not in itself produce social capital, because the values
            may be the wrong ones… The norms that produce social capital…
            must substantively include virtues like truth-telling, the meeting of
            obligations, and reciprocity. (pp. 378-379)




Other definitions characterize social capital not in terms of outcome but in terms of
relations or interdependence between individuals.       In later research, Putnam (2000)
defines social capital as


            ...connections among individuals - social networks and the norms
            of reciprocity and trustworthiness that arise from them. (pg. 19)


Ostrom (2000) writes



                                             4
            Social capital is the shared knowledge, understandings, norms,
            rules and expectations about patterns of interactions that groups of
            individuals bring to a recurrent activity. (pg. 176)


In a similar vein Bowles and Gintis (2002) state


            Social capital generally refers to trust, concern for one’s associates,
            a willingness to live by the norms of one’s community and to
            punish those who do not. (pg. 2)


Finally, one finds in a recent book-length treatment, Lin (2001)


            …social capital may be defined operationally as resources
            embedded in social networks and accessed and used by actors for
            actions. Thus, the concept has two important components: (1) it
            represents resources embedded in social relations rather than
            individuals, and (2) access and use of such resources reside with
            actors. (pp. 24-25)




         From these definitions, we can distinguish three main underlying ideas: (1) social
capital generates positive externalities for members of a group; (2) these externalities are
achieved through shared trust, norms, and values and their consequent effects on
expectations and behavior; (3) shared trust, norms, and values arise from informal forms
of organizations based on social networks and associations. The study of social capital is
that of network-based processes that generate beneficial outcomes through norms and
trust.
         By this definition social capital is always desirable since its presence is equated
with beneficial consequences. This formulation is quite unsatisfactory from the
perspective of policy evaluation (e.g., Durlauf (1999,2002b), Portes (1998)): if one denies
the appellation of social capital to contexts where strong social ties lead to immoral or
unproductive behaviors, there is nothing nontrivial to say in terms of policy. Presumably
it is social structures, not their consequences, which can be influenced by policymakers.


                                              5
Unless we know under what conditions social structures generate beneficial outcomes,
we cannot orient policy. We also note that the benefits that social capital generates for
one group may disadvantage another, so that the combined effect on society need not be
positive. We come back to this issue later.
        The three main ideas outlined above often appear intertwined in the mind of their
proponents so that one in isolation would probably not be considered social capital. For
instance, there are many phenomena that generate positive (or negative) externalities.
According to the definitions listed here, they would probably not be considered social
capital unless they involve norms or trust. There appears to be more confusion as to
whether all three parts of the definition are required for social capital. Norms and trust
can be based on formal institutions such as laws and courts without reference to social
networks. Yet the literature sometimes has referred to such generalized trust as social
capital (e.g., Knack and Keefer (1997)). It is also unclear whether (1) and (3) alone
constitute social capital. In his seminal work on job markets, for instance, Granovetter
(1975) discusses how social networks are activated to share job market information,
thereby speeding job search and raising the efficiency of the job matching process. This
process does not, by itself, require shared norms or values. Fafchamps and Minten (2002)
use the phrase ‘social network capital’ to describe this phenomenon.
        From the perspective of empirical work, a definition of social capital limited to
(1) and (2) is problematic. Things like ‘norms’ and ‘shared values’ are notoriously
difficult to measure. This has led some of the less rigorous work in this area to present
evidence of a beneficial group effect as evidence of social capital itself, and consequently
to conclude that social capital is good. This kind of circular reasoning is of course not
satisfactory since it is ultimately tautological and is not falsifiable.
        A definition of social capital suitable for rigorous empirical work must identify
observable variables that can be used as proxies for social capital (Portes (2000)). Norms,
trust, and expectations of behavior are very broad ideas that encompass no end of
phenomena. Identifying a commonly acceptable set of proxies for social capital has
therefore proved a formidable task and many different variables have appeared in
empirical papers purportedly to measure it. Another problem has to do with the extent to
which the variables used identify well defined social influences – part (3) of our



                                                6
definition. Adherence to norms can be induced for many reasons, including many that
cannot be reasonably construed as social. Consequently, evidence of adherence to norms
does not, by itself, constitute evidence of the importance of social networks. To the extent
that social networks and associations are part of the definition of social capital, evidence
must also be provided that trust and shared norms are achieved via social interaction
based on interpersonal networks and associations.


II.ii The efficiency of social exchange


       Perhaps a more fruitful approach for our purpose is to proceed by example, that is,
to select one specific phenomenon and use it to illustrate how research on social capital
can be organized. Much of the commonality in definitions of social capital and in
examples given by respective authors is the focus on interpersonal relationships and
social networks and their effect on the efficiency of social exchange – whether the
provision of a public good, as in Coleman’s work, or the better organization of markets,
as in Granovetter’s. At the heart of the concept of social capital is the idea that positive
externalities cannot be achieved without some kind of coordination, i.e., there is
coordination failure. Much of the interest in social capital stems from efforts to
understand how socially efficient outcomes can occur in environments in which the sorts
of conditions necessary for the classical First Welfare Theorem are not fulfilled.
Efficiency of social exchange is thus a good vantage point around which to organize our
assessment.
       One important potential role for social capital concerns its ability to ameliorate
potential inefficiencies caused by imperfect information. As Hayek (1945) was among
the first to point out, information asymmetries are an inescapable feature of human
society. As a result, exchange is hindered either because agents who could benefit from
trade cannot find each other, or because, having found each other, they do not trust each
other enough to trade. In either case, some mutually beneficial exchange does not take
place. Similar principles apply to the provision of public goods. Search and trust are thus
two fundamental determinants of the efficiency of social exchange. If we can finds ways
of facilitating search and of fostering trust, we can improve social exchange.



                                             7
       There are basically two ways of achieving these dual objectives: via formal
institutions (e.g., a stock exchange or a trading fair) or via interpersonal relationships
(e.g., word-of-mouth communication of opportunities, repeated interactions which benefit
both parties). The literature on social capital focuses principally on the latter. In the
following discussion, we illustrate how social networks can raise efficiency. We begin by
examining the possible effects of social networks on search. In so doing, we focus only
on parts (1) and (3) of our definition of social capital since norms and trust are not central
to the circulation of information (although they can play a subsidiary role). We then turn
to trust, the externalities it generates, and the way to sustain trust through social
networks. Public goods are discussed in the following sub-section. The relationship
between social capital and economic development is examined next. The last sub-section
explores the relationship between social capital and equity.


Social networks and search


       The role of social capital in search can be illustrated by comparing US equity and
labor markets. Given the existence of a stock market, it is very easy for a seller of stock
to find a buyer at the market clearing price. This is not the case in labor markets where no
equivalent institution circulates accurate and up-to-date information about jobs and
workers. In his path-breaking study of the US labor market, Granovetter (1975) brought
to light the role played by interpersonal relationships in channeling information about
jobs and job applicants. A large proportion of jobs are allocated on the basis of personal
recommendation and word-of-mouth. This can be understood as an endogenous,
spontaneous adaptation to the absence of a formal clearing house equivalent to the stock
market.3
       As this comparison demonstrates, observing that social capital plays a role in
markets does not, by itself, constitute evidence that social capital is necessary and should

3
  This is not to say that efforts have not been made to emulate the stock market model –
from employment offices to internet sites to temporary employment agencies. But to date
none of these institutions seems capable of conveying sufficiently precise information
about jobs and job applicants, especially regarding worker environment, work ethics, and




                                              8
be nurtured. Depending on the circumstances, the development of formal institutions may
be a superior alternative.


Social capital and trust


       As argued in Fafchamps (2004), trust may be understood as an optimistic
expectation or belief regarding other agents' behavior. The origin of trust may vary.4
Sometimes, trust arises from repeated interpersonal interaction. Other times, it arises
from general knowledge about the population of agents, the incentives they face, and the
upbringing they have received (Platteau (1994a,b)). The former can be called
personalized trust and the latter generalized trust. The main difference between the two is
that, for each pair of newly matched agents, the former takes time and effort to establish
while the latter is instantaneous.
       In most situations, trusting others enables economic agents to operate more
efficiently – e.g. by invoicing for goods they have delivered or by agreeing to stop
hostilities. Whenever this is the case, generalized trust yields more efficient outcomes
than personalized trust. The reason is that, for any pair of agents, generalized trust is
established faster and more cheaply than personal trust. This observation has long been
made in the anthropological literature on generalized morality. Fostering generalized trust
can thus potentially generate large efficiency gains. How this can be accomplished,
however, is unclear.
       Clubs and networks are different concepts having to do with the structure of links
among economic agents. Clubs describe finite, closed groupings. Networks describe
more complex situations in which individual agents are related only to some other agents,
not all. The term ‘network’ is sometimes used to describe the entire set of links among a
finite collection of agents. Other times, it is used to describe the set of links around a
specific individual. To avoid confusion, we refer to the second concept as a subjective
network.

personal motivation. See Fafchamps (2002) and Kranton (1996) for models of
spontaneous market emergence organized around interpersonal relationships.
4
  Sometimes trust is misplaced, but for the sake of brevity, we ignore this possibility here.
Put differently, we assume rational expectations.


                                             9
       Among other things, clubs and networks can be used to describe the extent to
which personalized and generalized trust exist in a population. Perfect generalized trust
corresponds to the case where all agents belong to a single club (or complete network)
and trust all other members. Situations in which generalized trust exists only among sub-
populations (say, Jewish diamond dealers in New York, cf. Bernstein (1992)) could be
described as small clubs. Situations in which individual agents only trust a limited
number of agents they know individually can be described as a network.
       From the above discussion, it is immediately clear that if trust is beneficial for
economic efficiency, the loss from imperfect trust can be visualized as the difference
between the actual trust network and the minimum network that would support all
mutually beneficial trades. Following this reasoning, inefficiency is expected to be
highest in societies where the trust network is very sparse (Granovetter (1995)).
Inefficiency is also large when sub-groups who could benefit a lot from trading with each
other are prevented from doing so by mutual isolation. This is true even if many links
exist within each sub-group.


Social capital and public goods


       In the preceding sub-section we discussed the role of trust in fostering exchange.
Trust is also an essential ingredient in the delivery of public goods. In many cases, the
state can organize the provision of public goods by taxing individuals. Whenever this is
true, trust is not essential. But there are many forms of public goods that cannot be
harnessed through state intervention.
       In his work on PTA run schools, for instance, Coleman (1988) shows that parental
involvement in school affairs has a beneficial external effect on student achievement,
probably because it leads children to believe their parents care about their education.
Parental involvement, in turn, requires trust to reduce and solve interpersonal conflicts
and to minimize fears of free-riding. In this example, the externality is a public good that
cannot be harnessed by state intervention. Voluntary participation by parents is essential.
       In poor countries, there are many situations in which the state could, theoretically,
intervene to provide a public good, but where it is unable to do so because its tax base



                                            10
and its capacity to organize are limited. Collective action can serve as a substitute for the
state. However, because it cannot rely on the coercive power of the state (e.g. the ability
to tax and enforce contracts), collective action is much harder to set in motion. Two
essential ingredients are then required: leadership and trust. A leader is required who is
capable of convincing community members that they should voluntarily contribute to the
public good. Trust is necessary to resolve conflicts among competing interests and to
reduce fears of free-riding. Leaders can also help raise the level of trust in the
community.
       What the above discussion indicates is that delivering public goods via voluntary
organizations depends critically on local trust and leadership. If these ingredients are
absent, for instance after a civil war, then state intervention is likely to be much easier.
Furthermore, good local leaders are rare. Projects that work well in one place because of
strong local involvement need not be replicable elsewhere if local leaders are weak. Pilot
projects of public good delivery through local communities may provide wrong signals if
their placement is correlated with the presence of good local leaders who managed to
attract the pilot project to their community.


II.iii Social capital and development


       Much of the interest in social capital stems from the view that the absence of
social capital represents one of the major impediments to economic development;
Woolcock (1998) provides a wide ranging conceptual analysis of the role of social capital
for developing societies and economies; a range of applications of social capital to
economic development are collected in Dasgupta and Serageldin (2000) and Grootaert
and van Bastelear (2002),. In fact, much of the current interest in social capital stems
from the now classic book by Putnam, Leonardi and Nanetti (1993) which argues that
Northern Italy developed faster than Southern Italy because the former was better
endowed in social capital -- measured by membership in groups and clubs. One of the
major claims in this literature is that social capital can facilitate the solution of collective
action problems.




                                                11
       However, when focusing on advanced societies, the effects of social capital on
economic performance are less obvious. For example, Putnam (2000), focusing on the
U.S. experience since the 1950's, argues that social capital, defined as membership in
formal and informal clubs, has declined monotonically since the 1950’s. This is true for
all states, all decades, and all measures of social capital. However, he finds no
relationship between the speed of the decline of social capital and economic performance
across U.S. states or across time periods. Further, the relationship between social capital
and socioeconomic outcomes is even harder to characterize when one looks at
subperiods. For example, the 1990's were a period of rapid economic growth in the U.S.
yet it is also a period of rapid decline in social capital, at least based on the sorts of
measures he uses. To be clear, Putnam does attempt to associate higher social capital with
better socioeconomic outcomes, our point is that the relationship between the two for the
United States is even at first glance relatively complicated.
       The differences between the case of Italian regions and that of the United States is
suggestive of how one might think about the relationship between development and
social capital. One interpretation of these differences is that for the United States,
generalized trust has improved over the period studied, so club membership has become
less necessary.5 In contrast, the Italian experience relates to an earlier period in which
generalized trust may have been insufficient or incomplete and small clubs helped
broaden the range of personalized trust. This raises the general possibility that clubs and
networks are important at intermediate levels of development. Their function is to
broaden the range and speed of social exchange beyond the confines of inter-personal
trust. But once a sufficiently high level of generalized trust has been achieved, clubs and
networks are no longer necessary and wither away (North (2001)). A similar kind of
reasoning can be followed for public goods. In undeveloped economies, the state is weak

5
 In this discussion, we stipulate that Putnam’s claims about declining U.S. social capital
are correct. In fact, this claim has been subjected to important criticism. Skocpol (1996),
has argued, for example, that while participation in local groups has declined,
participations in larger organizations such as the American Association of Retired
Persons has increased, and that what really needs be understood is the nature of voluntary
group memberships and the like, rather than the number of memberships per se. See
Skocpol (2003) for a detailed elaboration of this idea. One important implication of




                                             12
and under-funded. Consequently it cannot organize the delivery of all needed public
goods. This is particularly true for local public goods or for public goods that require a
modicum of voluntary involvement to limit free-riding (of which corruption is but one
manifestation).
       Social capital provides an alternative. Clubs formed for non-economic purposes
(e.g., religious worship) have leaders. In the absence of public good provision by the
state, these leaders may decide to mobilize club members (e.g., the religious
congregation) to provide missing public goods. History is replete with examples of faith-
based organizations intervening to build schools and clinics and to provide a variety of
public services. Here, sharing a common religious fervor is the basis for trust and the
religious hierarchy provides the necessary leaders. Some large secular organizations have
adopted similar practices – e.g., political parties yesterday, non-governmental
organizations (NGOs) today.6
       These issues have immediate implications for empirical work on social capital.
The difficulty comes from the fact that first-best outcomes can in principle be achieved
without paying attention to clubs and networks. Generalized trust in commercial
contracts, for instance, can theoretically be achieved via laws and courts. Because of the
possibility that revenues may be collectively raised via taxation, public goods can in
principle be organized by the state at lower cost in terms of public mobilization and
leadership skills. As North (1973,1990) has argued, the rise of the Western world is
precisely due to the invention of institutions that protect property rights and make the
state more effective at delivering public goods. Clubs, networks, and community-based
voluntary organizations can improve efficiency in economic exchange and public good
delivery. But these are typically second-best solutions. The first-best approach is
generally to develop well-functioning legal institutions and state organizations.7



Skocpol’s work for economists is that many of the measures that have been proposed to
quantify social capital may be fundamentally flawed.
6
  One classic historical example is the role of the Social Democratic Party in organizing a
range of social and cultural activities for its members in Imperial Germany, see
Blackbourn (1997, chapter 8).
7
  Bowles and Gintis (2002) elaborate this type of reasoning, although in their view social
capital plays a role in overcoming limits to government intervention generated by


                                            13
       Whether or not social capital raises efficiency we therefore argue depends on the
level of institutional development. Suppose that laws and courts are insufficient to ensure
respect of commercial contracts. This situation can arise anywhere (Bernstein (1996)) but
it is probably most severe in poor countries where many transactions are small and buyers
and sellers are too poor for court action to yield reparation (Bigsten et al. (2000),
Fafchamps and Minten (2002)).8 In such an environment, market exchange relies on a
combination of personalized trust, legal institutions (e.g., to enforce large contracts and to
punish thieves), and informal institutions (e.g., reputation sharing within business
networks and communities). Whether or not social capital facilitates exchange can then
be seen as a test of the strength and reach of formal institutions.
       A similar line of reasoning holds for public goods. Public good delivery is best
accomplished when the power of the state to tax and mobilize resources is combined with
trust and community involvement. The reason is that, without voluntarily accepted
discipline, government action is ineffective: taxes do not get paid, rules are not followed,
civil servants become corrupt, and free riding reigns. Discipline in turn depends on the
perceived legitimacy of government action and the degree of public involvement in the
decision-making process. It also depends on identification with the political elites, sense
of national urgency, and many other factors which are still poorly understood. The
bottom-line, however, is clear: without some form of voluntary acceptance by the public,
government efforts to provide public goods are likely to fail. Social capital is thus
probably essential for public good delivery. But the forms it may take are likely to vary
depending on local conditions, i.e., from generalized trust in government and formal
institutions to interpersonal trust mobilized via clubs and networks.


II. iv. Social capital and equity


       We have argued that trust is essential to both economic exchange and public good
delivery. We have also argued that clubs and networks can facilitate search and provide

information constraints and so acts as a complement to government institutions in
producing efficient outcomes.
8
  Except through forced labor, as in 19th century England and France. But this is now
outlawed in most countries.


                                              14
an imperfect substitute to generalized trust: in the absence of generalized trust, it may be
necessary to rely on clubs and networks. Unlike generalized trust, however, clubs and
networks often have distributional consequences that may be quite inequitable. The
reason is that, unlike generalized trust, clubs and networks only offer a partial or uneven
coverage of society. If the benefits of social capital principally accrue to network
members, those who happen to be included benefit from increased efficiency but those
that are excluded are penalized. As Fafchamps (2002) and Taylor (2000) have shown, the
creation of clubs or networks can even penalize non-members. This is because members
of a club or network find it easier to deal with each other and, as a result, may stop
dealing with non-members.9
       Clubs are least conducive to equity when membership is restricted to a specific
group (e.g., men or whites) or when new members are not accepted (e.g., established
firms only). Even when new members are accepted without restriction, historical events
can shape the composition of clubs for decades whenever entry is slow. In this case,
equal opportunity need not be realized because old members have enjoyed the benefits of
membership for much longer. By extension, clubs are likely to have undesirable
consequences on equity whenever (1) club membership is beneficial to members and (2)
entry into the club is not instantaneous. Put differently, clubs raise equity concerns
whenever they have real economic benefits.
       The creation of clubs may thus reinforce polarization in society between the ‘in’
group and the ‘out’ group. Investing in social capital by promoting clubs can thus have
serious equity repercussions. This is true even if we ignore the fact that certain clubs may
collude to explicitly dominate or exclude others (e.g., the Ku Klux Klan). A similar
situation arises with networks because better connected individuals profit from their
contacts (Fafchamps and Minten (2002)). Social capital can be used by certain groups to
overtake others, generating between-group inequality and political tension. To the extent
that between-group inequality itself favors crime and riots and deters investment,
promoting social capital by promoting specific groups may, in the long-run, be
counterproductive.

9
 Of course, this is not to say that impersonal markets based on generalized trust treat all
groups fairly. Statistical discrimination, for instance, naturally arises even in the absence


                                             15
III. When does social capital matter?


The conceptual discussion has clarified the definition of social capital and its possible
role in the development process. This discussion, however, has not precisely identified
the conditions under which social capital matters. To achieve this, we need a general
conceptual framework in which there is room for social capital to be beneficial.


III.i   Sources of inefficiency


        For social capital to increase Pareto efficiency, the decentralized equilibrium
without social capital must not be Pareto efficient in the first place. Social capital can
only have a beneficial effect in a second-best world. Deviations from first-best outcomes
arise for a variety of reasons including externalities and free-riding, imperfect
information and enforcement, imperfect competition, and the like. For social capital to be
beneficial, it must therefore resolve or compensate for one of these sources of
inefficiency. Secondly, whatever the source of inefficiency, there are only a limited
number of ways by which social capital – or any other mechanism – may improve upon a
decentralized equilibrium. First, it may resolve a coordination failure in an economy that
has multiple Pareto-ranked equilibria. Second, it may alter individual incentives so as to
replace the decentralized equilibrium with a superior one. Third, it may affect the
technology of social exchange, for instance by opening new avenues for the circulation of
information.
        From these two preliminary observations, it is immediately obvious that social
capital will never be the only possible solution to inefficiency. There always exist
alternative mechanisms to solve coordination failure, improve individual incentives, and
upgrade the technology of social exchange – such as contracts, vertical integration, state
intervention, or redefinition of property rights. Of course, there are many circumstances
in which social capital is a less expensive or simpler institutional solution, but it is
important to recognize that it can never be the only one.

of clubs and networks (e.g. Fafchamps (2003)).


                                            16
         These   observations    have    immediate      implications   regarding     empirical
investigation. Suppose social capital improves efficiency by solving a coordination
failure problem. For this to occur, the economy must have multiple Pareto-ranked
equilibria. Social capital provides the leadership or coordination device necessary to
select a superior equilibrium among the many possible ones. Suppose further that the
researchers have multiple observations of such economies, some with social capital and
some without. Since nothing precludes these economies from achieving a high
equilibrium without social capital, it is inherently difficult to test its effect. Furthermore,
social capital may arise endogenously as an institutional response to an inferior
equilibrium. To the extent that social capital does not always succeed in moving the
economy to the better equilibrium, one could have the paradoxical situation in which
economies with social capital are on average at a lower equilibrium than those without.
This is a standard difficulty with multiple equilibria but it is not always adequately
recognized in empirical work.
         Even when there is a single equilibrium, social capital never is the only possible
way of improving efficiency by altering incentives or technology. Identifying the effect
of social capital requires that the researcher adequately control for other possible
institutional solutions. Here too, self-selection is a concern.


III.ii   Channels


         The literature has identified a number of channels by which social capital
improves efficiency. Most of these channels fall under one or a combination of the
following three categories: information sharing, group identity, and explicit coordination.


Information sharing


         It is a commonplace that human beings derive satisfaction from interacting with
others. Socializing often involves the transfer of information, even if the purpose of
socialization is not to transfer this information. The sharing of information is then a by-




                                              17
product of social interaction, a Marshallian externality. To the extent that the shared
information is economically useful, socialization generates a positive externality.
       Socialization may also be initiated with the intent of acquiring a specific piece of
information. In this case, the transfer of information is the purpose of socialization.
Because interacting with others is also a consumption good, collecting information
through socialization benefits from a kind of ‘subsidy’ relative to non-social forms of
information collection (e.g., going to the library).
       The literature on social capital contains many applications of this simple idea.
Barr (2000), for instance, argues that social networks among Ghanaian entrepreneurs
serve to channel information about new technology. Fafchamps and Minten (1999),
Granovetter (1975,1995), Montgomery (1991), Rauch and Casella (2001) and many
others have emphasized the role of business networks in conveying information about
employment and market opportunities. Fafchamps (2004), Greif (1993), Johnson,
McMillan and Woodruff (2000), Kandori (1992) and McMillan and Woodruff (2000)
have brought to light the role of social networks in circulating information about breach
of contract, thereby enabling business groups to penalize and exclude cheaters. Wade
(1987, 1988) discusses the role of social capital in reducing incentive problems in teams
by circulating information about effort. This point has also been made in the theoretical
literature on industrial organizations, where the possibility for members of a team of
workers to monitor and penalize each other has been shown to increase efficiency. Social
capital may also circulate information about what tasks need to be done and when.
Platteau and Seki (2002) provide an illustration of this idea in the case of Japanese
fishermen and the coordination of their fishing efforts to minimize cost (e.g., exchange
information about fish location) and maximize revenue (e.g., coordinate the landing of
fish to maximize prices).
       While the evidence provided is impressive, the literature remains somewhat naïve
in its assumption regarding the ease with which accurate information can be exchanged.
In practice, three conditions must be satisfied for social capital to raise Pareto efficiency
through the sharing of information: (1) imperfect information must be the source of
inefficiency; (2) there are disincentives to spread erroneous information; (3) there are no
obstacles to Pareto efficiency other than imperfect information. Even if social capital



                                              18
satisfies the first condition, it may not satisfy the other two. It is also important to
recognize that the information sharing benefits generated by social capital can always be
obtained in another way. For instance, information sharing can be explicitly organized
and budgeted within a large organization, whether public or private (enterprise, NGO).
To empirically test the effect of social capital, one should control for the possible
presence of such organizations.
       It is so customary to blame imperfect information for economic inefficiency that
other sources of inefficiency, such as imperfect contract enforcement and insufficient
protection of property rights, are sometimes disregarded. Fafchamps (2002), for instance,
shows how the decentralized enforcement of contracts naturally takes the form of
relational contracting, even without exchange of information. In this example, contract
enforcement is the channel through which social capital raises efficiency, not information
sharing. In his analysis of market institutions in sub-Saharan Africa, Fafchamps (2004)
points out that incentives often exist to distort the conveyed information, either to hurt a
competitor or to hide one’s own shortcomings. Interviews with entrepreneurs suggest that
gossip is never regarded as reliable information. Guaranteeing that accurate information
is transferred through social networks requires the existence of punishment mechanisms –
such as the loss of reputation – penalizing false reporting. Finally, there often are
obstacles to Pareto efficiency other than imperfect information. The most common one is
coordination failure. We revisit this issue below.


Group identity and modification of preferences


       Under the general heading of group identity and modification of preferences, we
put various effects that arise because identification with a group or network affects
individual preferences and choices. Economists usually regard individual preferences as
exogenously given and relatively stable over time. As psychologists have shown,
however, individual preferences can be manipulated through advertising or propaganda.
Individual preferences can also fluctuate over time in a systematic, somewhat predictable
fashion. Impulses are one particularly relevant example of such phenomenon. Individuals




                                             19
have been shown to violate their own stated preferences in response to an impulse – to
eat, to drink, to buy.
         This introduces time inconsistency in preferences. Because agents anticipate they
may be subject to impulses, they often resort to various ‘tricks’ that limit their future
choices – such as putting money on a savings account that cannot be accessed easily, or
carrying a limited amount of cash when shopping. Agents may also voluntarily enter in
restrictive social arrangements in order to protect themselves against their own impulses.
Alcoholic Anonymous is a good example of such a process. Participation in Rotating
Savings and Credit Associations (ROSCAs) can similarly be understood as a way of
forcing oneself to save.
         The literature on social capital is replete with descriptions of such virtuous
processes. Because these descriptions implicitly assume that social capital alters
individual preferences, they often seem alien to economists. One such claim often made
in the literature is the idea that social capital favors altruism and raises concerns for the
common good – the ‘touchy-feely’ side of social capital. To see how even a minor
increase in altruism can raise efficiency, consider a standard Prisoner’s Dilemma (PD)
game with standardized payoff matrix:


                                  Cooperate                       Defect
Cooperate                         (1,1)                           (-a,b)
Defect                            (b,-a)                          (0,0)


with a > 0 , b > 1 . It is standard that (Defect,Defect) is the unique Nash equilibrium. Now
suppose that players become altruistic, so that their utility is the weighted sum of their
individual payoff        Πi   and their opponent’s individual payoff            Π j , so that

U i = (1 − α ) Π i + αΠ j where α > 0 . In this case, Defect is no longer necessarily a best

response strategy; (Cooperate,Cooperate) is now a Nash equilibrium if 1 > b (1 − α ) − aα

or equivalently, α >
                         ( b − 1) . This condition can be satisfied for values of α   well below
                         b+a
one half, implying that, depending on the values of a and b, even moderate levels of



                                               20
altruism can eliminate the Prisoner’s Dilemma. Similar reasoning can be applied to
games with inferior equilibria, such as the assurance game: in these games some altruism
can also eliminate Pareto inferior outcomes. The intuition behind this result is obvious:
the more players internalize others’ payoffs, the more they care about Pareto efficiency.
When both players give equal weight to their payoff and others’, they only care about
aggregate welfare, what we call the common good. In this case, the equilibrium is always
Pareto efficient.10 Altruism provides an efficient solution to free-riding – a principle that
most religions seem to have discovered centuries ago.
       The relationship between altruism and social capital probably has to do with
group identity (Akerlof and Kranton (2000)). Economic experiments using the dictator
game and the trust game indeed suggest that agents exhibit more altruism and play more
cooperatively if they have been induced to identify with a group (e.g., Fershtman and
Gneezy (2001)).11 This is true even if members of the group are unknown and even if
they are not even seen during the experiment. These results suggest that group
identification may trigger agents to adopt more altruistic preferences, thereby yielding
more efficient group outcomes. If identification with a group is necessary for preferences
to become more altruistic and better aligned with the common good, efforts to foster a
sense of community may naturally be seen as an essential component of social capital by
many researchers. This probably explains why community building is often construed as
a way to foster social capital.
       Social capital may also affect preferences in other ways. As argued by Fafchamps
(1996) and Platteau (1994a), several mechanisms can be used to enforce contractual
obligations: legal and extra-legal penalties, loss of reputation, and guilt. These same
mechanisms can enforce contributions to the public good in case individual preferences
are not aligned with the common good. By circulating information, social capital can
magnify reputational sanctions, a point we have discussed in the previous sub-section.
Group identification can also raise guilt for acting against the group’s common interest.

10
  Note that the common good equilibrium is Pareto efficient in both the original, selfish
preferences Π i and in the altruistic preferences U i = (1 − α ) Π i + αΠ j .
11
  In the trust game players play sequentially. Player 1 gives an amount X to player 2.
This amount is multiplied by the researcher, usually by 2 or 3. Player 2 then gives an
amount Y to player 1. There is no repetition.


                                             21
In our PD game, this is formally equivalent to deducting the subjective cost associated
with guilt, call it g, from the payoff b associated with defection. If this feeling is strong
enough so that b − g < 1 , defection is deterred. Since Max Weber, the literature on market
development has emphasized the role played by religion in fostering business honesty
(Ensminger (1992), Geertz, Geertz and Rosen (1979), Poewe (1989)). Communist work
ethics propaganda can be seen as a similar effort to improve team performance by raising
guilt among shirkers.
       By favoring identification with a group, social capital may also affect preferences
through mimicry. In the literature, this idea appears in many guises, the phrase most
commonly used being ‘role model’. Coleman’s example of PTA-run schools is a good
illustration. According to Coleman, children whose parents are involved in running the
school adopt a more positive attitude towards study. This change in preferences cannot be
understood as altruism: it is in the children’s long-term self-interest to study. Nor does it
appear to be purely the result of a sharpened sense of guilt for not studying. Rather it is
related to a demonstration or role model effect: children change their preferences to
mimic that of their parents. By visibly and credibly demonstrating their positive attitude
towards school, parents induce a change in attitude among their children.
       This kind of phenomenon is related to what economists have called ‘herding
behavior’, that is, the drive to mimic the behavior of others. More research is needed in
this area to fully comprehend the phenomenon and its implications for economic
efficiency. As has been argued formally in Blume (2002), however, mimicry need not
result in superior equilibria: nothing in mimicry itself precludes agents from copying bad
behaviors instead of good ones. One famous example is that of a group of high school
students who refused to take their graduation exam as a symbol of group identity, even
though doing so hurt them all. Other examples of bad mimicry involve hazing, gang rape,
crime culture, and the like. Unlike altruism, mimicry is a double-edged sword.


Coordination and leadership


       Some of the beneficial effects of social capital on preferences occur by osmosis,
without any purposeful action by anyone: people chat around a glass of beer and, quite by



                                             22
chance, a relevant piece of information is exchanged. In many cases, however, the
benefits of social capital are only achieved through purposeful action: someone has to
want to improve the group’s welfare and must do something about it for benefits to
materialize. This is particularly true of any benefit that requires coordination in order to
be achieved.
       This raises a host of difficult issues having to do with the decision making process
within groups. It is well beyond the scope of this Chapter to discuss these issues in detail.
A few remarks are nevertheless in order. First, two essential ingredients seem to play
fundamental roles in purposeful group action: leadership, and rules regarding group
decision making. At this level of generality, their respective role is unclear. What is
inescapable, however, is that neither of them constitutes social capital.
       In very informal groupings, leadership is likely to be essential to alter individual
preferences and elicit voluntary contributions to the common good. While social capital
may assist the action of leaders by facilitating the circulation of information and favoring
group identification, the respective roles of leadership quality and social capital are likely
to be extremely difficult to disentangle. This has important implications for empirical
work: if good leadership is required to achieve the coordination required to benefit from
social capital, testing the effect of social capital requires controlling for the quality of
leadership.
       This observation also has implications for policy. Good leaders may improve
efficiency by using the levers of social capital – e.g., by fostering altruistic preferences
and concern for the common good; favoring group identification; preaching good
behavior and making free-riders feel guilty; encouraging mimicry of good behavior
through role models and the manipulation of group symbols and representations (e.g.,
religion, ideology). This is what practitioners in the field call ‘building social capital’.12
Many NGOs, for instance, are engaged in precisely this kind of work. Sometimes they
focus on the identification and training of local leaders, something to which many NGOs
refer as an example of ‘capacity building’ (Barr, Fafchamps, and Owens (2004)).


12
 To a number of economists, these forms of policy intervention may seem unusual
because they have no effect on material incentives but operate only through mental
representations. We revisit these issues in greater detail below.


                                             23
        Purposeful coordination can also be obtained through formal rules by which
decisions are made and deviance penalized. A simple majority rule combined with fines
and jail sentences for free-riders is in many cases sufficient to reach efficiency. As long
as free-riding is not so prevalent as to overwhelm policing, punishments directly alter
incentives in ways that align individual behavior with the common good. In this case,
social capital plays little role – except perhaps in coordinating not to overwhelm the
enforcement apparatus. Leadership also becomes less critical since there is no need for a
charismatic leader who can affect individual preferences directly. All that is required is a
‘bureaucratic’ leader who can apply and enforce the rules decided by the group.
        A proper investigation of the importance of social capital in economic life
therefore requires a careful analysis of the rules by which decisions are reached. It is
important not to credit social capital with outcomes due to formal rules. This means
distinguishing between the benefits resulting directly from formal organization and the
indirect benefits members derive from contact with each other. For instance, the Rotary
Club has a decision making body to coordinate the date and venue of its next dinner. The
coordination benefit of meeting on the same day in the same place follows directly from
the Club’s formal rules. But once at the dinner, there is probably no coordinated
mechanism to share information among members.
        This same sort of reasoning applies to schools. In addition to the effects of student
attitudes discussed by Coleman, PTA-run schools have an organizational structure
different from that of other schools. In particular, decisions are taken differently and
funding is allocated in a different manner when parents and teachers possess
decisionmaking power in schools. As Jimenez and Sawada (1999) have shown in the
case of El Salvador, PTA-run schools tend to provide greater remuneration and select
better teachers than other schools. These schools also exhibit lower rates of teacher
absenteeism. At least part of these differences may plausibly be attributed to differences
in funding and internal decision-making rules. Disentangling these effects from those of
social capital is likely to be difficult and contentious.


III.iii. Formal theory




                                               24
       While the ideas associated with social capital have been linked to many strands of
modern microeconomic theory, there has been relatively little formal modeling of social
capital per se. One reason for this, we conjecture, is the absence of a generally accepted
and coherent definition of social capital, as discussed.
       In terms of the efforts to embody social capital in formal economic models, one
approach that has been taken is to incorporate social capital in models in the context of
repeated prisoner’s dilemma games. In environments in which agents change partners,
the sustainability of a cooperative equilibrium depends on either the likelihood with
which a match today will be repeated in the future and/or the ability of an agent to access
information about the past behavior of a new partner (Kandori (1992)). In this context,
social capital is interpreted in terms of the factors that facilitate the existence of a
cooperative equilibrium.     Routledge and von Amsberg (2003), using a prisoner’s
dilemma environment of the type we described above, define social capital as present
whenever a cooperative equilibrium exists; the key variable that determines whether
cooperation can occur is the probability of trade between a pair of agents. Intuitively, if
this probability is high, two agents meeting today are likely to meet in the future, so that
any loss from cooperation today is compensated by future cooperation in the repeated
relationship. Routledge and von Amsberg apply this idea to study how migration across
regions or sectors, can, by lowering the likelihood of repeated interactions, lead to a loss
of social capital. Annen (2003) defines social capital as an individual’s reputation for
cooperation in prisoner’s dilemma games. In his analysis, this reputation depends on the
extent to which information transmission about past behavior is reliable and the
complexity of the network in which agents interact. Changes in either reliability or
complexity can thus alter levels of social capital. Annen focuses on the question of when
increases in network complexity lead to a reduction of network size or an increase in
network size accompanied by greater investment in communication capacity.
       Other formal theory relevant to social capital includes efforts to model the notions
of trust and trustworthiness. Zak and Knack (2001) study a general equilibrium growth
model in which agents facing moral hazard problems decide how much to invest in
monitoring. The presence and strength of formal and informal sanctions for dishonesty
are shown to have powerful implications for growth because of their role in reducing the



                                             25
need to invest in monitoring. Another approach to modeling trust is due to Somanathan
and Rubin (2004), who study the evolutionary stability of honest types in a population.
        Perhaps the most important contribution to formal theory is Dasgupta (2002)
which provides a wide ranging discussion of the relationship between social capital and
formal modeling. Dasgupta argues that social capital should not be defined in terms of
the presence of cooperation or some other outcome; rather that it should be regarded
directly as social structure.


            “…social capital is most usefully viewed as a system of
            interpersonal networks…If the externalities network formation
            gives to are “confined”, social capital is an aspect of “human
            capital”, in the sense economists use the latter term. However, if
            network externalities are more in the nature of public goods, social
            capital is a component of what economists call “total factor
            productivity.” (pg. 6-7)




Dasgupta’s analysis is important as it indicates how the role of social capital in growth
cannot be reduced to the addition of a variable to a linear cross-country growth
regression. His analysis is also important in its recognition that theoretical claims about
the desirability of the sorts of social structures that have been equated to social capital are
to some extent artifices of particular modeling assumptions. For example, he argues that
the claim that repetition of a one-shot game necessarily benefits the players of the game
is not a generic finding and in fact does not generally hold for payoff structures other than
the prisoner’s dilemma, going on to argue that work such as Fudenburg and Maskin
(1996) shows how social capital can lead to exploitive relationships. As such Dasgupta’s
analysis makes clear how functional notions of social capital are inconsistent with
rigorous theorizing. Other conceptual discussions of social capital and social science
include Ostrom and Ahn (2002) and Paldam and Svendsen (2000); the former is
particularly interesting to contrast with Dasgupta (2002) as it is written from the
perspective of non-economists and indicates some of the conceptual gaps between
economists and other social scientists on this topic.




                                              26
IV.    From theory to empirics: econometrics and social capital


       Having clarified the relationship between social capital and the efficiency of
social exchange, we now turn to the statistical analysis of the effects of social capital. We
first revisit the points raised in this section, such as the distinction between individual and
aggregate efficiency effects. We then ask whether it is possible to uncover social capital
effects from the sorts of data available to social scientists. In particular, we discuss the
issue of identification, that is, of whether a role for social capital can be uncovered when
other types of social effects may be present.
       Standard practice in economics and sociology is to run regressions of some
outcome of interest against a set of controls and some asserted empirical proxies for
social capital. These regressions are often justified by an informal argument that the
empirical proxies act as instrumental variables for the unobserved “true” social capital
measure. At one extreme, one finds analyses such as Furstenburg and Hughes (1995) in
which the probability that an individual drops out of school is related to variables such as
the presence of a father in the household or the educational aspirations of the person’s
friends. In contrast, studies such as Knack and Keefer (1997) attempt to explain growth
differences across entire countries using survey measures of trust.
       In this section, we discuss some general econometric issues that arise in social
capital studies of this type. We first examine difficulties inherent in the estimation of the
benefits from social capital on the basis of individual data. These difficulties are not
specific to social capital and are shared by other externalities. But they are often ignored
in empirical work.
       Second, we discuss the question of model specification. In particular, we review
some requirements for treating a given social capital regression as causal. Next, we
discuss identification. In this case, we assume that a researcher has the “correct” model of
some outcome of interest and ask whether observational data on the phenomena will
allow for the identification of a causal relationship between social capital and the
outcome.




                                              27
        The basic econometric issues associated with identifying a role for social capital
may be understood in the context of cross-sections. While panel data have certain
advantages, notably that they allow for the researcher to control for fixed effects across
units, the conditions under which social capital effects may be identified are not
qualitatively different.


IV.i. Externalities and individual vs. aggregate effects


        As we have discussed in Section II, the literature on social capital is interested in
externalities arising from coordination failure. Much of the empirical work on social
capital seeks to identify the effect of social capital on an outcome variable of interest,
say, ωi . This variable of interest can be measured at the aggregate level – e.g., country
growth – or at the individual level – e.g., performance of a pupil on an exam. Empirical
work on social capital can thus be divided into individual and aggregate level regressions.
        The first difficulty many researchers encounter is that individual returns to social
capital often are poor predictors of aggregate externalities. There are two main reasons
for this: fallacy of composition and free riding. A fallacy of composition arises whenever
social capital pegs individuals against each other. In a situation of competition for a finite
resource, the gains made by those with more social capital lead to losses for those
without, relative to a situation without social capital. Free riding is the opposite situation
in which aggregate social gains are larger than those appropriated by the owners of social
capital. We discuss them in turn.


Fallacy of composition


        To illustrate fallacy of composition, consider a simple job search example
inspired by Granovetter’s work. Suppose there are M job openings and N job seekers, all
identical, with N>M. Suppose that employers and workers do not know each other and
are matched at random. Since N>M, all positions are filled and each worker has an equal
                                M
probability of getting a job      . Total surplus is the sum of employer and worker
                                N



                                             28
surplus. Since all workers are equivalent, total surplus is the same irrespective of which
workers get the available jobs.
       Next suppose that, because of interpersonal connections, a group of workers C
hears about the open positions before other workers. Further suppose that C < M .
Consequently C workers get a job with probability 1. Other workers get the remaining
                          M −C                       M
jobs with probability          which is smaller than   . Total surplus is unchanged since
                          N −C                       N
workers are equivalent. Social networks – in this case the existence of a better connected
group of workers – have no effect on the efficiency of social exchange. But they have
important distributional consequences, which can be measured by regressing the
probability of obtaining a job on group membership. Doing so in our example would
                             M −C
yield a coefficient of 1 −        on membership in the group even though the net effect
                             N −C
of social networks on aggregate welfare is zero. What this example illustrates is that
social networks can have private returns even when they have no effect – other than
distributional – on the efficiency of social exchange. Observing private returns to social
networks should therefore not be construed as evidence of social capital. In our example,
social networks actually generate a discriminatory outcome, which is inconsistent with
equality of opportunity as conceptualized by Roemer (1998) for example.13
       The above reasoning can be extended to situations where groups, not individuals,
compete with each other. Consider, for instance, high schools competing to place their
graduates at Harvard. We assume that the number of admissions in Harvard is fixed and
that the university selects the students with the best grades on a standardized test.
Suppose that Coleman is right and that, because of the social capital effects of parental
involvement in school affairs, students in PTA-run schools obtain better grades. As a
result, they are more likely to go to Harvard than students from non-PTA schools.
Whether or not this raises social welfare depends on how critical high school education is
to university learning.

13
   A similar example could be constructed in which it is the effect of social capital on
trust that matters. For instance, imagine silk produced in China and consumed in Europe.
Chinese silk producers do not trust European consumers so that direct sale is not possible.




                                              29
        To illustrate this point, suppose that students learn all they need to know at
Harvard. The only purpose of high school education is to screen out less able students.
Further assume that the minimum grade required to be admitted at Harvard is higher than
the grade necessary to earn one’s degree: some applicants do not get in even though, if
they did, they would earn their degree. In this case, the role of social capital is again to
enable one group – students in PTA schools – preferential access to a rationed resource –
admission at Harvard. The effect of social capital is distributional. Regressing the
probability of admission in Harvard on social capital would yield a positive coefficient
even though, in this example, the effect of social capital on the efficiency of social
exchange is zero. Of course, we do not claim that the above example is an accurate
depiction of the education system. The only purpose of the example is to illustrate the
danger of estimating the beneficial effect of social capital by comparing individual or
group outcomes according to whether or not they have social capital. Whenever social
capital enables one group to displace another, a statistical comparison of the two groups
is bound to overestimate the efficiency gain from social capital.
        This example exposes another ambiguity of the concept of social capital. In our
review of definitions of social capital, we noted that most authors associate social capital
with the idea of beneficial group externalities. In the above – admittedly extreme –
example, groups of students in PTA-run schools benefit from the social capital generated
by their parents. But society as a whole does not. According to our definition, there is
social capital at the level of each group but not at the aggregate level. This contradiction
serves to remind us that it is perilous to define a social process as necessarily having
beneficial effects.


Free riding


        It is also possible that social capital generates beneficial externalities but yields no
(or few) individual returns for the holders of social capital. A case in point is when the
external effects of social capital are fully captured by outsiders – i.e. individuals or


A group of traders who manages to gain the trust of both producers and consumers can
then capture the silk trade.


                                              30
groups who are outside the social networks or do not share the norms and values of the
group – who do not incur the cost of generating the externality.
       To see this, consider N groups of fishermen tapping the same fishing ground.14
Without collective action, there is over-fishing. Suppose that fishing groups with better
social capital enforce self-restraint – either through shared norms or through relational
contracting – while others do not.       Gains from self-restraint are shared among all
fishermen, irrespective of whether they have social capital or not. Social capital increases
aggregate social welfare but fishermen with less social capital have higher profit because
they free ride: they benefit from the self-restraint of others without having to incur any
cost. Regressing fish catch on social capital would result in a zero or negative coefficient
on social capital even though it has a positive social return.
       The externality can also be pecuniary. Keeping the fishing example, a similar
result obtains if the fishing groups do not share a common fishing ground but sell their
fish on the same market: social capital makes collusion to restrict supply possible since
all fishermen benefit from higher fish prices.15 To ascertain the effect of social capital,
one needs to compare fishing groups who do not compete with each other by either
accessing the same fishing ground or by selling fish on the same market.
       What these examples demonstrate is that, in the presence of fallacy of
composition or free riding, individual returns from social capital are poor indicators of
aggregate returns. If social capital enables certain individuals or groups to capture rents at
the expense of others (e.g., jobs in a non-clearing labor market, entry at Harvard when the
entry criterion is excessive), individual returns to social capital exceed social returns, and
social capital generates unequal outcomes. In contrast, if social capital generates positive
externalities not fully appropriated by owners of social capital, individual returns
underestimate social returns.


IV.ii. Model specification


14
   This example is inspired by the work of Platteau and Seki (2002) on Japanese
fishermen.
15
   An example of this situation is OPEC: not all oil producing countries are member, but
they all benefit from higher prices even though only members of the cartel restrict their
production.


                                             31
Exchangeability


        As we have noted, social capital studies have been applied to a remarkably large
number of units of observation, ranging from individual farmers to countries. One natural
question is whether these studies in fact use comparable observations. At an abstract
level, comparability of observations is a requirement for virtually all causal studies. We
raise the question in the context of social capital studies for several reasons.
        First, social capital studies, particularly those that employ aggregate data, often
use relatively crude sets of control variables. As a result, the residuals in the sample will
contain forms of heterogeneity that call into question the placement of the observations in
a common regression.
        Second, social capital studies often fail to account for the reasons why different
agents come to have different levels of social capital. As Durlauf (2002c) states


            …statistical analyses of social capital typically compare outcomes
            for individuals or aggregates who have social capital versus those
            who do not. These studies, in turn, typically do not incorporate a
            separate theory of the determinants of social capital formation,
            although they do often employ instrumental variables to account
            for the endogeneity of social capital. However, without a theory as
            to why one observes differences in social capital formation, one
            cannot have much confidence that unobserved heterogeneity is
            absent in the samples under study. (pg. 464)


Notice that this argument is more general than simply arguing that social capital is an
endogenous variable. Since the groups in which individuals are organized often are
endogenous, there will be various forms of sample selection that need to be accounted for
in empirical work.
        To see that these are more than abstract concerns, consider the regressions
employed in Helliwell and Putnam (2000) to show the effects of social capital on
economic growth. These authors regress regional output growth in Italy against initial
output and measures of civic community, institutional performance, and citizen
satisfaction.   They find that these three measures explain persistent differences in
regional growth rates and conclude that this supports social capital explanations of


                                              32
economic performance. Among the many questionable assumptions that underlie such a
conclusion is the assumption that the regression they employ is using comparable objects
as observations. In other words, the analysis assumes that each observation is generated
by a common growth process. What must be assumed about the growth process in
different regions when one includes Northern and Southern Italian regions in a
regression? One answer to this question is that one must assume that given the variables
included in the regression, the errors for the observations of different regions cannot be
distinguished, at least from the perspective of their distributions. Put differently, one must
assume that the regression is such that there is no reason to expect that the error from a
particular region has a nonzero expected value, for example. But how can a regression of
this crudity make such a breathtaking claim? The historical and social science literatures
give any number of reasons why this assumption is false in contexts such as Italian
regimes.     But if the assumption is false then one cannot defend the interpretation
provided by Helliwell and Putnam (2000) for their regression results.
       Brock and Durlauf (2001b) argue that a way to formalize the notion of
comparability is via the mathematical concept of exchangeability. We introduce this
formalism as it provides a way of providing a link between the ways one thinks about
data as a social scientist and the sorts of statistical assumptions that underlie regression
exercises.
       Suppose that for each of I observations, one has associated information Fi . This
information may include factors that are quantifiable, such as the savings rate of a
country, as well as factors that are not necessarily quantifiable, such as knowledge of a
country’s culture. Suppose that some outcome ω i is generated by the linear model


                                      ωi = γ Z i + ηi                                    (1)


where Zi represents that part of Fi that is controlled for in the regression. Typically,

models such as (1) are interpreted as meaning that, except for differences in the value of
Zi , ω i may be thought of as draws from a common distribution, which in turn means

that the ηi ’s are drawn from a common distribution. Notice, however, that this notion of



                                             33
being drawn from a common distribution should be determined relative to the complete
information set available for each observation, i.e. Fi . Hence, interpretation of (1)

presupposes that having controlled for the various Zi ’s, one has no information that

allows one to distinguish the residuals. Formally, the errors ηi are Fi -conditionally

exchangeable, which means that


                                                   (
           µ (η1 = a1 ,… ,η K = aK F1 … FI ) = µ η ρ (1) = a1 ,… ,η ρ ( K ) = aK F1 … FI   )   (2)



where ρ ( ⋅) is an operator that permutes the K indices.

       Exchangeability is a useful formalization because it creates a benchmark for the
assessment of empirical studies. In fact, many of the standard problems that arise in
regression analysis amount to exchangeability violations. For example, when a regressor
is omitted from a regression, this will mean that the errors in (1) are no longer
exchangeable as the distribution of a given error will depend on the distribution of the
included and omitted variables. Similarly, if there is parameter heterogeneity between
observations, this will imply that the distribution of a given error depends on which
country it is associated with.        To take a third example, self-selection can induce
exchangeability violations as the errors associated with one observation may be
differentiated from other differences in the implications of self-selection for the
conditional expectations of the residuals. To be clear, as Brock and Durlauf (2001b)
observe, exchangeability is not necessary for causally interpreting regressions. For
example, heteroskedasticity in errors is an exchangeability violation, but is compatible
with a structural regression interpretation. What we argue here is that good empirical
practice requires that one assess whether conditional exchangeability of errors holds for
the regression under study. To be more precise, we believe that a good empirical practice
is to ask, for a given regression specification whether, given the information a researcher
possesses about the individual observations, the researcher can justify the assumption of
(2) and if not, determine whether the regression retains the interpretation the researcher
wishes to place upon it.




                                                34
Instrumental variables


        As observed above, in many contexts social capital is endogenous social capital.
The problem of endogeneity is obvious in many contexts; when one talks about
membership in organizations, one must account for the fact that membership is a choice
variable. In other cases, the endogeneity problem is more subtle. Measures of trust are
often used to characterize social capital. Since trust presumably is related to
trustworthiness in actual behavior, such measures will exhibit endogeneity problems as
well.
        Many researchers have recognized that social capital is endogenous and so have
employed instrumental variables to allow for consistent estimation of parameters.
Leaving aside issues of self-selection that are not often not appropriately addressed by
instrumental variables approaches, the use of instrumental variables in social capital
studies can be subjected to criticism. Specifically, in many social capital studies the
choice of instrumental variables often appears to rely on ad hoc and untenable exogeneity
assumptions.
        For example, Narayan and Pritchett (1999), using village level data, argue that
measures of village level trust can instrument for measures of group memberships. In
their analysis social capital effects are argued to occur when one individual’s
“associational life” affects others in his village; measures of associational life include
factors such as the number of group memberships. Since associational life may be a
consumption good and thereby an increasing function of individual income, Narayan and
Pritchett argue that it must be instrumented if one wants to identify how social capital
causally affects income.     Yet, there is little reason that such a variable is a valid
instrument. As pointed out above, if trust is related to trustworthiness, as presumably is
the case, then there is no reason why trustworthy behavior is any different than
membership in an organization in terms of whether it is a choice variable. And without a
theory of what determines trustworthy behavior, there is little hope of identifying credible
instrumental variables for it in these types of regressions.
        The choice of instrumental variables is often one of the most difficult problems in
empirical work. In social capital contexts, the absence of explicit modeling of the



                                             35
process by which groups are formed and social capital created means that an empirical
researcher is forced to rely on intuition and guesswork. While this does not condemn all
studies using instrumental variables, we do believe that inadequate attention has been
paid to justifying instrumental variables in social capital contexts.


Group effects versus social capital effects


       A final specification issue in social capital studies concerns the question of
distinguishing between social capital and other group effects. There is no shortage of
reasons why group memberships influence individuals. For example, in recent models of
income inequality, primary emphasis has been given to peer group effects and role model
effects as influencing educational outcomes for youths.         This creates a relationship
between the outcomes for a given youth and the outcomes of others in his community of
residence.16 In many modern growth models, a key assumption is the presence of various
types of increasing returns to scale that are produced by externalities. These types of
models often take the form of positing that the productivity of a given actor depends on
the human and physical capital stocks of others. From the perspective of statistical
modeling, the description of individual behavior will require the incorporation of various
group-level variables.
       From the perspective of empirical work, the problem is simple. If one claims that
a social capital effect is present for some behavior on the basis of the statistical
significance of a group-level variable, this claim will not be credible unless one is able to
argue that the group-level variable is capturing social capital versus some alternative
group-level effect.      This problem is particularly serious when social capital is
endogenous, since aggregate levels of social capital are then determined by other group-
level variables, which, in absence of strong prior information, presumably include
whatever aggregate variables have been omitted from a regression explaining outcomes.




16
 See Durlauf (2001,2002a) for discussion of a range of possible group-level influences
on individual behavior.


                                             36
IV.iii. Identification


        The question of social capital and other group effects leads to the question of
identification.   In this section, we assume that the model under study is correctly
specified and evaluate what model parameters can be recovered from observational data.
This work is developed in Durlauf (2002c), a paper which builds on early work by
Manski (1993) and later work by Brock and Durlauf (2001a,c) on identifying group
effects in data. Our basic framework treats the level of social capital in a community as
an endogenous variable that represents the aggregation of individual-specific social
capital levels (for example, investments in individual-specific social capital as in Glaeser,
Laibson, and Sacerdote (2002)). As such, the determination of how social capital effects
individuals is an example of the “reflection problem” that Manski’s seminal (1993) paper
characterizes; identification problems arise when one needs to distinguish the effects of
the choices of others versus the characteristics of others on an individual. Identification
questions when social capital is exogenous are discussed separately.


IV.iii.a. Individual-level Data


        We first consider the case where one wishes to understand the effect of social
capital on some individual outcome ω i . For individual-level data, linear versions of

social capital models can be expressed as follows. Suppose that each agent i is a
member of some group g ( i ) . Each individual chooses an outcome variable ωi that is

linearly dependent on some control variables. Assume these variables are of four types:
an r -dimension vector of variables that are measured at the individual level, X i ; an s -
dimension vector of variables (often called contextual effects) that are measured at the
group level and are predetermined at the time that choices are made, Yg (i ) ; an individual's

                                                    (           )
expectation of the average choice of others, E ω g ( i ) Fg ( i ) (called an endogenous effect,

cf. Manski (1993)), where this expectation is made conditional on some information set

                                                            (            )
Fg ( i ) ; and expected social capital in the community, E SCg ( i ) Fg ( i ) . The assumption that



                                               37
individual behavior depends on expected rather than actual social capital does not result
in any loss of generality. Similarly, our assumption that agents react to the expected
behaviors and social capital levels in their group rather than the expected levels among
group members other than themselves has no bearing on the analysis, cf. Brock and
Durlauf (2001a,c).
       We assume that the X i and Yg (i ) vectors are components of the information sets

from which expectations are formed; these expectations are further assumed to be
rational, so we work with mathematical expectations rather than subjective beliefs. The
behavioral outcome is described by



                                                     (               )        (
                ωi = k + cX i + dYg (i ) + J1E ωg (i ) Fg (i ) + J 2 E SCg (i ) Fg (i ) + ε i  )                  (3)



       In order to close the model, it is necessary to specify how group level social
capital is determined. We assume that group level social capital is the average of
individual social capital levels, SCi . These levels are determined by an individual-level
behavioral equation that is analogous to (3):



                                                      (                  )        (
                SCi = k + cX i + dYg ( i ) + J1E ω g ( i ) Fg ( i ) + J 2 E SCg ( i ) Fg ( i ) + ηi)              (4)



       The identification problem amounts to asking whether the parameters in (3) are
uniquely determined by the reduced form equations that describe ω i and SCi . In order
to solve for these reduced form equations, one first applies an expectations operator to
both sides of (3) and (4). For the outcome equation,



            (              )                                     (                )       (
          E ω g (i ) Fg ( i ) = k + cX g (i ) + dYg (i ) + J1E ω g ( i ) Fg ( i ) + J 2 E SCg (i ) Fg ( i )   )

or




                                                          38
                                                                                           (
                                                   k + cX g ( i ) + dYg (i ) + J 2 E SCg ( i ) Fg ( i )        )
                            (             )
                         E ωg ( i ) Fg ( i ) =
                                                                         1 − J1
                                                                                                                                         (5)

        .



and for the social capital equation



              (                 )                                        (                         )       (
            E SCg ( i ) Fg ( i ) = k + cX g (i ) + dYg (i ) + J1E ω g ( i ) Fg ( i ) + J 2 E SCg ( i ) Fg ( i )             )
or

                                                                                               (
                                                     k + cX g (i ) + dYg ( i ) + J1E ωg ( i ) Fg ( i )         )
                            (
                         E SCg ( i ) Fg (i ) = )                          1− J2
                                                                                                                                         (6)



In these expressions, X g ( i ) is the within-group average of X i and represents the relevant

set of variables that relate individual characteristics of group members to the group-level

                                           (
behaviors. Subsituting out E ω g ( i ) Fg ( i )              ) and E ( SC         g (i )               )
                                                                                               Fg ( i ) in (3) and (4) using the

expressions in (5) and (6) produces reduced form expressions for ωi and SCi . Durlauf
(2002c) verifies the following proposition, which describes necessary conditions for
identification.




Proposition 1. Identification in linear individual-level models with social capital


        Identification of the parameters in eq. (3) requires

i.      The dimension of the linear space spanned by elements of                                                       (1, X , Y ( ) )
                                                                                                                             i   g i
                                                                                                                                          is

        r + s +1 .

ii.     The dimension of the linear space spanned by the elements of 1, X i , X g ( i ) , Yg ( i )                 (                      )
        is at least r + s + 3 .


                                                                39
        What this proposition states is that identification depends critically on the
relationship between the vector X g ( i ) that does not appear in the behavioral equations (3)

and (4) and the vectors X i and Yg (i ) that do appear in these equations. Intuitively, the

                                                                           (
key idea is that identification of equation (3) fails if E ωg ( i ) Fg ( i )           )           (
                                                                                           and E SCg ( i ) Fg ( i )   )
                                                                                       (
are linearly dependent on the other terms in the regression, i.e. 1, X i , Yg (i ) . Each of           )
these variables is a linear function of Yg (i ) and X g ( i ) . So, if X g ( i ) is linearly independent

of these other regressors, identification may hold.
        What does this theorem require in terms of empirical implementation? A key
requirement is that there are at least two X i variables whose within-group averages are

not elements of Yg (i ) . The existence of such variables will of course depend on context.

For example, one can imagine situations in which an individual’s age affects his
behavior, but not the average age of others in his group. The need for such prior
information illustrates how field work and qualitative studies can augment formal
statistical analyses.


IV.iii.b. Aggregate data


        A number of social capital studies employ data that are aggregated. Typically,
these studies explore the average behavior of groupings which define the social
environment for the individuals that comprise them. From the perspective of estimation,
one can think of such models as taking within group averages of (3) and (4), so that


                                              (            )       (
                        ωg = k + dYg + J1E ω g Fg + J 2 E SC g Fg + ε g        )                                 (7)


and


                                                  (            )       (
                        SC g = k + dYg + J1E ω g Fg + J 2 E SCg Fg + η g           )                             (8)



                                                      40
where ωg and SC g are group level averages.

        Necessary conditions for identification in this case are also developed in Durlauf
(2002c). To characterize these conditions, let H ω ,g and H SC , g denote the linear spaces

spanned by those regressors Yg with nonzero coefficients in equations (7) and (8)
                    c
respectively. Let H SC , g denote that part of H SC , g that is orthogonal to H ω ,g (i.e. the


linear space formed by the orthogonal complements of any basis of H SC , g after being

projected on H ω ,g ). These spaces are used in the following proposition on identification.


Proposition 2. Identification of social capital effects with aggregate data


i.      Identification of the parameters in eq. (7) requires that the dimension of the linear
                c
        space H SC , g is at least 2.


ii.     If J1 is known to equal 0, then identification of the parameters of eq. (7) requires
                                                 c
        that the dimension of the linear space H SC , g is at least 1.




        Relative to the identification condition for the individual level model, there are
some important differences. Specifically, in the aggregate case, one no longer has access
to instrumental variables based on the averaging of individual-level variables. In order to
achieve identification, it is necessary to have prior knowledge of aggregate variables that
affect social capital but do not affect the aggregate outcome under study. Intuitively, in
the aggregate data case, one is in essence working with a standard simultaneous equations
system, so cross-equation exclusion restrictions must be employed to achieve
identification.
        To repeat, the import of these various econometrics issues depends on the context
under study, the data available to a researcher, etc. The issues raised in this section
should be regarded as providing benchmarks in the assessment of empirical studies; their
salience will depend on the context that is under study.




                                               41
IV.iii.c. Identification with predetermined social capital


        When social capital is predetermined, the relevant individual level equation is
now



                                                                 (             )
                             ωi = k + cX i + dYg (i ) + J1E ω g (i ) Fg (i ) + J 2 SCg (i ) + ε i                    (9)



which means that social capital enters the equation in a symmetric way to the contextual
effects Yg (i ) . Identification for models of this type has been initially studied in Manski

(1993) and subsequently by Brock and Durlauf (2001a,b); an identification problem still

                                                                               (          )
exists because of the potential multicollinearity of E ω g ( i ) Fg ( i ) with the other control

variables in (9). Durlauf (2002c) provides the following necessary conditions for
identification.


Proposition 3. Identification of individual level behavioral equation with exogenous
social capital


        Identification of the parameters in eq. (9) requires


i.      The dimension of the linear space spanned by elements of (1, X i , Yg ( i ) , SC g (i ) ) is

        r+s+2.


ii.     The       dimension             of     the     linear        space     spanned    by        the   elements   of

        (1, X , X
              i     g (i )   , Yg (i ) , SC g (i ) ) is at least r + s + 3 .


        However, unlike the endogenous social capital case, it may be possible to identify
whether the role of social capital is nonzero even if (9) is not identified. Following an
argument of Manski (1993), observe that the reduced form for (9) is




                                                                42
                              k             Jc            d               J
                    ωi =          + cX i + 1 X g (i ) +        Yg (i ) + 2 SC g ( i ) + ε i                          (10)
                           1 − J1         1 − J1        1 − J1          1 − J1

                                                               J2
Identification of the compound parameter                            is sufficient for determining whether
                                                             1 − J1
there is some social capital effect. Identification of this parameter requires that the social
capital variable is not linearly dependent on the other variables in (10); formally (Durlauf
(2002c)) verifies


Proposition 4. Identification of a social capital effect when social capital is
exogenous


If the dimension of (1, X i , X g ( i ) , Yg ( i ) , SC g ( i ) ) exceeds (1, X i , X g (i ) , Yg ( i ) ) then the presence

of a social capital effect may be identified from (10).


          Proposition 4 may be readily extended to the case of aggregate data; if aggregate
social capital is exogenous then it is simply nothing more than an additional regressor in
an aggregate outcome regression. On the other hand, if one is working with aggregate
data and social capital is exogenous, then it is impossible to identify any of the model
parameters. The reason is simple: there are no longer any instrumental variables available

                                                                   (             )
from the social capital equation to instrument E ω g ( i ) Fg ( i ) , so no analog to Proposition

3 exists.


IV.iv. Additional issues


          A number of difficulties beyond identification plague empirical work on social
capital. As we have emphasized in Section II, reliance on interpersonal relationships and
networks can often be seen as a symptom that formal institutions do not work well.17 To

17
  This does not imply that networks would never be observed in well developed markets.
Through interpersonal relationships, economic agents may form coalitions to subvert the
market equilibrium to their advantage. Think of cartels, for instance. Clubs and networks
can similarly be used to bias market outcomes, e.g., to ban non-whites or women from


                                                           43
illustrate how this might impact statistical analysis, suppose we have data on labor
markets in different countries and we seek to estimate whether the density of social
networks raises the average quality of the match between workers and employers.
Suppose for the sake of argument that we have a convincing measure for the average
quality of the match. Regressing this measure against the density of social networks is
likely to yield incorrect results if the researcher does not control for differences in formal
institutions across the countries.
       For instance, employment offices may play an active match-making role in some
countries. Failing to control for employment offices would underestimate the effect of
social capital. In fact, if employment offices channel information more efficiently than
interpersonal networks and if these networks arise in response to the absence of
employment offices, countries with more networks will have less efficient labor markets.
       Studies of the effects of social capital on the delivery of public goods suffer from
other problems as well. Earlier in this section we have argued that social capital is
difficult to disentangle from other group effects. One such group effect likely to influence
empirical work is the role of leadership. Community leaders often play a crucial role in
fostering the creation of social capital – e.g., membership drive – that they can harness
for a particular goal. Observing a relationship between social capital and the presence of
a public good may be due to the presence of a third, unobserved factor: leadership. The
distinction between the two effects is important for policy because good community
leaders are rare and leadership is much harder to replicate than groups.




V.     Empirical studies of the effects of social capital


       Following the econometric discussion, the literature on the effects of social capital
may be divided into two types: individual and aggregate studies.


V.i. Individual-level studies


certain jobs. Political clientelism is another example (Bayart (1989)). In all these cases,
social capital actually reduces aggregate welfare.


                                             44
        Individual-level studies of social capital may be divided into studies that focus on
developing societies and studies that focus on OECD societies. This division reflects
more than data sets. Studies of social capital in developing societies are associated with
somewhat different questions than their OECD (primarily United States-based)
counterparts. This division reflects differences in underlying concerns. Development
scholars are interested in social capital as a mechanism to ameliorate society-wide
problems whereas interest in advanced societies tends to derive from concerns about the
persistence of social exclusion and poverty in affluent societies.
        A typical social capital study in this literature posits an individual outcome of the
form


                                ωi = γ X i + π Yg (i ) + JSCg (i ) + ε i                  (11)


where, following previous notation, X i denotes a set of individual controls, Yg (i ) denotes

a set of group controls and SC g ( i ) denotes social capital. As such, eq. (11) corresponds to

the case of exogenous social capital discussed in Section III. Evidence for the relevance
of social capital is equated with the statistical significance of the coefficient J. In the
various tables we have constructed to summarize various empirical papers, we report
dependent variables and social capital measures, as well as findings based on the
statistical significance standard.


Social capital and development


        Links between social capital and development have been examined in a range of
contexts. One reason for this is that the failure of many developing economies to achieve
sustained growth has led social scientists to look for previously unexplored factors in the
development process. Table 1 lists a number of studies of social capital in developing
societies.




                                                  45
       As the table indicates, a range of alternative outcomes have been studied.
Similarly, a range of social capital measures have been employed. While these studies
are quite disparate, there are some commonalities. First, these development studies
typically focus on measures describing the social networks in which individuals
participate. Fafchamps and Lund (2003), Fafchamps and Minten (2001,2002), Grootaert
(2000), Isham (2002) and Narayan and Pritchett (1999) all give primary focus to the role
of memberships in various organization and trading networks as determinants of
economic outcomes. The quite different social capital measures used by Lee and Brinton
(1996) and Palloni et al (2001) reflect the different outcomes they are measuring
(immigration and placement in elite firms.) Further, the studies in Table 1 give primary
focus to participation in organizations that can provide economic benefits in terms of
information sharing and the production of collective goods. In this sense, these studies
focus on economic benefits to organizations as opposed to more tangible psychological
and social benefits.
       From the perspective of the discussion of identification in Section III, several
questions arise. First, how does one differentiate social capital effects from the presence
of other group effects such as information spillovers, or the presence of common factors
such as legal or political institutions? In the papers discussed here, relatively little
attention has been paid to this question. Notice that the failure to consider this issue is
not necessarily a damning criticism, in the sense that one may have reasons to rule out
such effects in advance.     However, these studies also typically fail to make good
arguments that alternative social determinants of outcomes can be ignored. This strikes
us as a more serious indictment in that social capital variables can easily proxy for such
factors. Put differently, we have argued that social capital represents a new explanation
of individual and aggregate outcomes primarily to the extent that it embodies certain
types of informal norms. The empirical literature typically does not contrast this view
with alternative perspectives on social interactions.
       In our judgment, the more successful studies of social capital and development
are those that have focused on specific phenomena that have been placed under the social
capital rubric. Unsurprisingly, Fafchamps and Minten (2002) is in our view a good
example of this approach. As indicated in the paper’s title, the focus of the analysis is



                                             46
less on social capital per se than on the role of social networks in affecting trader
profitability. This paper focuses on agricultural traders in Madagascar. These traders are
intermediaries between farmers and various markets in the country. Because the goods
they sell (staples such as rice, potatoes, and beans) are well defined (the basic goods are
homogeneous and are distinguishable by observable features such as whether they have
been milled or converted to flour, etc.), it is relatively easy to measure the value added
associated with a trader’s activity. Fafchamps and Minten (2002) find that measures of
the size of an individual trader’s business network are positively associated with value
added and total sales. The paper argues that a relationship between networks and these
economic outcomes may be understood in the context of models of imperfect information
and monitoring, which provides a clear theoretical motivation for the empirical
framework as well as a plausible theoretical interpretation for the various findings.
        Finally, it should be noted that while the different studies in Table 1 consistently
support a role for social capital in facilitating various economic outcomes, two of the
studies, Krishna (2001) and Varughese and Ostrom (2001), argue that there are important
subtleties in this relationship that need to be accounted for. Krishna (2001) finds that for
villages in Rajastan India, the relationship between conventional social capital measures
and outcomes such as common land development and poverty reduction is sensitive to a
notion of effective governance Krishna calls “capable agency.” By capable agency,
Krishna refers to factors such as strong leadership in organizations, frequent interactions
between villagers and clients, etc. His argument is that the density of organizations, a
variable often used to measure social capital, will be associated with socially better
outcomes only when capable agency is present. Varughese and Ostrom (2001) find,
based on a study of groups of forest users in Nepal, that levels of collective action are not
well predicted by measures of ethnic, caste, and religious homogeneity within these
groups. These sorts of variables are often used to proxy for social capital. Varughese and
Ostrom (2001) conclude that institutional design, how decisions are made, etc, can
overcome barriers to cooperation that are induced by heterogeneity. Taken together,
these studies illustrate that successful group activities depend on more than the presence
of social ties per se.




                                             47
Social capital in OECD societies


         Just as social capital has been used to explain a range of outcomes in developing
economies, so it has been used to explain a range of US phenomena. Table 2 reports a
number of such studies.
         In comparing Tables 1 and 2, a number of differences may be identified. First,
social capital studies for affluent societies are far more heterogeneous than those which
we report for developing economies. One finds studies of social capital for the United
States that explore outcomes ranging from mental health (Furstenburg and Hughes
(1995)) to dropping out of high school (Teachman, Paasch, and Carver (1997)) to
criminal activity (Hagan and McCarthy (1995)). We do not believe this reflects
differences in our choices of what studies to report. Rather, interest in social capital in
advanced societies has been motivated by different phenomena than in the case of
developing economies. In particular, the focus on social capital appears to be motivated
by a desire to understand how some individuals avoid self-harming behaviors of various
types.
         Second, social capital studies for affluent societies focus on somewhat different
variables to proxy for social capital than their development counterparts. This may be
seen in the frequent examination of parental influences in Table 2.              A common
assumption in studies for the US is that the parent, child, neighborhood and school
relationships are a primary form of social capital. McNeal (1999), for example, explicitly
argues that parent/child interactions closely correspond to what Coleman originally meant
by social capital.
         Another feature that distinguishes the literature on OECD societies is its focus on
traditionally sociological concepts in construing social capital. One important notion is
intergenerational closure, which holds when parents of a given child know both his
friends as well as his friends’ parents; both Morgan and Sorenson (1999a) and Sandefur,
Meier, and Hernandez (1999) treat closure as an important aspect of social capital. This
variable arises because, as argued originally in Coleman (1988), control and monitoring
of children is sensitive to the ways that a family is embedded in a community.




                                             48
       While OECD social capital studies typically are based on richer data sets than
those available for developing countries, these studies often suffer from serious flaws.
One problem is that little discipline has been imposed on the empirical proxies used for
social capital, which makes many of the empirical claims in this literature incredible. For
example, authors such as Furstenburg and Hughes (1995), McNeal (1999) and Sandefur,
Meier, and Hernandez (1999) treat the number of family moves as a measure of social
capital for youths. The idea is that the more a family moves, the weaker the social ties
between the youth and his community. This is certainly a plausible claim. However, it
does not suffice to make family moves a valid social capital measure. Since moves are
endogenous, the variable in essence provides an indictor for those characteristics that
determine the moves.      Such characteristics can be associated with different youth
outcomes for reasons that have nothing to do with social capital. For example, families
who make more moves plausibly contain parents who are less interested in their children
than those who make fewer, since such parents may be putting less weight on the costs to
children of changing neighborhoods. Parents with less interest in their children (which
can be formalized by using Loury’s (1981) model of intergenerational mobility and
allowing for heterogeneity in the rates at which parents discount offspring utility) will
presumably invest less in their children, altering their outcomes in ways similar to the
purported effects of lower social capital. Our point is not that one explanation or the
other is correct, but rather that neither is identified from the data. Put differently, there
are good reasons to believe that there are systematic differences in the unexplained
components of individual behavior that render standard estimation methods inconsistent;
specifically, families asserted to posses high levels of social capital, from the perspective
of the estimated model, may be expected to be associated with higher levels of parental
interest in children, which means the residuals in the associated regressions no longer
have conditional expectations of 0. As such, this discussion is an illustration of an
exchangeability violation of the type discussed in Section III; Furstenberg and Hughes
(1995) are especially susceptible to this criticism due to the lack of attention to control
variables.
       Similarly, little attention is typically given to the identification problem of
distinguishing social capital from endogenous or other group effects. This failure derives



                                             49
from the flexibility of the social capital definitions that are employed. Is a psychological
propensity to behave similarly to one’s peers a form of social capital? The answer to this
question is unclear from the literature, since such a propensity could easily count as a
type of social norm.
           While none of the studies in Table 2 can be said to fully address these general
statistical questions, some of the studies are nevertheless clearly valuable contributions.
One paper we would identify is Morgan and Sorenson (1999a). This paper is noteworthy
for its careful attention to different causal mechanisms by which social capital may
matter and by the care with which empirical proxies are constructed. We would also note
that the paper focuses on a very specific issue, namely why Catholic schools appear to
outperform their public counterparts, where there are good prior reasons to believe social
factors matter.18 Palloni et al (2001) is in many ways a very different study, yet is also
very admirable. This analysis focuses on a very simple notion of social capital, in
studying the effect on an individual’s migration decision of prior migration by a sibling.
What commends this study is the immense care taken to deal with questions of
unobserved heterogeneity and common factors between siblings unrelated to social
capital.
           Before leaving this section, we draw attention to Costa and Kahn (2003b), which
provides an historical perspective on social capital. In this paper, the behavior of union
soldiers in the Civil War is examined, with particular attention to rates of promotion and
desertion across different companies of soldiers. Costa and Kahn find that ethnic and
occupational homogeneity of companies was conducive to braver conduct by soldiers.
While far removed from the types of behaviors that are usually studied using social
capital, the behavior of soldiers is in fact an excellent phenomenon to examine, given the



18
  Morgan and Sorenson (1999a) has in fact engendered some controversy, see Carbonaro
(1999) and Hallinan and Kubitschek (1999). The main thrust of these criticisms concerns
the extent to which the social closure measures used by Morgan and Sorenson fully
capture the relevant social dynamics. We believe that the rejoinder Morgan and Sorenson
(1999b) effectively answers these objections; equally important, these objections do not
mitigate the reasons we admire the study. The level at which debate on this paper
occurred is far deeper than the great majority of efforts to link social capital concepts to
data.


                                             50
well documented role of social factors in battlefield conduct.19 We believe creative
exploration of data sets like this can add a great deal to the understanding of social
capital.


V.ii. Aggregate studies


           At the beginning of Section III, we outlined the difficulty of estimating the
beneficial effects of social capital from individual data. We now turn to empirical studies
that rely on aggregate data and examine whether they provide more convincing evidence
of social capital. Table 3 reports a number of social capital studies that employ such data.
As the Table indicates, a large number of aggregate level social capital studies have
focused on the relationship between social capital and per capita output growth at a high
level of aggregation, such as a country or region. As such, most of the studies of this
type are variants on empirical growth regressions that have become a workhorse of
modern growth economics.20 An assessment of the aggregate studies using social capital
is therefore essentially equivalent to an assessment of a set of growth regressions
designed to establish that a particular variable is causally related to growth.
           Growth regressions of the type found in the studies of Table 3 have been
subjected to very serious methodological criticisms; examples include Brock and Durlauf
(2001b), Durlauf (2000), Durlauf and Quah (1999), and Temple (2000). As argued in
these papers, growth regressions suffer from several fundamental problems that make
implausible the types of causal inferences one typically finds in the empirical literature.
First, there is the problem of the choice of control variables. Growth theories are open-
ended, which means that one growth theory does not have any logical implications for the
truth or falsity of another. Hence, there is no natural way, when one wishes to test the
importance of a given theory, to identify the appropriate set of theories to incorporate in a
correctly specified structural growth model. As Durlauf and Quah (1999) indicate, there

19
   To be clear, social factors can play a negative role in military behavior, such as in
violence against civilians. See Aaronson (1999) for discussion of the social dynamics that
occurred among US soldiers during the My Lai massacre of Vietnamese civilians.
20
   See Durlauf and Quah (1999) and Temple (1999) for surveys of the methods and
findings of the empirical growth literature.


                                             51
are in fact more extant growth theories than there are countries to which they are
supposed to apply. As a result, any given growth regression may be subjected to the
criticism that relevant control variables have been omitted.        While there are some
possible ways to deal with this problem, see Fernandez, Ley, and Steel (2001), this
problem has not been addressed in any social capital and growth studies, as far as we
know.
        Second, growth regressions typically fail to account properly for parameter
heterogeneity across countries.     Evidence of such heterogeneity may be found in
Desdoigts (1999), Durlauf and Johnson (1995), and Durlauf, Kourtellos, and Minkin
(2001); theoretical models that imply heterogeneous growth processes for different
groups of countries include Azariadis and Drazen (1990) and Howitt and Mayer-Foulkes
(2002). Failure to account for parameter heterogeneity calls into question the structural
interpretation of a social capital variable as it may be proxying for this form of
heterogeneity. One example that is suggestive of this possibility concerns the role of
ethnic heterogeneity in growth, a question studied by Easterly and Levine (1997).21 In
this paper, the authors argue that ethnic conflict inhibits public good creation and so acts
as an impediment to growth.        Ethnic conflict is instrumented with a measure of
ethnolinguistic diversity which proves to be strongly negatively associated with growth.
Since sub-Saharan Africa has exceptionally high levels of ethnolinguistic diversity, the
authors conclude that this is an important mechanism in understanding Africa’s growth
problems. Brock and Durlauf (2001a) reexamine this study, allowing for various types of
exchangeability violations due to parameter heterogeneity, and find that the relationship
between ethnolinguistic diversity and growth appears only for sub-Saharan Africa; this
variable does not help explain growth patterns in the rest of the world. Brock and
Durlauf’s finding illustrates how growth explanations may well not be constant across
countries. And for the African case, it is unclear whether the growth findings are causal
or whether ethnolinguistic diversity simply proxies for some other form of “African
exceptionalism.”

21
  It should be noted that Easterly and Levine (1997) does not explicitly focus on social
capital; however, the mechanisms by which ethnic heterogeneity can affect economic
performance are in many cases the same as have been proposed in the social capital
literature.


                                            52
       Taken as a whole, these arguments imply that the social capital/growth studies do
not meet the exchangeability requirements that we discussed in Section III. While this
reflects more general failings of the empirical growth literature (Brock and Durlauf
(2001b)), it is also the case that growth studies using social capital have been quite
insensitive to efforts in the growth literature to address these problems.
       Beyond questions concerning the comparability of observations, there are
unresolved issues concerning causal interpretation of growth regressions that apply to the
social capital case. This is especially important given the endogeneity of aggregate
measures of social capital. We are unaware of any social capital study using aggregate
data that addresses causality versus correlation for social capital and growth in a
persuasive way. While this is a broad brush with which to tar this empirical literature, we
believe it is valid.   A related problem is that we are unaware of any compelling
instrumental variables for social capital in these regressions. This failure is a corollary of
the absence of any strong theories of aggregate social capital determination in the social
science literature that would allow one to characterize appropriate instruments.
       When one turns from national-level growth studies to other aggregate studies, the
plausibility of claims concerning social capital becomes stronger in some cases. A recent
study by Goldin and Katz (1999) is particularly interesting in its focus on the sources for
the rise of high school attendance in Iowa in the early part of the twentieth century. By
focusing on characteristics of Iowa counties, they are able to avoid some of the clear
problems of exchangeability that plague studies using coarser levels of aggregation. But
even here, other problems arise: more important, the data available are quite weak in the
sense that the variables which suggest the presence of social capital effects could equally
well suggest alternative explanations. The specific variables that seem most suggestive
of social capital effects are the percentage of native born citizens and the population of
towns; high percentages of native born and low population sizes are each associated with
higher high school attendance. Clearly, linking these correlations to a causal role for
social capital or other type of social influence is speculative. To be fair, Goldin and Katz




                                             53
(1999) point out that there may be alternative explanations, such as the smaller towns
having fewer opportunities for those without high school educations.22
       Overall, we conclude that aggregate social capital studies have not been
successful in providing compelling empirical evidence on the effects of social capital.
These studies require identifying assumptions that are incredible by conventional social
science reasoning. We believe that research efforts should be directed towards micro-
level studies as the problems with country-wide studies seem too intractable to overcome.
Data at lower levels of aggregation, such as county data for a homogeneous place like
1915 Iowa, are likely to be more amenable to persuasive analysis, provided the issues of
exchangeability and identification can be addressed adequately.




VI. Empirical studies of the level and determinants of social capital


       Interest in the effects of social capital has spawned a related literature of the level
of social capital and how this level is determined. Table 4 lists a range of studies that
have explored this issue. It is worth noting that while attention has been given to
questions of model specification and identification for models in which social capital is a
causal determinant of various outcomes, we are unaware of any formal analyses that have
been applied to models of social capital formation. Our conjecture is that the arguments
applied to models of social capital effects can be extended in a straightforward fashion to
models of social capital determinants, but this remains to be done.
       One important question in the literature on the formation of social capital has
been whether the extremely prominent claims by Putnam (1995,2000) that social capital
in the United States has experienced a major decline are correct, and if so, whether this
decline can be attributed to those factors he has described, namely, increased watching of
television and the passing of the World War II generation. It appears that many of
Putnam’s claims have not withstood careful scrutiny. Paxton (1999) shows that there is

22
  At the other extreme, the effort by Robison and Siles (1999) to link aspects of state
level income distributions to various social capital proxies fails to make any serious effort
to ensure exchangeability; in addition the variables used to measure social capital, such as
labor force participation, render the claims made about social capital untenable.


                                             54
little evidence of secular declines of trust or overall associational activity in the United
States. Bianchi and Robinson (1997) find little evidence that patterns of television
viewing have much relationship to maternal employment status or other family factors
often asserted to lead to lower social capital. Costa and Kahn (2003a), using more
disaggregated measures of associational activity, find declines in social capital measures
that are qualitatively similar to what Putnam has claimed. However, they find rather
different explanations.   Their analysis concludes that the decline in social capital
produced “outside the home” such as volunteering is explained to a large extent by the
rise in female labor force participation in the last 4 decades. This study also finds that
declines in social capital produced “inside the home” such as frequency of socializing is
strongly related to increases in neighborhood heterogeneity. One important implication
of this work is that it places claims about a decline in US social capital in a different
normative light. If increasing female labor force participation is due to the breakdown of
discriminatory barriers against women in labor markets and if increasing neighborhood
heterogeneity reflects a breakdown of the levels of social and ethnic segregation in the
United States, then perhaps declines in social capital are best thought of as an unfortunate
but necessary side effect of a movement towards a more just society and so should not be
mourned.
       One important aspect of this research is the move towards a causal understanding
of the processes by which social capital is formed. One interesting example of such work
is Brehm and Rahn (1997) who employ General Social Survey data to study the
reciprocal interaction of community involvement and trust in others. Their analysis finds
a stronger causal relationship between community participation to trust than the converse.
This finding is indicative of the empirical importance of Dasgupta’s (2002) argument that
social capital should be modeled as a network.
       Other studies have focused on identifying predictors of trust. For the US, Alesina
and La Ferrara (2002) find that trust in others is negatively associated with community
heterogeneity. Rahn and Rudolph (2002) extend work of this type in an analysis of the
determinants of trust in local government. This paper finds that political culture and
community heterogeneity play an important role in explaining trust. Interestingly, trust
does not appear to be influenced by the form of local government as trust levels are not



                                            55
predicted by whether a community has a mayor or city manager (the latter implying less
popular control of local government). These studies are best regarded as reduced form
analyses in that issues of causality are not specifically addressed.
       An especially important effort to understand the formation of social capital is the
Project on Human Development in Chicago Neighborhoods (PHDCN).                   This is a
remarkably detailed data collection project that covers several hundred neighborhoods in
Chicago. These data are proving to be very useful in delineating the detailed social
structure of neighborhoods. As described in Sampson, Morenoff, and Earls (1999 pg.
639), the available data include responses to questions such as “About how often do you
and people in your neighborhood do favors for each other?” and the likelihood that one’s
neighbors would intervene if one’s child were observed skipping school.
       Sampson, Morenoff, and Earls (1999) use the PHDCN to study a range of social
aspects of neighborhoods. In particular, they distinguish the social capital of a
neighborhood as “the resource potential of personal and organizational networks” (pg.
635) from the collective efficacy of a neighborhood, “a task-specific construct that relates
to the shared expectations and mutual engagement by adults in the active support and
social control of children.” (pg. 635). The purpose of this distinction is to differentiate
general notions of neighborhood social resources from the use of these resources. By
delineating how neighborhood members help one another, for example through
monitoring one another’s children, Sampson, Morenoff, and Earls (1999) give a rich
portrait of how neighborhoods benefit their members, illustrating how help in
childrearing or trust among neighbors are important mediating variables in understanding
why poor neighborhoods have adverse effects on their members. By uncovering specific
mechanisms by which neighborhoods matter, this study moves beyond the common use
of social capital variables in which the link between the variable and a behavioral
outcome is metaphorical and all too often a black box.




VII.   Suggestions for future research




                                             56
        As our discussion suggests, we believe that social capital studies have very often
been unpersuasive. We make the following suggestions as to how one can improve this
literature.
        First, empirical analyses need to step back from grandiose approaches to social
capital and focus on the more mundane but potentially far more fruitful task of analyzing
specific social components to individual behavior. This does not require abandonment of
social capital as a general organizing idea or metaphor, but rather means that evidence in
favor of social capital should be derived from specific claims about social influences on
individuals.
        A useful contrast may be made between the Helliwell and Putnam (2000) paper,
the study of regional differences in growth rates in Italy that we have criticized earlier,
and a recent study by Glaeser, Laibson, Scheinkman and Soutter (2000) that explores the
determinants of trust. Rather than run regressions that make incredible assumptions
about the exchangeability of regional growth rates, Glaeser Laibson, Scheinkman and
Soutter employ well crafted experiments to see how attitudes and background
characteristics influence the choice of strategies in various economic experiments. In the
context of these experiments, notions such as trust are quite well defined since it amounts
to expectations about the play of other agents in the game.             This well defined
environment provides much more compelling evidence of how trust influences behavior
than can be obtained from ad hoc regressions. The use of experiments to understand
social capital is further developed in Carter and Castillo (2003,2004), who consider how
variation in roles by players in economic experiments can allow for differentiation
between altruism and trust as determinants of behaviors.
        The importance of experimental evidence should not be exaggerated. Economic
experiments are not a panacea for the limits of inference with observational data. One
problem is generalizability; it is far from clear how behavior in economic experiments
maps into behavior in the larger economy and society, although Glaeser Laibson,
Scheinkman and Soutter make an important advance in this regard by attempting to
correlate behavior in experiments with behavior in the “real world” by participants.
Further, as discussed by Manski (2002) in an important recent paper, there are
identification problems in experiments as it is often difficult to distinguish behavior that



                                            57
is driven by altruistic preferences from behavior driven by selfish preferences but with
expectations of trustworthy behavior by others.          Nevertheless, Glaeser Laibson,
Scheinkman and Soutter and Carter and Castillo represent a style of research that is an
important advance in the social capital literature.
       In addition, moving the discussion of social capital away from generalities to
specific mechanisms in the way we suggest will allow one to deal with issues of
endogeneity and exchangeability more effectively, since it will facilitate more precise and
comprehensive modeling of causal mechanisms than one finds in the social capital
literature. While the great majority of social capital studies include numerous control
variables, the choice of these variables is rarely determined by careful delineation of the
determinants of behavior of the agents under study. In addition, there has been little
attention to questions of parameter heterogeneity.
       A concrete implication of this discussion is that future research on social capital
by the World Bank, for example, should be careful about the use of highly aggregated
data. It is difficult to make compelling exchangeability arguments for data sets in which
the observations are countries or regions. Ad hoc assumptions concerning the legitimacy
of instrumental variables have plagued this literature for good reason: theories of social
capital formation are underdeveloped so that it is difficult for researchers to sensibly
construct aggregate measures of social capital.
       Second, we believe that future data collection exercises must explicitly attempt to
gather information on group-level influences, rather than on social capital alone. This
should include measures of the quality of leadership. At the core of virtually all
microeconomic reasoning is the general idea that decisions are purposeful outcomes
based on an individual’s preferences over outcomes, constraints on what actions are
feasible, and beliefs over the consequences of those actions. The new social economics
(cf. Durlauf and Young (2001)), is based upon the recognition that these three
components to decisions are deeply influenced by social factors. A data collection
exercise designed to explain a given set of outcomes should therefore be based on the




                                             58
development of a typology of what sorts of social factors affect each of the components
and the development of plausible empirical analogs to these social factors.23
       The sorts of detailed data collection we advocate are in fact underway in some
cases. In particular, the Project on Human Development in Chicago Neighborhoods and
data collection based on the World Bank Social Capital Assessment Tool are exemplary.
In each case, the levels of specificity in terms of uncovering how individuals interact in
villages, communities and social networks is a great advance over the crude measures
often used in social capital studies. The most obvious suggestion in terms of the design of
these studies would be the exploration of the extent to which the existing survey
questions are adequate in terms of dealing with the specification and identification
problems we discuss in Section III. There is no quick answer to this as it would require
integrating some theoretical modeling with the survey design. Nevertheless, the payoffs
to such an endeavor could be quite high.
       How does our admittedly very general advice differ from the way in which data
collection on social capital is typically done? We have already discussed one difference,
namely, the effectiveness of data collection is augmented when attention is paid to the
uses to which the data will be applied. To repeat, the analysis of potential identification
problems should inform data collection and not just define limits to which a data set may
be used. Another important difference is that this approach avoids privileging social
factors that can be construed as “social capital” over others. As we have argued, the
failure to consider alternative social explanations to social capital is an important source
of skepticism with respect to existing studies. More importantly, there is no a priori
reason to assume that social capital is a more likely source of important effects than other
social factors. Another difference is that our proposed approach, by separating social
factors as concepts from empirical measurement, will avoid conflating the two, as often

23
  Sandefur and Laumann (1998) argue in favor of understanding social capital in terms
of its benefits, identifying these as provision of information, influence and control in
dealing with others, social solidarity between individuals. These types of benefits
represent combinations of the preferences, constraints, and beliefs we advocate
employing. An advantage of our approach is that our categories represent empirically
meaningful differences in the determinants of individual behavior whereas the Sandefur
and Laumann categories are necessarily interdependent and do not correspond to any




                                            59
occurs. Finally, the exercise of modeling individual choice in order to determine what is
meant by social factors should provide some guidance as to the appropriate levels at
which these factors should be measured. Does an individual’s or a society’s level of trust
matter for individual conduct? The appropriate answer to a question like this should
derive from the decision problem at hand. Empirical studies of social capital have largely
not addressed this question.
       Third, there needs to be greater recognition of the limits to statistical analysis in
contexts such as the evaluation of social capital. This is partly a restatement of the first
suggestion in that there simply do not exist any available data or methodology that can
allow an assessment of the broad claims of the sort one finds in the social capital
literature. But beyond this, we believe economists need to be more receptive to the sorts
of evidence found in other disciplines beyond the quantitative analyses that are standard
in economics. For example, sustained descriptive histories can teach us much about the
ways that social structures influence individual conduct even if they are not constructed
in the form of claims about F-statistics and the like. At the other extreme, there is a
wealth of information in the social psychology literature that addresses in precise ways
the inchoate ideas about individual behavior that underlie the social capital literature.
This suggestion requires greater openmindedness on the part of economists to
nonstatistical sources of information. But the payoffs can be high both in terms of
substantive understanding as well as in facilitating quantitative analyses. As the
discussion of identification argued, social capital effects can only be revealed if one has
prior information on what group effects do not directly influence individuals. This is
information that nonstatistical studies may be able to provide.24
       In fact, it is reasonable to argue that some aspects of the question of how social
capital has facilitated socioeconomic or political development should be treated in the
same spirit as questions such as what led to rise of emergence of democracy in ancient
Athens versus a martial culture in ancient Sparta or what were the causes of World War I.

“natural kinds” in terms of either individual activity or collective action, at least as far as
we can tell. For example, trust will affect information transmission.
24
   Of course, qualitative studies are not immune to the overinterpretation (due to ignoring
identification problems) and overclaiming (due to exaggeration of the import of statistical




                                              60
These are not meaningless questions; but it is necessary to accept limits as to the
quantitative precision with which such questions can be answered and what it means to
say the question has been answered. None of this suggests that statistical analysis should
play anything other than a primary role in social capital studies; our argument is that the
credibility of the social capital literature will be augmented when nonstatistical evidence
is better used to motivate assumptions and suggest appropriate ways for formulating
hypotheses.




VIII. Conclusions


       In this Chapter, we have tried to provide an overview of the state of social capital
research by both describing the state of the conceptual, theoretical and econometric
literatures on social capital and by surveying a number of empirical studies. Our overall
assessment of the social capital research is quite mixed. In terms of conceptual and
theoretical studies of social capital, there is a considerable amount of ambiguity and
confusion as to what social capital means. One conclusion we draw from our survey is
that the most successful theoretical work on social capital is that which, following
Dasgupta (2002), models social capital as a form of social network structure and uses the
presence of that structure to understand how individual outcomes are affected in
equilibrium. From the empirical perspective, the role of networks in facilitating exchange
is one of the most compelling empirical findings in the social capital literature (cf.
Fafchamps (2004)), so a more narrow focus on this type will likely not diminish the
importance of social capital as a concept.
       With respect to empirical work in general, social capital research has led to the
development of a number of interesting data sets as well as the development of a number
of provocative hypotheses, much of the empirical literature is at best suggestive and at
worst easy to discount. So while one can point to no end of studies in which a variable
that is asserted to proxy for social capital has some effect on individuals or groups, it is


findings taken on their own terms) that we have criticized in quantitative studies. See
Tarrow (1996) for criticisms along these lines.


                                             61
usually very difficult to treat the finding as establishing a causal role for social capital.
We have highlighted a number of studies that we think are particularly strong, but those
studies we find persuasive are relatively exceptional. The defects of the empirical social
capital literature are unfortunate, since the work on social capital is an active front in
which the “undersocialized conception of man” for which economics has been criticized
(Granovetter (1985)) is being addressed.
       One recommendation we make in regard to empirical studies is that social capital
literature pay far more attention to formal issues of identification, self-selection and
unobserved group characteristics. These issues have been extensively studied in the
closely related context of social interactions (cf. Brock and Durlauf (2001c)) and many
ideas from that literature may be applied to social capital. In addition, we believe that
empirical social capital studies must do a much better job of differentiating between
social capital effects and alternative types of group effects.
       Attempts to provide social richness to economic analysis will only succeed if the
theoretical and empirical work that accompanies this effort is subjected to the same
rigorous standards that are required of other analyses in economics. In contrast, the
extravagant claims so often found in this literature (an outstanding example of which is
Putnam (2000) who appears capable of attributing every conceivable societal virtue to
social capital)25 have little prospect of having lasting social science value. Beyond the
failure to contribute to the social science enterprise, there is a legitimate concern that
studies which make excessive claims and unsupported assertions can discredit social
capital as an idea. In conclusion, what the empirical social capital literature ultimately
needs is more matter and less art.




25
  See Durlauf (2002b) for an extended critique of Putnam (2000) which addresses the
problem of overclaiming, faulting Putnam both for not dealing with some of the
identification problems we hve described in Section IV as well as for failing to analyze
social capital in a fashion conducive to rigorous policy analysis.




                                              62
           TABLE 1: INDIVIDUAL-LEVEL STUDIES OF SOCIAL CAPITAL IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES

    STUDY               AGENTS               OUTCOMES                      SOCIAL CAPITAL                      FINDINGS
                                                                               MEASURES
Carter and         Households in       Child height for age         Number of associations in         Social capital helps
Maluccio (2003)    KwaZulu-Natal                                    community and interaction of      ameliorate effects of
                   South Africa                                     family income with community      individual-specific
                                                                    income                            economic shocks
Fafchamps and      Food traders in     Value added and total        Number of traders known,          Number of traders known
Minten (2002)      Madagascar          sales                        number of relatives in            and number of potential
                                                                    agricultural trade, number of     informal traders statistically
                                                                    potential informal traders        significant.
Grootaert (2000)   Rural households in Per capita household         Number of memberships in          Social capital index
                   Indonesia           expenditure                  associations, diversity of        statistically significant;
                                                                    memberships, number of            number of memberships,
                                                                    meetings of associations, index   internal heterogeneity of
                                                                    of participation in               associations and level of
                                                                    decisionmaking, measure of        participation in
                                                                    cash contribution to              decisionmaking appear most
                                                                    associations, measure of time     important.
                                                                    contribution to association,
                                                                    measure of orientation towards
                                                                    community.




                                                               63
           TABLE 1: INDIVIDUAL-LEVEL STUDIES OF SOCIAL CAPITAL IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES

    STUDY             AGENTS                OUTCOMES                      SOCIAL CAPITAL                        FINDINGS
                                                                             MEASURES
Isham (2002)     Households in rural   Adoption of improved        Village level measures of ethnic    Social capital measures are
                 Tanzania              fertilizer                  homogeneity for organizations       generally statistically
                                                                   in which households are             significant predictors of
                                                                   members, levels of participation    adoption, but some regional
                                                                   of household in organization        differences exist
                                                                   decisionmaking, and extent to
                                                                   which leaders of village
                                                                   organization have different
                                                                   livelihoods than village
                                                                   members
Krishna (2001)   Villages in           Performance with            Survey measures of                  Efficacy of social capital is
                 Rajastan, India       respect to common land      participation in labor-sharing      related to strength of leaders
                                       development, poverty        groups, trust, solidarity, and      of associations, patron-client
                                       reduction, and              reciprocity                         relations, etc.
                                       employment
Krishna and      Villages in           Collective action to        Social capital index based on       Index is a strong predictor of
Uphoff (1999)    Rajastan, India       restore degraded or         survey answers to questions on      better development
                                       vulnerable common           level of collective action in       outcomes
                                       lands                       village, village governance,
                                                                   village sense of obligation, etc.




                                                              64
            TABLE 1: INDIVIDUAL-LEVEL STUDIES OF SOCIAL CAPITAL IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES

     STUDY              AGENTS                 OUTCOMES                       SOCIAL CAPITAL                      FINDINGS
                                                                                  MEASURES
Lee and Brinton    Graduates of elite    Employment                    Private social capital (family     Institutional rather than
(1996)             colleges in South     opportunities at large        and friendship ties) and           private social capital is
                   Korea                 firms                         institutional social capital       important in determining
                                                                       (social ties provided by           employment opportunities
                                                                       university, eg. introductions to
                                                                       firms)
Malucccio,         Households in         Per capita total              Index of individual                Individual and community
Haddad, and May    Kwazulu-Natal         expenditure                   memberships in groups,             social capital measures
(2001)             Province, South                                     reflecting number, gender          statistically significantly
                   Africa                                              heterogeneity, and performance,    associated with expenditure
                                                                       based on survey responses.         in 1998 but not 1993
                                                                       Community social capital levels
                                                                       computed as aggregates of
                                                                       individual indices
Narayan and        Households in rural   Per capita household          Social capital indices             Village social capital
Pritchett (1999)   Tanzania              expenditure                   constructed for both households    dominates individual social
                                                                       and villages. Indices based on     capital
                                                                       memberships in groups,
                                                                       characteristics of the groups,
                                                                       and household values and
                                                                       attitudes
Palloni, Massey,   Sibling pairs in      Migration to the United       Previous migration of one          Likelihood of migration is
et al (2001)       Mexico                States                        sibling                            increased if a sibling has
                                                                                                          already migrated




                                                                  65
           TABLE 1: INDIVIDUAL-LEVEL STUDIES OF SOCIAL CAPITAL IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES

    STUDY               AGENTS              OUTCOMES                   SOCIAL CAPITAL                          FINDINGS
                                                                           MEASURES
Pargal, Huq, and   Households in       Establishment of          Indices of trust, reciprocity, and   Reciprocity index is best
Gilligan (1999)    Dhaka, Bangladesh   voluntary solid waste     sharing for neighborhoods            predictor of likelihood that a
                                       management (VWSM)                                              neighborhood has
                                       systems for                                                    VWSM system
                                       neighborhoods
Varughese and      Groups of forest    Level of collective        Homogeneity within group in         No necessary relationship
Ostrom (2001)      users in Nepal      activity, monitoring of    wealth, caste, ethnicity            between homogeneity and
                                       forest use, enforcement                                        level of collective action;
                                       of harvesting constraints,                                     institutional design is more
                                       etc.                                                           important




                                                            66
                  TABLE 2: INDIVIDUAL-LEVEL STUDIES OF SOCIAL CAPITAL: OECD COUNTRIES

     STUDY               ACTORS                 OUTCOMES               SOCIAL CAPITAL MEASURES                     FINDINGS
Costa and Kahn      Union soldiers in    Performance over course of    Homogeneity of companies of          More homogeneous
(2003b)             the US Civil War     war in terms of promotions,   soldiers with respect to ethnicity, companies are
                                         desertion, etc.               occupation, and age                  associated with more
                                                                                                            promotions and lower
                                                                                                            rates of desertion
Fernandez,          Phone center         Returns to investments        Use of employees social networks Investment in use of
Castilla, and       employers                                          in making new hires                  employee referrals is
Moore (2000)                                                                                                shown to be quite
                                                                                                            profitable
Frank and           French financial      Business dealings with one   Reciprocity, trust. Actors are       Basic predictions
Yasumoto (1996)     elite; i.e. prominent another                      organized into subgroups based       confirmed.
                    individuals                                        on friendship ties. Trust, equated
                    associated with                                    with absence of hostile business
                    financial                                          actions, such as a hostile takeover,
                    institutions                                       is expected to be higher between
                                                                       members of common subgroup.
                                                                       Reciprocity, defined as supportive
                                                                       actions such as helping a firm
                                                                       fend off a hostile takeover is
                                                                       expected to be higher between
                                                                       subgroups.




                                                               67
                   TABLE 2: INDIVIDUAL-LEVEL STUDIES OF SOCIAL CAPITAL: OECD COUNTRIES

     STUDY                ACTORS                  OUTCOMES              SOCIAL CAPITAL MEASURES                       FINDINGS
Furstenberg and      Children of          Graduation from high          Within family social capital          Various outcomes and
Hughes (1995)        teenage mothers      school, college enrollment,   (presence of father in home,          social capital measures
                     (US)                 economic status, avoidance    parents’ expectations for school      statistically
                                          of live birth, avoidance of   performance, etc.), family links to   significantly associated,
                                          criminal activity, mental     community (religious                  even controlling for
                                          health                        involvement, help network,            some human capital
                                                                        neighborhood quality, etc.)           measures
Guiso, Sapienza,     Households in Italy Financial activities such as   Electoral participation and blood     Social capital measures
and Zingales                             use of formal credit,          donation and province level           for both current
(2002)                                   portfolio behavior                                                   location and place of
                                                                                                              birth predict use of
                                                                                                              formal credit, and
                                                                                                              investment in stocks
                                                                                                              rather than cash. Effects
                                                                                                              stronger for the poorer
                                                                                                              and less educated.
Hagan,               Teenagers in         Level of educational          Parental involvement with             Both types of social
MacMillan, and       Toronto              attainment, occupational      children, family moves across         capital statistically
Wheaton (1996)                            status                        neighborhoods                         significant in predicting
                                                                                                              outcomes
Hagan and            Teenagers            Various forms of criminal     Social variables such as criminal     Social variables predict
McCarthy (1995)      (Canada)             behavior                      mentors and criminal social           criminality
                                                                        networks




                                                                68
                   TABLE 2: INDIVIDUAL-LEVEL STUDIES OF SOCIAL CAPITAL: OECD COUNTRIES

   STUDY                 ACTORS               OUTCOMES                SOCIAL CAPITAL MEASURES                   FINDINGS
McNeal (1999)        Teenagers in US   Academic achievement in        Parental interactions with child  Favorable social capital
                                       science, truancy, staying in   and with school                   effects on child
                                       school                                                           outcomes seem only to
                                                                                                        apply to white students
                                                                                                        from middle and upper
                                                                                                        class backgrounds
Morgan and           Teenagers in US   Test scores in mathematics     Social closure around school,     Social closure is
Sorenson (1999a)                                                      parental involvement in school,   negatively associated
                                                                      parental knowledge of friends     with test scores, in
                                                                                                        contradiction to
                                                                                                        standard predictions of
                                                                                                        social capital analyses
Parcel and           Children in US    Index of child behavioral      Miscellaneous measures of family Role of family social
Menaghan (1993)                        problems                       structure, parents’ working       capital generally
                                                                      conditions, and parents’ personal confirmed through
                                                                      resources, such as sense of self- statistical significance
                                                                      estimation
Sandefur, Meier,     Teenagers in US   Intergenerational closure,     Family structure, number of times Various social capital
and Hernandez                          parent/child interactions,     child changed schools, Catholic   measures are associated
(1999)                                 high school graduation,        High school attendance            with outcomes in ways
                                       post-secondary enrollment,                                       predicted by theory.
                                       enrolling in a four-year
                                       college




                                                              69
               TABLE 2: INDIVIDUAL-LEVEL STUDIES OF SOCIAL CAPITAL: OECD COUNTRIES

     STUDY            ACTORS             OUTCOMES              SOCIAL CAPITAL MEASURES                      FINDINGS
Sun (1999)        Teenagers (US)   Academic performance        Structural measures (number of         Various process
                                   measured by test scores     school changes, family structure)      variables associated
                                                               and process variables (parent          with test scores.
                                                               child interactions, participation in
                                                               activities, number of parents
                                                               known),
Teachman, Paasch, Teenagers (US)   Dropping out of high        Family social capital (living          Attending a Catholic
and Carver (1997)                  school                      arrangements with parents,             school and family
                                                               intensity of interactions with         structure robustly
                                                               parents), community social capital     statistically significant
                                                               (attendance in Catholic school,        across alternative
                                                               number of changes in school,           specifications
                                                               measures of interactions of
                                                               parents with schools and friends)




                                                          70
                              TABLE 3: AGGREGATE-LEVEL STUDIES OF SOCIAL CAPITAL

     STUDY                    UNITS               OUTCOMES                SOCIAL CAPITAL                      FINDINGS
                                                                               MEASURES
Beugelsdijk and     European Regions        Per capita output growth   Trust, group participation     Group participation helps
van Schalk (2001)                                                                                     explain growth, but not
                                                                                                      trust
Easterly and        Nations                 Per capita output growth   Ethnic heterogeneity           Per capita growth
Levine (1997)                                                          measured by                    negatively associated with
                                                                       ethnolinguistic diversity      ethnolinguistic
                                                                       within a country               heterogeneity; important in
                                                                                                      explaining poor
                                                                                                      performance of sub-
                                                                                                      Saharan Africa
Goldin and Katz     Iowa Counties in 1915   High school attendance     Population size of towns,      Small towns led expansion
(1999)                                                                 density of religious           of high school attendance.
                                                                       organizations, percentage      Positive relationship with
                                                                       of population that is native   other possible social
                                                                       born                           capital variables
Helliwell (1996)    Asian nations           Per capita output growth   Participation in               Social capital measures
                                                                       associations, trust            contribute little once other
                                                                                                      factors such as openness
                                                                                                      are accounted for




                                                             71
                             TABLE 3: AGGREGATE-LEVEL STUDIES OF SOCIAL CAPITAL

     STUDY                   UNITS              OUTCOMES                    SOCIAL CAPITAL                     FINDINGS
                                                                                MEASURES
Helliwell and      Regions in Italy      Per capita output growth       Measure of civic               For the various measures,
Putnam (2000)                                                           community (index of            higher social capital
                                                                        associations, newspaper        associated with higher
                                                                        readership, and political      growth
                                                                        behavior), institutional
                                                                        performance, citizen
                                                                        satisfaction with
                                                                        government
Knack and Keefer   Nations               Per capita output growth       Indices of civic cooperation   Social capital measures
(1997)                                                                  (measuring questions such      help predict growth
                                                                        as whether it is ever
                                                                        justified to cheat on taxes)
                                                                        and trust (percentage of
                                                                        individuals who say most
                                                                        people can be trusted)
LaPorta et al      Nations               Government efficiency          Trust                          Trust generally statistically
(1997)                                   (level of corruption, etc.),                                  significant
                                         participation in politics
                                         and associations, social
                                         efficiency (infrastructure
                                         quality, infant mortality,
                                         educational level, etc.)




                                                            72
                              TABLE 3: AGGREGATE-LEVEL STUDIES OF SOCIAL CAPITAL

     STUDY                    UNITS               OUTCOMES                   SOCIAL CAPITAL                 FINDINGS
                                                                                 MEASURES
Lochner, Kawachi,   Chicago neighborhoods   Aggregate and disease-       Measures of trust,         Social capital measures
Brennan, and Buka                           specific mortality rates for reciprocity, group         help to predict white
(2003)                                      neighborhoods and gender participation                  mortality; relationship
                                            and ethnic groups within                                with mortality of blacks is
                                            neighborhoods                                           weaker
Paxton (2002)       Nations                 Index of liberal             Number and types of        Democracy and social
                                            democracy                    international              capital reciprocally related;
                                                                         nongovernment              number of trade unions,
                                                                         organization in country,   sport associations and
                                                                         trust                      religious organizations
                                                                                                    negatively associated with
                                                                                                    democracy, number of
                                                                                                    others positively
                                                                                                    associated
Robison and Siles   US states               Means and coefficients of   Measures of family          Higher social capital
(1999)                                      variation for household     structure, educational      proxies generally
                                            income                      achievement, crime and      associated with higher
                                                                        labor force participation   means and lower
                                                                                                    dispersion in household
                                                                                                    income
Zak and Knack       Nations                 Per capita output growth    Trust                       Trust predicts growth even
(2001)                                                                                              when factors such as
                                                                                                    property rights are
                                                                                                    controlled for.




                                                             73
          TABLE 4: STUDIES OF SOCIAL CAPITAL FORMATION AND THE LEVEL OF SOCIAL CAPITAL

    STUDY              AGENTS           SOCIAL CAPITAL                   POTENTIAL                        FINDINGS
                                           MEASURES                   DETERMINANTS
Alesina and La    Adults in US       Trust                       Miscellaneous personal and        Low social capital measures
Ferrara (2002)                                                   community characteristics         for individuals are
                                                                                                   associated with
                                                                                                   membership in groups that
                                                                                                   have experienced
                                                                                                   discrimination (e.g. being
                                                                                                   African American), lack of
                                                                                                   economic success,
                                                                                                   community heterogeneity,
                                                                                                   experience of personal
                                                                                                   trauma
Bianchi and       Pre-teenagers in   Time spent on studying      Family structure, parental        Study is higher and
Robinson (1997)   California         and activities other than   characteristics, mother’s labor   television watching lower
                                     watching television         force status                      among children of better
                                                                                                   educated; children of
                                                                                                   working mothers watch less
                                                                                                   television than others




                                                            74
          TABLE 4: STUDIES OF SOCIAL CAPITAL FORMATION AND THE LEVEL OF SOCIAL CAPITAL

    STUDY              AGENTS        SOCIAL CAPITAL                     POTENTIAL                        FINDINGS
                                         MEASURES                   DETERMINANTS
Brehm and Rahn    Adults in US   Civic engagement and         Reciprocal relationship            Participation strongly
(1997)                           civic trust                  between engagement and trust,      affects trust, each positively
                                                              confidence in institutions, life   associated with
                                                              satisfaction, ethnicity,           socioeconomic status,
                                                              socioeconomic status, and          confidence, negatively
                                                              many others                        associated with being black
Charles and Kline Adults in US   Carpooling                   Ethnicity of neighbors             Ethnic heterogeneity
(2002)                                                                                           reduces social capital
                                                                                                 formation for some
                                                                                                 pairings, notably whites and
                                                                                                 blacks and whites and
                                                                                                 Hispanics
Costa and Kahn    Adults in US   Volunteering, socializing,   Gender, community                  Declines in social capital
(2003a)                          non-church memberships,      characteristics (race and          produced outside the home
                                                              income heterogeneity)              such as volunteering are
                                                                                                 strongly related to higher
                                                                                                 female labor force
                                                                                                 participation; declining
                                                                                                 social capital within home
                                                                                                 such as frequency of
                                                                                                 socializing is strongly
                                                                                                 related to higher
                                                                                                 community heterogeneity




                                                       75
            TABLE 4: STUDIES OF SOCIAL CAPITAL FORMATION AND THE LEVEL OF SOCIAL CAPITAL

    STUDY              AGENTS               SOCIAL CAPITAL                   POTENTIAL                       FINDINGS
                                                MEASURES                   DETERMINANTS
DiPasquale and    Adults in US          Citizenship (voting in local   Home ownership                Homeownership helps
Glaeser (1999)                          elections, helping solve                                     predict a range of
                                        local problems, knows                                        citizenship variables.
                                        school head, etc.)
Fafchamps         Traders in Benin,     Trust in trading               Ethnicity and religious       Ethnicity, religion and
(2003)            Madagascar, and       relationships                  similarity, gender, network   gender appear to have little
                  Malawi                                               effects                       effect on trust. Individuals
                                                                                                     possessing large numbers of
                                                                                                     business contacts give and
                                                                                                     receive more trust.
Gugerty and       Women’s groups        For women’s groups,         Funding of groups and            Grants to women’s groups
Kremer (2002)     and school            group size, attendance,     funding of school textbooks.     appear to have had little
                  development           financial status, and level                                  effect on the capacities or
                  projects in western   of interactions with other                                   size of women’s groups;
                  Kenya                 groups and individuals; For                                  grants to governing
                                        schools, participation in                                    committees of schools and
                                        school development                                           increases in textbook
                                        projects                                                     funding were associated
                                                                                                     with increased participation
                                                                                                     of parents in school
                                                                                                     development; additional
                                                                                                     effects were found for
                                                                                                     textbook funding




                                                               76
           TABLE 4: STUDIES OF SOCIAL CAPITAL FORMATION AND THE LEVEL OF SOCIAL CAPITAL

    STUDY               AGENTS        SOCIAL CAPITAL                      POTENTIAL                      FINDINGS
                                          MEASURES                      DETERMINANTS
Hofferth,          Adults in US   Access to time and             Previous provision of time and Time and assistance from
Boisjoly, and                     financial assistance from      financial assistance to those  friends is predicted by past
Duncan (1999)                     relatives and friends          same relatives and friends     provision, but not time and
                                                                                                assistance by relatives
Miguel, Gertler,   Districts in   Density of community           Rapid industrialization within Industrialization, if
and Levine         Indonesia      organizations                  district                       anything was associated
(2001)                                                                                          with rising density of
                                                                                                organizations. Districts that
                                                                                                neighbored districts
                                                                                                experiencing rapid
                                                                                                industrialization exhibited
                                                                                                some declines, possibly due
                                                                                                to out-migration
Oliver (1999)      Adults in US   Local civic participation      Community affluence and        Heterogeneous, middle
                                                                 associated levels of social    income cities exhibit higher
                                                                 needs, competition for         levels of civic participation
                                                                 resources induced by           than heterogeneous,
                                                                 population heterogeneity       affluent cities
Paxton (1999)      Adults in US   Trust, participation in        Time                           No strong evidence of
                                  various associations                                          declines in social capital in
                                                                                                the US since the 1970’s




                                                            77
          TABLE 4: STUDIES OF SOCIAL CAPITAL FORMATION AND THE LEVEL OF SOCIAL CAPITAL

    STUDY             AGENTS            SOCIAL CAPITAL                       POTENTIAL                        FINDINGS
                                            MEASURES                      DETERMINANTS
Rahn and         Adults in US        Trust in local government     Measures of political              Ideological polarization,
Rudolph (2002)                                                     institutions, political culture,   income inequality, and
                                                                   income inequality, ethnic          political culture are more
                                                                   fractionalization, ideological     important and political
                                                                   polarization, controls for         institutions in explaining
                                                                   individual characteristics         variation in trust
Sampson,         Adults in Chicago   Intergenerational closure,    Miscellaneous neighborhood         Residential stability and
Morenoff, and                        reciprocal social exchange,   characteristics                    relative affluence predict
Earls (1999)                         and shared expectations for                                      intergenerational social
                                     informal social control                                          closure and reciprocal
                                                                                                      exchange, whereas
                                                                                                      neighborhood disadvantage
                                                                                                      predicts low expectations of
                                                                                                      shared child control




                                                           78
References

Aaronson, E., (1999), The Social Animal, Eighth Edition, New York: Worth Publishers.

Akerlof, G.A. and R. E. Kranton, (2000) “Economics and Identity”, Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 115, 3, 715-753.

Alesina, A. and E. La Ferrara, (2002), “Who Trusts Others?,” Journal of Public
Economics, 85, 207-234.

Annen, K., (2003), “Social Capital, Inclusive Networks, and Economic Performance,”
Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization, 50, 449-463.

Aristotle, (1985), Nicomachean Ethics, T. Irwin trans., Indianapolis: Hackett Publishing..

Arrow, K., (2000), “Observations on Social Capital,” in Social Capital: A Multifaceted
Perspective, P. Dasgupta and I. Seragilden, eds., Washington DC: World Bank.

Azariadis, C. and A. Drazen, (1990), “Threshold Externalities in Economic
Development,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 105, 501-526.

Barr, A. (2000) “Social Capital and Technical Information Flows in the Ghanaian
Manufacturing Sector,” Oxford Economic Papers, 52, 3, 539-59.

Barr, A., M. Fafchamps, and T. Owens, (2004), “The Resources and Governance of Non-
Governmental Organizations in Uganda”, CSAE Working Paper, Oxford University

Bayart, J-F, (1989), L'Etat en Afrique: La Politique du Ventre, Paris: Fayard.

Bernstein, L. (1992), “Opting Out of the Legal System: Extralegal Contractual Relations
in the Diamond Industry,” Journal of Legal Studies, 21, 115-157

Bernstein, L. (1996), “Merchant Law in a Merchant Court: Rethinking the Code's Search
for Immanent Business Norms,” University of Pennsylvania Law Review, 144, 5, 1765-
1821.

Beugelsdijk, S. and T. van Schalk, (2001), “Social Capital and Regional Economic
Growth,” mimeo, Tilburg University.

Bianchi, S. and J. Robinson, (1997), “What Did You Do Today? Children’s Use of
Time, Family Composition, and the Acquisition of Social Capital,” Journal of Marriage
and the Family, 59, 332-344.

Bigsten, A., P. Collier, S. Dercon, M. Fafchamps, B. Gauthier, J.W. Gunning, A.
Isaksson, A. Oduro, R. Oostendorp, C. Patillo, M. Soderbom, F. Teal, A. Zeufack,




                                            79
(2000), “Contract Flexibility and Dispute Resolution in African Manufacturing,” Journal
of Development Studies, 36, 4, 1-37

Blackbourn, D., (1997), The Long Nineteenth Century, New York: Oxford University
Press.

Blume, L., (2002) “Stigma and Social Control: The Dynamics of Social Norms”, mimeo,
Department of Economics, Cornell University.

Bowles, S. and H. Gintis, (2002), “Social Capital and Community Governance,”
Economic Journal, 112, 483, 419-436.

Brehm, J. and W. Rahn, (1997), “Individual-Level Evidence for the Causes and
Consequences of Social Capital,” American Journal of Political Science, 41, 3, 999-1023.

Brock, W. and S. Durlauf, (2001a), “Interactions-Based Models,” in Handbook of
Econometrics, Vol. 5, J. Heckman and E. Leamer eds., Amsterdam: North Holland.

Brock, W., and Durlauf, S., (2001b), “Growth Empirics and Reality,” World Bank
Economic Review, 15, 3, 229-272.

Brock, W. and S. Durlauf, (2001c), “Discrete Choice with Social Interactions,” Review of
Economic Studies, 68, 2, 235-260.

Carbonaro, W., (1999), “Opening the Debate: On Closure and Schooling Outcomes,”
American Sociological Review, 64, 682-686.

Carter, M. and M. Castillo, (2003), “An Experimental Approach to Social Capital in
South Africa,” mimeo, University of Wisconsin.

Carter, M. and M. Castillo, (2004), “Morals, Markets and Mutual Insurance: Using
Economic Experiments to Study Recovery from Hurricane Mitch,” mimeo, University of
Wisconsin.

Carter, M. and J. Maluccio, (2003), “Social Capital and Coping with Economic Shock:
An Analysis of Stunting of South African Children,” World Development, 31, 7, 1147-
1163.

Charles, K. and P. Kline, (2002), “Relational Costs and the Production of Social Capital:
Evidence from Carpooling,” NBER Working Paper no. 9041.

Coleman, J., (1988), “Social Capital in the Creation of Human Capital,” American
Journal of Sociology, 94, S95-S121.

Coleman, J., (1990), The Foundations of Social Theory. Cambridge: Harvard University
Press.



                                           80
Costa, D. and M. Kahn, (2003a), “Understanding the Decline in American Social Capital,
1953-1998,” Kyklos, 56, 1, 17-46.

Costa, D. and M. Kahn, (2003b), “Cowards and Heroes: Group Loyalty in the American
Civil War,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118, 2, 519-548.

Dasgupta, P., (2000), “Economic Progress and the Idea of Social Capital,” in Social
Capital: A Multifaceted Perspective, P. Dasgupta and I. Seragilden eds., Washington DC:
World Bank.

Dasgupta, P., (2002), “Social Capital and Economic Performance: Analytics,” mimeo,
Faculty of Economics, University of Cambridge.

Dasgupta, P. and I. Serageldin, (2000), Social Capital: A Multifaceted Perspective,
Washington DC: The World Bank.

Desdoigts, A., (1999), “Patterns of Economic Development and the Formation of Clubs,”
Journal of Economic Growth, 4, 3, 305-330.

DiPasquale, D. and E. Glaeser, (1999), “Incentives and Social Capital: Are Homeowners
Better Citizens?,” Journal of Urban Economics, 45, 2, 354-384.

Durlauf, S., (1999), “The Case “Against” Social Capital,” Focus, 20, 1-4.

Durlauf, S., (2000), "Econometric Analysis and the Study of Economic Growth: A
Skeptical Perspective," in Macroeconomics and the Real World, R. Backhouse and A.
Salanti, eds., Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2000.

Durlauf, S., (2001), “A Framework for the Study of Individual Behavior and Social
Interactions,” Sociological Methodology, 31, 47-87.

Durlauf, S., (2002a), "The Memberships Theory of Poverty: The Role of Group
Affiliations In Determining Socioeconomic Outcomes," in Understanding Poverty in
America, S. Danziger and R. Haveman, eds., Harvard University Press, 2002.

Durlauf, S., (2002b), "Bowling Alone: A Review Essay," Journal of Economic Behavior
and Organization, 47, 3, 259-273.

Durlauf, S., (2002c), “On the Empirics of Social Capital,” Economic Journal, 112, 483,
459-479.

Durlauf, S. and P. Johnson, (1995), “Multiple Regimes and Cross-Country Growth
Behavior,” Journal of Applied Econometrics, 10, 365-384

Durlauf, S., A. Kourtellos, and A. Minkin, (2001), "The Local Solow Growth Model,"
European Economic Review, 45, 928-940, 2001.



                                           81
Durlauf, S. and D. Quah, (1999), "The New Empirics of Economic Growth," with D.
Quah, in Handbook of Macroeconomics, J. Taylor and M. Woodford eds., North-Holland.

Durlauf, S. and H. P. Young, (2001), “The New Social Economics,” in Social Dynamics,
S. Durlauf and H. P. Young eds., Cambridge: MIT Press.

Easterly, W. and R. Levine, (1997), “Africa’s Growth Tragedy: Politics and Ethnic
Divisions,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 112, 1203-50.

Ensminger, J. (1992), Making a Market: The Institutional Transformation of an African
Society, Cambridge University Press, New York.

Fafchamps, M., (1996), “The Enforcement of Commercial Contracts in Ghana,” World
Development, 24, 3, 427-448.

Fafchamps, M., (2002), “Spontaneous Market Emergence”, Topics in Theoretical
Economics, 2, 1, Article 2, Berkeley Electronic Press at www.bepress.com.

Fafchamps, M., (2003), “Ethnicity and Networks in African Trade,” Contributions to
Economic Analysis and Policy, 2, 1, article 14, Berkeley Electronic Press at
www.bepress.com.

Fafchamps, M., (2004), Market Institutions in Sub-Saharan Africa, Cambridge: MIT
Press.

Fafchamps, M. and S. Lund, (2003), “Risk Sharing Networks in Rural Philippines,”
Journal of Development Economics, 71, 261-287.

Fafchamps, M. and B. Minten, (1999), “Relationships and Traders in Madagascar”,
Journal of Development Studies, 35, 6, 1-35.

Fafchamps, M. and B. Minten, (2001), “Social Capital and Agricultural Trade,”
Ameircan Journal of Agricultural Economics, 83, 3, 680-685.

Fafchamps, M. and B. Minten, (2002), “Returns to Social Network Capital Among
Traders,” Oxford Economic Papers, 54, 173-206.

Fernandez, C., E. Ley, and M. Steel, (2001), “Model Uncertainty in Cross-Country
Growth Regressions,” Journal of Applied Econometrics, 16, 5, 563-576.

Fernandez, R., E. Castilla, and P. Moore, (2000), “Social Capital at Work: Employment
at a Phone Center,” American Journal of Sociology, 105, 1288-1356

Fershtman, C. and U. Gneezy, (2001), “Discrimination in a Segmented Society: An
Experimental Approach,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 116, 1, 351-77.




                                         82
Frank, K., and J. Yasumoto, (1996), “Linking Action to Social Structure within a System:
Social Capital within and between Subgroups,” American Journal of Sociology, 104, 3,
642-686.

Fudenberg, D. and E.. Maskin (1996), “The Folk Theorem in Repeated Games with
Discounting,” Econometrica, 54, 533-556

Fukuyama, F. (1997), “Social Capital,” Tanner Lecture on Human Values.

Furstenberg, F. and M. Hughes, (1995), "Social Capital and Successful Development
Among At-Risk Youth,” Journal of Marriage and the Family, 57, 580-592.

Geertz, C., H. Geertz, and L. Rosen, (1979), Meaning and Order in Moroccan Society,
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Glaeser, E., D. Laibson, J. Scheinkman and C. Soutter, (2000), "Measuring Trust,"
Quarterly Journal of Economics, CXV, 811-846.

Glaeser, E., D. Laibson, and B. Sacerdote, (2002), “An Economic Approach to Social
Capital,” Economic Journal, 112, 483, 437-458.

Goldin, C. and L. Katz, (1999), “Human Capital and Social Capital: the Rise of
Secondary Schooling in America. 1910 to 1940,” Journal of Interdisciplinary History,
29, 683-723.

Granovetter, M., (1975), Getting a Job: A Study of Contacts and Careers, Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, Chicago; 2nd edition 1995

Granovetter, M., (1985), “Economic Action and Social Structure: The Problem of
Embeddedness,” American Journal of Sociology, 91, 3, 481-510.

Granovetter, M. (1995) “The Economic Sociology of Firms and Entrepreneurs”, in The
Economic Sociology of Immigration: Essays on Networks, Ethnicity, and
Entrepreneurship, Alejandro Portes, ed., New York: Russell Sage Foundation, 128-165.

Greif, A., (1993), “Contract Enforceability and Economic Institutions in Early Trade: The
Maghribi Traders' Coalition,” American Economic Review, 83, 3, 525-548

Grootaert, C., (2000), “Social Capital, Household Welfare, and Poverty in Indonesia,”
mimeo, World Bank.

C. Grootaert and T. van Bastelear, (2002), The Role of Social Capital in Development: An
Empirical Assessment, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Gugerty, M. and M. Kremer, (2002), “The Impact of Development Assistance on Social
Capital: Evidence from Kenya,” in The Role of Social Capital in Development: An



                                           83
Empirical Assessment, C. Grootaert, and T. van Bastelear, eds., Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.

Guiso, L., P. Sapienza, and L. Zingales, (2002), “The Role of Social Capital in Financial
Development,” George J. Stigler Center for the Study of the Economcy and the State
Working Paper no. 173.

Hagan, J., R. MacMillan, and B. Wheaton, (1996), “New Kid in Town: Social Capital
and the Life Course Effects of Family Migration on Children,” American Sociological
Review, 61, 368-385.

Hagan, J. and B. McCarthy, (1995), “Getting Into Street Crime: The Structure and
Process of Criminal Embeddedness,” Social Science Research, 24, 63-95.

Hallinan, M., and W. Kubitschek, (1999), “Conceptualizing and Measuring School Social
Networks: Comment on Morgan and Sorenson,” American Sociological Review, 64, 687-
693.

Hayek, F. A., (1945), “The Use of Knowledge in Society”, American Economic Review,
35, 4, 519-530

Helliwell, J., (1996), “Economic Growth and Social Capital in Asia,” in The Asia Pacific
Region in the Global Economy: A Canadian Perspective, R. Harris, Richard, ed.,
Calgary: University of Calgary Press, 1996.

Helliwell, J. and R. Putnam, (2000), “Economic Growth and Social Capital in Italy,” in
Social Capital: A Multifaceted Perspective, P. Dasgupta and I. Seragilden eds.,
Washington DC: World Bank, 253-266.

Hofferth, S., J. Boisjoly, and G. Duncan, (1999), “The Development of Social Capital,”
Rationality and Society, 11, 1, 79-110.

Howitt, P. and D. Mayer-Foulkes, (2002), “Technological Innovation, Implementation,
and Stagnation: A Schumpeterian Theory of Convergence Clubs,” National Bureau of
Economic Research Working Paper no. 9104.

Isham, J., (2002), “The Effect of Social Capital on Fertilizer Adoption: Evidence from
Rural Tanzania,” Journal of African Economics, 11, 1, 39-60.

Jimenez, E. and Y. Sawada, (1999), “Do Community-Managed Schools Work? An
Evaluation of El Salvador's EDUCO Program,” World Bank Economic Review, 13, 3,
415-41.

Johnson, S., J. McMillan, and C. Woodruff, (2000), “Entrepreneurs and the Ordering of
Institutional Reform: Poland, Slovakia, Romania, Russia and Ukraine Compared,”
Economics of Transition, 8, 1, 1-36



                                           84
Kandori, M., (1992), “Social Norms and Community Enforcement”, Review of Economic
Studies, 59, 63-80.

Knack, S. and Keefer, P., (1997), “Does Social Capital Have an Economic Impact? A
Cross-Country Investigation,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 112, 1252-1288.

Kranton, R., (1996), “Reciprocal Exchange: A Self-Sustaining System”, American
Economic Review, 86, 4, 830-851

Krishna, A., (2001), “Moving from the Stock of Social Capital to the Flow of Benefits:
The Role of Agency,” World Development, 29, 925-943.

Krishna, A. and N. Uphoff, (1999), “Mapping and Measuring Social Capital: A
Conceptual and Empirical Study of Collective Action for Conserving and Developing
Watersheds in Rajastan, India, World Bank, Social Capital Initiative Working Paper no.
13.

LaPorta, R., F. Lopez-de-Silanes, A. Shleifer, and R. Vishny, (1997), “Trust in Large
Organizations,” American Economic Review, 87, 333-338.

Lee, S. and M. Brinton, (1996), “Elite Education and Social Capital: The Case of South
Korea,” Sociology of Education, 69, 177-192.

Lin, N., (2001), Social Capital, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Lochner, K., I. Kawachi, R. Brennan, and S. Buka, (2003), “Social Capital and
Neighborhood Mortality Rates in Chicago,” Social Science and Medicine, 56, 1797-1805.

Loury, G., (1977), “A Dynamic Theory of Racial Income Differences,” in Women,
Minorities, and Employment Discrimination, P. Wallace and A. LeMund, eds.,
Lexington: Lexington Books.

Loury, G., (1981), “Intergenerational Transfers and the Distribution of Earnings,”
Econometrica, 49, 843-867.

Maluccio, J., L. Haddad, and J. May, (2001), “Social Capital and Household Welfare in
South Africa,” Journal of Development Studies, 36, 6, 54-81.

Manski, C., (1993), “Identification of Endogenous Social Effects: The Reflection
Problem,” Review of Economic Studies, 60, 531-542.

Manski, C., (2000), “Economic Analysis of Social Interactions,” Journal of Economic
Perspectives, 14, 114-136.




                                          85
Manski, C., (2002), “Identification of Decision Rules in Experiments on Simple Games
of Proposal and Response,” European Economic Review, 46, 880-891.

McMillan, J. and C. Woodruff, (August 2000), “Private Order Under Dysfunctional
Public Order,” Michigan Law Review, 98, 8, 2421-2458.

McNeal, R., (1999), “Parental Involvement as Social Capital: Differential Effectiveness
on Science Achievement, Truancy, and Dropping Out,” Social Forces, 78, 1, 117-144.

Miguel, E., P. Gertler, and D. Levine, (2001), “Did Industrialization Destroy Social
Capital in Indonesia?,” mimeo, Department of Economics, University of California at
Berkeley.

Montgomery, J., (1991), “Social Networks and Labor-Market Outcomes: Toward an
Economic Analysis”, American Economic Review, 81, 5, 1408-1418.

Morgan, S. and A. Sorenson, (1999a), “Parental Networks, Social Closure, and
Mathematics Learning: A Test of Coleman’s Social Capital Explanation of School
Effects,” American Sociological Review, 64, 661-681.

Morgan, S. and A. Sorenson, (1999b), “Theory, Measurement, and Specification Issues in
Models of Network Effects on Learning: Reply to Carbonaro and to Hallinan and
Kubitschek,” American Sociological Review, 64, 693-700.

Narayan, D. and L. Pritchett, (1999), “Cents and Sociability: Household Income and
Social Capital in Rural Tanzania,” Economic Development and Cultural Change, 47, 4,
871-897.

North, D., (1973), The Rise of the Western World, Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.

North, D., (1990), Institutions, Institutional Change, and Economic Performance,
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

North, D., (2001), “Comments”, in Communities and Markets in Economic Development,
403-8, M. Aoki and Y. Hayami eds., Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Oliver, J., (1999), “The Effects of Metropolitan Economic Segregation on Local Civic
Participation,” American Journal of Political Science, 43, 186-212.

Ostrom, E., (2000), “Social Capital: A Fad or Fundamental Concept?,” in Social Capital:
A Multifaceted Perspective, P. Dasgupta and I. Seragilden eds., Washington DC: World
Bank.




                                          86
Ostrom, E. and T.Ahn, (2002), “A Social Science Perspective on Social Capital: Social
Capital and Collective Action,” mimeo, Workshop in Political Theory ad Policy
Analysis, Indiana University.

Paldam, M. and G. Svendsen, (2000), “An Essay on Social Capital: Looking for Smoke
Behind the Fire,” European Journal of Political Economy, 16, 339-366.

Palloni, A., D. Massey, M. Ceballos, K. Espinosa, and M. Spittel, (2001), “Social Capital
and International Migration: A Test Using Information on Family Networks,” American
Journal of Sociology, 106, 1262-1298.

Parcel, T. and E. Menaghan, (1993), “Family Social Capital and Children’s Behavioral
Outcomes,” Social Psychology Quarterly, 56, 2, 120-135.

Pargal, S., M. Huq, and D. Gilligan, (1999), “Social Capital in Solid Waste Management:
Evidence from Dhaka, Bangladesh,” World Bank, Social Capital Initiative Working
Paper no. 16.

Paxton, P., (1999), “Is Social Capital Declining? A Multiple Indicator Assessment,”
American Journal of Sociology, 105, 88-127.

Paxton, P. (2002), “Social Capital and Democracy: An Interdependent Relationship,”
American Sociological Review, 67, 254-277.

Platteau, J.-P., (1994a), “Behind the Market Stage Where Real Societies Exist: Part I -
The Role of Public and Private Order Institutions,” Journal of Development Studies, 30,
3, 533-577.

Platteau, J.-P., (1994b), “Behind the Market Stage Where Real Societies Exist: Part II -
The Role of Moral Norms,” Journal of Development Studies, 30, 3, 533-577.

Platteau, J. P. and E. Seki (2002), “Community Arrangements to Overcome Market
Failure: Pooling Groups in Japanese Fisheries”, in Communities and Markets in
Economic Development, M. Aoki and Y. Hayami eds., Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Poewe, K. (1989) Religion, Kinship, and Economy in Luapula, Zambia, The Edwin
Mellen Press, Lewinston.

Portes, A., (1998), “Social Capital: Its Origins and Application in Modern Sociology.”
Annual Review of Sociology, 1-14.

Portes, A., (2000), “The Two Meanings of Social Capital." Sociological Forum,15, 1,:1-
12.

Putnam, R. with R. Leonardi and R. Nanetti, (1993), Making Democracy Work: Civic
Traditions in Modern Italy, Princeton: Princeton University Press.



                                           87
Putnam, R., (1995), “Tuning In, Tuning Out: The Strange Disappearance of Social
Capital in America,” PS: Political Science & Politics, December, 664-683.

Putnam, R. (2000), Bowling Alone, New York: Simon and Schuster.

Rahn, W. and T Rudolph, (2002), “A Multilevel Model of Trust in Local Government,”
mimeo, University of Minnesota.

Rauch, J. and A. Casella, (2001) “Overcoming Informational Barriers to International
Resource Allocation: Prices and Group Ties,” Economic Journal, 113, 484, 21-42.

Robison, L. and M. Siles, (1999),”Social Capital and House Income Distributions in the
United States: 1980, 1990,” Journal of Socio-Economics, 28, 43-93.

Roemer. J., (1998), Equality of Opportunity, Cambridge: Harvard University Press.

Routledge, B. and J. von Amsburg, (2003), “Social Capital and Growth,” Journal of
Monetary Economics. 50, 1, 167-194.

Sampson, R., Morenoff, J., and Earls, F., (1999), “Beyond Social Capital: Collective
Efficacy for Children,” American Sociological Review, 64, 633-660.

Sandefur, G., A. Meier, and P. Hernandez, (1999), “Families, Social Capital, and
Educational Continuation,” mimeo, Department of Sociology, University of Wisconsin at
Madison.

Sandefur, R. and E. Laumann, (1998), “A Paradigm for Social Capital,” Rationality and
Society, 10, 4, 481-501.

Skocpol, T., (1996), “Unravelling from Above,” The American Prospect, March-April,
20-25.

Skocpol, T., (2003), Diminished Democracy: From Membership to Management in
American Civic Life, Norman: University of Oklahoma Press.

Somanathan, E. and R. Rubin, (2004), “The Evolution of Honesty,” Journal of Economic
Behavior and Organization, 54, 1-17.

Sun, Y., (1999), “The Contextual Effects of Community Social Capital on
Academic Performance,” Social Science Research, 28, 4, 403-426.

Tarrow, S., (1996), “Making Social Science Work Across Space and Time: A Critical
Reflection on Robert Putnam’s Making Democracy Work,” American Political Science
Review, 90, 2, 389-397.




                                          88
Taylor, C., (2000), “The Old-Boy Network and the Young-Gun Effect,” International
Economic Review, 41, 4, 871-91

Teachman, J., K. Paasch, and K. Carver, (1997), “Social Capital and the Generation of
Human Capital,” Social Forces, 75, 4, 1-17.

Temple, J., (1999), “The New Growth Evidence,” Journal of Economic Literature, 37,
112-156.

Temple, J., (2000), “Growth Regressions and What the Textbooks Don’t Tell You,”
Bulletin of Economic Research, 14, 395-426.
Varughese, G. and Ostrom, E., (2001), “The Contested Role of Heterogeneity in
Collective Action: Some Evidence from Community Forestry in Nepal,” World
Development, 29, 747-765.

Wade, R., (1987), “The Management of Common Property Resources: Finding a
Cooperative Solution”, World Bank Research Observer, 2(2): 219-34.

Wade, R., (1988), “The Management of Irrigation Systems: How to Evoke Trust and
Avoid Prisoners' Dilemma”, World Development, 16(4): 489-500.

Woolcock, M., (1998), “Social Capital and Economic Development: Toward a Synthesis
and Policy Framework,” Theory and Society, 27, 151-208.

Zak, P. and S. Knack, (2001), “Trust and Growth,” Economic Journal, 111, 295-321.




                                         89
