                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                            TRADE COSTS

                                          James E. Anderson
                                           Eric van Wincoop

                                         Working Paper 10480
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w10480


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       May 2004




In preparation for the Journal of Economic Literature. Second draft. We are grateful to John McMillan, two
referees and Jeff Bergstrand for quite exceptionally generous and detailed comments and suggestions. We
have also benefitted from many other comments by colleagues too numerous to single out, and from
presentations at the Brookings Institution, the World Bank, the University of Maryland, the University of
Wisconsin, the NBER ITI Program meeting, the CEPR conference on new economic geography, the
Universities of Kiel and Nottingham, and the London School of Economics. The views expressed herein are
those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2004 by James E. Anderson and Eric van Wincoop. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.
Trade Costs
James E. Anderson and Eric van Wincoop
NBER Working Paper No. 10480
May 2004
JEL No. F0
                                      ABSTRACT

This paper surveys the measurement of trade costs --- what we know, and what we don't know but
may usefully attempt to find out. Partial and incomplete data on direct measures of costs go together
with inference on implicit costs from trade flows and prices. Total trade costs in rich countries are
large. The ad valorem tax equivalent is about 170% when pushing the data very hard. Poor countries
face even higher trade costs. There is a lot of variation across countries and across goods within
countries, much of which makes economic sense. Theory looms large in our survey, providing
interpretation and perspective on the one hand and suggesting improvements for the future on the
other hand. Some new results are presented to apply and interpret gravity theory properly and to
handle aggregation appropriately.

James E. Anderson
Department of Economics
Boston College
Chestnut Hill, MA 02467
and NBER
james.anderson.1@bc.edu

Eric van Wincoop
Department of Economics
University of Virginia
Charlottesville, VA 22904
and NBER
vanwincoop@virginia.edu
         “... the report of my death was an exaggeration.” Mark Twain,
      1897


I    Introduction
The death of distance is exaggerated. Trade costs are large, even aside from trade
policy barriers and even between apparently highly integrated economies. De-
spite many difficulties in measuring and inferring the height of trade costs and
their decomposition into economically useful components, the outlines of a coher-
ent picture emerge from recent developments in data collection and especially in
structural modeling of costs. Trade costs have economically sensible magnitudes
and patterns across countries and regions and across goods, suggesting useful hy-
potheses for deeper understanding. This survey is a progress report. Much useful
work remains to be done, so we make suggestions below.

Trade Costs Matter

    (1) They are large — a 170% total trade barrier is constructed below as a
representative rich country ad valorem tax equivalent estimate. This includes all
transport, border-related and local distribution costs from foreign producer to
final user in the domestic country. (2) Trade costs are richly linked to economic
policy. Direct policy instruments (tariffs, the tariff equivalents of quotas and trade
barriers associated with the exchange rate system) are less important than other
policies (transport infrastructure investment, law enforcement and related property
rights institutions, informational institutions, regulation, language). (3) Trade
costs have large welfare implications. For example, Anderson and van Wincoop
(2002) argue that current policy related costs are often worth more than 10% of
national income. (4) Obstfeld and Rogoff (2000) argue that all the major puzzles
of international macroeconomics hang on trade costs. (5) Details of trade costs
matter to economic geography. For example, the home market effect hypothesis
(big countries produce more of goods with scale economies) hangs on differentiated
goods with scale economies having greater trade costs than homogeneous goods
(Davis, 1998). (6) The cross-commodity structure of policy barriers is important




                                          1
to welfare (e.g., Anderson, 1994).

Broadly Defined

    Broadly defined trade costs include all costs incurred in getting a good to a
final user other than the marginal cost of producing the good itself: transportation
costs (both freight costs and time costs), policy barriers (tariffs and non-tariff
barriers), information costs, contract enforcement costs, costs associated with the
use of different currencies, legal and regulatory costs, and local distribution costs
(wholesale and retail). Trade costs are reported in terms of their ad-valorem tax
equivalent. The 170% headline number breaks down into 55% local distribution
costs and 74% international trade costs (1.7=1.55*1.74-1).
    Both domestic and international trade costs are included because it is arbitrary
to stop counting trade costs once goods cross a border. It is not even obvious when
goods cross a border in the economic sense: when they arrive on the dock, leave
the dock, arrive at the importer?
    Costs broadly defined and reported below may include some rent. Exclusion of
rent requires a markup theory and its application.

Three Sources

    We report on trade costs from three broad sources. Direct measures of trade
costs are discussed in section II. Direct measures of trade costs are remarkably
sparse and inaccurate. Two types of indirect measures complement the incom-
plete and inadequate direct measures: inference from quantities (trade volumes),
discussed in section III, and inference from prices, discussed in section IV.

Theory Looms Large

     Theory looms large in our survey. A theoretical approach is inevitable to infer
the large portion of trade costs that cannot be directly measured in the data. The
literature on inference about trade barriers from final goods prices remains largely
devoid of theory. We point to ways in which trade theory can be effectively used to
fill this gap and learn more about trade barriers from evidence on prices. Recent
developments have bridged the gap between practice and theory in the inference
of trade costs from trade flows. Readers who pause with us on the bridge will


                                         2
produce better work in the future.
    The gravity model provides the main link between trade barriers and trade
flows. Gravity is often taken to be rather atheoretic or justified only under highly
restrictive assumptions. We place gravity in a wide class of trade separable gen-
eral equilibrium models. Trade separability obtains when the allocation of trade
across countries is separable from the allocation of production and spending within
countries. Gravity links the cross-country general equilibrium trade allocation to
the cross-country trade barriers, all conditional on the observed consumption and
production allocations. Inferences about trade costs therefore do not depend on
the general equilibrium structure that lies beneath the observed consumption and
production allocations within countries.
    Appropriate aggregation of trade costs is a key concern. Aggregation of some
sort is inevitable due both to the coarseness of observations of complex underly-
ing phenomena and the desirability of simple measures of very high dimensional
information. We show how theory can be used to replace common a-theoretic
aggregation methods with ideal aggregation. We also show how theory can shed
light on aggregation bias and what can be done to resolve it.

Trade Costs are Large and Variable

    Mattel’s Barbie doll, discussed in Feenstra (1998), illustrates large costs. The
production costs for the doll are $1, while it sells for about $10 in the United
States. The cost of transportation, marketing, wholesaling and retailing have an
ad valorem tax equivalent of 900%.
    A rough estimate of the tax equivalent of ‘representative’ trade costs for in-
dustrialized countries is 170%. This number breaks down as follows: 21% trans-
portation costs, 44% border related trade barriers and 55% retail and wholesale
distribution costs (2.7=1.21*1.44*1.55). The 21% transport cost includes both di-
rectly measured freight costs and a 9% tax equivalent of the time value of goods in
transit. Both are based on estimates for U.S. data. The 44% border related barrier
is a combination of direct observation and inferred costs. Total international trade
costs are then about 74% (0.74=1.21*1.44-1). Representative retail and wholesale
distribution costs are set at 55%, close to the average for industrialized countries.
    Direct evidence on border costs shows that tariff barriers are now low in most
countries, on average (trade-weighted or arithmetic) less than 5% for rich countries,

                                         3
and with a few exceptions are on average between 10% and 20% for developing
countries. Our overall representative estimate of policy barriers for industrialized
countries (including non-tariff barriers) is about 8%. Inferred border costs appear
on average to dwarf the effect of tariff and non-tariff policy barriers. An extremely
rough breakdown of the 44% number reported above is as follows: an 8% policy
barrier, a 7% language barrier, a 14% currency barrier (from the use of differ-
ent currencies), a 6% information cost barrier, and a 3% security barrier for rich
countries.
    Trade costs are also highly variable across both goods and countries. Trade
barriers in developing countries are higher than those reported above for indus-
trialized countries. High value-to-weight goods are less penalized by transport
costs. The value of timeliness varies across goods, explaining modal choice. Poor
institutions and poor infrastructure penalize trade, differentially across countries.
Sectoral trade barriers appear to vary inversely with elasticities of demand. Policy
barriers, especially NTB’s, also vary significantly across goods. Non-tariff barriers
are highly concentrated: in many sectors they are close to zero, but U.S. textiles
and apparel have 71% of products covered, with tariff equivalents ranging from 5%
to 33%.


II      Direct Evidence
Direct evidence on trade costs comes in two major categories, costs imposed by
policy (tariffs, quotas and the like) and costs imposed by the environment (trans-
portation, insurance against various hazards, time costs). We review evidence on
international policy barriers, transport costs and wholesale and retail distribution
costs. We focus on current and recent trade costs in this survey; see the work of
Williamson and co-authors (e.g., O’Rourke and Williamson, 1999) for historical
evidence.
    An important theme is the many difficulties faced in obtaining accurate mea-
sures of trade costs. Particularly egregious is the paucity of good data on policy
barriers.1 Transport cost data is limited in part by its private nature. Many
   1
     The grossly incomplete and inaccurate information on policy barriers available to researchers
is a scandal and a puzzle. It is natural to assume that trade policy is well documented since
theory and politics have emphasized it for hundreds of years.


                                                4
other trade costs, such as those associated with information barriers and contract
enforcement, cannot be directly measured at all. Better data on trade costs are
feasible with institutional resources, and would yield a high payoff.


II.A      Policy Barriers
II.A.1     Measurement Problems and Limitations

The seemingly simple question ‘how high are policy barriers to trade?’ cannot
usually be answered with accuracy for most goods in most countries at most dates.
The inaccuracy arises from three sources: absence of data, data which are useful
only in combination with other missing or fragmentary data, and aggregation bias.
Each of the difficulties is discussed further below.
    The key open2 (to the research community) source for panel data on policy
barriers to trade is the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development’s
Trade Analysis & Information System, TRAINS. It contains information on Trade
Control Measures (tariff, para-tariff3 and non-tariff measures) at tariff line level for
a maximum of 137 countries beginning in the late 1980’s. TRAINS reports all data
on bilateral tariffs, non-tariff barriers and bilateral trade flows at the six-digit level
of the Harmonized System (HS) product classification for roughly 5000 “products”.
Countries use a finer product classification when reporting tariffs to UNCTAD.
Thus, multiple tariff “lines” underlie each 6-digit aggregate. It is in some cases
possible to drill down to the national tariff line level. Some organizations have
obtained the full TRAINS database (without the front end software) and provide
access to a limited set of users inside the organization.4
   2
     UNCTAD sells the TRAINS data each year to commercial customers who use it to provide
current information on trade costs to potential traders. It comes with a front end designed for
convenience in pulling a maximum of 200 lines of data while preventing a user from gaining
access to the whole database and using it to compete with UNCTAD’s potential sales to other
customers.
   3
     Para-tariff measures include customs surcharges such as import license fees, foreign exchange
taxes, stamps, etc.
   4
     For example, Boston College has purchased disaggregated tariff information from UNCTAD’s
TRAINS database for the years 1988 through 2001, inclusive. We have data for 137 countries
for at least one year, counting the European Union as a single country, but far less than the
maximum amount suggested by 14 years times 137 countries.



                                                5
    Table 1 gives a sense of the substantial incompleteness of TRAINS. For each
year from 1989 to 2000, the table reports the fraction of countries that report some
lines (though possibly a very limited number) for tariffs, NTB’s and trade flows.
Of 121 reporting countries in 1999, 43% report tariffs, 30% report NTB’s, 55%
report trade flows and 17.4% have data for all three. The other countries report
no data at all for any good. Coverage is not much better in other years. Coverage is
better for OECD countries — over 50% have tariff and NTB information recorded
in 1999, with considerable variability in coverage across the years.
    The World Bank has very recently put together from these elements the most
comprehensive system for researchers, and in principle provides public access.5 Its
World Integrated Trade System (WITS) software is coupled to TRAINS and to the
World Trade Organization (WTO) Integrated Data Base and Consolidated Tariff
Schedules6 along with the UN Statistical Division’s COMTRADE trade flow data.
In principle it allows users to drill down and select data according to their own
criteria, to track the complexities of trade policy as finely as the primary inputs
allow.7 WITS has some other data handling and modeling functions as well.
    National sources in combination with the above allow better measurement of
   5
      See http://wits.worldbank.org. At this writing, there are still technical glitches facing a
user trying to gain access. WITS only runs in late model Windows machines, users may need
some IT support to install the software, and a user will need to pay fees to UNCTAD for use of
COMTRADE and TRAINS. Email queries are not answered, in our experience, without using
friends at the Bank as intermediaries.
    6
      The WTO Consolidated Tariff Schedule database lists the Most Favored Nation (MFN)
bound tariffs at the tariff line level. The bound tariffs are the upper limits under the member
countries’ WTO obligation for actual tariffs charged to member countries not associated with
the importer in a Free Trade Agreement or a Customs Union, and often exceed the actual duties
charged. The WTO’s Integrated Data Base contains information on the applied rates at the
national tariff line level. The data is closed to researchers. The WTO periodically reports on
individual member country trade policy with a published Trade Policy Review based on its data.
    7
      The World Bank Trade and Production database produces from its resources a set of 3 and
4 digit aggregates of trade, production and tariff data. It is published on the Bank website and
presumably will be regularly updated. The Trade and Production database covers 67 developing
and developed countries over the period 1976-1999. Again, the description given misleadingly
suggests a useful panel; the actual data is full of missing observations due to the underlying limi-
tations of TRAINS. The sector disaggregation in the database follows the International Standard
Industrial Classification (ISIC) and is provided at the 3 digit level (28 industries) for 67 countries
and at the 4 digit level (81 industries) for 24 of these countries.



                                                  6
a single country’s trade policy. A series from the Institute for International Eco-
nomics provides measures of a few national trade policies for single years.8 See
also the WTO’s Trade Policy Reviews series.
    Data limitations can make even the available trade barrier information diffi-
cult to interpret. TRAINS does not routinely report ad valorem equivalents of
specific tariffs (on quantities rather than values). Where specific tariffs are preva-
lent, such as in agriculture in many countries, the omission of specific tariffs is
highly misleading. Many tariffs are in the form of specific taxes (on quantity),
and must be converted to ad valorem equivalents using price information which
must be matched up to the tariffs. Imperfections of classification or other infor-
mation introduce potential measurement error. TRAINS reports the percentage
of underlying lines which have specific tariffs in order to provide the user with
some information about how widespread the measurement problem may be. The
World Bank’s trade barrier data base substantially supplements TRAINS by sup-
plying missing specific tariff information. The match of the tariff line classifications
with the commodity classifications for trade flows is imperfect as well, introducing
measurement error when converting all data to the Harmonized System.
    Nontariff barriers are much more problematic than tariff barriers. The World
Bank database unfortunately does not provide NTB data. A user must use TRAINS
or more specialized databases directed at particular NTB’s. The TRAINS database
records the presence or absence of a nontariff barrier (NTB) on each 6 digit line.
Many differing types of nontariff barriers are recorded in TRAINS (a total of 18
types). The NTB data requires concordance between the differing NTB, tariffs
and trade classification systems at the national level, converting to the common
HS system.
    Jon Haveman’s extensive work with TRAINS has produced a usable NTB
database.9 Haveman follows what has become a customary grouping of NTB’s into
hard barriers (price and quantity measures), threat measures (antidumping and
countervailing duty investigations and measures) and quality measures (standards,
licensing requirements, etc.). A fourth category is embargoes and prohibitions. A
common use of the NTB data is to construct a measure of the prevalence of non-
  8
     See Hufbauer and Elliott (1994) on the US, Messerlin (2001) on the EU, Sazanami et al.
(1995) on Japan, Kim (1996) on South Korea, and Zhang et al. (1998) on China.
   9
     See the Ultimate Trade Barrier Catalog at http://www.eiit.org/Protection.


                                            7
tariff barriers, such as the percentage of HS lines in a given aggregate which are
covered by NTB’s. Nontariff barrier information in TRAINS is particularly prone
to incomplete and poor quality problems, so analysts seeking to study particu-
lar sectors such as the Multi-Fibre Arrangement (MFA) will do better to access
specialized databases such as the World Bank’s MFA data.10
    No information about NTB restrictiveness is provided in TRAINS, since mea-
suring the restrictiveness of each type of nontariff barrier requires an economic
model. In some important cases, individual analysts have developed direct mea-
sures of the restrictiveness of NTB’s based on quota license prices where these are
available.
    Indirect methods of measuring the restrictiveness of NTB’s are important be-
cause of the paucity of direct measures. One method is to infer the restrictiveness
of nontariff barriers through the comparison of prices. Some important trade lines
are well suited for price comparisons (homogeneous products sold on well-organized
exchanges, for example), but even here there are important issues with domestic
transport and intermediary margins and the location of wholesale markets rela-
tive to import points of entry. Evidence from price comparisons is discussed in
section IV. The restrictiveness of nontariff barriers can also be inferred from trade
quantities in the context of a well specified model of trade flows. Inference about
nontariff barriers from trade flows is discussed in Section III. Deardorff and Stern
(1998) and Laird and Yeats (1990) provide other detailed discussion of inference
about the restrictiveness of NTB’s.
    Aggregation is an important problem in the use and analysis of trade barriers.
Tariffs and NTB’s comprise some 105 lines, with large variation across the lines.
The national customs authorities are the primary sources of trade restrictions, and
their classification systems do not match up internationally or even intranationally
as between trade flows on the one hand and tariff and nontariff barrier classes on
the other hand. Matching up the tariff, nontariff and trade flow data requires
aggregation, guided by concordances which are imperfect and necessarily generate
measurement error. Moreover, for many purposes of analysis, the comprehension
of the analyst is overwhelmed by detail and further aggregation is desirable. Athe-
  10
     National tariff line information is also very problematic when analyzing nontariff barriers.
For example, matching up reported trade flows with annual quotas immediately runs into incon-
sistencies in reporting conventions.


                                               8
oretic indices such as arithmetic (equally weighted) and trade-weighted average
tariffs are commonly used, while production-weighted averages sometimes replace
them. As for nontariff barriers, the binary indicator is aggregated into a nontariff
barrier coverage ratio, the arithmetic or trade-weighted percentage of component
sectors with nontariff barriers.
    Ideal aggregation is proposed by Anderson and Neary (1996, 2003) based on the
idea of a uniform tariff equivalent of differentiated tariffs and NTB’s. Theoretically
consistent aggregation depends on the purpose of the analysis, so the analyst must
specify tariff equivalence with reference to an objective which makes sense for the
task at hand. Anderson and Neary develop and apply indices for the small country
case which are equivalent in terms of welfare and in terms of distorted aggregate
trade volume,11 and show that atheoretic aggregation can significantly bias the
measurement of trade restrictiveness.12 The theme of appropriate aggregation in
the different setting of many countries in general equilibrium plays a prominent
role in our discussion of indirect measurement of trade costs, so we defer a full
treatment to that section. Ideal aggregation is informationally demanding, so for
that reason and because of their familiarity and availability in the work of others,
we report the standard trade-weighted and arithmetic averages of tariffs and of
NTB coverage ratios below.

II.A.2     Evidence on Policy Barriers

Tariffs
   Trade-weighted and arithmetic average tariffs are reported in Table 2 for 50
  11
     See also Anderson (1998) for equivalence in terms of sector-specific factor income and its
relationship to the commonly reported effective rate of protection.
  12
     Anderson and Neary (2003) report results using a volume equivalent uniform tariff — replace-
ment of the differentiated tariff structure with a uniform tariff such that the general equilibrium
aggregate value of trade in distorted products (in terms of external prices) is held constant. The
ideal index is usually larger than the trade-weighted average — an arithmetic average across
countries in the study yields approximately 11% for the trade weighted average and 12% for the
uniform volume equivalent, while the US numbers in 1990 are 4% and 4.8% respectively. For
purposes of comparison between the initial tariffs and free trade, the two indexes are quite highly
correlated. For a smaller set of evaluations of year-on-year changes, in contrast, Anderson and
Neary show that the ideal and trade weighted average indexes are uncorrelated.




                                                9
countries for 1999, based on TRAINS data.13 The relatively small number of
countries reflects reporting difficulties typical of TRAINS; some earlier years con-
tain data for more countries. The reported numbers aggregate the thousands of
individual tariff lines in the underlying data. The table confirms that tariffs are
low among most developed countries (under 5%), while developing countries con-
tinue to have higher tariff barriers (mostly over 10%). Dispersion across countries
is wide: Hong Kong and Switzerland have 0% tariffs, the USA has a 1.9% simple
average and at the high end India has 30.1% and Bangladesh 22.7%.
    The variation of tariffs across goods is quite large in all countries; typically only
a few are large. Intuition suggests that the variation of tariffs adds to the welfare
cost. Marginal deadweight loss is proportional to the tariff, hence the cumulated
dead weight loss triangle varies with the square of the tariff. Coefficients of varia-
tion (the ratio of the standard deviation to the mean) of tariffs, either arithmetic or
trade-weighted, thus sometimes supplement averages. Anderson and Neary (2003)
report trade-weighted coefficients of variation of tariffs for 25 countries around the
year 1990, ranging from 0.14 to 1.67, many being clustered around 1. The show
that a proper analysis qualifies the simple intuition considerably, with welfare cost
increasing in an appropriately-weighted coefficient of variation.
    Bilateral variation of tariffs can also be large. Preferential trade is mainly re-
sponsible since insiders face a zero tariff while outsiders face the MFN tariff, but
aggregation over goods induces further bilateral variation due to differing com-
position of trade across partners. Harrigan (1993) reports bilateral production-
weighted average tariffs in 28 product categories for OECD countries for 1983. For
Canada, the reported range of bilateral averages runs from 1.2% to 3.2% and for
Japan from 2.3% to 4.5%. The U.S. has more modest differences, from 1.6% to
2.3%.14

Nontariff Barriers

       Table 3 reports the prevalence of nontariff barriers for 34 countries in 1999
  13
     Calculations were based on TRAINS annual databases purchased by Boston College without
the front end software and assembled into panel data.
  14
     Harrigan’s data is available to the public. Lai and Trefler (2002) are notable for compiling
3-digit bilateral tariffs for 14 importers and 36 exporters for 1972, 1977, 1982, 1987 and 1992.
They emphasize the hard work involved and have not yet made the data public.



                                               10
based on data from TRAINS and Haveman’s work rendering it more usable. The
smaller number of countries available than for tariffs reflects previously noted limi-
tations of TRAINS. We report arithmetic and trade-weighted NTB coverage ratios;
the percentage of tariff lines subject to NTB’s. The trade-weighted NTB coverage
ratios generally exceed the arithmetic average NTB coverage ratios, often consider-
ably so. For example, on the narrow definition (defined below), the U.S. arithmetic
NTB coverage is 1.5% while the trade-weighted NTB coverage is 5.5%. This re-
flects the fact that NTB’s tend to fall on important traded goods such as textiles
and apparel.
     Narrow NTB coverage is basically price and quantity control measures and
quality control measures while broad coverage is the narrow classification plus
threat measures related to antidumping. Threats are significant, since Staiger and
Wolak (1994) have shown that the threat of antidumping impedes trade consider-
ably (on average for the U.S. they find a 17% reduction in trade due to an ongoing
investigation). Narrow NTB’s cover less than 10% of trade for the rich countries
and modest amounts of trade in most except for Argentina and Brazil. Table 3
implies that antidumping is quite common. For example, based on the TRAINS
data, the U.S. in 1999 had 1.5% of tariff lines subject to NTB narrowly defined
but 27.2% of tariff lines subject to NTB when broadly defined. These measures
do not include withdrawn suits, which are presumptively restrictive since they fa-
cilitate collusion. Table 3 also shows wide variability over countries in the use of
NTB’s. The broad definition with arithmetic averages has South Africa at 11.3%
and Argentina at 71.8%.
     The use of NTB’s is concentrated in a few sectors in most economies. Table
4 reports sectoral NTB coverage ratios for the U.S., E.U., Japan and Canada for
1999. NTB’s are widely used by developed countries in food products (for example,
the trade-weighted NTB coverage of Agriculture, Forestry and Fishery Products
is 74% for the U.S. and 24% for the E.U.), textiles/apparel (71% for the U.S. and
42% for the E.U.), wood and wood products (39% for the U.S. and 26% for the
E.U.) and in some other areas of manufacturing. The products involved are quite
significant in the trade of developing countries but also somewhat significant in
the trade of developed countries with each other.
     In comparison to tariffs, NTB’s are concentrated in a smaller number of sectors
and in those sectors they are much more restrictive. Deardorff and Stern (1998)

                                         11
survey most of what limited data is available on quota license prices. Table 5
(based on Table 3.6 of Deardorff and Stern, 1998) gives estimates of tax equivalents
based on annual averages of weekly Hong Kong MFA quota license prices15 (which
are themselves averages of transactions within the week) for textiles and apparel
subject to quota between controlled exporters and the U.S. in 1991 and 1993. The
license prices imputed for other suppliers depend on arbitrage assumptions and
especially on relative labor productivity assumptions which may not be met. The
prices are expressed as ad valorem tax equivalents using Hong Kong export prices
for the underlying textile and apparel items, trade-weighted across suppliers.16 We
add the U.S. tariffs on the corresponding items to the license prices to form the
full tax equivalent. The table shows fairly high tax equivalents, especially in the
largest trade categories (23% for products of Broadwoven fabric mills, 33% for
Apparel made from purchased material). There is also high variability of license
prices and tax equivalents across commodities (from 5% to 23% for textiles, from
5% to 33% for apparel). Earlier years reveal higher tax equivalents.17 Thus there
is (i) substantial restrictiveness of MFA quotas and (ii) very large differentials in
quota premia across commodity lines and across exporters.
    Price comparison measures confirm this picture of the high and highly con-
centrated nature of NTB’s with data from the agricultural sector. European and
Japanese agriculture is even more highly protected than U.S. and Canadian agri-
culture. Details are discussed in Section IV.
  15
      Where markets subject to quotas are thick and well organized and behavior of all agents is
competitive, quota license prices provide the best evidence of tariff equivalents. Using license
price data even under these assumptions forces the analyst to face the many dimensions on
which the quota is not equivalent to a tariff — daily price quotes exhibit within-year variation
with economically significant patterns (seasonality, year-end jumps and drops) — such that no
single index of them can generally be equivalent to a tariff. Nevertheless, average license prices in
combination with the substantial rent-retaining tariffs which are found on most quota-constrained
products provide a useful measure of the restrictiveness of quotas.
   16
      Because the license prices are for transfer between holders and users and are effectively
subject to penalty for the holder, the implied tariff equivalents are lower bounds to true measures
of restrictiveness; this bias direction probably also applies to the intertemporal averaging.
   17
      Anderson and Neary (1994) report trade-weighted average tax equivalents across the MFA
commodity groups for a set of exporters to the U.S. in the mid-1980’s. The Hong Kong average
exceeded 19% in each year and ranged to over 30% in some years, while tax equivalents (very
likely biased upward) for other countries were much larger, some over 100%.



                                                 12
    Using a variety of methods, Messerlin (2001) makes a notably ambitious at-
tempt to assemble tariff equivalents of all trade policy barriers for the European
Union. He combines the NTB tariff equivalents with the MFN tariffs. For 1999
the tariff equivalent of policy barriers were 5% for cereals, 64.8% for meat, 100.3%
for dairy and 125% for sugar. In mining the tariff equivalent was 71.3%. The
combined arithmetic average protection rate was 31.7% in agriculture, 22.1% in
textiles, 30.6% in apparel and much less in other industrial goods. The combined
arithmetic average protection rate in industrial goods was 7.7%. We use 7.7% for
our representative trade policy cost.


II.B     Transport Costs
Direct transport costs include freight charges and insurance which is customarily
to the freight charge. Indirect transport user costs include holding cost for the
goods in transit, inventory cost due to buffering the variability of delivery dates,
preparation costs associated with shipment size (full container load vs. partial
loads) and the like. Indirect costs must be inferred.

II.B.1   Measurement Problems and Limitations

There are three main sources of data for transport costs. Most direct is industry or
shipping firm information. Limao and Venables (2001) obtain quotes from shipping
firms for a standard container shipped from Baltimore to various destinations.
Hummels (2001a) obtains indices of ocean shipping and air freight rates from
trade journals which presumably are averages of such quotes. Direct methods are
best but not always feasible due to data limitations and the very large size of the
resulting datasets.
    Alternatively, there are two sources of information on average transport costs.
National customs data in some cases allow fine detail. For example, the U.S.
Census provides data on U.S. imports at the 10 digit Harmonized System level by
exporter country, mode of transport and entry port, by weight (where available)
and valued at f.o.b. and c.i.f. bases. Dividing the former value into the latter yields
an ad valorem estimate of bilateral transport cost. Hummels (2001a) makes use
of this source for the U.S. and several other countries. The most widely available
(many countries and years are covered) but least satisfactory average ad valorem

                                          13
transport costs are the aggregate bilateral c.i.f./f.o.b ratios produced by the IMF
from matching export data (reported f.o.b.) to import data (reported c.i.f.).18
The IMF uses the UN’s COMTRADE database, supplemented in some cases with
national data sources. Hummels (2001a) points out that a high proportion of
observations are imputed; this and the compositional shifts in aggregate trade
flows which occur over time lead him to conclude that “quality problems should
disqualify these data from use as a measure of transportation costs in even semi-
careful studies.”19

II.B.2     Evidence on Transport Costs

Hummels (2001a) shows the wide dispersion in freight rates over commodities and
across countries in 1994. The all-commodities trade-weighted average transport
cost from national customs data ranges from 3.8% of the f.o.b. price for the U.S.
to 13.3% for Paraguay. The all-commodities arithmetic average ranges from 7.3%
for Uruguay to 17.5% for Brazil. The U.S. average is 10.7%. Across commodities
for the U.S. the range of trade-weighted averages is from less than 1% (for transport
equipment) to 27% for crude fertilizer. The arithmetic averages range from 5.7%
for machinery and transport equipment to 15.7% for mineral fuels.
    Hummels (1999) considers variation over time. The overall trade-weighted
average transport cost for the U.S. declined over the last 30 years, from 6% to
4%. Composition problems are acute because world trade in high-value-to-weight
manufactures has grown much faster than trade in low-value-to-weight primary
products. Hummels shows that air freight cost has fallen dramatically while ocean
shipping cost has risen (along with the shift to containerization which improves
the quality of the shipping service). He also documents the wide dispersion in the
rate of change of air freight rates across country pairs over the past 40 years.
    Notice that alongside tariffs and NTB’s, transport costs look to be comparable
in average magnitude and in variability across countries, commodities and time.
Transport costs tend to be higher in bulky agricultural products where protection
in OECD countries is also high. Policy protection tends to complement natural
  18
    See the Direction of Trade Statistics and the International Financial Statistics
  19
    Nevertheless, because of their availability and the difficulty of obtaining better estimates for
a wide range of countries and years, apparently careful work such as Harrigan (1993) and Baier
and Bergstrand (2001) uses the IMF data.


                                                14
protection, amplifying the variability of total trade costs.
     Limao and Venables (2001) emphasize the dependence of trade costs on infras-
tructure. They gather price quotes for shipment of a standardized container from
Baltimore to various points in the world. Infrastructure is measured as an aver-
age of the density of the road network, the paved road network, the rail network
and the number of telephone main lines per person. A deterioration of infras-
tructure from the median to the 75th percentile of destinations raises transport
costs by 12%. The median landlocked country has transport costs which are 55%
higher than the median coastal economy.20 The infrastructure variables also have
explanatory power in predicting trade volume. Inescapably, understanding trade
costs and their role in determining international trade volumes must incorporate
the internal geography of countries and the associated interior trade costs.
     As for indirect costs, Hummels (2001b) imputes a willingness-to-pay for saved
time. Each day in travel is on average worth 0.8 percent of the value of manufac-
tured goods, equivalent to a 16% ad valorem tariff for the average length ocean
shipment. Shippers switch from ocean to air in his mode choice model when the
full (shipping plus time) cost of ocean exceeds that for air.21 The use of averages
here masks a lot of variation in the estimated value of time across two digit man-
ufacturing sectors, and is subject to upward aggregation bias due to larger growth
in trade where savings are greatest due to the substitution effect. Infrastructure
is likely to have a considerable effect on the time costs of trade.
     In 1998, half of U.S. shipments was done by air and half by boat.22 Assigning
1 day to shipment by air anywhere in the world, as Hummels does, and using the
20-day average for ocean shipping, leads to an average 9% tax equivalent of time
costs. Hummels argues that faster transport (shifting from shipping to air, and
faster ships) has reduced the tax equivalent of time costs for the U.S. from 32% to
9% over the period 1950-1998.23
  20
     Limao and Venables also report similar results using the c.i.f./f.o.b. ratios of the IMF.
  21
     Linking port of entry for US imports with the travel time to the exporter (a country-average
of times to the exporter’s ports), he creates a matrix of ocean shipping times. Air freight is
assumed to take one day for points anywhere in the world.
  22
     This ignores trucking and rail modes, which are important to trade with Canada and Mexico,
the two largest trade partners of the U.S..
  23
     The calculation is based on observing that US imports, excluding Canada and Mexico, had
0% air shipment in 1950 and 50% air shipment in 1998. The average ocean shipment time was


                                               15
   We combine 9% time costs and 10.7% US average direct transport costs for our
representative full transport cost of 21% (1.107*1.09-1).


II.C      Wholesale and Retail Distribution Costs
Wholesale and retail distribution costs enter retail prices in each country. Since
wholesale and retail costs vary widely by country, this would appear to affect
exporters’ decisions. Local trade costs apply to both imported and domestic goods,
however, so relative prices to buyers don’t change and neither does the pattern
of trade. Section III gives a formal argument. Section IV discusses the effect of
distribution margins on inference about international trade costs from retail prices.
    Burstein et al. (2001) construct domestic distribution costs from national
input-output data for tradable consumption goods (which correspond most closely
to the goods for which narrowly defined trade costs are relevant). They report a
weighted average of 41.9% for the U.S. in 1992 as a fraction of the retail price.
They also show that their input-output estimates of U.S. distribution costs are
roughly consistent with survey data from the U.S. Department of Agriculture for
agricultural goods and from the 1992 Census of Wholesale and Retail Trade. For
other G-7 countries they report distribution costs in the range of 35-50%.
    Bradford and Lawrence (2003) use the same input-output sources to measure
distribution costs for the U.S. and eight other industrialized countries, but instead
divide by the producer price, consistent with the approach in this survey of report-
ing trade barriers in terms of ad valorem tax equivalents. Table 6 reports distri-
bution costs for selected tradable household consumption goods and an arithmetic
average for 125 goods. The averages range over countries from 42% in Belgium to
70% in Japan. Average U.S. distribution costs are 68% of producer prices. The
range of distribution costs is much larger across goods than across countries, for
example running from 14% on Electronic Equipment to 216% on Ladies Clothing
in the U.S..24 We take 55% as our representative domestic distribution cost, close
halved from 40 days to 20 days over the same time. The net effect is a saving of 29.5 days, equal
to 40 days for 1950 minus 10.5 days for 1998. The latter is equal to .5 times 20 days for ocean
shipping plus .5 times 1 day for air freight. For manufacturing, at 0.8 per cent ad valorem per
day for the value of time in shipping, the saving of 29.5 days is worth a fall from 32% to 9% ad
valorem.
  24
     We should warn that some of these distribution cost estimates include rents in the form of


                                               16
to the tradable consumption goods average of OECD countries.


III      Inference of Trade Costs from Trade Flows
Trade costs can be inferred from an economic model linking trade flows to ob-
servable variables and unobservable trade costs. Inference has mainly used the
gravity model.25 The economic theory of gravity is developed here extensively, re-
vealing new properties which clarify procedures for good empirical work, reporting
results and doing sensible comparative statics. Our development embeds gravity
within the classic concerns of trade economists with the equilibrium allocation of
production and expenditure within nations.
    A variety of ad hoc trade cost functions have been used to relate the unob-
servable cost to observable variables. Plausibly, cost falls with common language
and customs, better information, better enforcement and so forth. Many imple-
mentations impose restrictions which seem implausible. Some proxies may not be
exogenous, such as membership in a currency union or regional trade agreement;
their effects will not be uniform; functional form is often too simple and so forth.
Further economic theory is needed to identify the underlying structure of trade
costs.


III.A       Traditional Gravity
Most estimated gravity equations take the form
                                                  M
                                                        βm ln(zijm ) + ij
                                                  X
                          xij = α1 yi + α2 yj +                                                (1)
                                                  m=1

where xij is the log of exports from         i to j, yi and yj are the log of GDP of the
exporter and importer, and zijm (m           = 1, ..., M ) is a set of observables to which
bilateral trade barriers are related.        The disturbance term is ij . A large recent
literature developed estimating this         type of gravity equation after a surprising
monopolistic markups rather than actual costs incurred by the local distribution sector. Although
it would be desirable to take out these rents, no data are available to do so.
   25
      A subset of the gravity literature uses it to discriminate among theories of the determinants
of trade. It is not very well suited for this purpose, since many trade models will lead to gravity
(Deardorff, 1998).


                                                17
finding by McCallum (1995) that the U.S.-Canada border has a big impact on
trade.26 McCallum estimated a version of (1) for U.S. states and provinces with
two z variables: bilateral distance and an indicator variable that is equal to 1 if
the two regions are located in the same country and equal to zero otherwise. He
found that trade between provinces is more than 20 times trade between states
and provinces after controlling for distance and size. The subsequent literature
has often added so-called remoteness variables, which are intended to capture the
average distance of countries or regions from their trading partners.
    Gravity equations can be derived from a variety of different theories. None lead
to traditional gravity, despite this literature’s use of references such as Anderson
(1979) and Deardorff (1998) to justify estimation of (1).27


III.B       Theory-Based Gravity
Gravity-like structure obtains in a wide class of models, those where the alloca-
tion of trade across countries can be analyzed separately from the allocation of
production and consumption within countries.28 Let {Yik , Eik } be the value of pro-
duction and expenditure in country i for product class k. A product class can be
either a final or an intermediate good. A model is trade separable if the allocation
of {Yik , Eik } for each country i is separable from the bilateral allocation of trade
across countries.
    Trade separability obtains under the assumption of separable preferences and
technology. Each product class has a distinct natural aggregator of varieties or
goods distinguished by country of origin. This assumption allows the two stage
budgeting needed to separate the allocation of expenditure across product classes
from the allocation of expenditure within a product class across countries of
origin.29 What exactly is implied by product differentiation within a product
  26
     See Anderson and Smith (1999a,b), Chen (2002), Evans (2003a,b,c), Helliwell
(1996,1997,1998), Helliwell and McCallum (1995), Helliwell and Verdier (2000), Hillberry (1998,
2002), Nitsh (2000), Wei (1996), and Wolf (2000a,b).
  27
     For recent surveys of gravity theory, see Harrigan (2002), and Feenstra (2002,2003).
  28
     The general equilibrium of trade in a many country world is enormously simplified by this
natural assumption.
  29
     Explicitly, separability restricts the dual cost function c(p, w, y) where p is a vector of traded
input prices and w is a vector of non-traded primary input prices while y is the level of output.
The separability restriction is imposed in c(p, w, y) = f [g(p), w, y] where g(p) is a homogenous


                                                  18
class will differ depending on the product class and its myriad characteristics. For
inputs of physically standardized products (grains, petroleum, steel plate), differ-
entiation may be on terms of delivery or subtle qualities which affect productivity;
while branded final goods suggest hedonic differentiation over varieties of clothing
or perfume. Imposing some form of differentiation is unavoidable if empirical trade
models are to fit the bilateral trade data, as Armington noted long ago.
    The class of trade separable models yields bilateral trade without having to
make any assumptions about what specific model accounts for the observed out-
put structure {Yik } and expenditure allocations {Eik } .30 Bilateral trade is de-
termined in conditional general equilibrium whereby product markets for each
good (each brand) produced in each country clear conditional on the allocations
{Yik , Eik }. Inference about trade costs is based on this conditional general equilib-
rium. Comparative static analysis, in contrast, requires consideration of the full
general equilibrium. A change in trade barriers, for example, will generally affect
the allocations {Yik , Eik }.
    Two additional restrictions to the class of trade separable models yield gravity.
These are: (ii) the aggregator of varieties is identical across countries and CES,
and (iii) ad-valorem tax equivalents of trade costs do not depend on the quantity
of trade. The CES form imposes homothetic preferences and the homogeneity
equivalent for intermediate input demand. These assumptions simplify the demand
equations and market clearing equations. Restrictions (ii) and (iii) can be relaxed
in various useful ways discussed below. Our derivation provides much more context
to Deardorff’s (1998) remark, “I suspect that just about any plausible model of
trade would yield something very like the gravity equation...”.
    If Xijk is defined as exports from i to j in product class k, the CES demand
structure implies (under the expositional simplification of equal weights for each
country of origin)
                                                !1−σk
                                    k      pkij
                                  Xij =               Ejk                           (2)
                                           Pjk
of degree one and concave function of p. By Shephard’s Lemma, fg is the aggregate demand for
the traded input class while fg gp is the demand vector for the individual products. A similar
structure characterizes the assumption of separability in final demand.
  30
     Specifically, it does not matter what one assumes about production functions, technology,
the degree of competition or specialization patterns. The nature of preferences and technology
that gives rise to the observed expenditure allocations Eik also does not matter.


                                             19
where σk is the elasticity of substitution among brands, pkij is the price charged by
i for exports to j and Pjk is the CES price index:
                                            "                         #1/(1−σk )
                                  Pjk               (pkij )1−σk
                                                X
                                        =                                                        (3)
                                                i

Assumption (iii) that trade costs are proportional to trade implies that the price
pkij can be written as pki tkij , where pki is the “supply price” received by producers in
country k and tkij − 1 is the ad valorem tax equivalent of trade costs, independent
of volume.
     If supply is monopolistic, the “supply price” is the product of marginal produc-
tion cost and the markup. So long as the markup is invariant over destinations31 ,
tkij contains only trade costs. Otherwise the tax equivalent must be interpreted
to contain markups. With competitive supply, this issue does not arise. Markups
arising from monopoly power in the distribution sector itself are a more important
issue with interpreting tkij − 1 as a cost.
     Imposing the market clearing conditions

                                            Yik =               Xijk
                                                          X
                                                                                                 (4)
                                                           j


for all i and k yields gravity. Solve for the supply prices pki from the market clearing
conditions and substitute the result in (2) and (3). This yields the system
                                                                                !1−σk
                                              Ejk Yik                  tkij
                                   Xijk     =                                                    (5)
                                               Yk                     Pjk Πki
                                                                      !1−σk
                                                               tkij             Ejk
                             (Πki )1−σk
                                                    X
                                            =                                                    (6)
                                                      j        Pjk              Yk
                                                                      !1−σk
                                                               tkij             Yik
                             (Pjk )1−σk
                                                    X
                                            =                                       .            (7)
                                                      i        Πki              Yk

where Y k is world output nin sector
                               o
                                     k. The indices Pjk and Πki can be solved as a
function of trade barriers tkij and the entire set {Yik , Eik }. Trade flows therefore
  31
     With Cournot competition, the markup is invariant over destinations in symmetric monop-
olistic competition. Generally, it is equal to 1/[1 − 1/σ(1 − sij )] where sij is the market share of
i in j.



                                                          20
also depend on trade barriers and the set {Yik , Eik }.32                      n       o
    A wide variety of production and expenditure models may lie behind Ejk , Yik .
In particular, some of the E’s and Y ’s may be equal to zero. Previous derivations
of gravity have usually made much more restrictive assumptions.33
    The main insight from the theory is that bilateral trade depends on relative
trade barriers. The key variables Πki and Pjk are outward and inward multilateral
resistance, respectively. They summarize the average trade resistance between a
country and its trading partners in an ideal aggregation sense which we develop
below. Basic demand theory suggests that the flow of good i into j is increased
(given σ > 1) by high trade costs from other suppliers to j, as captured by inward
multilateral resistance Pjk . But, less obviously, high resistance to shipments from
i to its other markets, captured in outward multilateral resistance Πki , tips more
trade back into i0 s market in j. Gravity gives these insights an elegantly simple
form in (5).
    The trade cost tkij may include local distribution costs in the destination market,
but those domestic costs do not affect trade flows. This rather surprising and
important result follows from basic gravity theory. Suppose for any goods class k
that each destination j has its own domestic margin mkj . If we multiply all narrowly
defined trade barriers tkij by domestic trade costs mkj in the destination market,
it is easily verified from (6)-(7) that the Pjk are multiplied by mkj , the Πki are
unchanged, and therefore trade flows are also unchanged.
    The invariance of trade patterns to domestic distribution costs that apply to all
goods has another important practical implication. We can only identify relative
costs with the gravity model. One way to interpret an inferred system of trade
costs {tkij } is to pick some region i and normalize tkii = 1. Essentially this procedure
  32
     Theoretical gravity equations in Anderson (1979), Bergstrand (1985,1989,1990) and Baier
and Bergstrand (2001) look far more complicated than (5), with a large number of prices and
price indices. Anderson and van Wincoop (2003) show that all these prices can be summarized
by just two price indices, one for the importer and one for the exporter, which are solved as a
function of trade barriers and total supply and demand in each location.
  33
     The first paper to formally derive a gravity equation from a general equilibrium model with
trade costs is Anderson (1979), who assumes that every country produces a particular variety.
Bergstrand (1989,1990) and Baier and Bergstrand (2001) derive gravity equations in models with
monopolistic competition, endogenizing variety. Anderson and van Wincoop (2003) assume each
country has an endowment of its good.



                                              21
treats the trade cost of i with itself as a pure local distribution cost and divides
all other trade costs by the local distribution cost in region i.
    As in most gravity papers, Anderson and van Wincoop (2003) consider a one-
sector economy. They show that when consumers have CES preferences with
common elasticity σ among all goods, the gravity equation can be written, omitting
the superscripts k, as
                                                           !1−σ
                                     Yi Yj         tij
                               Xij =                                              (8)
                                      Yw          Πi P j
                               Pj1−σ =        Πσ−1 θi t1−σ
                                         X
                                               i       ij  ∀j                     (9)
                                         i
                               Π1−σ           Pjσ−1 θj t1−σ
                                         X
                                i   =                   ij , ∀i.                 (10)
                                         j

where Yi and Yj are levels of GDP, Yw is world GDP, and θi is the income share of
country i. This is a special case of (5) with expenditure equal to output because
it is a one-sector economy (Ei = Yi ). With symmetry of trade costs (tij = tji ),
Πi = P i .
    A couple of comments are in order about homogeneous goods trade. When
we let the elasticity of substitution σk in (5)-(7) go to infinity, trade converges
to that in a homogeneous goods model. However, no information about trade
barriers can be inferred. As an example consider a two-country model with trade
in a homogeneous good k. If country 1 exports k to country 2, its export is equal
to E2k − Y2k . Gravity equation (5), accounting for multilateral resistance, indeed
converges to this for the two-country case as σk approaches infinity, assuming
any non-zero international trade barrier (and normalizing domestic barriers to
zero). Since the bilateral trade flow in the conditional general equilibrium does
not depend on the magnitude of trade barriers, nothing can be learned about
trade barriers. More generally it is difficult to learn much about trade barriers
from a gravity equation for sectors where the elasticity of substitution is extremely
high. The expressions t1−σij
                             k
                               on which trade flows (directly and through multilateral
resistance) depend are virtually zero when σk is very high as long as the trade
barrier is positive (tkij > 1). Conditional on a trade barrier being positive the size
of the trade barrier does not matter much to the pattern of trade flows in the
conditional general equilibrium, hence we cannot learn much about their size.
    Several authors have derived gravity equations for homogeneous goods trade

                                             22
when trade is an aggregate of a variety of homogeneous goods. Deardorff (1998)
derived a gravity equation in the Heckscher Ohlin model with complete special-
ization. This is essentially a differentiated goods model though with each country
producing a different brand. It does not mean much to say that a good is homo-
geneous when there is only one producer.
     A real homogeneous goods model, with multiple producers of the same homo-
geneous good, is the Ricardian model of Eaton and Kortum (2002). Their model
leads to a gravity equation for an aggregate of homogeneous goods. It is also a
model with trade separability, although the rationale is somewhat different. Pro-
duction is Ricardian, with the cost of production in country i in good k given
by ci /z(k), where z(k) is the realization of technology in good k, an element in
a continuum of goods. Productivity is drawn from a Fréchet distribution. The
distribution has two parameters. The first is Ti , with higher Ti meaning a higher
average realization for country i. The second is θ, with a larger value implying
lower productivity differences across countries. For a particular good users always
buy from the cheapest source. The price is the production cost times the trade cost
tij . Each good is produced with both labor and a bundle of intermediate goods
that consists of the same CES index of all final goods as the utility function over
final goods.
     Since there is a continuum of goods and the setup is the same for all goods
(same production function, same productivity distribution, same trade cost), the
fraction that country j spends on goods from i is equal to the probability for any
particular good that j sources from i. With the assumed Fréchet distribution this
is equal to
                                 Xij      Ti (ci tij )−θ
                                      =P                 −θ
                                                            .
                                  Ej       i Ti (ci tij )

The probability of shipment from country i is lowered by the trade cost of getting
the good to country j, relative to the average trade cost of shipping from all
other destinations, and lowered by a higher cost of labor. The same mathematical
representation of the allocation of trade arises as with the CES structure of demand
for goods differentiated by place of origin. This equation is the same as (2), with
σ = θ + 1 and p1−σ
                i    replaced by Ti c1−σ
                                     i   . The pi is essentially replaced by ci , which
can be solved in the same way from the conditional general equilibrium. This gives



                                          23
rise to the same gravity equation as before.34
    It is worth noting that gross output is now larger than net output due to the
input of intermediates. The output in the gravity equation (8) is gross output.
Since Eaton and Kortum assume that intermediates are a fraction 1 − β of the
production cost ci , with labor a fraction β, gross output is 1/β times value added.
If we interpret Yi in (8) as value added, the gravity equation must be multiplied
by 1/β.


III.C         The Trade Cost Function
The theoretical gravity model allows inference about unobservable trade costs by
(i) linking trade costs to observable cost proxies and (ii) making an assumption
about error terms which link observable trade flows to theoretically predicted val-
ues. Here we focus on (i), the next section deals with (ii). For now we will focus on
inference about trade barriers from the aggregate gravity equation (8). In a section
about aggregation below we will return to the disaggregated gravity equation (5 ).
    Bilateral trade barriers are assumed to be a function of observables zijm , com-
monly loglinear:
                                                 M
                                                       (zijm )γm
                                                 Y
                                         tij =                                     (11)
                                                 m=1

Normalizing such that zijm = 1 measures zero trade barriers associated with this
variable, (zijm )γm is equal to one plus the tax equivalent of trade barriers associated
with variable m. The list of observable arguments zijm which have been used in
the trade cost function in the literature includes directly measured trade costs,
distance, adjacency, preferential trade membership, common language and a host
of others. Gravity theory has used arbitrary assumptions regarding functional
form of the trade cost function, the list of variables, and regularity conditions.
    As an illustration of the functional form problem, consider distance. By far
the most common assumption is that tij = dρij . Grossman (1998) argues that a
more reasonable assumption is that τij = tij − 1 = dρij since one can think of
τij as transport costs per dollar of shipments. Hummels (2001a) estimates the
ρ in the second specification by using data on ad-valorem freight rates and finds
a value of about 0.3. Limao and Venables (2001) estimate the first specification
  34
       Eaton and Kortum only derive a gravity specification for Xij /Xii .


                                                  24
using c.i.f./f.o.b. data and also find an estimate of ρ of about 0.3. Although these
numbers are the same, they are inconsistent with each other. If the Grossman
specification is correct with ρ = 0.3, one would expect a distance elasticity of tij of
0.3τij /(1 + τij ), evaluated at some average τ , which is much less than 0.3. Highly
misleading results for trade barrier estimates arise when the wrong functional form
is adopted.
    Eaton and Kortum (2002) generalize the treatment of distance with a flexible
form which can approximate both of the preceding specifications. They assume
that there are different trade barriers for 6 different distance intervals. While
implicitly they still assume a particular functional form, in the form of a step
function, this spline approach is likely to be more robust to specification error.
    Another functional form issue is that the most common setup (11) is multi-
plicative in the various cost factors. Hummels (2001a) argues that an additive
specification is more sensible. A multi-dimensional generalization of the approach
by Eaton and Kortum (2002) may be applied, although there is a tradeoff be-
tween degrees of freedom and generality of the specification. To the extent that
theory has something to say about the functional form, it is preferable to use this
information over econometric solutions that waste degrees of freedom.
    The second problem is which observables to include. Empirical practice can
improve with a more theoretical approach to the z’s. Especially for abstract trade
barriers such as information costs, it is often unclear what specific variables are
meant to capture. Even in the absence of a specific theory, it is useful to ponder the
relationship between trade barriers and observed variables. For example, common
empirical practice uses a language variable that is one if two countries speak the
same language and zero otherwise. Melitz (2003) considers ways in which language
differences affect trade and develops several variables that each capture different
aspects of communication. One such variable is “direct communication,” which
depends on the percentages of people in two countries that can speak the same
language. Another is the binary variable “open-circuit communication,” which is
one if two countries have the same official language or the same language is spoken
by at least 20% of the populations of both countries. The first variable reflects
that trade requires direct communication, while the second variable is meant to
capture an established network of translation. Another example is distance. It is
common to model distance as the Great Circle distance between capitals. Where

                                          25
these differ from commercial centers it is sometimes taken to be superior to use
distance between commercial centers. But then what of countries with more than
one commercial center, of interior infrastructure?35
    Implausibly strong regularity (common coefficients) conditions are often im-
plicitly imposed on the trade cost function. For example, the effect of membership
in a customs union or a monetary union on trade costs is often assumed to be uni-
form for all members. As for customs unions, a uniform external tariff is indeed
approximately the trade policy (though NTB’s remain inherently discriminatory),
while free trade agreements continue to have different national external tariffs and
thus different effects. As for monetary unions, the effect of switching from national
to common currencies is likely to be quite different depending on the national cur-
rency. Similar objections can be raised to a number of the other commonly used
proxies zijm such as common language or adjacency dummies. NTB’s present an
acute form of this problem. The effect on trade barriers of NTB’s in a country i
will generally vary across trading partners j, goods k and time t. Regression resid-
uals reflect the NTB’s but also random error. To identify the tariff equivalent of
NTB’s Harrigan (1993) assumes, not very plausibly, that the importing country’s
NTB has the same trade displacement effect for each exporter i that it buys good
k from. Trefler (1993) assumes even less plausibly that U.S. NTB’s have the same
trade-reducing effect for all goods k that it imports from the rest of the world. 36
    We sympathize with efforts to identify trade costs with simple forms of (11).
Our criticism of the ad hoc functional form and the regularity assumptions aims to
stimulate improvement in estimation and useful comparative statics. Unpacking
the reduced form to its plausible structural elements will aid both.
  35
     Some investigators (e.g., Bergstrand) measure bilateral distance between ports, supplemented
by twice the land distance between ports and commercial centers, reflecting the rough difference
in cost between water and land shipment.
  36
     Both authors implicitly impose a further regularity condition. NTB coverage ratios for each
good are the explanatory variable, so all changes in this ratio are assumed to be equally important.




                                                26
III.D       Estimation of Trade Barriers
Given the trade cost function, the logarithmic form of the empirical gravity equa-
tion becomes (dropping the constant term)
                         M
                               λm ln(zijm ) − (1 − σ)ln(Πi ) − (1 − σ)ln(Pj ) + εij
                         X
       xij = yi + yj +                                                                       (12)
                         m=1

where xij = ln(Xij ), yi = ln(Yi ), and λm = (1 − σ)γm , xij and yi are observables,
and εij is the error term.
    The theoretical gravity equation can be estimated in three different ways.37
Anderson and van Wincoop (2003) estimate the structural equation with non-
linear least squares after solving for the multilateral resistance indices as a function
of the observables zijm (bilateral distances and a dummy variable for international
borders) and the parameters λm . Another approach, which also gives an unbiased
estimate of the parameters λm , is to replace the inward and outward multilateral
resistance indices and production variables, yj −(1−σ) ln Pj and yi −(1−σ)ln(Πi ),
with inward and outward region-specific dummies. With symmetry, a single set
of region-specific dummies suffice. This approach is adopted by Anderson and
van Wincoop (2003), Eaton and Kortum (2002), Minondo (2002), Rose and van
Wincoop (2002) and Hummels (2001a). Head and Mayer (2001) and Head and
Ries (2001) follow an estimation approach that is identical to replacing multilateral
resistance variables with country dummies in the case where internal trade data
Xii exist for all regions or countries. Assuming that zij = zji , it follows from (12)
that                               !0.5    M
                                                      (ziim zjj
                                                              m 0.5
                                                                    !
                           Xii Xjj         X                    )
                       ln               =     λm ln                                 (13)
                           Xij Xji        m=1              zijm
The parameters λk can then be estimated through a linear regression.
   A third method is to use data for the price indices and estimate with OLS.
This requires data on price levels for a cross-section regression or changes in price
indices when there are at least two years of data. The latter is the approach
  37
     A potential fourth method is to infer all bilateral trade barriers for a group of countries
or regions from the residuals of the bilateral trade flows from the prediction of the frictionless
gravity model. The information in this measure would be drowned in random error, however:
there is an unboundedly large confidence interval about the point estimates because all degrees
of freedom are used up.


                                               27
taken by Bergstrand (1985,1989,1990), Baier and Bergstrand (2001) and Head
and Mayer (2000). As discussed in Baier and Berstrand (2001), it is often hard or
impossible to measure the theoretical price indices in the data. Price indices, such
as the consumer price index, also include non-tradables and are affected by local
taxes and subsidies. Nominal rigidities also affect observed prices, and have a big
impact on relative prices when combined with nominal exchange rate fluctuations.
Anderson and van Wincoop (2003) also argue that certain trade barriers, such as a
home bias in preferences, do not show up in prices. Similarly, Deardorff and Stern
(1998) explain why certain NTB’s affect trade but not prices. Feenstra (2003)
sums it up by writing that “the myriad of costs ...involved in making transactions
across the border are probably not reflected in aggregate price indices..”. This
does not mean that prices of individual tradable goods are entirely uninformative
about trade costs. We turn to that topic in section IV.
    The tax equivalent of trade barriers between i and j associated with variable
m is estimated as
                                   λm /(1−σ)
                             zijm                − 1 ≈ λm (zijm − 1)/(1 − σ)    (14)

This shows that we need an estimate of σ in order to obtain an estimate of trade
barriers. Assumptions about σ can make quite a difference. For example, the
estimated tax equivalent is approximately 9 times larger when using σ = 2 instead
of σ = 10.
    Gravity can only measure trade barriers relative to some benchmark, as noted
above. The literature tends to compare trade barriers between countries to barri-
ers within countries, or barriers between regions to barriers within regions. This is
problematic since different countries or regions have different barriers for internal
trade. The results will also depend on the measure of barriers within a region
or country, such as the treatment of distance within a country or region. This is
essentially an aggregation problem since a country or region is itself an aggregate.
Head and Mayer (2001), Helliwell and Verdier (2001) and Hillberry and Hum-
mels (2002a) show that the different measures of internal distance can make a big
difference for the results.
    The error term in the empirical gravity literature is usually taken to reflect
measurement error. Trade flow data are notoriously rife with measurement error38 ,
 38
      For example mirror image trade flow data do not match.


                                                      28
which is taken to justify a normally distributed additive error term which is or-
thogonal to the regressors. More careful consideration of measurement error is
likely to be productive. Some recent implementations recognize the panel nature
of the data in constructing standard errors (all bilateral observations from i or into
j may have common disturbance elements).39 Improved econometric techniques
based on careful consideration of the error structure are likely to pay off. The
recent literature on spatial econometrics (e.g. Kelejian and Prucha (1999)) may
be helpful.
    The error term may also reflect unobservable variables in the trade cost func-
tion (11). If the trade cost tij is multiplied by eij , there is again an additive error
term in the empirical gravity equation (12). In this case the structural estima-
tion technique discussed above would have to be modified since the multilateral
resistance variables also depend on these error terms. But the second estimation
technique, replacing the multilateral resistance variables with region or country-
specific dummies, is still appropriate. Eaton and Kortum (2002) introduce the
error term in this way and adopt the second estimation method.
    Non-orthogonality of the error term has two sources, omitted variables and
endogeneity. If the error term reflects omitted trade frictions which are correlated
with the included zijm variables, it causes estimation bias. Endogeneity problems
arise in several ways. Concerned that trade can affect output, many papers use
instrumental variables for output Yi and Yj , The most common instruments are
population or factor endowments.40 With coefficients on the y 0 s constrained to one,
the natural implementation is to make the dependent variable size-adjusted trade
xij − yi − yj , as Anderson and van Wincoop (2003) do. Endogeneity issues also
arise when the proxies for trade costs are endogenous. Examples are membership
in currency unions or free trade agreements. Section III.G.2 below discusses how
the literature has addressed endogeneity in these specific cases.


III.E         Estimation Bias with Traditional Gravity Equations
The traditional gravity equation (1) omits the multilateral resistance terms of the
theoretically consistent model (12). In the absence of multilateral resistance the
  39
       See for example Anderson and Marcouiller (2002).
  40
       See for example Evans (2003a), Harrigan (1993) and Wei (1996).


                                               29
                                                                  m
two equations are the same, with βm = λm . In that case (zijm )β /(1−σ) is an estimate
of one plus the tax equivalent of trade barriers associated with this variable. This
interpretation of the results from estimating (1) is generally incorrect because the
zijm are correlated with the multilateral resistance indices, which are themselves a
function of trade barriers.
     In order to better illustrate this point, consider the following simplified environ-
ment. There are two countries, the U.S. and Canada, with respectively N states
and M provinces. The only trade barrier is a border barrier between states and
provinces (ignore distance and other factors generating trade barriers). In that
case tij = bδij , where b is one plus the tariff equivalent of trade barriers associated
with the border and δij is equal to zero when two regions are located in the same
country and equal to one otherwise. The gravity equation is then (dropping the
constant term)

     xij = yi + yj + (1 − σ)ln(b)δij − (1 − σ)ln(Pi ) − (1 − σ)ln(Pj ) + εij        (15)

    If we ignore multilateral resistance, the estimate of (1 − σ)ln(b) is equal to the
average within-country size adjusted trade minus the average cross-country size-
adjusted trade. When there are N observations of trade within the U.S. (between
states) and M observations of trade within Canada (between provinces), it is easy
to check that the estimate of (1 − σ)ln(b) when ignoring the multilateral resistance
terms is equal to (1 − σ)ln(b) plus the bias

                                    M −N
                          (1 − σ)        (ln PU S − ln PCA )                        (16)
                                    N +M
where PU S and PCA are the multilateral resistance indices for respectively U.S.
states and Canadian provinces. PCA > PU S because Canada is smaller and
provinces face border barriers with trade to all of the United States. The re-
sult is that for σ > 1 the estimate of (1 − σ)ln(b) is biased upwards as long as
M > N . This result is intuitive. If for example the only within-country trade in
the sample is between provinces, the average size-adjusted within-country trade is
very large. The reason is that relative trade barriers within Canada are lower than
within the US due to larger multilateral resistance, so that size-adjusted trade
is larger between provinces than between states. This point was emphasized by
Anderson and van Wincoop (2003).

                                           30
    The example above emphasizes size, but estimation bias holds more generally.
Consider the role of distance. When tij = dρij bδij , the gravity equation becomes
(15) with the term (1 − σ)ρln(dij ) added. There are two types of bias when
attempting to estimate the border barrier b in a traditional gravity equation that
omits multilateral resistance. First, the distance elasticity (1 − σ)ρ is generally
incorrectly estimated since bilateral distance is correlated with the multilateral
distance terms that are left in the error term. Second, even when (1 − σ)ρ is
estimated correctly, we still obtain the same bias as in (16). The bias results as
long as the multilateral resistance terms PCA and PU S are different. Differences
arise due to size, but also due to geography. For example, Canadian provinces are
located on the North American periphery. As a result their distances from main
trading partners tend to be relatively large, so that PCA > PU S . A McCallum type
gravity equation with N = 0 would then imply a positive U.S.-Canada border
barrier even when none existed. If the geographic size of Canada were much
smaller, so that trading distances between provinces are much smaller, PCA would
be smaller and the bias from estimating the border barrier b with McCallum’s
equation (N = 0) would be smaller. Coulombe (2002) emphasizes the role of these
topological issues related to the special structure of the regions.41


III.F      The elasticity of substitution
Estimates of trade costs from trade flows are very sensitive to assumptions about
the elasticity of substitution σ, so a look at the evidence is worthwhile. Although
many papers have estimated this elasticity from bilateral trade flow models, only
a few have used theory-based gravity.
    One way to obtain an estimate of σ is to use information from directly observed
trade barriers. Harrigan (1993), Hummels (2001a), Head and Ries (2001) and Baier
and Bergstrand (2001) all combine estimation of theoretical gravity equations with
information about tariffs and/or transport costs.
  41
    While we have focused the discussion on U.S.-Canada, estimation bias when estimating the
traditional gravity equation of course holds quite generally. Some authors have estimated both
equations to allow for easy comparison. For example, Rose and van Wincoop (2001) find that
the estimated trade barriers associated with the use of different currencies are much lower when
estimating the theoretical gravity equation. Minondo (2001) finds that the estimate of border
barriers for European trade is much lower when estimating the theoretical gravity equation.


                                              31
       Hummels (2001a) assumes
                                                       M
                                                             (zijm )γm
                                                       Y
                                tij = (fij + tarij )                                         (17)
                                                       m=1

where tarij is the tariff rate and fij is a freight factor, equal to one plus the
tax equivalent of freight costs. The gravity equation then becomes (dropping the
constant term)
                                         M
                                              (1−σ)γm ln(zijm )−(1−σ)ln(Pi )−(1−σ)ln(Pj )
                                         X
xij = yi +yj +(1−σ)ln(fij +tarij )+
                                        m=1
                                                                                    (18)
    The elasticity of substitution can now be estimated through the coefficient
on the log of directly observed trade costs. Hummels estimates (18) for 1992
data on sectoral imports of six countries from a large number of other countries.
Multilateral resistance terms are replaced by country dummies for each sector.
The estimated elasticity rises from 4.79 for one-digit SITC data to 8.26 for 4-digit
SITC data.
    Head and Ries (2001) adopt a similar method. They consider two countries,
the U.S. and Canada, and assume that the only trade barrier is a border-related
barrier, which varies across 3-digit industry data from 1990 to 1995. They estimate
(σ −1)ln(bit ), with bit equal to one plus the tariff equivalent of the border barrier in
industry i at time t. 42 They then decompose the border barrier into tariff and non-
tariff components, bit = (1+tarit )(1+N T Bit ). It is assumed that ln(1+N T Bit ) =
Kt + it , where Kt is a time dummy and it is a zero mean random disturbance.
By regressing the estimate of (1 − σ)bit on a time dummy and ln(1 + tarit ) they
obtain an estimate of both σ and average non-tariff barriers across industries. This
approach is similar to that in Hummels (2001a) in that it uses evidence on observed
trade barriers to tie down the elasticity. Head and Ries obtain an estimate of σ
of 11.4 when assuming that N T Bit is the same for all industries and 7.9 when
allowing for industry fixed effects.
    Baier and Bergstrand (2001) estimate a theoretical gravity equation where
tariffs and transport costs are the only trade barriers. They use aggregate trade
  42
    In this setup the estimate is obtained as a simple analytical function of the shares that both
countries spend on their own goods.



                                               32
data for OECD countries and focus on changes in trade flows from the period
1958-1960 to the period 1986-1988. Their point estimate of σ is 6.4.
    Harrigan (1993) implicitly models the impact on full trade costs of directly
observed trade costs as fij (1 + tarij ) and finds significantly different coefficients on
ln fij and ln(1 + tarij ) in the gravity regressions. His restricted regressions report
most elasticity point estimates for 28 sectors in the range from 5 to 10, with 4
above and one below.
    An entirely different way to estimate σ is to simply estimate demand equations
directly, using data on prices. But in general one estimates some combination
of demand and supply relationships, the classic simultaneity problem. Feenstra
(1994) is nonetheless able to obtain an estimate of the demand elasticity by using
the fact that the second moments of demand and supply changes (their variances
and covariance) have a linear relationship that depends on demand and supply
elasticities. By assuming that supply elasticities are the same for all countries, a
cross-section of the second moments allows for estimation of the elasticities. This
estimation method therefore requires panel data and is applied by Feenstra to U.S.
imports from 1967 to 1987 from various countries for six manufactured products.
The products are highly disaggregated, finer than 8-digit SITC. The estimated
elasticities range from 3 for typewriters to 8.4 for TV receivers.
    Eaton and Kortum (2002) adopt yet another entirely different approach to
obtain an estimate of σ. From (8) it follows that
                                         xii − xij − yi + yj
                     σ−1=                                                            (19)
                               ln(tij ) − ln(tii ) + ln(Pi ) − ln(Pj )

The numerator consists of observables. The denominator is approximated as fol-
lows. Using data on retail price levels for 50 manufactured products in 19 countries,
they approximate ln(Pj ) − ln(Pi ) as the arithmetic average of the log-price differ-
entials between j and i for all 50 goods. Using the fact that log-price differentials
between j and i are bounded above by ln(tij )−ln(tii ), they estimate ln(tij )−ln(tii )
as the maximum of log-price differentials between i and j. The parameter θ = σ−1
can then be estimated as the average of the ratio on the right hand side of (19).
They find θ = 8.28, so that σ = 9.28.
    Overall the literature leads us to conclude that σ is likely to be in the range of
5 to 10.


                                            33
III.G     The Size of International Trade Barriers
In this section we report some results for international trade barriers, computed
as the ratio of total trade barriers relative to domestic trade barriers: tij /tii . We
first present summary measures of all international trade barriers and then discuss
results which decompose border barriers into several likely sources. All our calcu-
lations are based on point estimates from gravity studies which differ somewhat in
their list of trade cost proxies, in the data used, and in the assumptions used to
construct standard errors.

III.G.1    Summary Measures

Part of the empirical gravity literature reports the tax equivalent of summary mea-
sures of trade barriers, those associated with distance and the presence of borders.
Table 7 presents the results of a number of studies. The table indicates whether
results are based on the traditional gravity equation (1) or the theory-based gravity
equation (12). It also indicates whether numbers are based on aggregate trade data
or disaggregate (sectoral) trade data. In the latter case Table 7 reports the aver-
age trade barrier across sectors. Column four reports the tax equivalent of trade
barriers reported by the authors, with the corresponding elasticity σ in brackets.
In order to make results more comparable across papers, the final three columns
re-compute the trade barriers for elasticities of 5, 8 and 10. These are representa-
tive of the elasticities estimated in the literature. In some cases two numbers are
shown, with the lower number applying to countries that share the same language
and border.
    The first three rows report results for total international trade barriers. The
results are sensitive to the elasticity of substitution. For example, the U.S.-Canada
trade barrier based on the Head and Ries (2001) study ranges from 35% for σ = 10
to 97% for σ = 5. From now on we will focus the discussion on the intermediate
value of σ = 8. In that case the findings by Head and Ries (2001) imply an
average U.S.-Canada trade barrier of 47% based on average results from 1990 to
1995. Based on Anderson and van Wincoop’s (2003) results, their estimated trade
cost parameters with σ = 8 imply a 46% U.S.-Canada trade barrier for 1993,
virtually the same as Head and Ries (2001). This is calculated as the trade-
weighted average barrier for trade between states and provinces, divided by the


                                          34
trade-weighted average barrier for trade within the U.S. and Canada. Eaton and
Kortum (2002) report results for 19 OECD countries for 1990. For countries that
are 750-1500 miles apart the trade barrier is 58-78%. The lower 58% number,
which applies to countries that share a border and language, is not much larger
than the estimates of the U.S.-Canada barrier. Summarizing, international trade
barriers are in the range of 40-80% for a representative elasticity estimate.
    Balistreri and Hillberry (2002) argue that trade barrier estimates from these
types of studies are implausibly large. Based on parameter estimates in Anderson
and van Wincoop (2003), they report on trade barriers for Alberta and Alabama
relative to the barrier of trade within Maryland, which has the lowest trade barrier.
As an illustration, they report a trade barrier between Alabama and Quebec of
1684% for σ = 3 and 322% for σ = 5. These numbers are much larger than
the 46% U.S.-Canada trade barrier reported above. There are several reasons
for this discrepancy. First, elasticities of 3 and 5 are low relative to estimates
in the literature reported above. If we set σ = 8, the Alabama-Quebec barrier
drops to 133% relative to the Maryland barrier. Second, Balistreri and Hillberry
report trade barriers relative to Maryland instead of relative to average domestic
trade barriers as in the papers discussed above. They therefore also capture trade
barriers within the United States, which are known to be very large based on the
direct evidence on distribution costs reported in section II. The trade barrier for
Alabama-Quebec trade relative to within-U.S. trade is 61%. The latter is still a
bit above the 46% U.S.-Canada barrier reported above since Alabama and Quebec
are farther apart than the average state-province pair.
    International trade barriers can be decomposed into barriers associated with
national borders and barriers associated with geographic frictions such as distance.
The next set of rows in Table 7 report the magnitude of international trade barriers
associated with borders. For σ = 8, the estimated U.S.-Canada border barrier from
Anderson and van Wincoop (2003) is 26%. With a total barrier of 46%, it implies
a distance related barrier of 16% (1.16=1.46/1.26). This is not much different
than direct estimates of trade costs reported in section II: the total transport cost
estimate for the U.S. is 21% (1.21=1.107*1.09, with 10.7% freight cost and 9%
time cost). In our representative total trade cost calculation, we assume all effects
of distance are captured in the transport cost number (Hummels reports partial
success in testing this hypothesis with his disaggregated data.)

                                         35
    Although based on traditional gravity equations, estimates of border barriers
in Wei (1996) and Evans (2003a) are not too far off, respectively 14-38% and
30%. Both apply to OECD countries. The results from Eaton and Kortum (2002)
are a bit higher, 39-55%. Eaton and Kortum do not actually report barriers
associated with national borders. The 39-55% barrier applies to trade costs of
countries 0-375 miles apart relative to domestic trade costs. Since even for those
countries the average distance is larger than within countries, it overstates a bit
the barrier associated with borders. But our own calculations based on estimates
from Anderson and van Wincoop (2003) indicate that this overstatement is only
about 6%. Summarizing, barriers associated with national borders are in the range
of 25-50% for a representative elasticity estimate.43
    All the trade costs estimates reported above are based on point estimates. Stan-
dard errors tend to be quite small though as the empirical fit of gravity equations
is generally very strong. For example, a 95% confidence interval of U.S.-Canada
border barriers based on Anderson and van Winoop (2003) is 23%-28%. Standard
errors of trade costs associated with distance are even smaller.

III.G.2     Decomposition of Border Barriers

It is of great interest to better understand what blocks build these border barriers.
We saw in section II that policy barriers, in the form of tariffs and NTB’s, amount
to no more than about 8% for OECD countries,44 suggesting important additional
barriers associated with national borders. Estimates of five different types of trade
frictions are associated with national borders.

Language Barriers

    Table 7 reports estimates from Eaton and Kortum (2002) and Hummels (2001a)
on language related barriers. They both follow the common approach of introduc-
ing a dummy variable that is one if two countries have a common language and
zero otherwise. Results from both papers imply a tax equivalent associated with
  43
     There is also a small literature that has documented border barriers at the level of states
within the United States. See Wolf (2000a,b), Hillberry and Hummels (2002a) and Millimet and
Osang (2001).
  44
     Recall that Messerlin (2001) reports a 7.7% arithmetic average protection rate in industrial
goods for the European Union.


                                               36
speaking different languages of about 7% when σ = 8.

Currency Barriers

    The use of different currencies may pose a barrier to trade as well. Rose and
van Wincoop (2001) introduce a dummy variable that is equal to one when two
countries use the same currency (are part of a currency union) and equal to zero
otherwise. Based on data for 143 countries, the estimated tariff equivalent associ-
ated with using different currencies is 14% when σ = 8.
    While Rose and van Wincoop (2001) is the only paper that computes the tariff
equivalent of the reduction in trade barriers from joining a currency union, by now
a large body of papers has documented a big positive impact of currency unions
on trade. Rose (2000) estimates a traditional gravity equation using data for 186
countries from 1970 to 1990 and finds that countries in a currency union trade
three times as much. The finding also applies to historical data. Using data from
the 19th and early 20th century, Estevadeordal et al. (2003) and Lopez-Cordova
and Meissner (2003) document a big impact on trade of belonging to the same
commodity regime, such as the gold standard. Rose (2003) considers the evidence
from 19 studies on the effect of currency unions on trade and concludes that the
combined evidence from all studies suggest a doubling of trade if countries belong
to a currency union.
    One problem with this evidence is that it is unclear why a currency union raises
trade levels so much. There are small costs involved in exchanging currencies.
There is substantial consensus that the impact of exchange rate volatility on trade
is very small at best, with even the sign uncertain; hence the volatility-suppressing
effect of currency unions should not raise trade much.
    Another potential problem is endogeneity. Countries may join a currency union
because they have close trade relationships rather than the other way around.
The endogeneity problem is well recognized in the literature. Anecdotal evidence
on this issue is mixed. Rose (2000) discusses anecdotal evidence suggesting that
trade does not play an important role in the decision to join a currency union,
but Estevadeordal et.al. (2003) discuss an example where it does appear to have
mattered. A second approach is to use instruments. Rose (2000) uses various
instruments associated with inflation and continues to find that currency unions
have a significant effect on trade. Alesina et al. (2002) and Barro and Tenreyro

                                         37
(2002) also adopt an IV approach. Using a probit analysis they first compute the
probability that a country adopts each of four potential anchor currencies. 45 For
any two countries i and j, the probability of belonging to the same currency union
is then 4c=1 pci pcj , where pci is the probability that country i adopts anchor currency
        P

c. This is used as an instrument for the currency union dummy. They find that
the impact of currency unions on trade remains large and significant. Broda and
Romalis (2003) also adopt an instrumental variables technique, but instead find
that endogeneity is important. They argue that commodities trade should not be
affected by currency unions. If this is the case, commodities trade can be used
as an instrument in a regression of a currency union dummy on total trade. The
resulting error term of this regression is used as an instrument for currency unions
in a regression of manufacturing trade on a currency union dummy. They find that
the coefficient on this currency union instrument is small and insignificant.
    Another approach to deal with endogeneity uses time series evidence. If a
country joins a currency union because of close trade ties, then trade is already
high when the country joins the currency union and does not rise subsequent to
that. Glick and Rose (2002) examine data for 200 countries from 1948 to 1997
and find that countries joining or exiting a currency union during this period
experienced respectively a near-doubling or halving of bilateral trade. In contrast,
Ritschl and Wolf (2003) find evidence that endogeneity is important. After the
Great Depression, most countries went off the gold standard and new regional
currency blocs were formed. Ritschl and Wolf find that trade among members of
these new currency blocs is two to three times as high as trade among countries
that do not belong to the same currency bloc. But they show that trade among
countries of these future currency areas was already high in the 1920s, a decade
before the new currency blocs were formed, and that the actual formation of the
currency areas did not raise bilateral trade among their members. However, their
currency blocs have fixed exchange rate systems rather than a single currency, so
  45
    The probability depends on exogenous factors, such as various size related measures, distance
from the anchor currency country, and various dummy variables such as common language with
the anchor currency country.




                                               38
that it is not evidence about currency unions.

Information Barriers

    Border costs associated with information barriers are potentially important.
This is documented by several authors. Portes and Rey (2002) first estimate a
traditional gravity equation (1), regressing bilateral trade on GDP’s, per capita
GDP’s and distance. Then they add two information variables: a size-adjusted
volume of telephone traffic and the size-adjusted number of branches of the im-
porting country’s banks located in the exporter’s country. Both coefficients are
positive and highly significant. Moreover, the coefficient on bilateral distance is
reduced from -0.55 to -0.23.
    Rauch and Trindade (2002) have conducted the most careful work so far. They
argue that information barriers to trade may be reduced when two countries have a
substantial Chinese network, proxied as the product of the population percentages
of Chinese ethnicity in the two countries. They estimate a traditional gravity
equation for both ‘reference price’ goods and differentiated goods which do not have
reference prices.46 The trade-increasing effect of the Chinese network variable is
larger for the differentiated goods than for the reference price goods. The difference
between them may be taken to represent the effects of information transfer using
the network, with the trade increasing effect of networks on the reference price
goods representing the value of the network to informal contract enforcement.
Pushing inference based on their results to the limit, we calculate the information-
cost-reducing value of strong Chinese immigrant links (where both partners have
a larger than 1% Chinese population) to be worth as much as a 47% increase in
trade.47 Earlier work done on the effect of Chinese immigrant links on the bilateral
  46
     For the reference price goods they also distinguish between goods traded on organized ex-
changes and those not so traded.
  47
     Table 9 of Rauch and Trindade (2002) reports the trade volume effect of changing the Chinese
network variable from zero to its sample mean value for two subsets of trading partners, those
with Chinese population shares greater than 1% and those with Chinese population shares less
than 1%. For the smaller share group, the volume effects are modest — 6.2% for the differentiated
products and somewhat smaller for the reference priced products. For the subset of countries
with larger Chinese population shares, the effect of switching on the sample mean of the Chinese
network variable is a 178% rise in trade for differentiated goods, a 128% rise in trade in reference
priced goods, and a 89% rise in trade in goods on organized exchanges. We attribute the difference


                                                39
trade of the U.S. by Gould (1994) found larger effects, while Head and Ries (1998)
found much more modest effects in the bilateral trade of Canada.
    With an elasticity of substitution of 8, these Chinese networks save an infor-
mation cost worth 6%. This may be both a lower bound and an upper bound to
the tax equivalent of information barriers. It is a lower bound in that information
barriers are likely to be important even if two countries have populations with the
same ethnic background. It is an upper bound to the extent that one believes
that other factors are picked up. For example, the results are largely driven by
countries with very large Chinese populations, such as Taiwan, Hong Kong, China,
Singapore, and Malaysia. Since Rauch and Trindade estimate a traditional gravity
equation, they may not properly control for the large distance of these countries
from the United States and Europe. It is also possible that strong historical trade
ties drive the results, as would be the case in trade models where history matters.
Evidence by Evans (2003a) also suggest that the 6% information barrier is an over-
statement. She estimates a traditional gravity equation for OECD bilateral trade
flow data for 12 industries, with trade dependent on GDP’s, distance, remoteness
and a border dummy. She finds that the coefficient on the border dummy does
not drop once a variety of industry-specific variables related to the importance
and difficulty of information transfers are included (e.g. the frequency of technical
service). More careful modeling of the underlying information costs in future work
will probably be illuminating.

Contracting Costs and Insecurity

    The costs of writing contracts and enforcing them or self-insuring the costs of
default on unenforced contracts are all plausibly larger across borders. 48 Evans
(2001) provides evidence that internal contracting costs within a firm are much
lower than external contracting costs. Specifically, the tax equivalent of the trading
costs of a foreign affiliate of a U.S. multinational with unaffiliated U.S. firms is on
average 37% higher (for a demand elasticity of 5) than the trading costs with
its U.S. parent. She provides evidence that proprietary assets associated with
transactions (e.g. the sale of a brand with a good reputation or a good that is
between the impact on differentiated goods and goods traded in organized exchanges as a result
of information costs: 47%=100*(2.78/1.89).
  48
     See Anderson (2000) for a discussion of the literature on this topic.


                                             40
technologically advanced) play an important role in this result. Since the goals
of unaffiliated firms are different, there are greater risks involved in selling goods
that involve substantial proprietary assets, which would involve larger contracting
costs.
    Rauch and Trindade (2002) also can be interpreted to provide an inference
about contracting and enforcement cost. Networks provide a kind of enforcement
through sanctions which substitutes for weak international enforcement of formal
contracts. Their finding of a 89% trade increasing effect of networks for reference
price goods is hard to interpret as information costs and may be a result of con-
tracting costs. But since these goods presumably have very high elasticities of
substitution, the tax equivalent is likely to be small (3% when σ = 20).
    Anderson and Marcouiller (2002) show that insecurity, associated both with
contractual enforcement problems and with corruption, lowers trade substantially.
Using survey data taken from businessmen by the World Economic Forum as an
index of institutional quality and making institutional quality (both contractual
enforcement and corruption) an argument of the trade cost function, they imple-
ment a variant of the theoretically consistent gravity model.49 They report the
effect of raising the quality of institutions from the Latin American average (for
the seven Latin American countries in the sample — Argentina, Brazil, Chile,
Colombia, Mexico, Peru, and Venezuela) to the E.U. average. Combined with
their maximum likelihood point estimate of the elasticity of substitution equal to
8, the implied tax equivalent of relatively low quality institutions is 16%. Insecu-
rity is therefore an important trade barrier for developing countries. It plays less
of a role for industrialized countries on which trade barrier estimates in Table 7
are based. An experiment based on their estimates that raises the U.S. security
level to that of Singapore, the highest in the data, implies a tax equivalent of 3%
for an elasticity of 8.

Non-Tariff Policy Barriers

   Harrigan (1993), Head and Mayer (2000) and Chen (2002) consider the role of
non-tariff barriers in accounting for the impact of borders on trade levels. The last
two papers do not find evidence of a positive relationship between sectoral esti-
  49
    They divide imports of j from i by US imports from i, which cancels the exporter price
index. The importer relative price index is approximated with a Törnqvist index.


                                           41
mates of the impact of borders on trade and sectoral data for non-tariff barriers.
Harrigan (1993) estimates the traditional gravity equation (1) for 1983 bilateral
trade data for 28 industries among OECD countries and also finds that non-tariff
barriers have little effect on trade, with coefficients sometimes having the wrong
sign. These insignificant results may be explained by failure to control for the
endogeneity of NTB’s suggested by political economy. Trefler (1993) shows that
the effect of NTB’s on U.S. trade with the rest of the world is increased in ab-
solute value by an order of magnitude when controlling for the endogeneity of
NTB’s with instruments commonly used in the political economy literature. In
contrast, in a related approach which uses a set of both rich and poor countries,
Lee and Swagel (1997) jointly estimate an equation relating sectoral imports to
trade barriers and an equation relating sectoral NTB’s to various driving factors
from political economy. Once appropriately controlling for industry and country
dummies in the trade regression, they find no evidence that NTB’s affect trade
flows. The difference between their results and Trefler’s may partly reflect differ-
ences across countries which are not controlled for, and partly the richer set of
political economy variables which Trefler is able to deploy for the U.S. alone.
    There is extensive evidence that free trade agreements and customs unions in-
crease trade and therefore reduce trade barriers (e.g. Frankel et al. (1998) and
Frankel and Wei (1997)), but it is less clear what elements of these trade agree-
ments play a role (tariffs, NTB’s, or regulatory issues). As noted above, all gravity
model analyses of NTB’s and regional trade agreements impose very strong and
presumptively implausible regularity restrictions on the effect of non-tariff barriers
and customs union membership upon trade volume. Moreover, most of this evi-
dence is cross-section evidence, which raises causality issues. Baier and Bergstrand
(2003) control for endogenous regional trade agreements and greatly increase the
implied magnitude of the membership effect. Time series evidence, in contrast,
suggests that free trade agreements are less important than in cross-section find-
ings. Although Helliwell (1998,1999) estimates a substantial drop in the border
effect for U.S.-Canada trade since the 1988 free trade agreement, Coulombe (2002)
shows that the same downward trend took place already before 1988 and applies
to the entire sample 1981-2000. Similarly, Head and Mayer (2000) document a
gradual drop in European border barriers from 1976 to 1995, with no significant



                                         42
drop after the implementation of the Single European Act of 1986.

Summary

    Assuming an 8% policy related barrier (based on direct evidence from tariffs
and NTB’s), a 7% language barrier, 14% currency barrier, a 6% information cost
barrier, and a 3% security barrier, overall border barriers are 44%. This falls
within the estimated 25-50% range reported for OECD countries in Table 7. The
discussion above qualifies these magnitudes as quite rough.


III.H     Aggregation Issues
The gravity equations (5)-(7) are the basis for discussion of aggregation issues:
                                                                   !1−σk
                                       Ejk Yik            tkij
                              Xijk   =
                                        Yk               Pjk Πki
                                                         !1−σk
                                                  tkij             Ejk
                        (Πki )1−σk
                                         X
                                     =
                                         j        Pjk              Yk
                                                         !1−σk
                                                  tkij             Yik
                        (Pjk )1−σk
                                         X
                                     =                                 .
                                         i        Πki              Yk

    There are two different aggregation issues. First, estimated trade costs at a
disaggregate level overwhelm the comprehension of the analyst. Like others, we
report atheoretic averages in this survey, but an ideal summary index is desirable.
Second, in practice gravity equations are estimated from aggregate data; even
sectoral data are not at the level of detail of reality. Aggregation bias results
from estimating trade costs with aggregate data when trade costs vary at the
disaggregate level.

III.H.1   Ideal Aggregation

Anderson and Neary (2003) develop an ideal summary index of trade costs, defined
as the uniform trade cost that leads to the same aggregate trade level. The ideal
index idea can be applied to aggregation in several dimensions, each providing
answers to sensible questions. In the context of gravity models, it is natural to
consider ideal aggregation over trading partners (e.g., aggregate tkij over importers


                                             43
j for an export trade cost index) and aggregation over commodities (e.g., aggregate
tkij over k for a given link from i to j).

Summary Trade Costs for Each Region

    The multilateral indices {Pjk , Πkj } are elegantly simple summary measures of
trade costs for a particular region j with all its trading partners (including the
region itself). Pjk is an average import trade cost (including imports from oneself)
and Πkj an average export trade cost (including exports to oneself). To see this,
note that if, hypothetically, the actual bilateral cost set {tkij } is replaced with
{Pjk Πki }, the equilibrium price indices themselves remain the same and aggregate
trade flows i Xijk and j Xijk also remain unchanged.
              P           P

    To illustrate, Table 8 reports multilateral resistance for U.S. states and Cana-
dian provinces based on Anderson and van Wincoop (2003), assuming σ = 8. In
their model Pi = Πi , so the import and export trade cost measures are the same.
We use the approach of Balistreri and Hillberry (2002) by normalizing trade costs
within Maryland as zero and therefore dividing all trade barriers by that of trade
within Maryland. Note that Canadian provinces have systematically higher trade
costs because they face the border cost on much more of their trade with the U.S.
states and because they are more distant from more important sources of supply.
Note also that populous Northeastern U.S. states and California face the lowest
trade costs, explained by the geographic advantage of being close to a greater share
of the output produced.50

Aggregating Across Trading Partners

    Since bilateral trade barriers vary across countries, a summary measure of in-
ternational trade barriers is useful. A natural aggregator for inward or outward
shipments replaces all tij where i 6= j with a uniform inward or outward interna-
tional trade barrier that leaves aggregate international trade unchanged.
    To illustrate this, consider a simple example. There are N countries, with
N an odd integer. Each produce a fraction 1/N of the output of industry k.
  50
   A more subtle pattern may be discerned. Location near a border should, all else equal, raise
multilateral resistance since the border cannot matter as much for a state located far from the
boder where distance will naturally impede trade. (This is observable only in states, since all
Canadian provinces are on the border.)


                                              44
The countries are evenly spaced on a circle, with trade barriers between them
proportional to their shortest distance on the circle. There are no trade barriers
within countries. These simplifying assumptions imply that inward and outward
summary barriers are the same and common across countries, and that Pi = Πi =
P . If bi is the trade barrier for two countries that are i steps away from each other
on the circle, it is easily checked that the uniform international trade cost index
b that leads to the same level of international trade can be solved from (dropping
industry subscripts)
                                         P0.5N −0.5 1−σ
                                                   bi
                                  b 1−σ
                                        = i=1                                     (20)
                                           0.5N − 0.5
Since b1−σ is convex in b, it follows that b is less that the average trade barrier.
More (omitted) algebra, based on the substitution effect, shows that b is larger
than the trade-weighted average barrier. The ideal index therefore lies in between
the arithmetic average and trade-weighted average barrier in this example.

Aggregating Across Goods

    Aggregation across goods is useful for summarizing detailed data. To illustrate,
again consider a simple example. Assume that there are two equally sized countries
(Y1 = Y2 ) and K sectors. Each country spends a fraction θk on sector k, Eik =
θk Yi , and produces half of the output in each sector. The only trade barrier is a
border barrier between the two countries that varies across industries: tk12 = bk .
This example again has the advantage of closed form solutions for the multilateral
resistance indices. It is easy to check that for each sector P k = Πk . When raised to
be power 1 − σk they are equal to (0.5 + 0.5bk1−σk )0.5 . In our example the uniform
barrier b that leads to the same aggregate trade between the two countries can be
solved from
                           K                      K
                          X        (bk )1+σk     X         b1+σk
                              θk               =     θ k                          (21)
                          k=1    1 − (bk )1−σk   k=1     1 − b1−σk
    Starting from a benchmark where all barriers are equal to b̄ and all elasticities
are equal to σ̄ we now introduce variation in the barriers and elasticities such that
the industry size weighted averages N
                                        P               PN
                                          k=1 θk bk and  k=1 θk σk remain constant at
respectively b̄ and σ̄. The function B(b, σ) ≡ b /(1 + b1−σ ) is decreasing and
                                                     1−σ

convex in b. Then Jensen’s Inequality implies that for a mean-preserving spread
in {bk }, b < b. Since the absolute effect on aggregate trade is larger when reducing

                                         45
a trade barrier than raising a trade barrier, the ideal index gives relatively more
weight to low sectoral trade barriers. Variation in σ given a uniform b has no effect,
from (21).
    Simultaneous variation of {bk , σk } requires us to consider covariation. Consider
marginal variation holding λ = var(σ)/var(b) constant. We can use a second order
Taylor expansion of (21) to show the following:

                           ∂b/∂(var(b)) = −α1 + α2 λcorr(b, σ)                                (22)

where α1 and α2 are two positive constants. If the elasticity is low exactly in
sectors with high barriers, the impact on aggregate trade of these high barriers is
reduced, leading to a smaller uniform barrier b. There is evidence that a negative
correlation is realistic, which reinforces the conclusion that the uniform b is lower
than b.51
    As an illustration, Figure 1 graphs trade barriers against price elasticities for
findings based on Table 4 in Hummels (2001a). Hummels assumes tkij = dρijk mkij ,
where dij is distance and mkij stands for trade barriers unrelated to distance. An
increase in ρk implies higher distance related trade barriers. Figure 1 shows that
sectors with a high distance elasticity ρk of trade costs tend to have low elasticities
of substitution, which is consistent with corr(b, σ) < 0. Similar conclusions can
be drawn for language and adjacency as factors driving trade costs in Hummels
(2001a). Evans (2003a) provides similar evidence for border related trade barriers.
Using 1990 OECD country data for 12 industries she estimates relatively high
values of bσ , with b the tariff equivalent of border barriers, for industries with a
high degree of product differentiation (low elasticity). This can only be the case if
industries with low elasticities tend to have relatively high border barriers.52
    Finally, there is also reason to believe that the industry size weighted average
b̄ = N
    P
      k=1 θk bk is lower than a simple average trade barrier. Head and Ries (2001)
point out that U.S.-Canada trade barriers tend to be low in relatively large sectors
such as motor vehicles. This will further reduce the uniform barrier below a simple
  51
     Simulation with discrete changes confirms the result from (22): negative correlation increases
b − b, positive correlation can change its sign, and the magnitude of b − b can be substantial.
  52
     Chen (2002) finds that for European trade there is no relationship between bσ and the Rauch
and Trindade (2002) measure of product differentiation, again pointing to a negative relationship
between b and σ across industries.


                                                46
average barrier across industries. Hillberry (2002) shows that for U.S.-Canada
trade a simple average border related barrier across industries is twice as large as
an output weighted average.
    The example shows that there are several reasons to believe that an ideal index
of trade barriers that aggregates over sectors will be lower than a simple average
of sectoral trade barriers. This suggests that arithmetic average trade barriers
reported in section II, as well as the numbers in Table 7 based on studies from
disaggregate data, overstate an ideal index of trade barriers. How much they
overstate the ideal index is unknown and is therefore an obvious area for future
research.

III.H.2   Estimation Bias and Aggregation

Estimation based on aggregate data pretends that there is only one border barrier
b and one elasticity σ, while international trade barriers vary across goods. Con-
sider aggregate estimation with multilateral resistance indices replaced by country
dummies. The aggregate gravity equation can be written as

                            xij = αi + αj + (σ − 1)ln(b)δij + εij                          (23)

where αi and αj are country-specific constants that depend on the multilateral
resistance variables, and δij is one if i = j and zero otherwise.
    First consider again the example above where the border barriers vary across
country pairs. With N countries, the OLS estimate of ln(b1−σ ) is
                                                                    P0.5N −0.5
                   1−σ        1  X          1 XN
                                                                      i=1      ln(b1−σ
                                                                                   i   )
           ln(b̂         )= 2         xij −       xii =                                    (24)
                           N − N i6=j       N i=1                         0.5N − 0.5

Together with (20) and the concavity of the log-transformation, it follows that the
estimated border barrier is larger than the ideal index if we know the elasticity σ.
    Next consider the two-country example with varying border barriers across
industries. In this case the OLS estimate of the border barrier is
                                             X12
                                (b̂)1−σ = 0.5 0.5
                                          X11 X22
Substitution of the theoretical expressions for X11 , X22 and X12 yields
                                  (b̂)1−σ         K
                                                  X            b1−σ
                                                                k
                                                                    k

                                              =         θk                                 (25)
                                1 + (b̂)1−σ       k=1        1 + b1−σ
                                                                  k
                                                                      k




                                                  47
Together with (21) it follows that the estimate b̂ based on the aggregate gravity
equation is equal to the ideal index b when all price elasticities are identical and
we set σ at that level. Although the assumption of identical elasticities across
sectors is not realistic, this result nonetheless provides important guidance. There
is confusion in the literature about whether one should use elasticities based on
aggregate data or disaggregate data when interpreting estimation results based
on aggregate data. It makes a big difference because price elasticities based on
aggregate data are much smaller. The example shows that the elasticity of sub-
stitution at the more aggregate level, between sectors, is entirely irrelevant. One
should choose elasticities at a sufficiently disaggregated level, at which firms truly
compete.
    If the price elasticities differ across sectors, then we need to choose σ below
the average across sectors in order for the estimate b̂ to be equal to the uniform
index b. If we choose σ to be equal to the average elasticity across sectors, then
the estimate b̂ would be lower than the uniform barrier b. The magnitude of this
bias is unknown.
    In the examples above the production and spending structure– the set {Yik , Eik }–
is unrelated to trade barriers. In general though the production and spending
structure is endogenous and depends on trade costs. This can generate another
important source of aggregation bias, as discussed in Hillberry (2002) and Hill-
berry and Hummels (2002). They consider models with an endogenous production
structure, whereby either (i) trade barriers vary across both industries and coun-
tries while the demand structure is the same across countries, or (ii) trade barriers
only vary across countries while the (intermediate) demand structure varies across
countries (due to varying gross output mix).53
    Hillberry (2002) considers case (i) in the context of a monopolistic competition
model with endogenous entry of firms. Countries will tend to specialize in sectors in
which they have a comparative advantage reflected in trade costs. If for example
trade costs take the form tkij = τk + mij , then a country i that faces relatively
  53
    If neither (i) nor (ii) are satisfied, there is no aggregation bias. An example of this is the
model by Eaton and Kortum (2002). All firms use the same CES bundle of all intermediate
goods as inputs and all consumers have the same preferences. The demand structure is therefore
the same across countries. Moreover, trade barriers are the same for all industries. As discussed
previously, their model can still be shown to lead to the standard aggregate gravity equation (8).



                                               48
low trade barriers mij has comparative advantage in industries with relatively
low industry-specific barriers τk .54 This raises the level of trade among countries
with low bilateral trade barriers. Trade becomes more sensitive to trade barriers:
trade barriers reduce trade both through a standard substitution effect and because
firms endogenously locate close to markets with which they have low trade barriers.
Estimation based on aggregate data attempts to attribute the reduction in trade
as a result of trade costs solely to the standard substitution effect. Estimated trade
barriers will therefore be too high.
    Hillberry (2002) considers another example applied to U.S. states and Canadian
provinces. He assumes that trade costs take the form tkij = mij eδij τk , where mij is
a barrier related to distance and δij is 0 if regions are located in the same country
and 1 otherwise. τk is an industry-specific border barrier. This setup implies that
regions located close to the border, which tend to trade a lot with the other country,
have comparative advantage in the sectors with relatively low border costs. Since
all state-province pairs get equal weight in gravity equation estimation, Hillberry
argues that estimates from aggregate gravity equations overstate the impact of
border barriers on international trade. He provides some evidence to confirm this,
but because it is based on the traditional gravity equation, omitted variable bias
may explain the finding.
    Hillberry and Hummels (2002) consider case (ii) in which trade barriers are
the same across industries but the demand structure varies across countries be-
cause firms use different bundles of intermediate goods in production. In that case
countries tend to specialize in industries in which demand is relatively high from
trading partners with whom they have relatively low trade barriers. This again
raises the impact of trade barriers on aggregate trade flows, leading to an upward
bias of trade cost estimates based on aggregate data. For trade within and between
U.S. states, Hillberry and Hummels (2002) regress the product of sectoral demand
and supply, Ejk Yik , on distance, adjacency and a within-state dummy. They find
that the co-location of production and demand is mainly important at the very
local level, within states or between adjacent states. They do not report results
on the extent to which trade barrier estimates based on aggregate data overstate
  54
    If on the other hand trade barriers take a multiplicative form tkij = τk mij , the relative
trade barrier in two different sectors is the same for all i, j and all countries will have the same
production structure.


                                                49
the ideal index.
    Papers by Yi (2003a,2003b) are also relevant in this context. These papers are
based on evidence of an important role of vertical specialization in international
trade, as documented in Hummels et al. (2001). Vertical specialization is defined
as the use of imported intermediate goods in the production of goods that are
exported. Yi (2003a) develops a two-country model (H and F) in which consumer
goods are produced in three stages. The first stage produces an intermediate good,
which is used in the second stage to produce another intermediate good. The final
stage combines all intermediate goods from stage two to produce a non-traded final
consumption good. These stages can take place in different locations, leading to
“back and forth” trade. Yi (2003a) shows that trade barriers now have a magnified
effect on world trade, which helps account for the growth in world trade over the
past four decades. Yi (2003b) argues that taking into account this magnification
factor should reduce estimates of trade barriers.
    Two factors magnify the impact of trade barriers on trade. First, there are
fewer imports of vertically specialized goods by the final goods sector. There is
vertical specialization when for example stage 1 is produced in H, which is shipped
to F for stage 2 production, which is shipped to H for final goods production.
Stage 1 goods will then have crossed borders twice, magnifying the impact of
border barriers.55 Second, a rise in trade barriers affects the production structure
in that it becomes more likely that the first two stages are produced in the same
country (thus eliminating vertical specialization). If stage 1 is produced in H,
higher trade barriers make it more attractive to produce stage 2 in H as well.
Both magnification factors are again associated with aggregation bias. Standard
gravity equations still hold for stage-2 sub-sectors that use the same production
  55
     The critical aspect of the Yi model that leads to this magnification effect is the asymmetry
of production functions. This can be seen most clearly in comparison to the model of Eaton and
Kortum (2002). As discussed above, the Eaton and Kortum model leads to a standard gravity
equation, so there is no magnification effect. In the Eaton and Kortum model firms produce
goods that are used both as intermediate goods and final consumption goods. Intermediate
goods produced in one location are used as inputs in the production of intermediate goods in
another location, which are used as intermediate inputs in another location, etc. Components
will therefore have crossed borders infinitely many times. But in contrast to Yi (2003a,b), the
same bundle of intermediate goods is used for the production of each good. This symmetry
assumption regarding production functions kills the magnification effect.



                                               50
function (source stage-1 products from the same country).
    While aggregation bias can theoretically arise in many ways, little is known
about the empirical magnitude of aggregation bias. One obvious recommendation
is to disaggregate. There is no bias in the estimation of trade costs for given
expenditure and production at the disaggregated level. But disaggregation can
never be as fine as reality, so some degree of aggregation bias is inevitable.


III.I   Criticisms of the Gravity Approach
The main criticisms against using gravity equations such as (8) and (5) to analyze
trade volumes and trade costs are these:

  1. Estimates of the distance elasticity of trade costs are unrealistically high
     (Grossman (1998)) and have not dropped over time in the face of globaliza-
     tion (“the missing globalization puzzle”-Coe et al.(2002)).

  2. There are no import-competing sectors or non-tradables sectors that only
     supply to the domestic market (Engel (2002)).

  3. One should allow the elasticity of substitution between domestic and foreign
     goods to be different from the elasticity of substitution among domestic goods
     (Engel (2002)).

  4. In contrast to the predictions of the model, the substantial increase in U.S.
     Canada trade during the 1990s was not accompanied by a big drop in intra-
     provincial trade (Helliwell (2003)).

  5. The model implies trade among all countries for each sector, while the reality
     is dominated by zeros (Haveman and Hummels (2001)).

  6. Estimated trade barriers are unrealistically high (Balistreri and Hillberry
     (2002)).

  7. Estimates of the gravity equation have the unrealistic implication that con-
     sumer prices are much higher in Canada than in the United States (Balistreri
     and Hillberry (2002)).



                                       51
    Criticisms of the empirical validity of gravity equations are implicitly (some-
times explicitly) criticisms of the assumptions of theories underlying the gravity
framework. Below we will therefore discuss how these criticisms can be addressed
by generalizing assumptions of theories behind gravity equations (8) and (5). But
before doing so, we will first discuss these criticisms in a bit more detail.
    The puzzle of unrealistically high distance elasticities was first raised by Gross-
man (1998). Grossman pointed out that a distance coefficient of -1.42 in McCal-
lum’s gravity equation implies that regions that are 500 miles apart will trade
2.67 times more with each other than regions that are 1000 miles apart, which he
considered implausibly large. The distance elasticity is much lower (-0.79 with a re-
ported standard error of 0.03) in Anderson and van Wincoop (2003). This remains
unreasonably large if distance is intended to capture transport costs. Grossman
(1998) reasoned as follows. First write tij = 1 + τij , where τij is the tax equiva-
lent of transport costs. Defining α = τij /(1 + τij ), one can write the elasticity of
bilateral trade with respect to distance (holding constant multilateral resistance
indices) as:
                              α(1 − σ)∂ln(τij )/∂ln(dij )                          (26)
    Transport costs are plausibly no more than proportional to distance, so that
the elasticity ln(τij )/∂ln(dij ) is less than 1. Hummels (2001a) estimates it to be
about 0.3.56 As discussed in section I, the tax equivalents for transport costs for
the U.S. are on average about 11%. With the elasticity σ in the range of 5 to 10,
the distance elasticity can be expected to be in the range of -0.12 to -0.26. If we
include time costs, the tax equivalent of U.S. transport costs are on average 21%.
Even then the implied distance elasticity is below available estimates, in the range
of -0.21 to -0.46 for σ in the interval [5, 10].
    Apart from changing theoretical assumptions, to which we turn in a moment,
there are at least two possible explanations in the literature for this distance elas-
ticity puzzle. First, the distance may proxy for much more than trade costs. Portes
and Rey (2002) find that the distance elasticity halves to -0.23 once information
barriers are introduced separately. A second explanation is offered by Coe et al.
  56
    Grossman (1998) assumes a constant distance elasticity of τij . However, the estimated trade
distance elasticies from the gravity equations that Grossman refers to assume a constant distance
elasticity of tij . If the Grossman specification is correct, it is possible that the high distance
elasticites obtained from gravity equation estimation are a result of specification error of tij .


                                                52
(2002). They estimate the theoretical gravity equation (8) in levels rather than
logs, which reduces the absolute value of the distance elasticity from -1.08 to -0.35
for 2000 trade data. A possible explanation for their finding is that the absolute
value of the elasticity of trade with respect to distance is falling in distance, as
Eaton and Kortum document. Cutting off the high distance, low trade volume
observations by using logarithmic data with exclusion of zeroes excludes observa-
tions for which the elasticity is low in absolute value, hence pushing upward the
estimated distance elasticity.
     Apart from the level of the distance elasticity there is also the so-called “missing
globalization puzzle,” which is based on findings in a large number of studies that
the distance elasticity has not declined or even risen over time (see survey of this
literature in Coe et. al. (2002)). This is often considered puzzling since transport
costs have declined over time. Coe et al. (2002) find that when the gravity equation
is estimated in levels rather than logs the distance elasticity has fallen over the
last two decades, from -0.51 in 1980 to -0.35 in 2000. It is not clear though why
estimation in levels would resolve this puzzle. For industrialized countries Brun
et al. (2002) succeed in reversing a rising distance elasticity by including the cost
of fuel in the trade cost function. A rise in the price of fuel acts like a negative
productivity shock to transportation, so omitting the fuel cost variable in an era
when it is rising will produce rising distance elasticities. Fuel costs both rose and
fell in the period of their analysis, 1962-96, and it is not clear why the omitted fuel
cost variable is associated with rising distance elasticities in subperiods when fuel
costs are falling. Moreover, fuel costs should affect the trade cost of developing
countries symmetrically, so it is not clear why this effect only works with rich
countries. The missing globalization puzzle may not be a real puzzle after all
if one realizes that since 1913 technology growth in shipping has been relatively
slow in comparison to the rest of the economy. Transport costs may therefore
have increased as a fraction of average marginal production costs. This point is
emphasized in Estevadeordal et. al. (2003).
     The second criticism, raised by Engel (2002), is that there are no import-
competing sectors or non-tradables sectors that do not export. Engel makes this
comment on Anderson and van Wincoop (2003) and argues that ignoring sectors
that do not export can lead to an underestimation of border barriers. His reasoning
is most clearly understood for non-tradables. Assume that as a result of a rise in

                                           53
border barriers there is a shift in resources out of tradables into non-tradables.
The non-tradables are only sold locally within a region and not between regions.
As a result a given 10% drop in exports of provinces will lead to a smaller increase
in trade with other provinces than in the absence of non-tradables. Engel argues
that therefore a bigger border barrier is needed to account for the observed home
bias. Under trade separability, however, this is not the case for the conditional
general equilibrium model upon which estimation is based. Non-tradables do not
affect the gravity equation for tradables and trade barrier estimates are therefore
unaffected.57
    To better understand this seemingly paradoxical result, consider the gravity
equation (8). Let YU S and YCA be the tradables output of respectively individual
states and provinces, PU S and PCA be the respective multilateral resistance vari-
ables for states and provinces and b the border barrier. Then trade between two
provinces is equal to
                                 YCA YCA      1
                                           1−σ 1−σ
                                   Yw PCA PCA
while trade between a province and state is equal to
                                     YU S YCA b1−σ
                                        Yw PU1−σ  1−σ
                                              S PCA

For observed tradables outputs YU S and YCA , the ratio of inter-provincial to state-
province trade does not depend on non-tradables and the estimated border barrier
does not.
    In contrast, full general equilibrium comparative statics is affected by the pres-
ence of non-tradables. In the presence of non-tradables a rise in border barriers
will shift resources to the non-tradables sector, so that tradables output of Cana-
dian provinces, YCA , drops. Tradables output of U.S. states drops much less. As a
result inter-provincial trade will rise less and state-province trade will drop more.
For every 1% drop in international trade, the increase in inter-provincial trade will
be lower.
    In short, the gravity equation and estimates of trade barriers are unaffected by
non-tradables but comparative statics are. The same conclusion cannot be drawn
for an import-competing sector. Many manufacturing firms do not export, a fact
  57
    Under trade separability, non-tradables do not affect the marginal utility (or marginal pro-
ductivity) of different types of tradable goods within a sector.


                                              54
that cannot be accommodated by the gravity equation (5). Below we will consider
an extension of fixed trade costs that modifies the gravity equation and allows for
certain varieties to be only supplied to the domestic market.
    The third criticism, also by Engel (2002), is that gravity theory does not allow
the elasticity of substitution between domestic and foreign goods to be different
from the elasticity of substitution among domestic goods. There is good reason
to consider the case of a higher elasticity of substitution among domestic goods,
commonly assumed in the “new open economy macro” literature. In the context of
Eaton and Kortum (2002) it is equivalent to the variation of productivity among
regions within a country being lower than among regions of different countries,
which is undoubtedly true. Extensions of gravity in this direction are discussed
below.
    The fourth criticism is raised by Helliwell (2003), based on a finding in another
paper, Helliwell (1999). He documents that following the 1988 free trade agreement
between the U.S. and Canada trade between them rose rapidly while trade within
Canada (inter-provincial trade) did not fall much. This stands in sharp contrast
to the finding by Anderson and van Wincoop (2003) that border barriers have
increased inter-provincial trade much more (factor 6) than they reduced state-
province trade (about 44%).58
    Helliwell (2003) criticizes the plausibility of the outcome from the comparative
statics exercise in Anderson and van Wincoop (2003). Comparative statics exer-
cises depend on the entire general equilibrium. This is therefore not necessarily
a criticism of the gravity equation itself, which is based on a conditional general
equilibrium. It may be that the modeling outside of the gravity structure, in par-
ticular the production structure, is incorrect.59 This does not affect the estimation
of the trade cost parameters, which only depends on the gravity structure.
    One possible explanation for the Helliwell puzzle is a non-tradables sector, as
discussed above. But this would only work if trade barriers lead to a significant
shift out of tradables into non-tradables. Because of its much larger size, the share
of the tradables sector would not be much affected in the U.S. and therefore be
  58
     Possibly related to the Helliwell evidence is the point raised by Brown (2003) that industries
where border barriers have disappeared when comparing data on inter-state and state-province
trade tend to still have much more inter-provincial trade than inter-state trade.
  59
     Anderson and van Wincoop (2003) adopt a simple endowment economy.



                                                55
much bigger than in Canada. There is no evidence of this in the data. With
tradables defined as the sum of mining, agriculture and manufacturing, its share
in total output is about the same in the two countries.
    The criticism by Helliwell raises a more general point. An obvious direction for
future research would be to evaluate the validity of theoretical gravity equations
with respect to their time series implications. This is especially useful since most
estimation is based on cross-section data. Baier and Bergstrand (2001) estimate
a gravity equation with pooled data for two periods (1958-1960 and 1986-1988)
to understand what factors drive the increase in world trade. However, their use
of price data is unlikely to properly capture changes over time in multilateral
resistance indices. Estevadeordal et al. (2003) estimate a gravity equation with
pooled data for three years (1913,1928 and 1938). While they include country-
specific dummies to capture the multilateral resistance variables, the theory tells
us that these will change over time. One should therefore include separate country
dummies for each year. In order to exploit the time series properties of the data
most effectively, it is even better to estimate gravity equations in their structural
form.
    The fifth criticism, launched by Haveman and Hummels (2001), is that gravity
models imply that all countries purchase goods from all suppliers. Using 1990
bilateral trade data among 173 countries for 4-digit SITC categories, Haveman
and Hummels show that in 58% of cases importers buy from fewer than 10%
of available suppliers. The Haveman and Hummels criticism is directed at models
with complete specialization. However, Eaton and Kortum (2002) derived the same
gravity equation in a model without complete specialization. In that model there
are generally a limited number of suppliers, each of which sells to countries with
whom they have relatively low trade barriers (in comparison to other suppliers).
Countries therefore buy goods from only one supplier (the cheapest one), even
though many suppliers may exist. It can therefore account for zero trade flows
at a disaggregated level. At the aggregate level, since it is equivalent to the CES
model, the Eaton and Kortum model cannot account for zero aggregate bilateral
trade flows, which are seen for trade among small regions (certain states and
provinces) or developing countries. Below we will also discuss an extension with
fixed cost as an explanation for zero trade flows.



                                         56
    The sixth criticism, by Balistreri and Hillberry (2002)), that estimated trade
barriers are unrealistically high, has already been discussed above. The numbers
would certainly be too high when they are interpreted as transport costs, as Bal-
istreri and Hillberry do. In reality though they reflect lots of trade barriers that
cannot be directly measured. It is hard to dismiss estimates of large trade barriers
without direct evidence to refute this. It is quite possible though that various
extensions of existing gravity theory that we discuss below will eventually lead to
a consensus of lower trade barriers than reported in Table 7.
    The final criticism, by Balistreri and Hillberry (2002), is that gravity equations
have unrealistic implications for price differences. They argue that the Anderson
and van Wincoop (2003) results imply that the consumer price index is 24% higher
in Canada than in the United States (assuming σ = 5). As discussed above, we
think the focus on consumer prices indices in the data is a misuse of the model.
They include things such as non-tradables, taxes and subsidies, and relative price
fluctuations with exchange rates due to nominal rigidities of prices. We interpret
multilateral resistance in the context of gravity theory as an ideal index of trade
costs, and find the 24% greater trade cost index for Canada to be quite plausible
given the revealed trade cost impact of the border, Canada’s much smaller size,
the revealed trade cost impact of distance and the greater distance of Canadian
provinces from U.S. centers of activity.


III.J    Extensions of the Gravity Approach
Simple extensions can meet criticisms and allow greater flexibility while retaining
the essential simplicity of the gravity model (5)-( 7). Three assumptions lead
to gravity (5): (i) trade separability, (ii) the aggregator of varieties is identical
across countries and CES, and (iii) ad-valorem tax equivalents of trade costs do
not depend on the quantity of trade. A variety of extensions of (ii) and (iii) are
discussed below. With relaxation of (i), two-stage budgeting is impossible. It is
worthwhile to at least consider how estimates of trade barriers depend on this, but
no work has yet been done in this direction.

Extensions of the CES Structure

   Tchamourliysky (2002) considers non-homothetic CES preferences. He modi-


                                         57
fies a standard CES consumption index by adding a constant δi to consumption
of goods from country i by every country’s consumers. He then derives a modified
gravity equation and estimates δi to be negative, interpretable as a subsistence
requirement. A subsistence requirement makes trade flows less sensitive to trade
barriers. Incorrectly assuming homothetic CES preferences would make consump-
tion excessively sensitive to trade barriers and the estimated trade barriers there-
fore too high. Tchamourliysky (2002) focuses particularly on distance as a trade
barrier and finds that allowing for non-homothetic preferences reduces the impact
of distance on trade barriers. This extension can potentially address several of the
criticisms raised above. First, by reducing estimates of trade barriers, it addresses
the concern by Hillberry and Balistreri (2002) that estimated trade barriers from
theoretical gravity equations are unrealistically high. Second, a lower distance
elasticity of trade addresses the concern of Grossman (1998).
    The CES preference structure can also be generalized by assuming, using nested
CES structures, that certain goods within a sector are better substitutes than other
goods. This would for example allow domestic goods to be closer substitutes for
each other than domestic goods are with foreign goods, addressing the criticism of
Engel (2002). How much this matters to trade costs is unknown.60

Differences in Preferences and Technology

   The gravity model assumes that preferences and technology are the same for all
agents. This is a strong assumption and can be relaxed in a number of directions.
  60
     Consider for example data on trade flows for U.S. states and Canadian provinces. Assume
a one-sector world. Let σH be the elasticity of substitution between goods produced within a
country and σF the elasticity of substitution between domestic and foreign goods. It is then
easily verified that the gravity equation (8) is modified as follows:

                                        Yi Yj       t1−σ
                                                     ij
                                                         H

                                Xij =         σF −σH 1−σF 1−σH                                 (27)
                                         Yw Pj,c    Pj     Πi

where Pj,c is the price index of goods imported by region j from country c in which the exporting
region i is located, Pj is the overall price index of importer j and Πi is a price index specific to
exporter i. In general the estimated trade barriers can now be different. The direction in which
they will change is not obvious though and will depend on the details. It is for example easy to
show that the estimate of the U.S.-Canada border barrier is the same as based on the standard
gravity equation (8 ) when this is the only trade barrier.



                                                58
First, it is possible that consumers in different regions or countries have different
preferences. For example, consumers may be biased towards goods produced in
their own country. Differences in preferences are, however, empirically indistin-
guishable from trade costs. Consider the following utility function for country j
consumers:                                           !           σ/(σ−1)
                                    (1−σ)/σ
                                            (cij /γij )(σ−1)/σ
                             X
                                   βi                                                       (28)
                               i

Here cij is consumption of goods produced in country i by country j consumers.
Utility generally differs across countries due to variation in the γij . It is easily
verified that in the absence of trade barriers the gravity equation is the same
as in (8) with tij replaced by γij . Under sufficiently strong restrictions on taste
differences, it is possible to distinguish trade costs from taste differences.61 Another
promising route to distinguishing the two is to exploit time series variation. Trade
costs plausibly move over time while tastes presumptively are stable.
    Evans (2003b) provides some evidence suggesting that estimates of large border
related trade barriers are not a result of a home bias for domestic goods. Infor-
mation about the size of border related barriers is usually obtained by comparing
international trade to domestic trade within a gravity framework. Evans (2003b)
estimates a traditional gravity equation to find that, after controlling for size,
distance and remoteness, domestic sales within non-U.S. OECD countries is 4.36
times imports from the United States. But she finds that the home bias is virtually
identical when comparing local sales in non-U.S. OECD countries of affiliates of
U.S. multinationals to imports from the United States. This suggests that location
is critical and not the nationality of the firm that sells the goods.
    Demand can also be different when it comes from firms buying intermediate
goods. Assume that for a specific industry the index of intermediates in the pro-
duction function differs across firms. For example, let (28) represent the index of
intermediates in the production functions of firms in country j. The same com-
ment can now be made as for heterogeneous preferences of consumers. One cannot
empirically distinguish trade barriers tij and the parameters γij in production func-
  61
    Bergstrand (1985) derives a gravity equation under a different type of heterogeneity in pref-
erences. Consumers consider the elasticity of substitution among goods produced in foreign
countries to be different from the elasticity of substitution between home and foreign goods,
where “home” and “foreign” varies with the location of the consumer.



                                                 59
tions. If production functions of firms tend to give more weight to intermediates
that are produced in their own country, it will be indistinguishable from a border
barrier. One can therefore estimate positive border barriers even if none exist.

Fixed Costs of Trade

    Bernard and Jensen (1997), Bernard and Wagner (1998) and Roberts and Ty-
bout (1997) all report substantial evidence of fixed entry costs into foreign markets.
They all show that having exported in the past significantly increases the prob-
ability of a firm exporting today. Introducing fixed costs can explain the many
zeros in bilateral trade data. Coe et al. (2002) and Evenett and Venables (2002)
also document that the number of zeros has substantially dropped over time. This
suggests that a reduction in fixed costs or growth of income can play an important
role in accounting for the growth of world trade. Evenett and Venables (2002) find
that the removal of zeros accounts for one third of developing countries’ export
growth since 1970.
    Evans (2003c) attempts to recompute the tax equivalent of proportional trade
costs for U.S. exports after controlling for fixed costs. She assumes that fixed
trade costs are borne by exporters. Once a firm has paid the sunk cost it can
export to all foreign markets. She finds that in 1992 only 25% of all U.S. firms
exported abroad. The U.S. Census of Manufactures provides data for each industry
on the proportion of U.S. output that is produced by firms that both export and
sell domestically. The output Yik of country i in industry k is then redefined
as the output of firms that sell in both domestic and foreign markets. Evans
(2003c) finds that estimates of proportional trade costs drop somewhat as a result
of this. However, there are two problems with this approach. First, she estimates
a traditional gravity equation. Second, one cannot ignore firms that only supply
varieties to the domestic market. These are import-competing firms that affect the
demand from firms in the industry that supply goods to both the domestic market
and foreign markets.
    In contrast to Evans (2003c), Klenow and Rodriguez (1997) develop a model in
which fixed costs are borne by importers.62 In that setup it is possible that firms
only export to a limited number of markets. The same would be the case if fixed
 62
      They use their model to compute welfare gains from trade liberalization.



                                               60
costs are borne by exporters but vary across export markets. Based on data for
Costa Rica from 1986 to 1993, Klenow and Rodriguez (1997) find that a drop in
tariffs from 48.5% to 22.1% over this period led to an increase in the number of
imported varieties of 30% for consumer goods and 20% for intermediate goods.
    A simple generalization of (5)-(7) takes into account fixed costs. Assume that as
a result of fixed costs in industry k country i exports to the limited set of countries
Xik and imports from the set Mik , observed from the trade flow data. When there
are positive exports from i to j the generalized gravity equation becomes
                                                                !1−σk
                                          Ejk Yik      tkij
                                 Xijk   =                                                (29)
                                           Yk         Pjk Πki
                                                           !1−σk
                                                    tkij           Ejk
                           (Πki )1−σk =
                                            X
                                                                                         (30)
                                            j∈Xik
                                                    Pjk            Yk
                                                           !1−σk
                                                    tkij           Yik
                           (Pjk )1−σk
                                            X
                                        =                              .                 (31)
                                            i∈Mjk
                                                    Πki            Yk

This setup allows for the case where firms in a country only sell to the domestic
market (import-competing firms), sell to a limited set of foreign markets, or sell to
all foreign markets. On the importing side it allows for the case where a country
only purchases domestic varieties, where it purchases a limited set of domestic
and foreign varieties and where it purchases all varieties from all countries. It can
therefore address several of the criticisms of gravity models discussed above. Note
that (29)-(31) give rise to zero trade flows independently of fixed trade costs if
either Ejk or Yik is equal to zero. These are unrestricted in conditional general
equilibrium.
    We can either estimate the structural form or estimate the log-transformation
with OLS after replacing the multilateral resistance indices with importer and
exporter dummies. In the latter case the estimates for proportional trade barriers
remain the same as before when only positive trade flows are included in the
regression. However, estimates based on aggregate gravity equations overstate
proportional trade barriers since they aggregate zero and positive trade flows. We
expect fixed costs to be a fruitful area for further research.63
  63
   Bergstrand (1985,1989,1990) and Baier and Bergstrand (2001) model the cost of distributing,
marketing and tailoring a product to an export market as a CES transformation function. Total


                                              61
IV       Evidence from Prices
Prices provide another indirect source of information about the magnitude of trade
costs. Two separate literatures shed light on trade barriers using price data, a trade
literature and a macro literature. The trade literature has focused on comparing
import or “world” prices to domestic wholesale prices. The aim is to usually
to estimate NTB’s. The macro literature compares retail prices of similar goods
across countries. The macro literature is focused on issues such as the speed of
convergence of prices across countries and the relationship between exchange rates
and prices. We will only discuss what can be learnt about the magnitude of trade
costs from this literature. Broader surveys can be found elsewhere.64


IV.A       The Trade Literature
It is useful to first introduce some notation. Consider two countries, i and j, with
i a major exporter of a particular good and j an importer. The wholesale price of
the good in country j is pj . The c.i.f. import price at the port of entry is pm
                                                                               j , while
                               x
the f.o.b. export price is pi . The literature aims to extract information about
policy barriers by comparing either the ‘world’ price pxi or port of entry import
price pmj to the domestic wholesale price pj .
    There are both conceptual and data problems associated with this method. The
main conceptual problem for our purposes is that the price comparison captures
only a limited component of the overall trade barrier tij between two countries. It
also does not accurately capture NTB’s, for which the method is designed. Data
problems take the form of measurement problems and limited data coverage.
    First consider the conceptual problems. In most reasonable models of economic
activity a large component of trade costs, often the most important component, is
borne by the exporter and then shifted onto the importer. The c.i.f. import price
includes not only the standard transport, insurance and freight costs, but also the
myriad of other costs borne by the exporter in order to bring the good to the foreign
market. The price ratio pj /pm  j therefore does not capture this portion of full trade

output of a particular good is a CES function of the quantities of that good sold to various
markets. It is not exactly clear though what the microfoundations are for this transformation
function. It leads to additional price indices in the gravity equation.
  64
     See for example Froot and Rogoff (1995) and Goldberg and Knetter (1997).


                                             62
cost. It only captures the trade costs directly borne by the importing country,
those associated with policy barriers in the form of tariffs and NTB’s, as well as
more informal trade costs borne by the importing country, such as information,
regulatory, and contract costs.
    Deardorff and Stern (1998), in their survey of the literature on the measurement
of NTB’s, explain why the price ratio pj /pm j does not necessarily capture all trade
costs associated with quotas and other NTB’s. If for example the exporting firm
has market power it may be able to extract the quota revenue for itself by raising
the import price.65 Another possibility is that a quota licence is allocated directly
to the final user of the imported good. In that case no price comparison will be able
to capture it. Finally, Voluntary Export Restraints (VER’s) allocate the quota to
exporters who presumptively build the value of their quota licenses into the export
price. The Multi-Fibre Arrangement is the most prominent example.
    The data problems besetting price comparisons are twofold: limitations of cov-
erage and imperfections in the data which do exist. As to limitations of coverage,
perhaps the main data problem, survey data on price comparisons is mostly lim-
ited to agricultural products and, to a lesser extent, textiles and clothing. Even
within these categories data are only available for certain countries and years. As
to imperfections of the data that do exist, they can be categorized in three types.
First, the wholesale price pj is not a port of entry price and therefore already con-
tains some local distribution costs. Second, the price pj is usually for a domestic
substitute of the import good or an index of imported and domestic goods. The
analyst making price comparisons must confront the issue of comparability of the
goods. Even a physically homogeneous good (such as Number 2 Red wheat) has
variations with respect to terms of delivery. The price comparison method is most
convincing where markets are thick and well organized. Third, there are timing
problems, which are particularly an issue when the import or world price is de-
nominated in another currency and a correct exchange rate needs to be used for
price comparison.
    The lack of availability of survey data on prices has led some researchers to
compute unit values (e.g. Sazanami et al. (1995)). This is only possible for
categories of goods that are sufficiently broadly defined that domestic production
  65
    Knetter (1997) provides evidence that German exporters charge substantially higher prices
to Japan due to a variety of NTB’s in Japan.


                                             63
exists and for which sensible quantity units exist. The domestic price pj is then
computed by dividing the value of domestic production by the quantity of output,
and similarly for imports. The approximations resulting from this technique tend
to be very crude and yield very different results than survey data when both are
available. The comparison is often over very dissimilar goods.
    Deardorff and Stern (1998) and Laird and Yeats (1990) both review studies that
have estimated trade barriers based on price comparisons. The overall conclusion
one reaches from the evidence is that trade barriers are very large in the agricul-
tural sector. Table 9 reproduces from Deardorff and Stern a few price comparison
measures in agriculture in the United States for 1991 and 1993. Agricultural policy
commonly starts with a price support fixed by the government, and uses quotas
or variable levies (in the case of the E.U.) to avoid supporting farmers in rest of
the world. Sugar is the most notorious example of large distortions. In 1991 the
sugar support price was equivalent to a 125% tariff, while in some years the tariff
equivalent has exceeded 300%. Protection for U.S. dairy products is also very high.
Canada also protects its agricultural sector. Deardorff and Stern report 1992 tariff
equivalents of 165% in dairy products, 28% in chicken and 29% in turkey. Other
countries have even more extreme agricultural distortions — Japan is notorious
for a domestic rice price over 10 times the world price, with similar differentials
for sugar in some years.


IV.B      The Macro Literature
The purchasing power parity literature compares retail prices of individual goods
or baskets of goods across countries. The main weakness of the literature to date
is the absence of a theoretical foundation necessary to link evidence on relative
prices across countries to trade barriers. We suggest various directions that trade
theory can be employed to extract more information from price data.
    Papers that attempt to draw a link from relative prices to trade barriers com-
monly refer to an arbitrage equation of the type
                                     1    pi
                                        ≤    ≤ tij                               (32)
                                    tij   pj

with tij the cost of arbitraging a price differential between i and j by a wholesaler.
The relative price is assumed to move freely between the arbitrage points, also

                                         64
referred to as Heckscher’s (1916) commodity points. Equation (32) is unfortunately
of limited relevance in understanding the link between price differentials and trade
costs in most markets.
    Limitations on arbitrage pose a significant limitation to using (32). In many
cases the arbitrage costs of wholesalers are prohibitive. Producers often obtain
exclusive national marketing licences, which precludes arbitrage by wholesalers.
Moreover, as pointed out by Obstfeld and Rogoff (2000), even small firms that
do not have exclusive distribution rights can price discriminate by dealing with a
small number of wholesalers with whom they have developed long-term relation-
ships. Other factors, such as warranties or small differences in products due to
regulatory constraints, also contribute to limit the ability of wholesalers to arbi-
trage price differences. Goldberg and Verboven (2001) provide explicit evidence
for the European car market showing that arbitrage activity by resellers is very
limited even though price differences are large.
    General equilibrium forces limiting price variation pose an even greater limi-
tation to using (32). Even though (32) holds in most models, the relative price
cannot freely fluctuate in the range given by Heckscher’s (1916) commodity points.
Below we will show that arbitrage alone leads to a much tighter condition. As-
suming a specific trade model can tie down the relationship between relative prices
and trade costs exactly. We will illustrate this point and examine the link between
relative prices and trade costs below in the context of a version of the Ricardian
model of Eaton and Kortum (2002).
    While we will focus this survey on evidence from price levels at a point in
time, some studies have employed evidence on changes in relative price over time
to extract information about trade costs motivated by (32). We will first briefly
review the time series evidence. The remainder of this section discusses what can
be learned from price levels at a point in time.

IV.B.1    Time Series Evidence

A well-known paper by Engel and Rogers (1996) computes the standard deviation
of relative prices between Canadian and U.S. cities for 14 consumption categories
(such as alcoholic beverages and men’s and boy’s apparel). They show that the
standard deviation of relative prices depends positively on distance and is much


                                        65
higher when two cities are separated by a border than when they are located in
the same country. They argue that this may be a result of trade barriers, as
arbitrage equation (32) suggests that larger relative price differences are possible
if trade barriers are larger. But Engel and Rogers (2001) provide evidence that
exchange rate volatility may be the main explanation for the border effect. In that
study they use evidence from cities in 11 European countries, which allows them
to compute the border effect after controlling for bilateral exchange rate volatility.
The coefficient on the border dummy drops from 2.85 to 0.21.
    Obstfeld and Taylor (1997) is another example of a study that has used price
index information. Their starting point is again (32). They estimate a threshold
autoregression (TAR) model66 , whereby the log-price differential follows a random
walk inside a band [−c, c]. It can also exit the band and will then converge back to
the band at a rate to be estimated. Their estimates for c tend to be rather small,
on average about 0.08 for the U.S. relative to other countries. Obstfeld and Taylor
interpret them as estimates of trade barriers based on arbitrage equation (32).
    Since theory tells us that relative prices are not free to fluctuate in the range
suggested by (32), it is not a correct starting point for either time series evidence
or evidence about price levels at a point in time. There are many factors that
contribute to time series variation in relative prices, such as changes in marginal
costs, trade costs, taxes, markups and exchange rates. It is hard to see how
information can be extracted about the level of trade costs from evidence on
changes in relative prices, especially without the guidance of theory.

IV.B.2       Extracting Information from Price Levels

Recent survey evidence of price levels for individual goods in cities around the
world has led to a small but promising literature aimed at extracting information
about trade costs. Since the approach that most authors have taken is rather
a-theoretical, we will first discuss some theoretical background to interpret the
findings from this literature.

Some Theoretical Background

      The price paid by the final user of a good generally contains four components:
 66
      See also Taylor (2001) and references therein.


                                                66
(i) the marginal cost of production, (ii) trade costs, (iii) various monopolistic
markups over cost in the chain from producer to final user, and (iv) subsidies
and taxes. In order to shed light on the relationship between trade costs and price
differentials we will first abstract from the last two price components. The key force
is a general equilibrium or multi-market version of arbitrage which constrains the
behavior of relative prices.
    If country i buys a good from country m the price in i will be pi = cm tmi , where
cm is the cost of production in m and tmi is one plus the tax equivalent of trade
costs on shipments from m to i. Country i will source from the producer m for
which cm tmi is the lowest. Arbitrage is done here not by consumers or wholesalers,
but by producers. If the price in market i is above cm tmi , it is profitable for the
producer in country m to undercut the existing price in country i.
    Without imposing any specific model structure, we can already say something
about the price in location i relative to the price in location j. Specifically, if it is
optimal for country i to source from country zi and country j from zj , then it must
be the case that the price in i is no larger than if it had sourced from zj and the
price in j is no larger than if it had sourced from zi . These arbitrage constraints
lead to the following inequalities
                                    tizi   pi  tiz
                                         ≤    ≤ j                                   (33)
                                    tjzi   pj  tjzj

    The arbitrage equation (33) is generally much tighter than the equation (32)
commonly referred to in the literature. As an example, consider the case where
i and j purchase the good from the same producer. If the producer is located in
country m, the relative price is equal to
                                       pi   tim
                                          =                                         (34)
                                       pj   tjm

In this case the relative price is completely tied down by trade barriers. Analogous
points were made in Deardorff (1979) in the context of forward and spot currency
trade with transactions costs.
    It also follows from (34) that trade costs do not necessarily lead to price dif-
ferentials. If both i and j face the same trade barrier with m, their relative price
is equal to one. On the other hand, in the specific case where m is one of the
two countries, the relative price captures exactly what we intend to measure. If

                                           67
m = j the relative price is tij /tjj , the trade cost between i and j relative to the
trade cost within country j. A natural strategy would be to identify the source
country for each product. The price in country i relative to the source country
is informative about international relative to local trade barriers. Unfortunately
survey data often do not tell us which country produced the good. In some cases
the price is not even for a specific good, but an index of similar goods. We will
return to these issues below.
    More can be learned about the relationship between relative price differentials
and trade costs by adopting a specific trade model with a specific economic geog-
raphy. This is useful for gaining perspective on the atheoretical literature which
looks at the geographic dispersion of prices for evidence of trade costs. We simu-
late a model to generate distributions of prices and then relate them to the trade
cost parameters we impose.
    For the trade model we will consider a variation of Eaton and Kortum (2002).
There are N countries that each have the same size labor force. There are G goods,
with an elasticity of substitution σ between them. Productivity z for each good in
each country is drawn from the Fréchet distribution with cumulative distribution
             −θ
function e−z . The variance of z is inversely related to the parameter θ.
    The countries are evenly spaced on a circle. The average trade cost for any pair
of countries is proportional to their distance on the circle. Trade costs vary across
both goods and location pairs. This extends Eaton and Kortum, who assume that
trade costs are identical across goods. The average trade cost of good g (across
location pairs) is 2tav (g − 1)/(G − 1). Average trade costs therefore vary across
goods from 0 to 2tav . The average trade cost (tax equivalent) across all goods and
location pairs is tav .
    Each country buys from the cheapest producer, so that the price of good g in
country i is
                               pgi = min(cg1 tg1i , .., cgN tgN i )              (35)
where cgj is the production cost of good g in country j and tgji is one plus the
tax equivalent of trade costs on shipments of good g from j to i. When there is
a continuum of goods, total labor demand will be the same across countries and
wage rates will be equal. The level of this common wage rate is irrelevant for the
price dispersion measures. We approximate the continuum model by simulating
the model for a large number of goods, with G = 3000.

                                         68
   In simulations of the model we compute five different price dispersion measures
that have been reported in the literature. The measures can be location-specific,
location pair-specific or good-specific. The five measures are

  1. location-specific: for given location i the average of |pgi − pgj |/(0.5pgi + 0.5pgj )
     across both goods and locations j.

  2. good-specific: average of |pgi − pg |/pg across locations i, with pg the average
     price of good g across locations.

  3. location-specific: expenditure weighted average of (pgi − pglow )/pglow across
     goods, where pglow is the lowest price across countries of good g.

  4. location pair-specific: the standard deviation of ln(pgi ) − ln(pgj ) across goods
     for a given location pair (i, j).

  5. standard deviation across both goods and countries of ln(pgi ) −             ln(pgj )/N .
                                                                            P
                                                                              j


      Particularly the third and the fourth measures have been computed with the
aim of measuring trade barriers. Bradford and Lawrence (2003) and Crucini et.al.
(2000) compute variations of measure 3 and interpret it respectively as a measure
of “fragmentation” and “cost of arbitrage”. This measure may both overstate and
understate the trade-weighted average trade barrier. If the cheapest country is m,
the price that i would pay to import from m is the price in m times the trade cost
tgmi . If the trade cost is high, it may be optimal to import from another country
with whom i has a lower trade barrier. In that case the measure overstates actual
trade costs. It may also be optimal to purchase from a domestic producer in i. In
that case the model tells us that the price difference with the cheapest country m
is equal to the difference in production cost between i and m. The latter is smaller
than the trade barrier between i and m (otherwise i would import from m) and
may even be zero (if i is itself the cheapest country).
      Parsley and Wei (2002) compute measure 4. They justify it based on the
arbitrage equation (32). Assuming the same trade barrier for all goods, and that
the relative prices between i and j are evenly dispersed in this no-arbitrage zone,
there is indeed a direct relationship between the trade barrier between i and j
and the standard deviation of these relative prices across goods. But arbitrage


                                           69
equation (32) is not a good starting point for relating price differences to trade
barriers. Two extreme examples make the point. First assume that trade costs are
so large that there is no trade. In that case price differences are entirely driven by
differences in local production costs, which in general bear no relationship to trade
costs. As a second example assume that i and j buy all goods from country m,
with whom they have the same trade barrier for each good. The price dispersion
measure will then be zero, even though trade costs may be very large.
    Table 10 provides some results of model simulations for various model param-
eters. Only average price dispersion measures are reported (e.g. across location
pairs or goods). Apart from the assumed average trade cost, the table also re-
ports the trade-weighted average and the ideal index. The latter is the common
international trade barrier (across goods and countries) that leads to the same ag-
gregate international trade as implied by the assumed trade barriers. All reported
numbers are in percentages. The trade-weighted average trade cost is much lower
than the arithmetic average since international shipments tend to be limited to
countries with whom the producer has a low trade barrier. Clusters of countries of
varying sizes are formed, with one member of the cluster being the single source of
production for all members of the cluster. The ideal index always lies in between
the arithmetic average and trade-weighted average barrier.
    Table 10 shows that even if trade barriers are the only source of price dis-
persion, it is hard to conclude much about the magnitude of trade barriers from
the average price dispersion measures. Rows (i)-(ix) show results for 9 different
parameterizations. All price dispersion measures are far below the ideal index.
There is also no apparent relationship with the trade-weighted average index. If
we lower the elasticity of substitution σ from 4 to 1, the trade-weighted average
barrier rises but the price dispersion measures (other than the third) remain un-
changed. If we remove the variation of trade barriers across locations and goods,
the trade-weighted average barrier rises from 31% to 100% but the price dispersion
measures change very little. When we raise the number of countries from 10 to 20,
the trade-weighted average barrier drops, while the third price dispersion measure
rises. All price dispersion measures drop relative to the trade-weighted average
barrier when the average trade cost is increased or θ is lowered.
    Even if we knew the model and the parameters of the model other than trade
costs, it would still be impossible to conclude much about the magnitude of trade

                                         70
costs, whether the arithmetic or trade-weighted average or the ideal index. The
reason is that we do not know the distribution of trade costs across goods and
location pairs.
    While average price dispersion measures are not very informative about trade
costs, the variation of price dispersion across location pairs and goods is. This is
illustrated in panels A and B of Figure 2 based on representative simulations of
the model. Panel A shows the fourth price dispersion measure for each location
pair as a function of the average trade cost for that location pair. Price dispersion
is clearly higher for location pairs that have higher average trade costs. Panel
B shows a similar result for goods based on the second price dispersion measure.
Average price dispersion for a particular good (across location pairs) depends on
the particular productivity draws for that good from the Fréchet distribution and
therefore has some randomness to it. Each point in the panel represents the average
for 10 goods. It is clear that price dispersion tends to rise for goods with higher
trade barriers.
    These findings can be exploited empirically. For example, one can specify a
trade cost function like (11), relating trade cost across location pairs to distance
and other observable characteristics that are associated with trade barriers. One
can similarly add good-specific characteristics to the trade cost function. The
parameters of the trade cost function can be estimated by using the variation of
price dispersion across location pairs and goods. We will return to this in the
discussion of empirical evidence below.
    So far we have abstracted from the two other components of prices, associated
with taxes and markups. We have also abstracted from differences in domestic
trade costs across countries. Introducing domestic trade costs and taxes is rela-
tively easy. The equilibrium prices in the model above then need to be multiplied
by the ad-valorem tax equivalent of domestic trade costs and taxes. This affects
the price dispersion measures to the extent that taxes and local trade costs vary
across countries.
    Variable markups also affect price differences. Markups depend on factors
such as the price elasticity of demand and the market share of an oligopolist. In
practice one of the most important factors affecting markups is nominal exchange
rate volatility combined with nominal price rigidities in the buyer’s currency. To
the extent that exporters set prices in the buyer’s currency, the relative price for

                                         71
the same good across two countries will fluctuate one-for-one with the exchange
rate during the time that prices remain set. The profit margin of the exporter will
fluctuate accordingly.67
    To illustrate the impact of these additional sources of price dispersion, we
multiply the equilibrium prices by tgi for good g in location i. This captures local
taxes and distribution costs. One can make an argument that it also captures ex-
post markup variation due to exchange rate volatility and price rigidities, although
introducing such features would require a substantial modification of the model.
As an illustration we will assume that ln(tgi ) has a standard deviation of 23%
across goods and countries, including country and good-specific components with
standard deviations of both 5%.
    Rows (x)-(xii) of Table 10 show the average price dispersion moments which
result from introducing variation in ln tgi . It further illustrates that average price
dispersion measures tell us very little about trade barriers. For example, doubling
the average trade barrier from 100% to 200% has remarkably little effect on the
price dispersion measures. It is again the case that much more can be learned from
the variation in price dispersion across location pairs and goods. Panels C and D
of Figure 2 show that across both location pairs and goods there remains a strong
positive relationship between price dispersion and trade costs, even though it is
somewhat clouded by the additional sources of price dispersion.

Evidence from Survey Data

    Various authors have computed measures of price dispersion, using survey data
for disaggregated goods from the OECD, Eurostat and the Economist Intelligence
Unit. Table 11 lists the papers that have computed the five price dispersion mea-
sures discussed above, as well as the data samples. Average price dispersion mea-
sures are listed in the last row of both Table 10 and 11. While some papers
consider a much broader set of countries, for comparability we only report results
for industrialized countries (mostly European countries).
  67
     Essentially the same outcome occurs when the exporter sets the price in its own currency,
but domestic distributors in the importing country (importers, wholesalers, retailers) absorb the
exchange rate fluctuations in their profit margins by setting the price fixed in the local currency.
See Bacchetta and van Wincoop (2003) for a model along this line, which shows that such price
setting behavior may be optimal for both exporters and importers.


                                                72
    Table 10 shows that the average price dispersion numbers in the data are not
too far from those in the model when other sources of price dispersion are included.
But since this can be said for an average trade barrier in the model of 100% as well
as for an average trade barrier of 200%, we cannot expect to learn much about
trade barriers from this.
    We saw that more can be learned by exploiting the variation of price dispersion
across location pairs and goods. Parsley and Wei (2001,2002) and Crucini et al.
(2000) have related location pair-specific price dispersion measures to observables
associated with trade barriers, while Crucini et al. (2000,2001) have related good-
specific price dispersion measures to various characteristics of goods. These studies
confirm that variation of price dispersion across location pairs and goods is related
to variation in trade barriers across locations and goods. This is consistent with
the results from the model we discussed. The main weakness of the literature so
far is that the empirical work is not based on any particular trade model.
    Parsley and Wei (2002) regress the location pair-specific fourth price dispersion
measure, the standard deviation of ln(pgi )−ln(pgj ) across goods, on various variables
related to trade frictions. These include distance, common language, exchange rate
volatility, membership of a currency union and average tariff rate. Using data for
14 U.S. cities and cities in 69 other countries, they find that such regressions have
a high adjusted R2 in the range of 0.7 to 0.8.
    Parsley and Wei are particularly interested in an estimate of the reduction in
the tariff equivalent of trade barriers associated with currency unions. They find
that the price dispersion measure is reduced by 3.2% for non-EMU country pairs
with the same currency and by 4.3% for EMU countries, relative to countries that
do not have a common currency. They transform these into tax equivalents by
using that a 1% tariff reduction reduces the price dispersion measure by 0.86%.
The reduction in the tax equivalent of trade barriers is then 3.7% for non-EMU
countries in a currency union and 5% for EMU countries. These are much lower
estimates of international trade barriers than those based on trade volume data in
the gravity literature. The important difference though is that there is a theoretical
foundation for estimates based on gravity equations. Theory does not predict a
simple linear relationship between price dispersion and trade barriers.
    Parsley and Wei (2001) apply the same method to relative prices between
Japanese and U.S. cities for 27 goods. They find that price dispersion is positively

                                          73
related to distance and the presence of a border between two cities. They also find
that the importance of the border has declined during their 1976-1997 sample.
Nominal exchange rate volatility and shipping costs help account for the border
effect, but do not explain the decline in the border effect over time.
     Crucini et al. (2000) run a regression of a different price dispersion measure
on distance and distance squared. Their price dispersion measure for location pair
                      g    g
(i, j) is G                     g
           g=1 (1/G)|pi − pj |/p . This is similar to the first price dispersion measure
         P

discussed above. Applying it to data for 13 European countries from the mid
1980s, they find distance to be highly significant, with an R2 of 0.53.
     Crucini et al. (2001) consider the relationship between price dispersion and
goods characteristics. They do not particularly focus on trade costs, but one of
their results is closely related to trade costs. They find a negative relationship
between good-specific price dispersion (measure 2 above) and the level of trade for
each good. The latter is defined as aggregate trade among the countries in the
sample divided by aggregate output. Since more trade is associated with lower
trade barriers, this result is consistent with a positive relationship between price
dispersion and trade barriers.
     While the results from this literature do not yet reveal much about the mag-
nitude of actual trade barriers, they suggest that exploiting the variation of price
dispersion across goods and location pairs is a natural direction to go to learn
about the size of trade barriers. This needs to be done in the context of a trade
model that incorporates all major sources of price differentials: international trade
costs, domestic trade costs, taxes and markups.
     Which theoretical approach to adopt depends on the nature of the survey data.
There are three different types of data. The first category gives us information
about prices of a particular brand (particular make and model) in different loca-
tions and also tells us the location of the producer of that brand. An example of
this is data on automobile prices for particular makes and models. The second
type of data also gives detailed price information for a particular brand in various
locations, but does not provide sufficient information that allows for identification
of the producer of the brand. An example of this is the Eurostat survey data.
The third type of price data is not for particular brands, but for an average of
representative brands in a sector. An example of this is the OECD survey data.68
  68
       Bradford and Lawrence (2003) provide a description of the aggregation procedures adopted


                                               74
    The first type of data is the most informative about trade costs, but detailed
information of this type is quite rare. In the absence of local trade costs, markups
and taxes, the trade barrier is revealed by the price relative to that in the producer’s
country. But of course local trade costs, markups and taxes are not zero and
some modeling is still required to extract information about trade barriers. A
nice illustration is Goldberg and Verboven (2001), who develop a model for the
European car market. They only consider one type of trade barrier, quotas for
Japanese cars, but their approach could be used more broadly to estimate trade
barriers. The price paid by consumers is equal to marginal cost times a wholesale
price markup, times an exogenous dealer markup, times the gross value added
tax rate, times trade costs associated with quotas. The marginal cost is defined
to include the cost of local distribution and marketing in the destination market,
which depends on the wage rate in the destination market. The markup charged
by producers is endogenous and depends on both the supply and demand side of
the model. Estimation of the parameters of the model, together with data on taxes
and exogenous dealer markups, then yields an estimate of trade costs associated
with quota.
    Next consider the second type of data, where we do not know the location of
the producer. One can of course make an informed guess about who the producer
is. Otherwise we need a general equilibrium model to tell us which country is
the likely producer of a product. As an illustration consider again the Eaton
and Kortum (1992) model. Production costs for each country are not known
exactly, only the distribution from which these costs are drawn. For each good in
country i we know the probabilities that it is sourced from various countries. The
distribution from which the set of relative prices is drawn is therefore known and
can be used to estimate trade barriers after assuming a specific trade cost function.
For realism the Eaton and Kortum model would need to be extended to allow for
local distribution costs, taxes and markups.
    Finally consider the case where the price data are not for individual brands,
but for an average of prices of various brands of a category of consumption. This
may actually make it easier to extract information about trade costs. In this case
we can straightforwardly apply the gravity model without having to make any
by the OECD.



                                          75
specific assumptions about the production structure. Simply equating aggregate
demand and aggregate supply, assuming a constant elasticity demand structure,
yields (6) and (7):
                                                          !1−σk
                                                   tkij           Ejk
                             (Πki )1−σk
                                              X
                                          =
                                               j   Pjk            Yk
                                                          !1−σk
                                                   tkij           Yik
                             (Pjk )1−σk
                                              X
                                          =                           .
                                               i   Πki            Yk

Theory implies that the equilibrium price indices Pik for consumption category (or
sector) k are an implicit function of aggregate demand and supply in every country
and all bilateral trade barriers. After adopting a specific trade cost function the
equilibrium price indices will depend on observables and parameters of the trade
cost function that need to be estimated. If we interpret the price data for con-
sumption categories as the Pik , plus measurement error, the trade cost parameters
can be estimated with non-linear least squares.69
    In applying this approach some other realistic features need to be added. First,
one needs to allow for tax differences across countries and goods. Second, local
trade costs tii are probably better modeled as a function of both local wages and
internal distance. Direct information on local distribution costs may be used as
well. Third, as discussed in section III, introducing fixed costs makes it possible to
capture the fact that brands from only a limited number of suppliers are purchased
by a country. Using information about the set of suppliers to each country will
then make it possible to solve for the price indices Pik from (30) and ( 31).


V      Conclusion
Trade costs are large when broadly defined to include all costs involved in getting a
good from producer to final user. Both international trade costs and local distribu-
tion costs are very large and together dominate the marginal cost of production.
Trade costs also vary widely across countries. On average developing countries
have significantly larger trade costs, by a factor of two or more in some important
  69
    It is possible that the average price data are not representative of the various brands con-
sumed and therefore not a good proxy for Pik . An alternative approach is to use price data for
individual brands from the second type of data and aggregate those up to the price indices Pik .


                                              76
categories. Trade costs also vary widely across product lines, by factors of as much
as 10 or more. The patterns of variation make some economic sense, but we think
more sense can still be extracted.
    Better measurement of trade costs is highly desirable. The quality of the ex-
isting measures is low and can feasibly be improved. Direct measures of policy
barriers are scandalously difficult to find and to use, considering the importance
of trade policy in overall international policy-making and to potential welfare-
improving changes. Transport cost data could relatively easily be improved greatly.
Estimates based on the structural gravity models can also be improved. Exten-
sions of existing gravity models, better treatment of aggregation and endogeneity
problems and better estimates of substitution elasticities are all likely to improve
our understanding of trade costs.
    Our focus is on measuring the costs, only glancingly with their explanation.
Ultimately, the profession should proceed to explanation. There is undoubtedly a
rich relationship between domestic and international trade costs, market structure
and political economy. Some trade costs provide benefits, and it is likely that the
pursuit of benefits partly explains the costs.




                                        77
                                         References

Alesina, Alberto and Robert J. Barro and Silvana Tenreyro (2002), “Optimum Currency
       Unions,” NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2002.
Anderson, James E. (1979), “A Theoretical Foundation for the Gravity Equation,” Amer-
       ican Economic Review, 1979, 69(1), pp. 106-116.
—————– (1994), “The Theory of Protection”, Surveys in International Trade, David
       Greenaway and L. Alan Winters, eds., Oxford: Blackwell Publishers, 107-138.
—————- (1998), “Effective Protection Redux”, Journal of International Economics,
       44, 21-44.
—————– (2000), “Why Do Nations Trade (So Little)?” Pacific Economic Review 5,
       115-134, 2000.
Anderson, James E. and Douglas Marcouiller (2002), “Insecurity and the Pattern of Trade:
       An Empirical Investigation,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 84(2), 345-352.
Anderson, James E. and J. Peter Neary, (1994), “The Trade Restrictiveness of the Multi-
       Fibre Arrangement”, World Bank Economic Review, 8(2), 171-189.
———————————, (1996), “A New Approach to Evaluating Trade Policy”, Review
       of Economic Studies, 63, 107-125.
———————————, (2003), “The Mercantilist Index of Trade Policy”, International
       Economic Review, 44, 627-649.
Anderson, James E. and Eric van Wincoop (2003), “Gravity with Gravitas: A Solution
       to the Border Puzzle,” American Economic Review, March 2003, 93, 170-192.
Anderson, James E. and Eric van Wincoop, (2002), “Borders, Trade and Welfare”, Brook-
       ings Trade Forum 2001, Susan Collins and Dani Rodrik, eds., Washington: The
       Brookings Institution, 207-244.
Anderson, Michael A. and Smith, Stephen L.S. (1999a), “Canadian Provinces in World
       Trade: Engagement and Detachment,” Canadian Journal of Economics , 32(1),
       pp. 23-37.
—————————— (1999b), “Do National Borders Really Matter? Canada-U.S. Re-
       gional Trade Reconsidered,” Review of International Economics, 7(2), pp. 219-227.
Bacchetta, Philippe and Eric van Wincoop. “Why do Consumer Prices React Less than
       Import Prices to Exchange Rates?,” Journal of the European Economic Associa-
       tion, forthcoming, 2003.
Baier, Scott L and Jeffrey H. Bergstrand (2001), “The Growth of World Trade: Tariffs,


                                          78
       Transport Costs and Income Similarity,” Journal of International Economics 53,
       2001, 1-27.
—————————————————- (2003), “Endogenous Free Trade Agreements and
       the Gravity Equation”, Notre Dame University.
Balistreri, Edward J. and Russell H. Hillberry (2002), “Trade Frictions and Welfare in
       the Gravity Model: How much of the Iceberg Melts?,” working paper, U.S. Inter-
       national Trade Commission, 2002.
Barro, Robert J. and Silvana Tenreyro (2002), “Economic Effects of Currency Unions,”
       working paper, Harvard University, 2002.
Bergstrand, Jeffrey H. (1985), “The Gravity Equation in International Trade: Some
       Microeconomic Foundations and Empirical Evidence,” Review of Economics and
       Statistics, 1985, 67(3), pp. 474-81.
———————– (1989), “The Generalized Gravity Equation, Monopolistic Competition,
       and the Factor-Proportions Theory in International Trade,” Review of Economics
       and Statistics, 1989, 71(1), pp. 143-53.
———————– (1990), “The Heckscher-Ohlin-Samuelson Model, the Linder Hypothesis
       and the Determinants of Bilateral Intra-Industry Trade,” The Economic Journal,
       1990, 100, pp. 1216-29.
Bernard, Andrew B. and J, Bradford Jensen (2003), “Why Some Firms Export,” Review
       of Economics and Statistics, 2003, forthcoming.
Bernard, Andrew B. and Joachim Wagner (2001), “Export Entry and Exit by German
       Firms”, Weltwirtschaftliches Archiv, 2001, 137(2), pp. 105-123.
Bradford, Scott C. and Robert Z. Lawrence (2003) “Paying the Price: The Cost of Frag-
       mented International Markets,” Institute of International Economics: Washington
       DC, forthcoming.
Broda, Christian and John Romalis (2003), “Identifying the Relationship between Trade
       and Exchange Rate Volatility,” working paper, Chicago GSB.
Brown W. Mark (2003), “Overcoming Distance, Overcoming Borders: Comparing North
       American Regional Trade,” Research Paper 8, 2003, Micro-Economic Analysis
       Division, Statistics Canada.
Brown, W. Mark and William P. Anderson (2002), “Spatial Markets and the Potential
       for Economic Integration between Canadian and U.S. Regions,”          Papers in
       Regional Science, 2002, 81, 99-120.
Burstein, Ariel, Joao C. Neves and Sergio Rebelo (2003), “Distribution Costs and Real

                                         79
       Exchange Rate Dynamics During Exchange-Rate-Based Stabilizations,” Journal
       of Monetary Economics 50, 1189-1214.
Chen, Natalie A. (2002), “Intra-national Versus International Trade in the European
       Union: Why Do National Borders Matter?”, CEPR Discussion Paper 3402.
Coe, David T., Arvind Subramanian and Natalia T. Tamirisa (2002), “The Missing Glob-
       alization Puzzle,” IMF Working Paper, August 2002.
Coulombe, Serge (2002), “Border Effects and North American Economic Integration,”
       working paper, University of Ottawa.
Crucini, Mario J., Chris I. Telmer and Marios Zachariadis (2001) “Understanding Euro-
       pean Real Exchange Rates,” working paper, Vanderbilt University.
Crucini, Mario J., Chris I. Telmer and Marios Zachariadis (2000) “Dispersion in Real
       Exchange Rates,” working paper, Vanderbilt University.
Crucini, Mario J. and Mototsugu Shintani (2002) “Persistence in Law-of-One Price De-
       viations: Evidence from Micro-Data,” working paper No 02-W22, Vanderbilt Uni-
       versity.
Davis, Donald R. (1998), “The Home Market Effect, Trade and Industrial Structure”,
       American Economic Review, 88, 1264-1276.
Deardorff, Alan V (1998), “Determinants of Bilateral Trade: Does Gravity Work in a Neo-
       classical World?,” in J.A. Frankel, ed., The Regionalization of the World Economy.
       Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1998, pp. 7-32.
———————– (1979), “One-way Arbitrage and Its Implications for the Foreign Ex-
       change Markets”, Journal of Political Economy, 87, 351-364.
Deardorff, Alan V. and Robert M. Stern, (1998), Measurement of Nontariff Barriers, Ann
       Arbor: University of Michigan Press.
Eaton, Jonathan and Samual Kortum (2002) “Technology, Geography and Trade,” Econo-
       metrica, 2002, 70(5), 1741-1779.
Engel, Charles (2002), “Comment on Anderson and van Wincoop” in Brookings Trade
       Forum 2001, Susan Collins and Dani Rodrik, eds., Washington: The Brookings
       Institution.
Engel, Charles and John H. Rogers (2001). “Deviations from Purchasing Power Parity:
       Causes and Welfare Costs,” Journal of International Economics , 55, 29-57.
——————————–, (1996), ”How Wide is the Border?”, American Economic Re-
       view, 86:1112-1125.
——————————-, (2000), ”Relative Price Volatility: What Role Does the Border

                                           80
       Play?,” in Gregory Hess and Eric van Wincoop, eds., Intranational Macroeco-
       nomics, (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge), 92-111.
Estevadeordal, Antoni, Brian Frantz and Alan M. Taylor (2003), “The Rise and Fall of
       World Trade, 1870-1939,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 68(2), 359-408, 2003.
Evans, Carolyn L. (2003a). “The Economic Significance of National Border Effects,”
       American Economic Review 93(4), 1291-1312, 2003.
—————- (2003b). “Home Bias in Trade: Location or Foreign-ness?,” working paper,
       2001a.
—————-, (2003c). “Border Effects and the Availability of Domestic Products Abroad,”
       working paper, Board of Governors, 2003.
—————- (2001). “The Costs of Outsourcing,” working paper, 2001b.
Evenett, Simon J. and Anthony Venables, (2002), “ Export Growth in Developing Coun-
       tries: Market Entry and Bilateral Trade Flows,” working paper, London School of
       Economics.
Feenstra, Robert C. (2003), Advanced International Trade: Theory and Evidence, Prince-
       ton University Press, 2003.
——————, (2002), “The Gravity Equation in International Economics: Theory and
       Evidence,” Scottish Journal of Political Economy , 49(5), 2002, 491-506.
—————— (1994), “New Product Varieties and the Measurement of International
       Prices,” American Economic Review, 1994, 84(1), 157-177.
—————– (1998), “Integration of Trade and Disintegration of Production in the Global
       Economy”, Journal of Economic Perspectives, 12, 31-50.
Frankel, Jeffrey A. and Shang-Jin Wei (1997), “ASEAN in a Regional Perspective,” in J.
       Hicklin, D. Robinson and A. Singh, eds., Macroeconomic Issues Facing ASEAN
       Countries. Washington, DC: International Monetary Fund, 1997.
Frankel, Jeffrey, Ernesto Stein and Shang-jin Wei (1998), “Continental Trading Blocs:
       Are They Natural or Supernatural?” in J.A. Frankel ed.,      The Regionalization
       of the World Economy. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 91-113.
Froot, Kenneth A. and Kenneth Rogoff (1995) “Perspectives on PPP and Long-Run Real
       Exchange Rates,” in Gene M. Grossman and Kenneth Rogoff, eds., Handbook of
       International Economics, volume 3, Elsevier: Amsterdam, 1645-1729.
Ghosh, Atish and Holger C. Wolf (1994), “Pricing in International Markets: Lessons from
       the Economist,” NBER Working Paper 4806, July 1994.
Glick, Reuven and Andrew K. Rose (2002), “Does a Currency Union Affect Trade? The

                                          81
       Time Series Evidence”, European Economic Review, 46, 1125-1151.
Goldberg, Pinelopi Koujianou and Michael M. Knetter (1997) “Goods Prices and Ex-
       change Rates: What Have we Learned?,” Journal of Economic Literature , vol.
       35, no. 3, 1243-1272.
Goldberg, Pinelopi Koujianou and Frank Verboven (2001), “The Evolution of Price Dis-
       persion in European Car Markets”, Review of Economic Studies, 68, 811-48.
Gould, David M. (1994), “Immigrant Links to the Home Country: Empirical Implications
       for U.S. Bilateral Trade Flows,” Review of Economics and Statistics 76:2, May,
       pp.302-316.
Grossman, Gene (1998), “Comment on Deardorff”, in J.A. Frankel ed., The Regional-
       ization of the World Economy. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1998, pp.
       33-57.
Harrigan, James (1993), “OECD Imports and Trade Barriers in 1983,” Journal of Inter-
       national Economics 34, 1993, 91-111.
Harrigan, James (2002) “Specialization and the Volume of Trade: Do the Data Obey the
       Laws?,” in Kwan Choi and James Harrigan, eds. The Handbook of International
       Trade, London: Basil Blackwell, 2002.
Haveman, Jon and Hummels, David (1999), “Alternative Hypotheses and the Volume
       of Trade: Evidence on the Extent of Specialization,” Mimeo, Krannert School of
       Management, Purdue University, 1999.
Head, Keith and Thierry Mayer (2000), “Non-Europe: The Magnitude and Causes of
       Market Fragmentation in the EU,” Weltwirtschaftliches Archiv 136(2), 2000, 284-
       314.
—————————– (2001) “Illusory Border Effects: Distance Mismeasurement Inflates
       Estimates of Home Bias in Trade,” working paper, 2001.
Head, Keith and John Ries (2001), “Increasing Returns versus National Product Dif-
       ferentiation as an Explanation for the Pattern of U.S.-Canada Trade,” American
       Economic Review, 91(4), pp. 858-876.
—————————- (1998), “Immigration and Trade Creation: Evidence from Canada”,
       Canadian Journal of Economics, 31, 47-62.
Heckscher, E.F. “Växelkursens Grundval vid Pappersmyntfot, Ekonomisk Tidskrift, Oc-
       tober 1916, 18, 309-312.
Helliwell, John F. (1996), “Do National Boundaries Matter for Quebec’s Trade?”, Cana-
       dian Journal of Economics, 29, pp. 507-22.

                                         82
———————– (1997), “National Borders, Trade and Migration,” Pacific Economic
       Review, 2(3), pp. 165-185.
———————– (1998), How Much Do National Borders Matter?. Washington, D.C.:
       The Brookings Institution.
———————– (1999), “Perspectives on North American Free Trade: Effects of the
       Canada-United States Free Trade Agreement on Interprovincial Trade,” Industry
       Canada Research Publications Program, No. 5, April 1999.
———————– (2003), “Border Effects: Assessing Their Implications for Canadian Pol-
       icy in a North American Context,” working paper, University of British Columbia.
Helliwell, John F. and Frank C. Lee (1999), “Effects of the Canada-United States Free
       Trade Agreement on Interprovincial Trade,” Industry Canada Research Publica-
       tion Program, Paper 5, April 1999.
Helliwell, John F. and McCallum, John (1995), “National Borders Still Matter for Trade,”
       Policy Options, 16, pp. 44-48.
Helliwell, John F. and Verdier, Genevieve (2001), “Measuring Internal Trade Distances: A
       New Method Applied to Estimate Provincial Border Effects in Canada,” Canadian
       Journal of Economics, 34(4), 1024-1041.
Hillberry, Russell (1998), “Regional Trade and the Medicine Line: The National Border
       Effect in U.S. Commodity Flow Data,” Journal of Borderlands Studies, 8(2), pp.
       1-17.
Hillberry, Russell (2002), “Aggregation Bias, Compositional Change and the Border Ef-
       fect”, Canadian Journal of Economics, 35, 3, 2002, 517-530.
Hillberry, Russell and David Hummels (2002a), “Intra-National Home Bias: Some Ex-
       planations,” NBER Working Paper 9022, Review of Economics and Statistics,
       forthcoming.
Hillberry, Russell and David Hummels (2002b), “Explaining Home Bias in Consumption:
       The Role of Intermediate Input Trade”, National Bureau of Economic Research
       (Cambridge, MA) Working Paper No. 9020.
Hufbauer, Gary and Kimberly Ann Elliott (1994), Measuring the Cost of Protection in
       the United States, Washington: Institute for International Economics.
Hummels, David (2001a), “Toward a Geography of Trade Costs”, working paper, Purdue
       University.
————– (2001b), “Time as a Trade Barrier,” working paper, Purdue University.
————– (1999), “Have International Transportation Costs Declined?”, working paper,

                                          83
       Purdue University.
Hummels, David, Jun Ishii and Kei-Mu Yi (2001), “The Nature and Growth of Vertical
       Specialization in World Trade,” Journal of International Economics, 54, 75-96.
Kelejian, H.H. and Ingmar R. Prucha (1999), “A Generalized Moments Estimator for the
       Autoregressive Parameter in a Spatial Model,” International Economic Review
       40, 509-533.
Kim, Namdoo (1996), Measuring the Costs of Visible Protection in Korea, Washington:
       Institute for International Economics.
Klenow, Peter J. and Andres Rodriguez-Clare (1997), “Quantifying Variety Gains from
       Trade Liberalization,” working paper.
Knetter, Michael. “Why Are Retail Prices in Japan So High?: Evidence from German
       Export Prices,” International Journal of Industrial Organization , August 1997,
       549-572.
Lai, Huiwen and Daniel Trefler (2002), “The Gains from Trade with Monopolistic Com-
       petition: Specification, Estimation and Mis-specification”, NBER Working Paper
       No. 9169.
Laird, Sam and Alexander Yeats (1990), Quantitative Methods for Trade-Barrier Analysis,
       New York: New York University Press.
Lee, Jong-Wha and Phillip Swagel. “Trade Barriers and Trade Flows Across Countries
       and Industries,” The Review of Economics and Statistics, 1995.
Limao, Nuno and Anthony J. Venables (2001), “Infrastructure, Geographical Disadvan-
       tage, Transport Costs and Trade,” World Bank Economic Review, 15, 451-79.
Lopez-Cordova, Ernesto J. and Christopher M. Meissner (2003), “Exchange Rate Regimes
       and International Trade: Evidence from the Classical Gold Standard Era”, Amer-
       ican Economic Review, 93(1), 344-353.
Melitz, Jacques (2003), “Language and Foreign Trade”, working paper, University of
       Strathclyde.
Messerlin, Patrick (2001), Measuring the Cost of Protection in Europe, Washington:
       Institute for International Economics.
Millimet, Daniel L. and Thomas Osang (2001), “Do State Borders Matter for U.S. In-
       tranational Trade? The Role of History and Internal Migration,” working paper,
       Southern Methodist University.
McCallum, John (1995), “National Borders Matter: Canada-U.S. Regional Trade Pat-
       terns,” American Economic Review, 85(3), pp. 615-623.

                                          84
Minondo, Asier (2002), “Borders and Trade in Europe: A Fresh Analysis on the Ex-
       tent of the Home-Bias Effect,” working paper, Universidad de Deusto-ESTE, San
       Sebastian.
Nitsch, Volker (2000), “National Borders and International Trade: Evidence from the
       European Union,” Canadian Journal of Economics 33(4), 1091-1105.
Obstfeld, Maurice and Kenneth Rogoff (2000), “The Six Major Puzzles in International
       Macroeconomics. Is There a Common Cause?”, in B.S. Bernanke and K. Rogoff,
       eds., NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2000. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2000, pp.
       339-390.
Obstfeld, Maurice and Alan M. Taylor. “Nonlinear Aspects of Goods-Market Arbi-
       trage and Adjustment: Heckscher’s Commodity Points Revisited,” Journal of
       the Japanese and International Economies, December 1997, vol. 11, 441-479.
O’Connel, Paul G.J. and Shang-Jin Wei (2002), “The Bigger They Are, the Harder They
       Fall: Retail Price Differences across U.S. cities,” Journal of International Eco-
       nomics 56, 21-53.
O’Rourke, Kevin H. and Jeffrey G. Williamson (1999), Globalization and History: The
       Evolution of a Nineteenth Century Atlantic Economy, Cambridge: MIT Press.
Parsley, David C. and Shang-Jin Wei (2001). “Explaining the Border Effect: The Role of
       Exchange Rate Variability, Shipping Costs and Geography,”       Journal of Inter-
       national Economics, 55(1), 87-105.
————————– (2002) “Currency Arrangements and Goods Market Integration: A
       Price Based Approach,” working paper, Vanderbilt University.
Portes, Richard and Helene Rey (2002), “The Determinants of Cross-Border Equity Trans-
       action Flows,” working paper, London Business School.
Rauch, James E. and Vitor Trindade (2002), ”Ethnic Chinese Networks in International
       Trade”, Review of Economics and Statistics, 84, 116-30.
Ritschl, Albrecht and Nikolaus Wolf (2003). “Endogeneity of Currency Areas and Trade
       Blocs: Evidence from the Inter-War Period,” working paper, Humboldt University.
Roberts, Mark and James Tybout (1997), ”The Decision to Export in Colombia: An
       Empirical Model of Entry with Sunk Costs,” American Economic Review , 87, pp.
       545-564.
Rose, Andrew K. (2003), “The Effect of Common Currencies on International Trade: A
       Meta-Analysis”, forthcoming in Volbert Alexander, Jacques Melitz and George
       M. von Furstenberg, eds., Monetary Unions and Hard Pegs: Effects on Trade,

                                          85
        Financial Development and Stability.
Rose, Andrew K. and Eric van Wincoop (2001), “National Money as a Barrier to Trade:
        The Real Case for Currency Union,” American Economic Review Papers and Pro-
        ceedings, 2001, 91(2), pp. 386-390.
Rose, Andrew K. (2000), “One Money, One Market: Estimating the Effect of Common
        Currencies on Trade”, Economic Policy, 30, pp. 7-45.
Sazanami, Yoko, Shujiro Urate and Hiroki Kawai (1995), Measuring the Costs of Pretec-
        tion in Japan, Washington: Institute for International Economics.
Staiger, Robert W. and Frank A. Wolak (1994), “Measuring Industry Specific Protec-
        tion: Antidumping in the United States”, Brookings Papers in Economic Activity:
        Microeconomics, 51-118.
Taylor, Alan M. (2001), “Potential Pitfalls for the Purchasing-Power-Parity Puzzle? Sam-
        pling and Specification Biases in Mean-Reversion Tests of the Law of One Price,”
        Econometrica, 69, 473-98.
Tchamourliyski, Yuriy (2002), “Distance and Bilateral Trade: The Role of Non-Homothetic
        Preferences,” working paper, Boston College.
Trefler, Daniel (1993) “Trade Liberalization and the Theory of Endogenous Protection:
        An Econometric Study of U.S. Import Policy,” Journal of Political Economy 101:1,
        138-160.
Wei, Shang-Jin (1996), “Intra-national versus Inter-national Trade: How Stubborn are
        Nations in Global Integration?,” National Bureau of Economic Research (Cam-
        bridge, MA) Working Paper No. 5531.
Wolf, Holger (2000a), “(Why) Do Borders Matter For Trade?”, in G.D. Hess and E. van
        Wincoop, eds., Intranational Macroeconomics. Cambridge: Cambridge University
        Press, pp. 112-128.
———— (2000b) “Intranational Home Bias in Trade,” Review of Economics and Statis-
        tics, 82(4), 555-563.
Yi, Kei-Mu (2003a) “Can Vertical Specialization Explain the Growth of World Trade?,”
        Journal of Political Economy, 111(1), 52-102.
———- (2003b). “A Simple Explanation for the Border Effect,” working paper, Federal
        Reserve Bank of New York.
Zhang Shuguang, Zhang Yansheng and Wan Zhongxin (1998), Measuring the Costs of
        Protection in China, Washington: Institute for International Economics.



                                          86
          Table 1: Percentage of Countries with Data in TRAINS

                 All Countries          OECD CountriesOECD Countries
 Year   Tariff    NTB Trade      All    Tariff NTB Trade      All
 1989     0.8      1.7    1.7    0.8      0.0   0.0     5.6    0.0
 1990     1.7      0.8     2.5    0.0     0.0   0.0     5.6    0.0
 1991     6.6      5.8    11.6    0.8    11.1  16.7    27.8    0.0
 1992    10.7     10.7    33.9    5.0    16.7  16.7    61.1    5.6
 1993    30.6     23.1    35.5   13.2    83.3  72.2    72.2   50.0
 1994    10.7     20.7    57.9    5.0     0.0  27.8    83.3    0.0
 1995    33.1     17.4    63.6   14.0    50.0  22.2    83.3   22.2
 1996    18.2     13.2    62.8    6.6    61.1  55.6    83.3   44.4
 1997    29.8     15.7    58.7    8.3    27.8  11.1    83.3   11.1
 1998    36.4     17.4    47.1    9.1    50.0   5.6    83.3    5.6
 1999    43.0     29.8    55.4   17.4    55.6  50.0    83.3   38.9
 2000    36.4      2.5     0.0    0.0    55.6  55.6     0.0    0.0


N otes : The data are from UNCTAD’s TRAINS database (Haveman Repackaging).
The table reports the percentage of all countries, based on total
of 121 reporting countries, that have at least one type of data for one year
available through TRAINS. For OECD countries the percentages are based on 19
countries. “All” indicates that a country has reported all three types of data
for that year.




                                    2
   Table 2: Simple and Trade-Weighted Tariff Averages - 1999

                                    Simple      TW
                Country             Average    Average
                Argentina              14.8       11.3
                Australia               4.5        4.1
                Bahamas                 0.7        0.8
                Bahrain                 7.8          -
                Bangladesh             22.7       21.8
                Barbados               19.2       20.3
                Belize                 19.7       14.9
                Bhutan                 15.3          -
                Bolivia                 9.7        9.1
                Brazil                 15.5       12.3
                Canada                  4.5        1.3
                Chile                  10.0       10.0
                Colombia               12.2       10.7
                Costa Rica              6.5        4.0
                Czech Republic          5.5          -
                Dominica               18.5       15.8
                Ecuador                13.8       11.1
                European Union          3.4        2.7
                Georgia                10.6          -
                Grenada                18.9       15.7
                Guyana                 20.7          -
                Honduras                7.5        7.8
                Hong Kong               0.0        0.0
                India                  30.1          -
                Indonesia              11.2          -
                Jamaica                18.8       16.7
                Japan                   2.4        2.9
                Korea                   9.1        5.9
                Mexico                 17.5        6.6
                Montserrat             18.0          -
                New Zealand             2.4        3.0
                Nicaragua              10.5       11.0
                Paraguay               13.0        6.1
                Peru                   13.4       12.6
                Philippines             9.7          -
                Romania                15.9        8.3
                Saudi Arabia           12.2          -
                Singapore               0.0        0.0
                Slovenia                9.8       11.4
                South Africa            6.0        4.4
                St. Kitts              18.7          -
                St. Lucia              18.7          -
                St. Vincent            18.3          -
                Suriname               18.7          -
                Switzerland             0.0        0.0
                Taiwan                 10.1        6.7
                Trinidad               19.1       17.0
                Uruguay                 4.9        4.5
                USA                     2.9        1.9
                Venezuela              12.4       13.0


N otes: The data are from UNCTAD’s TRAINS database (Haveman
repackaging). A ”-” indicates that trade data for 1999 are unavailable in
TRAINS.
                                   3
                         Table 3: Non-Tariff Barriers - 1999

     Country           NTB ratio         TW NTB ratio           ratioNTB ratio         TW NTB ratio
                       (narrow)            (narrow)                 (broad)              (broad)
 Algeria                 .001                .000                     .183                 .388
 Argentina               .260                .441                     .718                 .756
 Australia               .014                .006                     .225                 .351
 Bahrain                 .009                  -                      .045                   -
 Bhutan                  .041                  -                      .045                   -
 Bolivia                 .014                .049                     .179                 .206
 Brazil                  .108                .299                     .440                 .603
 Canada                  .151                .039                     .307                 .198
 Chile                   .029                .098                     .331                 .375
 Colombia                .049                .144                     .544                 .627
 Czech Republic          .001                  -                      .117                   -
 Ecuador                 .065                .201                     .278                 .476
 European Union          .008                .041                     .095                 .106
 Guatemala               .000                .000                     .348                 .393
 Hungary                 .013                .034                     .231                 .161
 Indonesia               .001                  -                      .118                   -
 Lebanon                 .000                  -                      .000                   -
 Lithuania               .000                .000                     .191                 .196
 Mexico                  .002                .000                     .580                 .533
 Morocco                 .001                  -                      .066                   -
 New Zealand             .000                .004                     .391                 .479
 Oman                    .006                .035                     .134                 .162
 Paraguay                .018                .108                     .256                 .385
 Peru                    .021                .094                     .377                 .424
 Poland                  .001                .050                     .133                 .235
 Romania                 .001                .000                     .207                 .185
 Saudi Arabia            .014                  -                      .156                   -
 Slovenia                .030                .019                     .393                 .408
 South Africa            .000                .002                     .113                 .161
 Taiwan                  .057                .074                     .138                 .207
 Tunisia                 .000                .000                     .317                 .598
 Uruguay                 .052                .098                     .354                 .470
 USA                     .015                .055                     .272                 .389
 Venezuela               .131                .196                     .382                 .333


N otes: The data are from UNCTAD’s TRAINS database (Haveman
repackaging). The “Narrow” category includes, quantity, price, quality and
advance payment NTBs, but does not include threat measures such as
antidumping investigations and duties. The “Broad” category includes
quantity, price, quality, advance payment and threat measures. The ratios calculated based on six-digit HS
categories. A ”-” indicates that trade data for 1999 are not available.




                                             4
                  Table 4: NTB Coverage Ratios by Sector - 1999

                                           United States 1999                          EU-12 1999             Japan 1996                      Canada 1999
                                         Narrow         Broad            Narrow          Broad          Narrow         Broad              Narrow       Broad
                                        NTB Ratio NTB Ratio             NTB Ratio      NTB Ratio       NTB Ratio      NTB Ratio          NTB Ratio NTB Ratio
                                         S    TW       S    TW           S    TW        S    TW         S    TW      S     TW             S    TW     S    TW
 ISIC     Description
     1    Agric., Forestry, Fish.       .011    .052    .719    .743    .001   .001    .229    .241    .153    .227     .897     .962    .028    .022   .878   .938
     2    Mining, Quarrying             .000    .000    .018    .099    .001   .055    .001    .055    .028    .008     .193     .706    .000    .000   .027   .014
    21     Coal Mining                  .000    .000    .000    .000    .004   .000    .004    .000    .000    .000     .667    1.000    .000    .000   .000   .000
    22     Crude Petroleum              .000    .000    .250    .105    .004   .067    .004    .067    .000    .000    1.000    1.000    .000    .000   .375   .019
    23     Metal Ore Mining             .000    .000    .000    .000    .000   .000    .000    .000    .087    .000     .087     .000    .000    .000   .000   .000
    29     Other Mining                 .000    .000    .000    .000    .001   .038    .001    .038    .014    .129     .120     .184    .000    .000   .000   .000
     3    Manufacturing                 .015    .047    .245    .423    .007   .042    .083    .107    .044    .102     .322     .366    .171    .044   .261   .196
    31     Food, Bev., Tobacco          .072    .120    .644    .809    .004   .011    .489    .474    .185    .329     .925     .893    .185    .348   .456   .453
    32     Textiles, Apparel            .000    .002    .509    .708    .030   .255    .102    .420    .022    .050     .163     .120    .762    .681   .816   .784
    33     Wood, Wood Prod.             .000    .000    .459    .389    .000   .007    .197    .263    .000    .000     .098     .025    .016    .015   .262   .252
    34     Paper, Paper Prod.           .000    .000    .053    .023    .000   .000    .000    .000    .000    .000     .133     .036    .000    .000   .000   .000
    35     Chem., Petrol Prod.          .036    .149    .114    .322    .003   .011    .032    .033    .048    .169     .635     .750    .013    .007   .047   .073
    36     Non-Metal Min. Prod.         .000    .006    .014    .029    .000   .016    .000    .043    .000    .000     .073     .160    .000    .000   .000   .000
    37     Basic Metal Ind.             .003    .044    .006    .044    .002   .010    .012    .016    .051    .086     .375     .139    .000    .000   .381   .362
    38     Fab. Metal Prod.             .002    .039    .166    .450    .000   .010    .005    .012    .032    .057     .095     .266    .000    .000   .048   .179
    39     Other Manuf.                 .000    .002    .122    .199    .000   .017    .238    .222    .000    .000     .134     .112    .000    .000   .073   .012
 Total    All Products                  .015    .055    .272    .389    .008   .041    .095    .106    .055    .098     .369     .442    .151    .039   .307   .198


N otes: “S” indicates “Simple” and “TW” indicates
“Trade-weighted”. Data are from UNCTAD’s TRAINS database (Haveman repackaging). The “Narrow” category includes, quantity, price, quality
and advance payment NTBs, but does not include threat measures such as antidumping
investigations and duties. The “Broad” category includes quantity, price,
quality, advance payment and threat measures. The ratios are calculated for two-digit ISIC categories based on the six-digit HS classifications used
by TRAINS, using HS to ISIC concordances published by the World Bank.




                                                                                 5
  Table 5: Tariff Equivalents of U.S. MFA Quotas, 1991 and 1993 (Percent)

 Sector                                     1991                            1993
                                            Rent       Rent        S       TW     Rent +      %US
                                           Tar Eq.    Tar Eq.    Tariff   Tariff TW Tariff   Imports
   Textiles:
    Broadwoven fabric mills                  8.5        9.5       14.4    13.3     22.8       0.48
    Narrow fabric mills                      3.4        3.3        6.9     6.7     10.0       0.22
    Yarn mills and textile finishing         5.1        3.1       10.0     8.5     11.6       0.06
    Thread mills                             4.6        2.2        9.5    11.8     14.0       0.01
    Floor coverings                          2.8        9.3        7.8     5.7     15.0       0.12
    Felt and textile goods, n.e.c.           1.0        0.1        4.7     6.2      6.3       0.06
    Lace and knit fabric goods               3.8        5.9       13.5    11.8     17.7       0.04
    Coated fabrics, not rubberized           2.0        1.0        9.8     6.6      7.6       0.03
    Tire cord and fabric                     2.3        2.4        5.1     4.4      6.8       0.08
    Cordage and twine                        3.1        1.2        6.2     3.6      4.8       0.03
    Nonwoven fabric                          0.1        0.2       10.6     9.5      9.7       0.04

   Apparel and fab. textile products:
    Women’s hosiery, except socks             5.4       2.3
    Hosiery, n.e.c.                           3.5       2.4       14.9    15.3     17.7       0.04
    App’l made from purchased mat’l          16.8       19.9      13.2    12.6     32.5       5.71
    Curatins and draperies                   5.9        12.1      11.9    12.1     24.2       0.01
    House furnishings, n.e.c.                 8.3       13.9      9.3      8.2     22.1       0.27
    Textile bags                              5.9       9.0        6.4     6.6     15.6       0.01
    Canvas and related products              6.3        5.2        6.9     6.4     11.6       0.03
    Pleating, stitching, ...embroidery        5.2       7.6        8.0     8.1     15.7       0.02
    Fabricated textile products, n.e.c.       9.2       0.6        5.2     4.8      5.4       0.37
    Luggage                                  2.6        10.4      12.1    10.8     21.2       0.28
    Women’s handbags and purses               1.0       3.1       10.5     6.7      9.8       0.44


N otes: “S” indicates “Simple” and “TW” indicates
“Trade-weighted”. Rent equivalents for U.S. imports from Hong Kong were
estimated on the basis of average weekly Hong Kong quota prices paid by
brokers, using information from International Business and Economic Research
Corporation. For countries that do not allocate quota rights in public
auctions, export prices were estimated from Hong Kong export prices, with
adjustments for differences in labor costs and productivity.
Sectors and their corresponding SIC classifications are
detailed in USITC (1995) Table D-1.
Quota tariff equivalents are reproduced from Deardorff and Stern,
(1998), Table 3.6 (Source USITC 1993,1995). Tariff averages,
trade-weighted tariff averages and US import percentages are calculated using
data from the UNCTAD TRAINS dataset. SIC to HS concordances from the US
Census Bureau are used.




                                                          6
Table 6: Distribution Margins for Household Consumption and Capital Goods

           Select             Aus.      Bel.    Can.     Ger.      Ita.    Jap.     Net.      UK       US
   Product Categories           95       90       90       93       92       95       90       90       92
            Rice              1.239    1.237    1.867    1.423    1.549    1.335    1.434    1.511    1.435
    Fresh, frozen beef        1.485    1.626    1.544    1.423    1.605    1.681    1.640    1.390    1.534
            Beer              1.185    1.435    1.213    1.423    1.240    1.710    1.373    2.210    1.863
         Cigarettes           1.191    1.133    1.505    1.423    1.240    1.398   1.230     1.129    1.582
      Ladies’ clothing        1.858    1.845    1.826    2.039    1.562    2.295    1.855    2.005    2.159
  Refrigerators, freezers     1.236    1.586    1.744    1.826    1.783    1.638    1.661    2.080    1.682
    Passenger vehicles        1.585    1.198    1.227    1.374    1.457    1.760    1.247    1.216    1.203
           Books              1.882    1.452    1.294    2.039    1.778    1.665    1.680    1.625    1.751
 Office, data proc. mach.     1.715    1.072    1.035    1.153    1.603    1.389   1.217*    1.040    1.228
  Electronic equip., etc.     1.715    1.080    1.198    1.160    1.576    1.432   1.224*    1.080    1.139
      Simple Average
      (125 categories)        1.574    1.420    1.571    1.535    1.577    1.703    1.502    1.562    1.681


N otes: The table is reproduced from Bradford and Lawrence, ”Paying the Price: The Cost of Fragmented
International Markets”, Institute of
International Economics, forthcoming (2003). Margins represent the ratio of purchaser price to producer
price. Margins data on capital goods are not available for Netherlands, so an average of the four European
countries’ margins is used.




                                                            7
                      Table 7: Tariff equivalent of Trade Costs

                                              method      data          reported        σ=5        σ=8       σ = 10
                                                                       by authors
 all trade barriers
 Head and Ries (2001)                         new         disaggr.         48             97         47         35
     U.S.-Canada, 1990-1995                                             (σ = 7.9)
 Anderson and van Wincoop (2003)              new         aggr                            91         46         35
    U.S.-Canada, 1993
 Eaton and Kortum (2002)                      new         aggr.          48-63         123-174     58-78      43-57
    19 OECD countries, 1990                                            (σ = 9.28)
    750-1500 miles apart
 national border barriers
 Wei (1996)                                   trad.       aggr.            5            26-76      14-38      11-29
    19 OECD countries, 1982-1994                                        (σ = 20)
 Evans (1999)                                 trad.       disaggr.         45             45         30         23
    8 OECD countries, 1990                                               (σ = 5)
 Anderson and van Wincoop (2003)              new         aggr.            48             48         26         19
    U.S.-Canada, 1993                                                    (σ = 5)
 Eaton and Kortum (2002)                      new         aggr.          32-45         77-116      39-55      29-41
    19 OECD countries, 1990                                            (σ = 9.28)
 language barrier
 Eaton and Kortum (2002)                      new         aggr.            6              12          7         5
    19 OECD countries, 1990                                            (σ = 9.28)
 Hummels (1999)                               new         disaggr.         11            12%          8         6
    160 countries, 1994                                                 (σ = 6.3)
 currency barrier
 Rose and van Wincoop (2001)                  new         aggr.        26 (σ = 5)         26         14         11
    143 countries, 1980 and 1990                                        (σ = 5)


N otes : This table reports findings in the gravity literature on the tariff equivalent of a variety of factors that
increase trade barriers. The second column indicates whether estimates are based on the traditional gravity equation
–“trad.”– or the theory-based gravity equation –“new”. The third column indicates whether estimation is based on
aggregate or disaggregate data. The numbers in the fourth column have been reported by the authors for various
elasticities of substitution σ that are shown in brackets. For results based on disaggregated trade data, the average
trade barrier across sectors is reported (for Hummels (1999) only sectors with statistically significant estimates are
used). The numbers in the last three columns re-compute these results for alternative values of σ. For results based
on disaggregate data, the trade barriers are first re-computed for each sector and then averaged (with the exception
of Head and Ries (2001), who only report average trade barriers across all sectors). When two numbers are reported,
the lower number applies to countries that share a border and have a common language.




                                                             8
    Table 8: Trade Cost Indices for US and Canadian Regions

                                             Multilateral
                                              resistance
                 Provinces
                  Alberta                        1.65
                  British Columbia               1.55
                  Manitoba                       1.65
                  New Brunswick                  1.62
                  Newfoundland                   1.74
                  Nova Scotia                    1.63
                  Ontario                        1.51
                  Prince Edward Island           1.67
                  Quebec                         1.53
                  Saskatchewan                   1.66
                 States
                  Alabama                        1.39
                  Arizona                        1.49
                  California                     1.31
                  Florida                        1.38
                  Georgia                        1.37
                  Idaho                          1.49
                  Illinois                       1.35
                  Indiana                        1.36
                  Kentucky                       1.37
                  Louisiana                      1.41
                  Maine                          1.43
                  Maryland                       1.31
                  Massachusetts                  1.33
                  Michigan                       1.37
                  Minnesota                      1.42
                  Missouri                       1.38
                  Montana                        1.50
                  New Hampshire                  1.39
                  New Jersey                     1.33
                  New York                       1.30
                  North Carolina                 1.37
                  North Dakota                   1.47
                  Ohio                           1.35
                  Pennsylvania                   1.33
                  Tennessee                      1.38
                  Texas                          1.41
                  Vermont                        1.40
                  Virginia                       1.35
                  Washington                     1.43
                  Wisconsin                      1.39
                  Rest USA                       1.50


N otes : This table reports multilateral resistance indices for US states and
Canadian provinces, based on data and trade cost estimates from Anderson
and van Wincoop (2003). The assumed elasticity of substitution is 8.




                                                     9
        Table 9: Price-Gap Measures by Sector, 1991 and 1993 (Percent)

              Sector                     1991                               1993
 Price-gap measures                     Quota        Quota        S       TW         Quota          %US
   Agricultural Sectora                Tar. Eq.     Tar. Eq.    Tariff   Tariff    + TW Tar.      Imports
     Sugar                              124.8         93.7       1.0      0.2         93.9         0.1296
     Butter                              26.9         20.8       8.8      8.7         29.5         0.0008
     Cheese                              35.4         37.4      10.6     11.2         48.6         0.0889
     Dry/condensed milk prod.            60.3         60.3      13.2     13.2         73.5         0.0033
     Cream                               60.3         60.3       0.0      0.0         60.3         0.0008
     Meat                                 6.5         5.0        1.3      4.0         9.0          0.4296
     Cotton                                -          27.0       2.2      0.1         27.1         0.0001
 Motor Vehiclesb                           -          0.4        2.2      1.7         2.1          9.5673
 Maritime trans. (Jones Act)c           133.0         89.1


N otes :
a. The price comparisons for the agricultural products
were as follows. Sugar – calculated as the difference between the U.S.
price and the world price, inclusive of transport costs and import duties,
expressed as a percentage of the world price; data from USDA, Sugar and
Sweetener: Situation and Outlook Yearbook. Dairy products–based on domestic
and world price data collected by the USDA for whole milk powder, butter and
cheese; for dry/condensed milk products and cream, the price gap for whole
milk powder was used as a proxy. Meat – based on the ”market price
support” portion of the producer subsidy equivalent (PSE) calculated by the
OECD, comparing Sioux Falls (U.S) cutter prices with New Zealand milk cow
prices, and domestic and world prices of Orleans/Texas ”B” index cotton,
including adjustments for transportation and marketing costs.
b. Motor vehicles–based on an estimated 1.5 percent
additional increase above the industrywide U.S. price increase needed in
Japanese autos to equate supply and demand in the presence of the auto
import restraint; weighted by the percent of Japanese auto imports to total
whole imports.
c. Maritime transport–calculated as the output-weighted
average difference between the U.S. and world price for shipping ”wet” and
“dry” cargo, the weighted differences are between the U.S. price for
shipping Alaskan North Slope crude petroleum to the U.S. west coast and to
the U.S. gulf coast and the average world price for comparable tanker
shipments transported equal distances; a separate estimate from the
literature was used for the tariff equivalent for dry cargo. Additional
estimates of the price gap attributed to the Jones Act can be found in White
(1988) and Francois et al. (1996, p.186).

Sources: USITC (1993, 1995).
Quota tariff equivalents and the notes for price comparisons above are reproduced from Deardorff and Stern,
(1998), Table 3.6 (Source USITC 1993, 1995). Tariff averages,
trade-weighted tariff averages and US product import percentages (except
maritime transport) are calculated using data from the UNCTAD TRAINS
database (Haveman repackaging). SIC to HS concordances from the US Census
Bureau are used.
                     Table 10: Trade Costs and Price Dispersion

                     parameters                  Price Dispersion Measure       Trade Cost
           N     σ   θ      trade cost           1     2   3    4     5       trade-    ideal
                         average vary/                                      weighted index
                                    same                                     average
                                                  Trade Cost Only Source of Price Dispersion
 (i)       10    4    5      100        vary     20 13 26 27         18         31        52
 (ii)      10    4    5      200        vary     23 15 30 31         21         38        77
 (iii)     10    1    5      100        vary     20 13 42 27         18         40        62
 (iv)      10    1    5      200        vary     23 15 53 31         21         50        92
 (v)       10    4    5      100        same     22 15 40 30         20        100       100
 (vi)      10    4    3      100        vary     26 17 32 34         23         43        57
 (vii)     10    4    8      100        vary     15 10 21 19         13         22        43
 (viii)    20    4    5      100        vary     19 13 29 26         18         28        50
 (ix)      20    4    5      200        vary     23 15 37 29         21         36        73
                                                    With Other Sources of Price Dispersion
 (x)       20    4    5       0         vary     25 17 37 31         22          0         0
 (xi)      20    4    5      100        vary     32 22 45 40         28         28        50
 (xii)     20    4    5      200        vary     34 23 47 43         30         36        73
                                                          Data
 (xiii)                                          32 21 40 44         24


N otes : This table reports the average of five price dispersion measures described in the text. All numbers
are in percentages. The model moments are based on the trade model described in the text, which is a
variation of the Eaton and Kortum (2002) model. Results are shown for a variety of parameter assumptions
in the model. N refers to the number of countries. σ is the elasticity of substitution between goods. θ is the
parameter from the Fréchet distribution that is inversely related to productivity differences across countries.
“vary/same” refers to whether the trade barriers tgij vary across goods and countries as described in the
text or are the same across al goods and countries. Trade weighted average trade costs and the ideal index
of trade costs are shown as well. The latter is a common trade barrier across countries and goods that leads
to the same overall expected trade level as implied by the trade costs assumed in the model. The last row
reports data moments that have been computed by different authors. The samples are reported in Table 11.
             Table 11: Data Sources for Price Dispersion Measures

                      Measure 1         Measure 2          Measure 3            Measure 4             Measure 5

 author             Bradford &            Crucini         Bradford &            Parsley &            Crucini &
                  Lawrence (2003)       et.al (2001)    Lawrence (2003)         Wei (2002)         Shintani (2002)
 data source        OECD survey          Eurostat        OECD survey            Economist            Economist
                                                                             Intelligence Unit    Intelligence Unit
 countries             9 OECD              13 EC            9 OECD                 11 EC                15 EC
 goods                    120               3545               120                   95                   270
                                                                                                       (traded)
 period               1990, 1999            1990              1990s                1990s              1990, 2000
 average price            32                 21                40                    44                   24
 dispersion


N otes : The Table reports the papers and associated data sources that have computed the five price dispersion measures
mentioned in the text. “Traded” refers to traded goods as an unknown subset of the total number of goods listed.
Figure 1 Elasticity of Substitution versus Distance Elasticity of Trade Costs

Distance Elasticity of
Trade Costs (r)
       0.6

       0.5

       0.4

       0.3

       0.2

       0.1

          0
              0          2          4              6          8    10
                             Elasticity of Substitution (s)
                      Figure 2 Price Dispersion Across Location Pairs and Goods
Fourth Price
             35
                                 Panel A*                         Second Price
                                                                              25
                                                                                                      Panel B*
Dispersion                                                        Dispersion
Measure      30                                                   Measure     20

             25                                                               15

             20                                                               10

             15                                                                5

             10                                                                0
                  0   20 40     60 80 100 120 140 160 180 200                      0       20 40     60 80 100 120 140 160 180 200
            Average Trade Barrier For Location Pair                           Average Trade Barrier Class of Goods

Fourth Price
Dispersion 46
                                     Panel C**                    Second Price
                                                                               30                     Panel D**
                                                                  Dispersion
Measure      44
                                                                  Measure      27
             42
             40
                                                                               24
             38
             36                                                                21
             34
                                                                               18
             32
             30                                                                15
                  0   20   40   60   80 100 120 140 160 180 200                        0   20   40   60   80 100 120 140 160 180 200
            Average Trade Barrier For Location Pair                                Average Trade Barrier Class of Goods

      * Trade Costs Only Source of Price Dispersion
      ** Including Other Sources of Price Dispersion
