NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ASSESSING THE ECONOMIC GAINS
FROM TELECOM COMPETITION
Richard N. Clarke
Kevin A. Hassett
Zoya Ivanova
Laurence Kotlikoff
Working Paper 10482
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10482
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2004

Portions of this research have been supported by AT&T. The opinions expressed here do not necessarily
reflect the views of AT&T or of the authors’ respective institutions. The views expressed herein are those
of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2004 by Richard N. Clarke, Kevin A. Hassett, Zoya Ivanova, and Laurence J. Kotlikoff. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that
full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Assessing the Economic Gains from Telecom Competition
Richard N. Clarke, Kevin A. Hassett, Zoya Ivanova, and Laurence J. Kotlikoff
NBER Working Paper No. 10482
May 2004
JEL No. L10
ABSTRACT
This paper develops and simulates a dynamic model of strategic telecom competition. The goal is to understand how
regulatory policy, particularly relative to lease charges for local network elements, affects telecom competition,
investment, retail prices, and consumer welfare. The model assumes two products, local voice service and data
(broadband), and three types of players n the regional Bell operating companies, referred to as incumbent local
exchange carriers (ILECs), cable companies (Cables), and competitive local exchange carriers (CLECs). The game
begins with a) ILECs established in each county with respect to the provision of local voice and data services and
b) Cables established in roughly half of the counties with respect to the provision of data.There are one-time fixed
costs of entering a county, product- and period-specific costs of operating in a county, and marginal costs of
supplying each product. Economies of scope reduce the fixed entry and operating costs of supplying both products
in a given county at a given point in time. Finally, in supplying telecom services in a given county, CLECs may enter
by leasing ILEC infrastructure at specified access rates. The requirement that ILECs allow CLECs to lease their local
network facilities was established in the Telecommunications Act of 1996 as part of a quid pro quo that promised
ILECs entry into the long distance market. But the ILECs continue to contest the quid. The ILECs support their
position by suggesting that leased access reduces telecom investment and output and raises telecom prices. Our
model considers the entire range of options available to each of the players, but it reaches the opposite conclusion.
Indeed, we find thatif UNE-P rates were set at the Supreme Court-approved total element long-run incremental cost
(TELRIC) levels, telecom investment and employment outlays would increase by over one fifth in counties
containing the majority of the U.S. population and by over 30 percent in counties containing almost a third of the
population. The present value of telecom outlays over the next 5 and 20 years would rise by $71 billion and $155
billion, respectively. On average, the switch from actual to TELRIC UNE rates would lower local phone rates across
the country’s 3108 counties by $57 per year, generating annual total savings to consumers of $15 billion. Almost
two fifths of the population would experience reductions in local phone rates of 20 percent or more. Over one fifth
would experience rate reductions of 30 percent or more. These findings of price reductions are based on a fairly
conservative parameterization of our model with respect to the specification of true ILEC and CLEC incremental
long-run production costs.
Richard N. Clarke
Director of Economic Analysis, AT&T

Zoya Ivanova
Ph.D Student, Boston University

Kevin A. Hassett
Director of Economic Studies
The American Enterprise Institute

Laurence J. Kotlikoff
Department of Economics
Boston University
270 Bay State Road
Boston, MA 02215
and NBER
kotlikof@bu.edu

I. Introduction
A vibrant telecom sector is remarkably important to national economic
performance. Two-thirds of U.S. economic growth appears driven by innovations in
information technology.3 And telecom, which plays an essential role in information
acquisition and dissemination, accounts for the lion’s share of IT investment and
innovation.

Unfortunately, after booming during the second half of the 1990s, the

telecom industry has fallen on hard times.4
What explains the decline in the telecom sector? The regional Bell operating
companies, referred to as ILECs (incumbent local exchange carriers), blame it on their
competitors, known as CLECs (competitive local exchange carriers). The CLECs blame
it on the ILECs and the failure of the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) to
vigorously enforce the Telecommunications Act of 1996 (TA96). This act required the
ILECs to lease, at wholesale rates, telephone lines and the other bottleneck facilities they
control to CLECs so that CLECs too could market local voice and broadband services.
To ensure ILEC compliance with its provisions, TA96 dangled a very big carrot, namely
allowing ILECs to enter the long distance market.
According to the CLECs, the ILECs have used every means at their disposal to
stymie competition based on leased access and have failed to comply not only with the
spirit, but also with the letter of TA96. For their part, the ILECs claim that competition
based on leased access is synthetic and greatly limits their own incentives to invest.
While the two sides have been arguing, the FCC has made three decisions that will

3

See Jorgenson, Dale, “Information Technology and the U.S. Economy,” American Economic Review, vol.
91, no. 1 (March 2001), 1-32. The Commerce Department’s estimate of the contribution of information
technology to economic growth is smaller.
4

Extremely recent data may suggest that the industry is starting to rebound.
1

significantly affect future competition in telecom. The first is to permit all four regional
Bell operating companies to enter the long distance market notwithstanding the fact that
CLECs have yet to secure more than 15 percent of the local voice market.5 The second is
to reaffirm the role of state public utility commissions (PUCs) in setting conditions under
which CLECs can lease either individual ILEC facilities or “platforms” of interconnected
ILEC telephone lines, switches, and transport services. This latter option is referred to as
UNE-P, which stands for unbundled network element platform, because in renting these
elements, the CLECs are, in effect, leasing the entire platform of local network voice
elements. In providing their final retail voice services under UNE-P, the CLECs bring to
these wholesale network-inputs significant customer support and product differentiation.6
The alternative to competing for voice services under UNE-P is for CLECs to
obtain physical access to customer loops by collocating equipment in ILEC central
offices. Leasing access in this manner is called UNE-L (unbundled network element
loop) because it entails disconnecting the telephone line or loop from the ILEC’s switch
and reconnecting it to the CLEC’s equipment. This physical re-termination of the loop is
called the hot cut process. Competing under UNE-L turns out to be very difficult, and
often impossible, due to an array of significant operational and cost impediments.7

5

Federal Communciations Commission, “Federal Communications Commission Releases Data on Local
Telephone Competition,” Press release, December 22, 2003. available at:
http://hraunfoss.fcc.gov/edocs_public/attachmatch/DOC-242397A1.pdf
6

The rental of network services at wholesale rates is routine in the long distance and wireless markets. The
main difference is that in long distance and wireless markets, there are competing carriers, whereas in the
local voice and broadband market, the ILECs have a virtual monopoly over the transmission infrastructure.
Ironically, AT&T is one of the largest CLECs. When the Bell Telephone Company was broken up in 1983
into a single long-distance provider, AT&T was compelled to lease access to its long-distance lines. Today
the ILECs are leasing these and other long-distance lines to transmit their customers’ voice and data
messages. I.e., in the long distance market, both sets of shoes are on different feet.

7

Operational impediments include the considerable time the ILECs take to implement hot cuts and the
mistakes, whether intentional or not, that they make in the process. The costs CLECs face in operating
under UNE-L include the significant expense of collocating their equipment in the ILEC central offices, of
2

The third FCC decision grants ILECs what, over time, could amount to exclusive
use of local phone lines to provide high-speed broadband service.8 Specifically, the FCC
has indicated that if ILECs add additional fiber to their transmission networks they are no
longer required to unbundle (lease out) the use of that fiber to those CLECs seeking to
market broadband under UNE-L.
These three FCC decisions have been made against the backdrop of an intense
ILEC-CLEC battle over the proper pricing of UNEs. The ILECs appealed the FCC’s
Total Element Long-Run Incremental Cost (TELRIC) UNE pricing formula all the way to
the Supreme Court and lost. But on the heels of the Supreme Court’s affirmation of
TELRIC, the FCC has opened a proceeding to investigate whether this standard needs to
be revised9 – and the ILECs continue to contest UNE pricing at the state level,
particularly in states that have begun lowering their leasing rates toward TELRIC levels.
Those states that have dropped their UNE rates have seen a significant increase in UNE-P
based competition, and their residents have seen their local phone bills drop by as much
as one third.10
renting collocation space from the ILECs, of backhauling loops from the ILEC central offices to their own
networks, and of switching transmissions. For CLECs to provide broadband service, they need to have
physical access to the loop, which means entering the market under UNE-L. But given the high costs and
operational impediments of UNE-L, CLECS that provide broadband under UNE-L typically provision the
voice service under UNE-P.
8

The latter two decisions were part of the FCC’s Triennial Review of UNEs Order that was announced on
February 20, 2003. Subsequently, the FCC issued detailed regulations implementing its February decision.
These regulations state that ILECs will no longer be required to unbundle facilities to CLECs for purpose
of data transmission to the extent that these facilities are either modernized or expanded to provide highspeed fiber optic capacity.

9

Federal Communications Commission, Notice of Proposed Rulemaking in in the Matter of the Review of
the Commission’s Rules Regarding the Pricing of Unbundled Network Elements and the Resale of Service
by Incumbent Local Exchange Carriers, WC Docket No. 03-173, released September 15, 2003.

10

See, Braunstein, Yale M. “The Role of UNE-P in Vertically Integrated Telephone Networks: Ensuring
Healthy and Competitive Local, Long Distance, and DSL Markets.” University of California, Berkeley,
May 2003; Michigan Alliance for Competitive Telecommunications press release on “study” – May 15,
and 2003 “Consumer Savings from Local Telephone Service Competition in Illinois,” released by Illinois
Coalition for Competitive Telecommunications, February 2003.
3

Given the importance of regulatory policy to the telecom industry and the
importance of the industry to the economy, it’s essential to have a clear understanding of
how the telecom sector operates and responds to government actions. This paper seeks to
contribute to that understanding by developing and simulating a new dynamic strategic
model of telecom entry, pricing, and investment.
Our model features two products -- local voice service and data (broadband) -and three types of players – ILECs, CABLES, and CLECS. The playing field consists of
the 3,108 counties in the continental United States. The game begins with a) ILECs
providing both local voice and data services in each county; and b) CABLES providing
data service in roughly half of the counties. CLECs must decide if and when to enter
each county and what products to market in those counties they enter. Multiple equilibria
in the entry game are resolved via a randomization mechanism that selects equilibria with
equal probability. Post-entry market supplies and product prices are determined via
Cournot competition.
There are one-time fixed costs of entering a county, product- and period-specific
costs of operating in the county, and marginal costs of supplying each product. There are
also economies of scope that reduce the fixed entry and operating costs of supplying both
products in a given county at a given point in time. Finally, in supplying voice in a given
county, CLECs can potentially lower their costs by leasing ILEC unbundled network
infrastructure at specified access rates.
The model’s central message is that TELRIC UNE-based competition can be
highly effective in lowering voice and broadband prices, enhancing consumer welfare,
and resurrecting telecom investment. But the key to making UNE competition work

4

appears to be having state PUCs set platform rental rates at true TELRIC levels, which,
we estimate, averages about $15.10 per line per month.11 Thus far, only a few state PUCs
have set their UNE-P rates close to what we measure to be their own state-specific
TELRIC levels. Indeed, average state-specific actual UNE-P rates exceed this estimate
of average TELRIC UNE-P rates by 27.9 percent.
Our model indicates that if UNE rates were set at TELRIC levels throughout the
country, telecom entry, investment and employment outlays, and output would increase
significantly and local voice prices would fall significantly. That is, telecom investment
and employment outlays would increase by over 20 percent in counties containing the
majority of the U.S. population and by over 30 percent in counties containing almost a
third of the population – compared with the outlays that we may expect to occur under a
continuation of current above-TELRIC UNE prices. In particular, improved adherence to
TELRIC would increase telecom investment outlays by $71 billion over the next 5 years.
And the present value of these outlays over the next 20 years would increase by $155
billion.
A switch in each state from current to TELRIC UNE rates would lower local
phone prices, on average, across the country’s 3108 counties by $57 per household per
year for an aggregate savings of $15.0 billion per year. Almost two-fifths of households
would experience reductions in local phone rates of 20 percent or more. Over one fifth
would experience rate reductions of 30 percent or more.

11

Our rough estimate of TELRIC rates starts with rates calculated from the FCC’s 1998 Synthesis Model
adjusted to report UNE costs. These rates are then deflated for 5 years at a 5 percent per year to account for
intervening reductions in input prices and unit costs. This uniform nationwide calculation provides only a
rough index of state-by-state TELRICs and should not be construed to support or impeach more targeted,
specific calculations of TELRIC.
5

The gains from TELRIC-based UNE-based competition are significant across the
entire spectrum of counties arrayed by income and population density. Almost a fifth of
households in low-income – low-density counties begin to enjoy local voice competition
when the switch is made from current to TELRIC UNE rates. And households and
business in such counties experience an 8.7 percent reduction in the cost of their local
phone service.
These findings are based on a fairly conservative parameterization of our model
with respect to the specification of true ILEC and CLEC incremental long-run production
costs. With arguably more realistic parameters, the average price of local phone service
would fall by more than one third in moving from current to TELRIC UNE rates. And
much greater price reductions would arise in the voice market were the government to
require electronic loop provisioning, under which a customer’s local voice transmissions
would be switched electronically and instantaneously to CLEC facilities at the same
extraordinary low cost as occurs in the long distance market.12 Our simulations also
show significant entry by CLECs in broadband. Indeed, across cross-county average
broadband price under TELRIC pricing of UNEs ends up almost 22.9 percent lower than
the regulated monopoly price.
In contrast to our findings about the gains from UNE-based competition with
proper TELRIC pricing, the model indicates that current UNE pricing by some state
PUCs is a mixed blessing. PUCs that set UNE prices far above TELRIC can actually end
up raising voice prices, lowering demand for telecom services, and reducing telecom
investment and employment outlays. The reason stems from our assumption that state
PUCs will phase out their regulation of local retail telecom prices at the first sign of
12

See Kotlikoff, Laurence J., “On the Broadband Mess,” The Milken Review, First Quarter, 2003.
6

competition from CLECs. Such eventual regulatory “relief” is one of the long-term goals
of TA96. But if wholesale prices for UNEs are set too high, competitors will be unable
to provide service economically to all customers, and substantial segments of the market
will be served only by a now unregulated monopolist or by an unregulated dominant
market player. The resulting “free” market price likely will be higher than the price
previously set by the regulators.

Stated differently, a regulated monopoly may be

preferred to an unregulated duopoly or oligopoly if the ILEC can persuade state PUCs to
maintain above-TELRIC UNE prices and, thereby, raise their rivals’ costs. Thus, state
PUCs should understand that abandoning regulation at the first sign of competition may
have very adverse consequences, and that limited competition may be a very poor
substitute for full and fair competition.
This paper reaches its pro-competitive conclusions after considering the empirical
evidence, reviewing basic lessons about monopoly behavior, and simulating our model
for all 3108 counties in the continental United States.13 We proceed in section 2 by
describing the recent rise and fall of telecom investment.

Section 3 considers the

argument that the Telecommunications Act of 1996 (TA96) is responsible for the
industry’s recent distress. Section 4 presents our model. Section 5 delivers findings, and
Section 6 concludes.

2. The Telecom Investment Boom and Bust
Table 1 shows total telecom investment since 1990 as well as the investment of
the CLECs and ILECs. It is clear that TA96 triggered a huge expansion of investment. It
did so by promising CLECs that they would receive access to the local network or
13

Unfortunately, critical data needed to run the model are not available for either Alaska or Hawaii.
7

components (elements) of the local network at a reasonable price and on a timely basis.
The local network refers to the local telephone lines, telephone poles, underground
conduits, and switches that connect the American public to the outside word.
TA96 expanded use of this vital communications pipeline bottleneck by a)
eliminating the ILECs’ legal status as monopoly franchises and b) requiring the ILECs to
rent access to the local network to incipient, would-be competitors. The act further
required the ILECs to rent access to (to unbundle) the local network on either a
component-by-component basis or on a package-of-components basis as requested by
their competitors.14 Finally, rents were to be set at a compensatory price that included a
profit.
During the 1996-2000 telecom investment boom, over a third of gross and over
one half of net telecom investment was done by the CLECs even though they were fifteen
times smaller than the ILECs when measured in terms of revenues.15 In 2000, at the peak
of the investment boom, CLECs invested $25 billion, which almost matched the $27
billion of new ILEC investment.
Despite investing two-thirds of their revenues, as compared to one quarter by the
ILECs, CLECs were able to gain only 8.5 percent of nationwide access lines, and only
4.6 percent of residential and small business lines, by the end of 2000. The explanation
for this is straightforward. CLECs concentrated their investment in dense metropolitan

14

Because local network assets were acquired by the ILECs under concessionary conditions and paid for by
the public over decades in the form of high, regulated telephone rates for local and long distance telephone
calls, even these “compensatory” rents may be too high.

15

Hall, Robert E. and William H. Lehr, “Rescuing Competition to Simulate Telecom Growth,” mimeo,
September 28, 2001. Revenues refer here to receipts earned from operations in the local telecom market.
8

areas to a) capture scale and density economies and b) bypass ILEC control of the local
network by constructing their own pipelines feeding into high-traffic office buildings.16
Over the past seven years, state PUCs have adopted a “look-see” approach to
lowering UNE-P rates and vigorously enforcing TA96. They have looked to preserve
ILEC profitability, while also seeing how much competition their policies would
engender. Recently, PUCs in a number of major states, including New York, California,
Illinois, and Michigan, have lowered their UNE rates toward TELRIC levels and have
required their ILECs to expedite the unbundling process. In these states, CLEC market
shares have risen and local voice and broadband retail prices have fallen.17
The surge in telecom investment in the last decade was not unique to the United
States. According to a recent Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development
(OECD) review of telecommunications policy in OECD member nations, “The evidence
indicates that opening access networks and network elements to competitive forces
increases investment and the pace of development. Nearly all OECD governments have

16

CLECs attribute this need to bypass the ILECs to the fact that the ILECs used and continue to use a
variety of mechanisms to restrict or degrade access to the local network. Their proposed list of abuses
includes charging exorbitant prices for unbundling their components (elements), delaying the transfer
(handoff) of loops (wires) from their own switches to those of competitors, using slow and error-prone
manual rather than electronic handoffs, charging high prices to CLECs for renting space in ILEC local
service offices to collect these loops, and simply opting to pay fines rather than obey the law. CLECs claim
that these ILEC practices have succeeded in killing off the lion’s share of their number.

17

For example, one recent estimate finds that local phone customers that switch to CLEC providers can
save $11.40 per month, or almost $137 a year, in California. See http://www.trac.policy.net/proactive/

newsroom/release.vtml?id=18900. A study released by the Michigan Alliance for Competitive
Telecommunications said consumers in that state saved $72M on local residential phone bills in 2002
because of competition stimulated by reduced UNE-P rates. A similar study in Illinois said consumers
spent $131 million less on local residential phone service as competition heated up. See, Braunstein, Yale
M. “The Role of UNE-P in Vertically Integrated Telephone Networks: Ensuring Healthy and Competitive
Local, Long Distance, and DSL Markets.” University of California, Berkeley, May 2003; Michigan
Alliance for Competitive Telecommunications press release on “study” – May 15, and 2003 “Consumer
Savings from Local Telephone Service Competition in Illinois,” released by Illinois Coalition for
Competitive Telecommunications, February 2003.

9

already introduced such policies or taken decisions to introduce such policies, in respect
to telecommunications networks.”18
This evidence notwithstanding, there have been few careful attempts to measure
the effects of unbundling on price and investment. One exception -- Willig, Lehr,
Bigelow, and Levinson (2002) -- gathered detailed data on ILEC investment and
regulatory regimes and found that lower UNE prices are associated with higher ILEC
investment in a statistically significant manner --a pattern consistent with the findings
presented here, including the fact that the investment boom ended when most of the
CLECs exited or were otherwise driven out of the market.

3. The ILEC View
The ILECs have a much different view of the 1996-2001 telecom boom and bust.
Their explanation of CLEC business failures is that these companies had bad business
plans, over-invested in telecom, and were poorly managed. With respect to their own
investment, the ILECs argue that absent TA96 and TELRIC pricing, they would be
introducing broadband much more rapidly throughout the country.
This position is set forth in Jorde, Sidak and Teece (2000), Hausman (1997, 1998,
2000, and 20002), Kahn (1998), and Sidak and Spulber (1997). Their framework is given
in equation (1), which equates the expected marginal return from investment to its
marginal cost.
(1)

18

λb MRb MPK b + λ g MR g MPK g = c ,

See Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (2001), p.4.
10

where λ b is the probability of the bad state with low demand and λ g is the probability of
the good state with high demand. In MRi MPK i , MRi stands for the marginal revenue
product and MPKi stands for the marginal physical product of capital in state i. The term

c is the user cost of capital. Those who suggest that TA96 has lowered ILEC investment
make two arguments. First, they claim that MRi equals the retail price of telecom output
in state i and that TA96 lowers retail prices, particularly in states of high demand.
Second, they contend that TA96 makes the cost of capital c higher by increasing the risk
of ILEC investment. In both cases the level of capital and, thus, investment that satisfies
the equation is smaller than would otherwise be the case.
Our principal concern with these studies is that they treat ILECs as ordinary,
price-taking competitive firms, rather than as natural monopolists, that control bottleneck
infrastructure. In taking this approach, the prior studies ignore the elementary textbook
lesson that lowering and fixing the prices that monopolists can charge will induce them to
produce more, not less, output. The reason is that when confronted with a fixed price,
monopolists no longer have an incentive to restrict production in order to jack up prices
and profits. Because producing more output entails acquiring more inputs, this means
hiring more labor and investing in more capital.
How does this discussion square with equation (1)? It doesn’t. In the case of a
regulated monopoly, equation (1) doesn’t represent the correct framework for
determining investment. Even if it did, under monopoly marginal revenue, MRi, doesn’t

11

equal price, and eliminating monopoly by fixing a lower output price can actually raise
marginal revenue.19
The third point seemingly missed by the prior studies is that TA96’s leased access
provisions represent an indirect method of regulating the price telecom monopolists can
charge. Instead of simply setting and fixing price, leased access uses competition to do
so. In the course of setting a lower price, leased access expands the market, but also may
transfer some market share to new entrants.

Total market output and capital must

increase, but depending on the share captured by CLECs, ILEC capital may go up or
down. Leased access also transforms ILECs into wholesale producers with respect to
their transactions with the CLECs. And because much of the final output sold by CLECs
employs wholesale network inputs purchased from the ILECs, the effect of retail market
share loss on ILEC capital investments is likely to be minimal. This point is important in
assessing the unbundling simulations presented below.
To summarize, TA96 needs to be understood as part of a general strategy of
restraining a natural monopolist from exercising monopoly power.

The unbundling

requirements of TA96 enforce competitive pricing. While this lowers the prices the
ILECs receive for their products, they are still likely to produce and invest more, either
directly or through their sale of inputs to the CLECs, as they realize that limiting supply

19

When price is fixed (typically at average cost) via regulation, the monopolist ends up at a corner solution
in which marginal cost exceeds marginal revenue with respect to a marginal increase in output and
marginal revenue exceeds marginal cost with respect to decrease in output. In the case of a monopolist,
MRi does not simply equal the monopoly product price, Pim. Instead, it equals the product Pim (1-1/ε),
where ε is the elasticity of demand. Unregulated monopolists operate in regions of the demand curve in
which ε exceeds 1. Consequently, marginal revenue is below price. When regulators set a regulated lower
price, call it Pi ’, they also transform the demand curve facing the monopolist into a horizontal line, with ε =
’
∞. This, in turn, changes marginal revenue from the product Pim (1-1/ε) to Pi . Hence, leased access can
raise ILEC marginal revenue even through it lowers the product price.

12

to increase prices will no longer work. Thus, when one frames the discussion of TA96 as
part of a policy to restrict monopoly power and compares the impact of TA96 with the
price fixing and cutbacks in supply that its absence would foster, the conclusion that
TA96 stimulates overall telecom output and investment seems unavoidable. Moreover,
the proposition, supported by the investment experience reported in Table 1, that it
actually stimulates ILEC production and investment is highly plausible.
An additional, but crucial point ignored by the literature claiming that TELRIC
pricing is “too low,” is that that the TELRIC formula prices unbundled network access at
its average cost rather than its much lower marginal cost. Pricing at marginal cost is, of
course, more efficient because it equates marginal benefits to marginal costs. In contrast,
TELRIC pricing may leave marginal benefits far above marginal costs. Hence, under
TELRIC pricing access rates may be set too high, rather than too low. Indeed, TELRIC
access rates appear to be far too high since the marginal costs of using many of the
elements of the local network are close to zero.

4. Analyzing Telecom Investment as a Dynamic Game
The ability of TA96 to restrain the ILECs from monopolizing the provision of
telecom products depends critically on the degree to which the law encourages CLECs to
enter and compete in local telecom markets. In this section we develop an economic
model that accounts for these factors.

Subsequent sections discuss the model’s

calibration to U.S. county data and present our simulation results.
A serious appraisal of TA96 and its impact on investment, product pricing, and
consumer welfare requires a dynamic model that incorporates multiple telecom products,

13

entry and exit decisions, heterogeneity in local telecom demand, the first-mover
advantage of the ILECs, the ability of multiple competitors to unbundle and use the local
network pipeline, the cost of unbundling, competition from cable companies, the nature
of local telecom competition at any point in time given current entrants, economies of
scope in producing and marketing multiple telecom products in the same geographic
location, and the option values of both waiting to invest and not waiting to invest.20 Each
of these features is included in our analysis. One added feature that we include in our
model but not in the simulations because of computational constraints is economies of
scale in entering geographically adjacent markets.
Since the model has a number of features, it may help to present it first
informally, the task to which we now turn.

Players, Products, and Location
The model accommodates a variable number of players, products and local
markets, which we reference as squares on a grid. In the simulation, however, we posit
four players – an ILEC, two CLECs and a Cable— that market two products – local voice
and data – in 3108 local telecom markets – the counties in the continental United States.
In principal, each player decides each period whether to remain in the squares in which
20

Hausman’s concern about option values affecting telecom investment decisions is certainly appropriate,
but there is no way to evaluate TELRIC pricing without a fully articulated dynamic model in which the
options available to both the ILECs and CLECs are made explicit. Since Hausman fails to present such a
model, he provides no substantiation for his allegation that TELRIC prices are set too low. Furthermore,
the TELRIC formula’s cost of capital takes into account investor considerations of option values. Finally,
many of the points that Hausman makes about CLECs having the option to terminate the purchase of UNEP service from ILECs are not particularly special to this market. Regardless of what line of business one
considers and regardless of whether one is talking about retail or wholesale sales, the reality is that retail
telecom customers almost always retain the option of not buying one’s product leaving one with
unrecoverable sunk costs. Hausman’s concerns also seem to pre-date the FCC’s issuance of its Triennial
Review Order in which is makes clear that it does not intend to require ILECs to provide CLECs access to
services and capabilities that may arise from new ILEC investments or technologies.
14

she has been operating or whether to enter squares in which she hasn’t been operating.
However, in our specific application of the model only the CLECs make entry and exit
decisions.

The Structure of Demand
Demand differs in each square and can change over time.

Specifically, we

assume that squares can differ in the number of consumers they contain and their average
per capita income. Households in these squares are assumed to have Cobb-Douglas
preferences defined over communication services and other goods and services.
Communication services are, themselves, a composite commodity generated by a CobbDouglas production function, whose inputs are the individual telecommunication
products sold on the market, e.g., voice and data.
These assumptions greatly simplify the model and the time required for its
computation. With Cobb-Douglas preferences, households spend a fixed share of their
incomes on communication services each period. And, thanks to the Cobb-Douglas
assumption about the production of communication services, households also spend a
fixed share of their income each period on each particular telecom product. This feature
implies three things. First, there is a unitary elasticity of demand for each telecom
product.

Second, it becomes computationally simple to calculate total countywide

demand for each telecom product once the price of the product is determined; all that is
needed is to divide the price of the product by total countywide income. Third, the
demand for one telecom product does not depend on the prices of the other telecom
products.

15

The Structure of Supply
Telecom firms are assumed to produce their products at constant marginal cost,
but they face two different fixed costs.

One is a fixed cost for entering a square

(geographic market), which must be paid upon initial entry, but need not be paid again as
long as the firm continues to operate in the square. Such fixed entry costs are meant to
capture the costs of installing local infrastructure that is incidental to producing
telecommunications services in the market in question.
The other fixed cost is a flat operating cost that the firm must pay each period that
it operates (produces and sells product) in the square. One can think of these as the
overhead costs of management, accounting, billing, providing customer support,
advertising, maintaining a fringe benefits program, and the flat costs of renting (either
explicitly or implicitly via direct ownership) necessary network facilities.
We can model economies of scale by specifying that the fixed entry and operating
costs for a particular square are lower if the player is already operating in an adjacent
square. And we can model economies of scope by assuming that if a player offers more
than one product in a square, her fixed costs of entering the square to offer the second
product and her fixed operating costs with respect to this second product are lower.

The State of Entry
At the beginning of each period, there is a state of entry that indicates which
players operated in the square in the previous period. The indicator variables identifying
such states of entry represent the model’s state variables. The state space that is relevant
to entry decisions in any given square can get very large in the presence of economies of

16

scale. The reason is that the state of entry in one square can affect entry and exit
decisions in adjacent squares, which, in turn, affect decisions in squares adjacent to the
original adjacent squares, and so on. This implies that the inclusion of scale economies
enlarges the state space relevant to entry and exit in a given square to the state of entry in
all squares. Since the application of our model treats each of the 3108 counties in the
continental United States as a square, incorporating economies of scale would entail
evaluating an enormous set of strategies over an enormous set of state variables –
something far beyond the capacity of conventional computers.

Entry and Exit Decisions
At the beginning of each period, the players decide whether or not to offer each of
the products in each of the squares. The fixed costs they incur for entering a square and
offering service may differ across products and, as indicated, be subject to economies of
both scale and scope. The fixed operating costs can also be subject to economies of
scope, if more than one product is offered by the same player in a given square. The fact
that incumbents don’t need to pay an entry cost, while new entrants do, captures the
advantage of moving first (being an incumbent). In general, entry costs will differ across
players and are influenced by regulatory policy.
Players that exit a market are assumed to abandon their infrastructure. Hence, if
they choose at a future date to enter a square, they will need to repay the fixed entry cost.
This feature may lead players to remain in a square in the short run even if they are losing
money on current operations.

17

Since there are several products per square and many squares, there are many
different “in” or “out” entry strategies over which each player must choose. This choice
is whittled down by solving for the set of pure strategy Nash equilibria, which, in this
setting, refers to the set of strategies in which each player makes an entry decision with
respect to each product and each square that generates the largest expected profits,
measured in present value, given the entry decisions (i.e., the strategy sets) of the other
players. Players consider not just their current profits from entry, but also their future
profits because their future profits can be used to amortize their initial fixed entry costs.

Multiple Equilibria
In entry games of this type, multiple Nash equilibria are to be expected.
Intuitively, if player A enters a market it may be optimal for player B to stay out. But if
player A stays out, it may be optimal for player B to go in. Which outcome arises can be
thought of as a fluke of timing since there is nothing in our model that pins down which
equilibrium is selected.
Our method of resolving the problem of multiple Nash equilibria in a given period
is to assume that each of the Nash equilibria is played with the same probability.21 The
players realize that this randomly determined coordination over particular Nash equilibria
will occur not only in the present, but also at every future date. And they take this into
account in determining their best current entry/exit strategy for each of the possible
current entry/exit strategies of their fellow players.

21

This assumption that a particular equilibrium among the many available is selected is Aumann’s (1974)
correlated equilibrium.
18

Within-Period Product Competition
Once entry and exit decisions have been made, the players operating in a given
square play Cournot. Consequently, the more entrants in a given square, the lower are
product prices, and the better off are consumers.22 Another appealing feature of Cournot
within-period equilibria is that producers with lower marginal costs produce more output
than those with higher marginal costs. Finally, the Cournot Model suggests that the
reduction in product prices associated with more competition can lead the ILEC to invest
more and produce more output. While the Cournot model has lots of appealing features,
the list does not include the ability to consider the bundling of products that players
would likely use to achieve a competitive advantage. Such product bundling will be
examined in future work.

Option Valuation
The model is solved using dynamic programming, which automatically captures
all the options available to the players with respect either to delaying or accelerating their
entry/investment decisions.23 Consequently, it deals explicitly with the concerns raised
by Hausman (1998, 2002) that TA96’s effects must be evaluated with respect to possible
ILEC options to wait to invest. Although our model does not include exogenous pricing
uncertainty, future prices are uncertain because of the correlation on randomly selected
equilibria. Hence, there can be a value to waiting in order to ascertain whether other
firms choose to enter a square.

22

This assumes that new entrants do not have higher marginal costs, on average, than incumbents.

23

If the last period is set sufficiently far into the future, its choice will not affect the model’s predicted
current behavior.
19

The Formal Model
Time runs from t=1 to t=T. There are Z players, V network inputs, and F= H × M
squares, where H is the number of north-south squares and M is the number of east-west
squares. For each product and for each player, there are N=2F possible states of entry at
the beginning of any period, where a state of entry is a description of all the squares in
which a player was operating in the previous period.

Entry Space
The possible states of entry of player i with respect to product k at the beginning
of any time t are given by the N rows of the N × F matrix E, with row vector ei. A value
of 0 indicates entry has not yet occurred. A value of 1 indicates entry has occurred. Note
that there are F elements in each row vector – one for each square.

(1)
e1
e2
e3
e4
e5
e6
e7
e8
.
.
.
eN

= (0,0,0,0,…,0)
= (1,0,0,0, …,0)
= (0,1,0,0,…,0)
= (1,1,0,0,…,0)
= (0,0,1,0,…,0)
= (1,0,1,0, …,0)
= (0,1,1,0, …,0)
= (1,1,1,0, …,0)
.
.
.
= (1,1,1, …,1)

The State of Entry
Let mikt denote the entry state of player i with respect to product k at the beginning
of time t. The value of mikt is a number ranging from 1 through N indicating which of the

20

N row vectors of E is applicable. The entry state of all players at the beginning of time t
is given by the Z × V matrix At, whose row vectors (one for each player) are given below.
(2)

a1t = (m11t , m12t, …, m1Vt)
a2t = (m21t , m22t, …, m2Vt)
.
.
.
.
.
.
aZt = (mZ1t , mZ2t, …, mZVt)

Each element in At can take on N different values. Hence, there are NZV different possible
states of nature (At matrices) at time t.
Strategies
In each period, each player can play any of the rows of E; i.e., players can stay
where they are in terms of entry, chose to leave squares they entered in the past, or
choose to enter squares in which they were not operating in the previous period. There
are G = NV different strategies for each player, because there are V products and N
possible entry vectors for each product. Index these strategies by g, where g = 1,…,G.
Let sg(i)t refers to strategy g undertaken by player i at time t, where strategy vector sg(i)t =

(jg(i)1t , jg(i)2t , …,jg(i)Vt ), for g(i)= 1,…,G. This vector indicates the entry decisions made
by player i at time t for each product given that player i is playing strategy g(i). For
example, suppose there are three products (V = 3) and consider sg(i)t = (4,7,2). This
strategy entails player i entering the market for product 1 in all the squares determined by
the row vector e4, entering the market for product 2 in all the squares determined by the
row vector e7, and entering the market for product 3 in all the squares determined by the
row vector e2.

21

Determination of Entry at Time T
Entry decisions at time T need to be made for each possible state of the entry
matrix AT. For each such possible state we calculate all pure strategy equilibria at time T.
We then assume that each of these equilibria arises at time T with equal probability; i.e.,
that there is a random correlation mechanism that chooses the equilibrium.

Calculating Pure Strategy Equilibria at Time T
Let πit (sg(1)1t, sg(2)2t,…, sg(Z)Zt; At ) for g(1) = 1,…,G; g(2) = 1,…,G; …; g(Z) =

1,…,G; specify the net income earned by firm i in period t given the state of entry is At
from playing strategy sgit given that player 1 plays sg(1)1t, player 2 plays sg(2)2t, etc. For

(sg(1)1T, sg(2)2T,…, sg(i)iT, …, sg(Z)ZT; AT ) to be a pure strategy at T, it must be the case that,
(3)

π1T (sg(1)T, sg(2)T,…, sg(Z)T; AT ) ≥ π1T (sjT, sg(2)T,…, sg(Z)T; AT ), for all j ≠ g(1).
π2T (sg(1)T, sg(2)T,…, sg(Z)T; AT ) ≥ π2T (sg(1)T, sjT,…, sg(Z)T; AT ), for all j ≠ g(2).
.
.
.

.
.
.

πZT (sg(1)T, sg(2)T,…, sg(Z)T; AT ) ≥ πZT (sg(1)T, sg(2)T,…, sjT; AT ), for all j ≠ g(Z).

Determination of Entry at t<T
Entry decisions at time t need to be made for each possible state-of-entry matrix

At. For each possible state-of-entry matrix we calculate all the economy’s pure strategy
equilibria at time t. As in the case of entry at time T, we assume that each of the time t<T
equilibria arise with equal probability.

22

Calculating Pure Strategy Equilibria at Time t
Let Nt(At) equal the number of pure strategy equilibria at time t given that the
entry state at time t is At. Let nt = 1,…,Nt(At) reference these equilibria. Define Vit(At) as
the expected present value of net income earned by firm i calculated at the beginning of
time t given the entry state at time t is At.

(4)

Vit ( At ) =

N t ( At )

π it (n; At ) + δVit +1 ( At +1 (nt ))

nt =1

N t ( At )

∑

,

where ViT+1(AT+1) = 0. The term δ is the discount factor. The index nt, which references
the pure strategy equilibrium played at time t, determines the entry state that will prevail
at time t+1. Hence, At+1 is written as a function of nt. For (sg(1)t, sg(2)t,…, sg(i)t, …, sg(Z)t;
At ) to be a pure strategy at t, it must satisfy
(5)

π1t (sg(1)t, sg(2)t,…, sg(Z)t; At )+ δV1t+1(At+1(sg(1)1t, sg(2)2t,…, sg(Z)Zt)) ≥
π1t (sj1t, sg(2)2t,…, sg(Z)Zt; At ) + δV1t+1(At+1(sj1t, sg(2)2t,…, sg(Z)Zt)),

for all j ≠ g(1).

π1t (sg(1)1t, sg(2)2t,…, sg(Z)Zt; At )+ δV1t+1(At+1(sg(1)t, sg(2)t,…, sg(Z)t)) ≥
π1t (sjt, sg(2)t,…, sg(Z)t; At ) + δV1t+1(At+1(sjt, sg(2)t,…, sg(Z)t)),

for all j ≠ g(2).
.
.
.
.
.
.
π1t (sg(1)t, sg(2)t,…, sg(Z)t; At )+ δV1t+1(At+1(sg(1)t, sg(2)t,…, sg(Z)t)) ≥

π1t (sg(1)t, sg(2)t,…, sg(Z)t; At ) + δV1t+1(At+1(sg(1)t, sg(2)t,…, sjt)),

for all j ≠ g(Z).

The equations defining pure strategy equilibria are the same as those for time T except
that the players consider not simply current net revenue from playing a particular
strategy, but also the expected present value of future revenue associated with entering

23

the next period from the entry state to which their own strategic entry decisions as well as
those of their competitors lead.

The Structure of Demand and Supply
Assume the utility of agents is Cobb-Douglas in communications, c, and other
goods, d, where
(7)

U(c,d) = cα h(1-α)

Each agent’s demand for communications is given by c = αy/pc, where y stands for
income and pc stands for the price of communications. Each agent produces
communications based on a Cobb-Douglas production function that takes as inputs the V
communications products that include local telephone and data. Each agent’s production
function is given by
(8)

c = Hq1

β1

q2

β2

… qV

βV

j=V

, where βV = 1 - Σ βj
j=1

Cost minimization implies that input expenditure shares equal their production
coefficients.
(9)

piqi = βi E

The constant returns property means that total costs equal total expenditures. Hence,
(10)

pcc = E ,

where pi is the price (user cost) of input i. And since pcc = αy, we have
(11)

piqi =βiαy

or
(12)

qi =βiαy/pi

24

The aggregate demand for telecom input i in the telecom market in question, Qi , is then,
Qi =βiαY/pi ,

(13)

where Y is aggregate income in the local telecom market.

The Cournot Game
A player j producing telecom input i playing Cournot will set

ηθji =(pi – mcji)/pi ,

(14)

where η is the inverse demand elasticity in the market for the input, θji is the output share
of player j in the production of good i, and mcji is the marginal cost of player j in
producing input i. In this model, η = 1. Summing the above equation over all players j,
we have that
vi

(15)

pi = Σ mcij / (vi – 1),
j=1

where vi is the number of players in the market.

Summarizing and Evaluating the Solution
This solution is simple. In each square for each configuration of entrants being
considered, we simply add up the marginal costs of the players, divide by one less than
their number, and that’s the price that will prevail. The formula, Qi =βiαY/pi can be used
to determine Qi, and each entrant j’s output can be determined by multiplying qj=θjQi,
where θj=(pi – mcji)/pi. Player j’s profit for operating in the square for the period in
question is given by piqj –fecj – focj – mcjqj, where fecj refers to the fixed cost of entry for

25

player j if she hasn’t already entered the market and focj stands for player j’s fixed
operating cost.
A shortcoming of this method of modeling demand is that the solution is not well
defined in the case of a monopolist because the demand elasticity for each telecom input
equals unity. We assume that when there is a single player supplying an input in a given
market, the player is forced by regulators to price at levels that roughly match current
actual circumstances.
The model’s solution has the property that a player’s profits in producing one
telecom input don’t depend on the amount of the other telecom inputs she supplies in the
market (square). The reason is that the demand curve for input i depends only on its own
price and not on the prices of the other inputs. Were this not the case, a Cournot player in
a square supplying more than one input would have to consider how her supply of one
input altered the price and thus demand for the other input(s) she supplies.
5. Calibration

To focus the model on the current policy debate, we assume that in each county
there are two markets, local voice and data, and that the ILEC offers both of these
services in each county in the initial period. We also assume that cable companies have
entered some, but not all counties, to offer CATV service – and if they are offering
CATV service in a county, they also offer data in that county. Because of franchise
limitations, cable companies are assumed never to enter additional counties, nor to exit
counties. Our procedure for specifying which counties are served by cable companies is
to use FCC statistics that report the percentage of zip codes in each state having particular

26

numbers of broadband providers.24 We assume these statewide percentages of zip codes
apply similarly to the counties in a state and thus infer the percentage of counties in each
state having two or more broadband providers. This percentage is then assumed to be the
percentage of counties served by a cable provider. Next, we rank the counties in each
state by population density and, starting with the county with the highest density, we
work down the ranking until we have selected enough counties to account for the
specified percentage of counties with a cable provider. Thus, for Alaska, the FCC report
indicates that 22 percent of the Alaska’s zip codes have two or more broadband
providers. We then assume that the 22 percent of Alaska's counties with the highest
population density have a cable provider.
In addition to the ILEC and cable company providers of voice or data services in
a square, we assume that there are two identical CLECs, which decide individually
whether to enter one or both of these product markets in each particular square.
When the ILEC is the sole provider of voice in a particular county, we assume, to
repeat, that the price for voice is set via regulation. We refer to this regulated price as the
regulated monopoly price. The same assumption is made with respect to the price of data
in counties in which the ILEC is the sole provider of data. However, if one or more
competitors enter a county in either voice or data or both, we assume that prices are set
according to Cournot competition.
Interestingly, there is no guarantee that Cournot competition will generate lower
prices than those currently set by regulators. The prices that emerge in a county with one
or more competitors will depend on the precise number of competitors and their marginal
24

“FCC Releases Data on High-Speed Services for Internet Access,” FCC Press Release, July 10, 2003.
Available at: http://www.fcc.gov/Bureaus/Common_Carrier/Reports/FCC-State_Link/IAD/hspd0603.pdf.

27

costs of production. Since the marginal costs facing CLECs depend on the UNE rates set
by state PUCs, PUCs should be aware that if they set their UNE rates too high, they may
be leaving consumers facing higher telecom prices under “competition” than under
regulated monopoly. This, in fact, is what we find in a minority of counties in states with
particularly high UNE rates.
We assume that preferences of residential consumers for communication services
are identical across all counties. However, total residential consumer demand in each
county will differ based on the county’s number of households and average level of
household income. Our county counts of total households and our county averages of
household

income

come

from

the

2000

U.S.

Census

(available

at

http://www.factfinder.census.gov).
Households are assumed to spend three percent of their income on
communication services. This percentage accords with findings from the Consumer
Expenditure Survey and is used to identify the model’s Cobb-Douglas preference
parameter. Of the total expenditure on communication services, we assume that 70
percent is spent on local voice and 30 percent is spent on data.25
Another component of demand for communication services in each county is
business demand, which we assume is inelastic. Hence, in each county we add a fixed
level of expenditure by businesses on voice and data services to the respective household
demands for those services. We determine these fixed expenditures in the following
manner. The PACE Report details total business lines per state,26 and a 2002 Commerce

25

“Consumer Telecom Spending Increases by 6% from Previous Year,” TNS Telecoms Report, July 15,
2003, posted at http://www.tnstelecoms.com/press-7-15-03.html.

26

The “UNE-P Fact Report: January 2003"
http://www.pacecoalition.org/UNEPfactreport_1_2003/
28

by

the

PACE

Coalition

is

available

at

Capital Markets report provides estimates of business revenues per line per ILEC
provider.27 We multiply each state’s total business lines by the state’s ILEC’s business
revenue per line to arrive at our estimate of total voice business expenditures by state.
We allocate this overall state expenditure across the counties in the state based on the
cross-county distribution of total state employment, where our county employment data
are taken from the 2000 U.S. Census.28
We follow the same county-allocation procedure with respect to our estimate of
total business spending on broadband in each state. This estimate is determined by
multiplying our estimate of each state’s total business voice expenditure by the nationwide ratio of total business broadband spending to total business voice spending. Our
estimate of total business broadband spending comes from data reported in an ISP-Planet
article posted at http://www.isp-planet.com/research/2002/cable_020524.html.

This

article indicates that small businesses are spending about $2.3 billion in 2002 on
broadband and that they account for 34 percent of the total business broadband market.
Dividing $2.3 billion by .34 gives $6.8 billion, which is our estimate of total business
broadband spending in 2002. Our measure of total business voice spending is determined
by simply adding together our state estimates of business voice spending.

27

See Exhibit 6 in Anna Maria Kovacs, Kristin L. Burns, and Gregory S. Vitale, “The Status of 271 and
UNE-Platform in the Regional Bells’ Territories,” Commerce Capital Markets, Inc. November 8, 2002.
Although this report’s authors note numerous weaknesses in the development of this business revenues
number and suspect that their estimates are much too high, we are not aware of a superior public estimate
for this figure.

28

We received these data via a special request made to the U.S. Census Department.
29

Incorporating Current Policy
To accommodate current policy, we expanded our model to allow CLECs to
decide each period whether or not to operate in a county under UNEs. Recall that to offer
voice, CLECs purchase a platform of local network elements from ILECs at wholesale
rates and add to it their own marketing and customer support to create retail voice
services to sell to the public. This does not require CLECs to collocate in ILEC central
offices in order to access physically the local phone line (loop).

Such collocation and

physical connection to the customer’s loop is, however, required for the CLEC to be able
to offer broadband.
When a CLEC decides to offer data, it has the option of offering voice as well.
Because CLECs are more than willing to provide both data and voice services over the
loops they access from the ILEC, we assume that when offering data, CLECs need pay
only a single entry fee and a single fixed annual operating fee to enter a county and be
able to provide both voice and data; i.e., we assume strong economies of scope in
providing both products. The result is that CLECs that enter a local market to offer data
also choose to provide voice. But given the prohibitive operational and cost impediments
enumerated above in backhauling voice signals from a collocation into the CLEC’s own
network, we assume, realistically, that such CLECs return the voice signal to the ILEC
switch from this collocation point and offer voice under UNE-P. As discussed in the
calibration section, we add an additional marginal cost to account for data-providing
CLECs’ extra costs to offering voice.

30

All players (ILEC and CLECs) must cover their fixed operating costs in each
period they are present in a square -- regardless of whether they are offering just voice, or
voice and data.

Additional Parameters
We assume that the regulated monopoly price for voice in each state is set at the
average residential revenue per line per state, which, across all states, averages roughly
$29.29 We set the regulated monopoly price for data at $50 based on our sense of the
average broadband price that would prevail around the country in the absence of any
competition. We set the ILEC’s marginal cost of providing voice at $5. Note that this is
the ILEC’s short-run marginal network costs for providing an extra voice line of service.
We treat the ILEC’s ongoing marketing, customer support, and sales costs in a given
county as fixed operating costs that total $50 per household times the number of
households in the county.
Our source for each state’s actual UNE-P rates is the above-referenced 2002 Ex
Parte submission. Our source for state-specific TELRIC UNE-P rates are the TELRIC
rates calculated from the UNE version of the FCC’s 1998 Synthesis Model, with a 5
percent annual adjustment to reflect intervening reductions in input prices and unit costs.
State-specific actual and TELRIC UNE-P rates are reported in Table 2. Consider
first current UNE-P rates, and note the wide range in values, from a low of $12.42 in
Indiana to a high of $45.64 in West Virginia. About three-fifths of the states are setting

29

See Ex Parte submission from Joan Marsh, AT&T, to Secretary, FCC, WC Docket No. 01-338,
September 25, 2002. These data were collected at a time when there was relatively little voice competition
in the country.
31

UNE-P rates from $18 to $25. Only 7 states have UNE-P rates that are reasonably close
to the national weighted average TELRIC rate of $15.10.
Next consider the true TELRIC UNE-P rates. These range in value from a low of
$9.45 in Washington, D.C. to a high of $27.39 in Missouri. Thirty-eight states, including
the District of Columbia, have true TELRIC rates below $18. In only 5 states do
TELRIC rates exceed $22. While TELRIC UNE-P prices are, on average, 27.9 percent
lower than current UNE prices, five states – Indiana, Kentucky, Maine, Missouri, and
Vermont have set current UNE-P rates below the TELRIC levels, with the difference
reaching as high as $1.74 in Indiana. On the other hand, current UNE-P prices exceed
their corresponding TELRIC levels by $6 or more in 34 states, including Washington,
D.C. The largest differential -- $21.75 -- arises in the case of West Virginia, where the
current UNE –P rate is $45.64 even though the true TELRIC UNE-P rate is only $23.89.
CLECs that provide voice-only services using UNEs are assumed to face a
marginal cost equal to the UNE-P (whether actual or TELRIC) rate plus $5 to cover
customer support costs. Such CLECs incur no fixed entry cost, but do need to pay fixed
operating costs on an ongoing basis for marketing, sales, and customer support, which we
also take as $50 per household times the number of households. CLECs that operate in a
given county (square) to provide data and voice are assumed to face a marginal cost for
offering voice equal to the prevailing UNE-P rate plus $5 for customer support costs plus
$5 for additional costs of interfacing with the ILECs to hand back the voice portion of the
signal. The marginal cost of providing data is set at $20 for both the local ILEC and
cable companies and at $25 for CLECs, where the difference reflects the higher CLEC
costs for acquiring and transporting the data signal to their network.

32

The fixed cost faced by a CLEC to enter a county and operate under UNE-L is set
at $75 times the number of households in the county. And the CLEC’s fixed operating
cost each year under UNE-P is, again, set at $50 times the number of households in the
county. Note that CLECs that enter under UNE-L and UNE-P to market both voice and
data incur only a single fixed entry cost and need pay only a single annual fixed operating
cost.
The final parameter we need to discuss is the choice of discount rate applicable to
CLEC decision-making.

We use an 11 percent real discount rate.

This seems, if

anything, to be on the low side, given the considerable risks of new carriers entering and
competing in the telecom market with its ever-changing policies and policymakers. Were
we to use a higher discount rate, our model would likely generate less data entry than we
report. The reason is that for CLECs to enter providing data, they need to recoup their
fixed entry costs. But the higher the discount rate, the smaller will be the present value of
the future profits from entry that need to be set against the immediate cost of entry.

6. Findings

We now present two sets of findings, one from running the model based on the
actually prevailing UNE rates and the other based on running the model assuming each
state adopts completely TELRIC UNE rates. To limit the paper’s length, we show only
aggregate results in most tables. However, we discuss some of the state-specific results
in

the

text.

The

state-specific

results

http://econ.bu.edu/kotlikoff.

33

for

all

tables

are

posted

at

The Effect of UNE-P Rates on Voice and Data Prices
Table 3 shows the impact on voice and data prices of introducing UNE-P
competition under both actual and TELRIC rates. The top set of results is for the entire
country. The next set of results divides counties into four groups based on whether their
levels of per capita income are higher or lower than average, and whether their
population density is higher or lower than average. HYHD stands for high income, high
density. HYLD stands for high income, low density. LYHD stands for low income, high
density. And LYLD stands for low income, low density.

Average Voice Prices Across the Country30
Table 3’s results compare our measure of the regulated monopoly price with the
prices that prevail under the two UNE pricing regimes. Each of the regulated monopoly
prices reported in the table represents a household weighted average of the counties
included in average. Our association of regulated monopoly prices for voice with the
average state voice prices that prevailed in 2000 is admittedly arbitrary since these
figures come from a period marked by some, albeit very limited, competition. In any
case, these state averages range from $28 to $31 per line per month, with the national
average voice price equaling $28.93. In the case of data, we’ve assumed, to repeat, a
regulated monopoly price of $50 per month per broadband connection. Since the model’s
terminal date of year 20 is set to limit computation time and is, in that sense, arbitrary, we
focus here on prices and entry that arise in the initial year following the introduction of
either actual or TELRIC UNE-P rates.
30

All of the calculated figures in this paper should be only taken as suggestive of the model’s results based
on a uniform nationwide parameterization. We have not attempted to capture all of the influences
surrounding these competitive interactions.
34

First consider UNE-P competition based on the actual UNE rates now being set
by state PUCs. According to our model, this policy actually raises the nationwide
average voice price by $1.68 relative to the regulated monopoly price.31 This reflects the
point we made above that if UNE rates are set too high, they will deliver prices that are
higher than those arising under regulated monopoly.
Next consider the impact of switching from current to TELRIC UNE-P rates.
This lowers the nation’s average voice price by 15.5 percent from $30.61 to $25.86.
Note that the average voice price is now lower than the regulated monopoly price, by
10.6 percent.
Table 3’s next set of results, which break out prices based on county income and
density, show that counties of all income and density levels stand to gain from switching
from current to TELRIC UNE pricing. The largest gains arise in counties with the
highest densities and highest levels of per capital income. In counties with high per
capita income and high density, the potential gain is 22.6 percent. For counties with low
density and low income per capita, the potential gain is 8.7 percent.

Voice Prices in Individual States
Under current UNE rates, voice prices range from a low of $23.09 in Illinois to a
high of $42.21 in South Dakota. These differences partly reflect the relative sizes of the
markets in the particular counties in the two states, but they are primarily the
31

Recall that this assumes no retail rate regulation. The model’s predicted increase over time in the
average voice price reflects the 20-year length of the model. As this terminal date for competition and
entry approaches, CLECs become more willing to enter both voice and data as opposed to just voice
because they know that in the future there will be less entry given that competitors will have less time to
recoup their fixed entry costs. As indicated above, the marginal costs that CLECs face for voice given that
they are offering data are assumed to be $5 higher than under just voice, which explains the higher
equilibrium prices generated in the Cournot quantity setting game.
35

consequence of the UNE rates set by those states. As indicated in table 2, the Illinois
current UNE rate is $12.69, while South Dakota’s is $34.82.

Only three states --

California, Illinois, Indiana, and Michigan – have voice prices that fall below $25 per line
when current UNE rates are run through the model.32 At the other extreme, three states -Idaho, South Dakota, and Wyoming – have current UNE prices above $38. By way of
comparison, voice prices under a TELRIC UNE rate regime range between $21.52 in
Illinois and $36.78 in Wyoming.
According to the model, some states would experience particularly large voice
price reductions in moving from current to TELRIC UNE rates. In Massachusetts, for
example, the price reduction is 39.9 percent. In South Dakota, the reduction is 25.9
percent. And in the state of Washington, it’s 27.8 percent.

Data Prices
Turning to data prices, note that regardless of whether UNE-P is priced at actual
or TELRIC rates, there is sufficient CLEC entry to substantially lower broadband prices.
In the case of current UNE pricing, the resulting data price is $37.41, which is 25.2
percent below the regulated monopoly price. In the case of TELRIC UNE-P pricing, the
data price is slightly higher -- $38.56, but this is still 22.9 percent below the regulated
monopoly price. In contrast to UNE voice pricing, there are much larger differences in
data pricing across regions that are distinguished by per capita income and density.
Interestingly, low density-low income counties experience particularly low data
prices under TELRIC UNE rates -- $37.85 per month compared with $39.43 per month in

32

The Indiana PUC has recently raised its UNE rates significantly. See
http://www.in.gov/iurc/press/2004/42393_010504.pdf
36

the high density-high income counties. The explanation here appears to lie in the fact
that cable companies aren’t competing in the low-density counties. Consequently, there
is sufficient profit opportunity for two CLECs to enter a number of such counties, which
lowers the data price by a greater percentage.
There is a significant spread across states in data prices. For example, under the
policy of current UNE rates, data prices range from $33.04 in Kansas to $41.85 in West
Virginia.

Consumer and Business Voice Savings from Implementing TELRIC UNE-P Rates
Table 4 shows for each state and all states combined the annual local voice
savings accruing to consumers and businesses associated with switching from current to
TELRIC UNE rates. The table assumes that states with UNE rates below our TELRIC
proxy will not adjust upward their UNE rates.
Totaled across all the states, the annual savings is just shy of $15 billion. That’s a
lot of money. Indeed, it exceeds the gross domestic product of most countries. Those
states whose UNE rates are the farthest from TELRIC levels and have the largest markets
obviously have the most to gain from lowering their rates. Texas, New York, and
Massachusetts stand to gain $1.9 billion, $1.8 billion, and $1.1 billion, respectively. But
smaller, less populated, and less wealthy states, like Oklahoma, also could do very well
by changing their UNE pricing policy. Oklahoma’s potential gain is $129 million.

37

The Nature of Entry
Table 5 examines the structure of competition in the voice market and, thus, the
entry that arises, under actual and TELRIC UNE-P regimes.33

The results clearly

indicate that there is significantly more entry and competition under TELRIC pricing. In
the case of current UNE rates, 36.2 percent of households end up where they started –
living in counties with no competition and being forced to purchase voice services from
the ILEC.

The introduction of TELRIC pricing cuts the percentage of households

without choice almost in half. Now, only 19.3 percent of households live in noncompetitive counties. Furthermore, in the actual UNE rate regime, only 11.6 percent of
households live in counties that experience entry by two CLECs, whereas this figure rises
to 17.6 percent when TELRIC rates are substituted.
As one would expect, entry and competition is most pronounced in the high
income/high-density counties.

In the case of TELRIC pricing, 99.0 percent of all

households in such counties experience entry by at least one CLEC, and 29.1 percent
experience entry by two CLECs.34
On the other hand, because the rich, dense markets already enjoy some
competition under current UNE-P rates, movement to TELRIC pricing is relatively more
important for low-income, low-density counties in generating competition.

Indeed,

33

There are a couple of counties in which ILECs stop providing service in the short run. That’s why the
row percentages in Table 4 may not always sum to 100 percent.

34

The dynamics of entry shown in Table 5 are also quite interesting. There is much more entry in the
medium and long runs than in the short run. This additional entry occurs lonly when the CLEC offers data
in addition to voice. The reason is that the CLECs realize that early entry, while it offers a longer period to
recoup the fixed cost of entering for data, is also riskier because the likelihood that competitors will enter in
the future is higher. This likelihood of future entry declines the closer the players get to the model’s 20year end date as potential competitors realize that there is too little time to recoup their investments. Stated
differently, the barrier to entry represented by the fixed entry cost is a greater obstacle to entry when this
cost much be amortized over only a few years.

38

TELRIC pricing raises the fraction of households in such counties that can enjoy the
fruits of competition from 44.3 percent to 62.2 percent.
For individual states, the structure of competition can differ dramatically,
particularly with current UNE rates.

At one extreme is Arizona in which there is

essentially no entry under current UNE rates.35 At the other extreme are California,
Michigan, and Washington D.C., in which essentially all households experience
competition. With TELRIC UNE pricing, the share of Arizona residents that enjoy a
choice in providers rises from less than 1 percent to 83.6 percent.
Table 6 provides further information about the nature of entry. It shows the type
of CLEC entry under both current and TELRIC UNE-P rates. In the table “Voice Only”
stands for only one CLEC entering under for voice. “Combined” stands for one CLEC
entering for both voice and data. “Combined/Voice” stands for two CLECs, one of
which enters for both voice and data and the other of which enters just for voice.
“Voice/Voice” stands for two CLECs, both of which enter just for voice.
“Combined/Combined” stands for two CLECs, both of which enter for both voice and
data. And “No CLECs” refers to counties with no CLEC entry.
The table shows that pricing UNEs at TELRIC rather than actual rates increases
overall CLEC entry, particularly for voice. With TELRIC UNE pricing, over two-fifths
of households live in counties with one CLEC that offers voice. But almost one half of
households live in counties in which one or more CLECs offer both voice and data.
Interestingly, the model generates no cases in which two CLECs enter just to provide
voice.

35

Since this paper was developed, the Arizona PUC has reduced its UNE rates, and entry may be
occurring.
39

The table also indicates more entry by CLECs into data markets in low-densitylow-income counties due to the absence of competition from cable companies. This
explains why the move to TELRIC pricing ends up lowering data prices by more in lowdensity-low-income counties than in high-density-high-income ones.

CLEC Shares in Voice and Data Markets
Tables 7 and 8 show the CLEC shares of the voice and data markets, respectively.
According to the model, with current UNE rates, CLECs have 10.7 percent of the voice
market and 13.1 percent of the data market. The respective voice and data market shares
reported by the FCC in mid 2003 are 14.7 percent and 6.6 percent.36 So our model, while
in the same ballpark with respect to the actual and predicted levels of these shares, does
not fit the data perfectly.
According to the model, the move to true TELRIC pricing raises our model’s
CLEC voice market share from 10.7 percent to 16.5 percent. On the other hand, it lowers
the CLEC data market share from 13.1 percent to 12.1 percent. The CLEC voice share
depends significantly on the type of county being considered. In the case of high-income
- high-density counties, the model predicts a 14.8 percent CLEC share with current UNEP rates and a 21.6 percent share with TELRIC UNE-P rates. For low-income – low
density counties, the CLEC voice share is 6.7 percent under current UNE-P rates and
13.2 percent under TELRIC rates.

Hence, in low-income – low-density counties

competition is relatively more sensitive to the level of UNE-P rates.

36

http://hraunfoss.fcc.gov/edocs_public/attachmatch/DOC-242397A1.pdf and
http://hraunfoss.fcc.gov/edocs_public/attachmatch/DOC-242398A1.pdf
40

The Distribution of Price Changes Across Households
Table 9 shows the share of households experiencing particular voice-price
changes relative to the regulated monopoly price under the current UNE-P regime. In the
current UNE-P regime, almost two fifths of households end up facing a higher voice
price than the regulated monopoly price. Indeed, over a quarter of the households
experience price increases in excess of 20 percent. For the roughly three fifths of
households who see their prices fall, the declines are generally modest. Fewer than 6
percent of all households experience voice price reductions greater than 20 percent.
These nation-wide results mask, however, major differences across states in the treatment
of households. In some states, like Louisiana, all households experience price hikes,
while in other states, like Illinois, all households experience price cuts.
As Table 10 shows, this heterogeneity is much less pronounced in the case of
TELRIC UNE-P rates. In this case, almost all households experience price reductions in
voice relative to the regulated monopoly price. To be precise, more than a quarter of
households experience price reductions in excess of 20 percent, and almost three fifths of
households enjoy voice price cuts of 10 percent or more. As in the case of current UNEP rates, households in different states have quite different experiences. In New York,
almost four-fifths of households enjoy a 30 to 40 percent reduction in voice prices,
whereas in Arkansas almost two thirds of households experience a modest price increase
compared to the regulated monopoly price.
Table 11 shows the distribution of price changes from implementing TELRIC
rather than current UNE-P rates. Almost two-fifths of households see their voice bills
fall by at least 20 percent, and over one fifth experience a 30 percent or greater reduction

41

in these bills. In certain states, the price reductions are really big. In Massachusetts and
Maryland, for example, over three-fifths of households experience voice price reductions
ranging from 40 to 50 percent.

Changes in Investment and Hiring Outlays
Our next two Tables, 12 and 13, consider how the two UNE pricing regimes
affect outlays on investment and new hiring over 1, 5, and 20 years relative to the level of
these cost outlays that would have occurred with no competition (no CLEC entry). The
results are again displayed on a household-weighted basis. Outlays refer here to all cost
expenditures, whether these expenditures are entry costs, operating costs, or marginal
costs. These outlays will finance either new investment or the purchase of additional
labor services. In the case of 5-year and 20-year cost outlays, total outlays over those
periods are measured in present value.
According to table 12, most households – about two thirds of the total -- live in
counties that experience increased spending on investment and new hiring in response to
CLEC voice entry based on current UNE prices.

For example, 29.2 percent of

households live in counties that enjoy a 30 percent or greater hike in telecom cost outlays
in the first year after current UNE rates are introduced. Going out 20 years, 17.1 percent
of households live in such counties.
While the table indicates a positive outlay response in those counties containing
most of the nation’s households, some counties experience a reduction in outlays from
the introduction of UNE-based voice competition. The reason is that the price increases
that arise in certain high UNE rate counties lead to cut backs in ILEC cost outlays that

42

more than offset the increase in CLEC outlays.

These results, should, again be taken

with a grain of salt since they may simply reflect our overstatement of true TELRIC rates
in the states in question.
Table 13 shows that with TELRIC UNE rates, there is also much more telecom
investment and hiring expenditures than with no competition. There is also somewhat
more of such expenditures than arises under current UNE rates.

In particularly,

substantially fewer counties experience reductions in telecom investment and hiring
outlays. Table 14 presents the absolute present value dollar outlays on investment and
hiring occurring over specified numbers of years under the regulated monopoly structure
and under policies of actual and TELRIC UNE rates. The table shows that TELRIC rates
promote the greatest investment and hiring. Over a 20 years period, the present value of
investment is almost one quarter higher than with the ILECs having exclusive control of
the market. This 20-year outlay total is almost 5 percent higher with TELRIC UNE rates
than with actual UNE rates. The absolute numbers are also important. According to the
table, over a five-year period, the emergence of competition should mean $71 billion
more telecom investment than under the monopoly structure that prevailed prior to the
Telecom Act of 1996. Over 20 years, competition should add $155 billion to aggregate
investment.

Conclusion

Our conclusions number five.

First, there is strong empirical evidence that

telecom competition promotes telecom investment. Second, there are solid theoretical
arguments to explain that outcome. Third, the policy debate on telecom investment and

43

regulation has been framed within a static model that fails to capture the dynamic and
highly uncertain entry, pricing, and investment game being played by the ILECs, CLECs,
and cable companies. Consequently, it is difficult to assess the relevance of many prior
telecom studies to the actual telecom market. Fourth, a model rich enough to capture the
complexities of the telecom industry must a) be solved on the computer and b) carefully
calibrated if it is to provide real insight into the policies and other factors affecting that
critical market. We view this paper as a first step in that direction. Fifth, our model
indicates that were UNE rates set at their proper TELRIC level throughout the country,
telecom entry, investment and employment outlays, and output would increase
significantly and local voice prices would fall dramatically. To be precise, telecom
investment and employment outlays would increase by over one fifth in counties
containing the majority of the U.S. population and by over one third in counties
containing almost one third of the population.

44

References

Aumann, Robert, “Subjectivity and Correlation in Randomized Strategies,” Journal of
Mathematical Economics, 1: 67-96, 1974.
Barnett, William P., and Glenn R. Carroll. “How Institutional Constraints Affected the
Organization of Early U.S. Telephony.” Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization
9:98-126, 1993
Hall, Robert E., “Rescuing Competiton to Stimulate Telecom Growth,” mimeo, Stanford
University, September 28, 2001.
Hausman, Jerry, “The Effect of Sunk Costs in Telecommunications Regulation,” mimeo,
MIT, October 2, 1998.
Hausman, Jerry, “The Effect of Mandatory Unbundling on Investment in Broadband and
Other New Technologies,” mimeo, MIT, April 21, 2002.
Hubbard, Glenn R. and William Lehr, “Telecommunications, the Internet, and the Cost of
Capital,” mimeo, Columbia University, May 4, 2000.
McDonald, Robert and Daniel Siegel, “The Value of Waiting to Invest,” Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 101, November 1986, 707-23.
Jorde, Thomas M., J. Gregory Sidak, and David J. Teece, “Innovation, Investment, and
Unbundling,” Yale Journal of Regulation, 17 (1), Winter, 2000.
Kotlikoff, Laurence J., “On the Broadband Mess,” The Milken Review, First Quarter
2003.
Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, “The Development of
Broadband Access in OECD Countries,” October 29, 2001.

45

Table 1
Telecom Gross Investment, 1992-2002
(billions of dollars)

Year

CLECs

ILECs

Total

1992

Na

17.5

17.5

1993

Na

17.5

17.5

1994

Na

17.5

17.5

1995

Na

18.0

18.0

1996

Na

20.8

20.8

1997

5.0

21.5

26.5

1998

9.2

22.2

31.4

1999

16.8

22.8

39.6

2000

21.7

27.8

49.5

2001

12.3

28.1

40.4

2002

10.7*

24.2*

34.9*

Source: ARMIS data provided by William Lehr. ILEC investment includes investment by
Estimate for CLECs provided by William Lehr.
Estimate for ILECs based on a May 8, 2002 Banc of America Securities.
Na – not available, * indicates preliminary estimate for the year from those sources

46

Table 2
Actual and TELRIC UNE Rates by State

State

National
Average*
AL
AR
AZ
CA
CO
CT
DC
DE
FL
GA
IA
ID
IL
IN
KS
KY
LA
MA
MD
ME
MI
MN
MO
MS
MT
NC
ND
NE
NH
NJ
NM
NV
NY
OH
OK
OR
PA
RI
SC
SD

Percentage
Difference
Between
Actual and
TELRIC
Rates

Actual
UNE-P
Rates

TELRIC
UNE-P
Rates

Difference
Between
Actual and
TELRIC
Rates

$20.95

$15.10

$5.85

25.27

$22.11
$19.28
$25.49
$13.30
$22.40
$21.54
$16.52
$21.12
$24.52
$22.48
$24.59
$26.56
$12.69
$12.42
$18.90
$19.19
$24.68
$24.71
$23.62
$22.08
$13.90
$23.89
$19.83
$25.69
$32.61
$22.08
$30.86
$28.19
$23.38
$14.24
$27.26
$30.28
$18.12
$13.84
$23.24
$22.75
$20.47
$19.52
$24.89
$34.82

$21.13
$18.06
$12.52
$12.29
$14.11
$15.41
$9.45
$14.31
$13.24
$14.61
$14.70
$16.94
$11.30
$14.16
$15.24
$21.05
$18.05
$11.79
$13.01
$22.19
$13.86
$13.79
$15.16
$27.39
$21.26
$15.00
$16.34
$16.19
$17.18
$12.04
$16.06
$19.19
$10.76
$12.75
$16.33
$13.40
$13.49
$12.96
$17.95
$17.18

$0.98
$1.22
$12.97
$1.01
$8.29
$6.13
$7.07
$6.81
$11.28
$7.87
$9.89
$9.62
$1.39
- $1.74
$3.66
- $1.86
$6.63
$12.92
$10.61
- $0.11
$0.04
$10.10
$4.67
- $1.70
$11.35
$7.08
$14.52
$12.00
$6.20
$2.20
$11.20
$11.09
$7.36
$1.09
$6.91
$9.35
$6.98
$6.56
$6.94
$17.64

4.43
6.33
50.88
7.59
37.01
28.46
42.80
32.24
46.00
35.01
40.22
36.22
10.95
- 14.01
19.37
(9.69)
26.86
52.29
44.92
- $0.50
0.29
42.28
23.55
- 6.62
34.81
32.07
47.05
42.57
26.52
15.45
41.09
36.62
40.62
7.88
29.73
41.10
34.10
33.61
27.88
50.66

47

TN
TX
UT
VA
VT
WA
WI
WV
WY

$20.26
$20.74
$19.01
$23.09
$23.94
$19.93
$20.99
$45.64
$30.20

$17.79
$12.87
$12.44
$13.75
$24.37
$12.39
$13.23
$23.89
$22.63

$2.47
$7.87
$6.57
$9.34
($0.43)
$7.54
$7.76
$21.75
$7.57

* Weighted by the number of households in each state.

48

12.19
37.95
34.56
40.45
(1.80)
37.83
36.97
47.66
25.07

Table 3
The Impact of Actual and TELRIC UNE
Rates on Retail Voice and Data Prices
State

Voice Market
Actual
TELRIC
UNE-P
UNE-P

Data Market
Actual
TELRIC
UNE-P
UNE-P

Year

Monopoly

All states
(3108 counties)

1
5
20

$28.93

$30.61
$31.78
$31.92

$25.86
$25.92
$25.94

$50.00

$37.41
$35.47
$34.78

$38.56
$36.77
$36.16

HYHD counties
(222 counties)

1
5
20

$28.56

$29.97
$30.90
$30.96

$23.19
$23.12
$23.12

$50.00

$36.68
$34.43
$33.27

$39.43
$36.86
$35.88

HYLD counties
(301 counties)

1
5
20

$28.21

$29.41
$30.68
$30.75

$25.06
$25.13
$25.18

$50.00

$37.64
$36.05
$35.54

$38.94
$37.90
$37.09

LYHD counties
(186 counties)

1
5
20

$29.49

$31.05
$32.48
$32.69

$27.42
$27.48
$27.48

$50.00

$37.43
$35.23
$34.82

$37.67
$36.02
$35.80

LYLD counties
(2399 counties)

1
5
20

$29.26

$31.61
$32.90
$33.11

$28.85
$29.12
$29.17

$50.00

$38.41
$37.09
$36.80

$37.85
$36.90
$36.58

Alabama
( 67 counties)

1
5
20

$30.29

$33.17
$35.26
$35.38

$32.86
$34.76
$34.85

$50.00

$37.38
$35.08
$34.95

$37.23
$34.80
$34.68

Arizona
(15 counties)

1
5
20

$29.76

$29.83
$38.39
$38.39

$23.92
$23.82
$23.82

$50.00

$40.02
$34.03
$34.03

$42.72
$34.93
$34.93

Arkansas
(75 counties)

1
5
20

$28.22

$32.96
$33.38
$33.53

$31.79
$32.31
$32.45

$50.00

$35.16
$34.82
$34.45

$35.40
$34.59
$34.37

California
(58 counties)

1
5
20

$25.17

$23.70
$23.79
$23.79

$22.64
$22.64
$22.64

$50.00

$39.51
$38.07
$34.34

$40.68
$36.57
$35.69

Colorado
(63 counties)

1
5
20

$29.76

$35.55
$36.88
$36.98

$25.53
$24.86
$24.87

$50.00

$34.28
$32.97
$32.87

$37.99
$34.87
$34.17

49

Monopoly

Connecticut
(8 counties)

1
5
20

$29.37

$35.79
$36.46
$36.46

$26.76
$25.49
$25.49

$50.00

$33.28
$32.58
$32.58

$37.31
$33.55
$32.86

DC

1
5
20

$28.78

$28.78
$28.78
$28.78

$19.45
$19.45
$19.45

$50.00

$40.00
$40.00
$40.00

$40.00
$40.00
$40.00

Delaware
(3 counties)

1
5
20

$28.78

$34.19
$34.19
$34.19

$25.64
$25.75
$25.75

$50.00

$34.47
$34.47
$34.47

$39.21
$37.64
$37.64

Florida
(67 counties)

1
5
20

$30.29

$31.87
$35.51
$35.51

$26.97
$26.62
$26.65

$50.00

$38.59
$35.64
$35.64

$39.24
$37.91
$37.51

Georgia
(159 counties)

1
5
20

$30.29

$34.81
$35.97
$36.09

$27.24
$27.13
$27.15

$50.00

$34.96
$33.76
$33.63

$37.44
$36.25
$34.01

Idaho
(44 counties)

1
5
20

$29.76

$38.12
$38.90
$38.90

$31.28
$31.44
$31.51

$50.00

$35.76
$35.27
$35.27

$35.47
$34.92
$34.48

Illinois
(102 counties)

1
5
20

$28.40

$23.09
$23.00
$23.00

$21.52
$21.47
$21.47

$50.00

$41.30
$34.24
$33.38

$39.60
$38.28
$34.20

Indiana
(92 counties)

1
5
20

$28.40

$23.32
$23.26
$23.28

$26.68
$26.80
$26.80

$50.00

$39.30
$38.77
$37.37

$37.48
$34.43
$34.12

Iowa
(99 counties)

1
5
20

$29.76

$36.35
$38.00
$38.20

$27.92
$27.91
$27.91

$50.00

$35.94
$34.68
$34.53

$36.81
$34.82
$33.80

Kansas
(105 counties)

1
5
20

$28.22

$32.86
$33.24
$33.24

$27.41
$27.50
$27.50

$50.00

$33.04
$32.54
$32.54

$33.66
$33.17
$33.08

Kentucky
(120 counties)

1
5
20

$30.29

$31.68
$33.01
$33.06

$32.46
$34.06
$34.25

$50.00

$39.62
$37.09
$37.00

$39.48
$37.42
$37.17

Louisiana
(64 parishes)

1
5
20

$30.29

$36.63
$37.74
$37.98

$32.40
$32.48
$32.48

$50.00

$35.20
$34.31
$34.12

$34.25
$34.01
$34.01

50

Maine
(16 counties)

1
5
20

$30.92

$34.68
$35.18
$36.07

$34.56
$35.06
$36.17

$50.00

$35.85
$35.24
$34.16

$36.09
$35.48
$34.16

Maryland
(24 counties)

1
5
20

$28.78

$35.70
$36.44
$36.44

$24.24
$24.24
$24.24

$50.00

$34.93
$34.37
$34.37

$39.70
$39.67
$39.67

Massachussetts
(14 counties)

1
5
20

$30.92

$36.28
$39.28
$39.68

$21.82
$21.82
$21.82

$50.00

$35.43
$32.87
$32.53

$39.94
$39.08
$39.08

Michigan
(83 counties)

1
5
20

$28.40

$24.65
$24.41
$24.42

$24.51
$24.37
$24.38

$50.00

$37.68
$34.23
$32.99

$37.75
$34.38
$33.07

Minnesota
(87 counties)

1
5
20

$29.76

$34.99
$37.13
$37.23

$25.33
$25.24
$25.29

$50.00

$36.33
$34.58
$34.49

$38.86
$36.81
$36.52

Mississippi
(82 counties)

1
5
20

$30.29

$34.29
$38.03
$38.36

$35.13
$39.54
$39.71

$50.00

$37.98
$35.29
$35.05

$37.89
$35.15
$35.05

Missouri
(115 counties)

1
5
20

$28.22

$33.42
$34.08
$34.19

$28.18
$27.87
$27.88

$50.00

$34.79
$34.05
$33.92

$35.66
$34.01
$33.81

Montana
(56 counties)

1
5
20

$29.76

$32.45
$39.91
$41.05

$32.92
$34.69
$34.69

$50.00

$40.37
$37.24
$36.76

$37.61
$35.56
$35.56

Nebraska
(93 counties)

1
5
20

$29.76

$35.20
$35.25
$35.25

$30.44
$30.81
$30.81

$50.00

$38.66
$38.64
$38.64

$37.98
$36.05
$36.05

Nevada
(17 counties)

1
5
20

$25.17

$25.44
$25.44
$25.44

$25.29
$25.49
$25.49

$50.00

$40.06
$40.06
$40.06

$40.06
$39.89
$39.89

New Hampshire
(10 counties)

1
5
20

$30.92

$34.66
$37.29
$37.95

$30.62
$30.91
$30.91

$50.00

$36.60
$33.97
$33.30

$36.44
$33.03
$33.03

51

New Jersey
(21 county)

1
5
20

$28.78

$25.08
$25.11
$25.11

$22.06
$22.06
$22.06

$50.00

$39.52
$36.35
$35.54

$39.83
$38.97
$38.32

New Mexico
(33 counties)

1
5
20

$29.76

$31.68
$38.00
$38.36

$30.66
$30.76
$30.76

$50.00

$39.95
$36.16
$35.95

$35.23
$34.58
$34.58

New York
(62 counties)

1
5
20

$30.92

$30.82
$31.00
$31.02

$22.87
$22.87
$22.87

$50.00

$37.71
$35.62
$35.54

$40.61
$39.30
$39.30

North Carolina
(100 counties)

1
5
20

$30.92

$32.56
$33.44
$33.69

$29.14
$29.13
$29.13

$50.00

$37.83
$36.86
$36.58

$37.21
$36.10
$35.52

North Dakota
(53 counties)

1
5
20

$29.76

$37.28
$40.54
$40.54

$30.50
$30.72
$30.77

$50.00

$39.56
$38.05
$38.05

$37.12
$36.10
$35.84

Ohio
(88 counties)

1
5
20

$28.40

$26.63
$26.69
$26.69

$23.83
$23.82
$23.82

$50.00

$37.50
$35.80
$35.76

$39.12
$39.08
$39.08

Oklahoma
(77 counties)

1
5
20

$28.22

$34.21
$36.14
$36.26

$29.81
$29.99
$29.99

$50.00

$35.26
$33.82
$33.73

$34.24
$33.80
$33.80

Oregon
(36 counties)

1
5
20

$29.76

$32.55
$34.40
$34.58

$26.20
$26.17
$26.17

$50.00

$37.52
$35.78
$35.62

$37.57
$35.84
$35.84

Pennsylvania
(67 counties)

1
5
20

$28.78

$30.85
$31.49
$32.24

$27.15
$27.13
$27.13

$50.00

$38.37
$37.66
$36.81

$38.61
$38.29
$38.29

Rhode Island
(5 counties)

1
5
20

$30.92

$31.64
$31.95
$34.07

$26.18
$26.18
$26.18

$50.00

$38.19
$37.54
$33.14

$35.02
$35.02
$35.02

South Carolina
(45 counties)

1
5
20

$30.29

$33.03
$36.56
$37.08

$32.06
$32.38
$32.45

$50.00

$38.51
$35.76
$35.35

$35.66
$34.76
$34.55

South Dakota
(66 counties)

1
5
20

$29.76

$42.21
$44.12
$45.14

$31.29
$31.74
$31.74

$50.00

$38.44
$37.74
$37.36

$37.79
$36.41
$36.41

52

Tennessee
(95 counties)

1
5
20

$30.29

$33.39
$34.05
$34.13

$32.04
$32.18
$32.18

$50.00

$35.66
$34.61
$34.54

$35.05
$34.42
$34.42

Texas
(254 counties)

1
5
20

$28.22

$33.92
$34.68
$34.77

$24.03
$23.81
$23.81

$50.00

$33.50
$32.74
$32.65

$36.98
$34.65
$33.57

Utah
(29 counties)

1
5
20

$29.76

$32.99
$33.57
$33.80

$22.90
$22.90
$22.90

$50.00

$34.26
$33.24
$32.82

$39.55
$35.22
$35.22

Vermont
(14 counties)

1
5
20

$30.92

$33.97
$37.94
$37.94

$33.50
$38.33
$38.33

$50.00

$38.42
$34.71
$34.71

$38.99
$34.71
$34.71

Virginia
(135 counties/cities)

1
5
20

$28.78

$32.14
$32.60
$33.01

$26.60
$26.53
$26.60

$50.00

$38.26
$37.89
$37.57

$40.07
$39.70
$39.39

Washington
(39 counties)

1
5
20

$29.76

$32.39
$34.19
$34.19

$23.38
$23.27
$23.32

$50.00

$36.38
$33.77
$33.77

$39.76
$39.67
$39.59

West Virginia
(55 counties)

1
5
20

$28.78

$34.36
$35.81
$35.93

$30.83
$31.09
$31.09

$50.00

$41.85
$41.62
$41.60

$41.71
$41.58
$41.58

Wisconsin
(72 counties)

1
5
20

$28.40

$32.61
$35.23
$35.44

$24.13
$24.11
$24.11

$50.00

$35.97
$33.39
$33.18

$39.29
$38.27
$37.80

Wyoming
(23 counties)

1
5
20

$29.76

$40.45
$44.35
$44.35

$36.78
$36.78
$36.78

$50.00

$34.73
$32.84
$32.84

$32.84
$32.84
$32.84

53

Table 4
Annual Consumer and Business Voice Savings from
Switching from Actual to TELRIC UNE Rates
(in millions)

$14,984.5

All States
Alabama
Arizona
Arkansas
California
Colorado
Connecticut
DC
Delaware
Florida
Georgia
Idaho
Illinois
Indiana
Iowa
Kansas
Kentucky
Louisiana
Maine
Maryland
Massachusetts
Michigan
Minnesota
Mississippi
Missouri
Montana
Nebraska
Nevada
New Hampshire
New Jersey
New Mexico
New York
North Carolina
North Dakota
Ohio
Oklahoma
Oregon
Pennsylvania
Rhode Island
South Carolina
South Dakota
Tennessee
Texas
Utah
Vermont
Virginia
Washington
West Virginia
Wisconsin
Wyoming

12.2
334.6
26.4
540.1
487.4
389.7
66.1
76.6
824.6
618.8
69.8
324.6
0.0
229.1
157.5
0.0
140.1
1.5
733.9
1,067.2
21.4
537.9
0.0
293.9
0.0
76.3
4.2
58.9
443.3
16.5
1,759.3
280.6
42.2
414.6
129.2
230.9
501.9
63.8
36.1
57.8
72.7
1,932.3
213.9
2.9
485.4
626.7
48.0
518.8
14.9

54

Table 5
Competitive Structure in the Voice Market
Actual UNE rate
percent of households with
ILEC &
ILEC & 2
CLEC
CLECs

year

ILEC
only

All states
(3108 counties)

1
5
20

36.48%
20.94%
19.01%

51.85%
58.60%
58.76%

11.57%
20.43%
22.22%

19.29%
13.51%
13.47%

63.28%
61.08%
55.43%

17.37%
25.16%
31.10%

HYHD counties
(222 counties)

1
5
20

15.22%
3.76%
3.09%

64.55%
59.36%
57.76%

20.24%
36.88%
39.16%

1.00%
0.00%
0.00%

69.90%
61.83%
49.78%

29.09%
38.17%
50.22%

HYLD counties
(301 counties)

1
5
20

33.56%
16.52%
15.35%

60.01%
74.44%
71.95%

6.43%
9.04%
12.70%

13.95%
10.14%
9.33%

77.92%
73.93%
69.58%

7.66%
15.93%
21.09%

LYHD counties
(186 counties)

1
5
20

53.12%
31.69%
28.06%

43.69%
59.52%
61.39%

2.86%
8.79%
10.55%

32.46%
23.70%
24.32%

58.22%
55.57%
53.60%

9.31%
20.11%
22.08%

LYLD counties
(2399 counties)

1
5
20

55.70%
39.43%
36.79%

36.85%
51.46%
53.76%

7.45%
8.99%
9.45%

37.72%
26.55%
26.14%

52.72%
61.37%
60.97%

9.52%
11.70%
12.88%

55

ILEC
only

TELRIC UNE rate
percent of households with
ILEC &
ILEC & 2
CLEC
CLECs

Table 6
Type of CLEC Entry
Actual UNE Rate

TELRIC UNE Rate

Percentage of Households in Counties with CLECs Entering As

Percentage of Households in Counties with CLECs Entering As
V only

State

Year

V only

D only

V and D

V and V

D and D

no CLECs

D only

V and D

V and V

D and D

no CLECs

All states

1

17.59%

34.26%

6.36%

0.00%

5.22%

36.58%

43.99%

19.30%

12.44%

0.00%

4.93%

19.35%

(3108 counties)

5

8.82%

49.77%

15.69%

0.00%

4.74%

20.97%

36.23%

24.85%

22.18%

0.00%

2.28%

13.76%

20

7.04%

51.73%

17.48%

0.00%

4.74%

19.01%

30.30%

25.13%

28.82%

0.00%

2.28%

13.47%

HYHD counties

1

27.83%

36.71%

14.17%

0.00%

6.06%

15.22%

66.17%

3.74%

25.67%

0.00%

3.42%

1.00%

(222 counties)

5

11.19%

48.17%

31.30%

0.00%

5.58%

3.76%

57.09%

4.74%

38.06%

0.00%

0.11%

0.00%

20

8.91%

48.84%

33.57%

0.00%

5.58%

3.09%

45.04%

4.74%

50.11%

0.00%

0.11%

0.00%

HYLD counties

1

30.29%

29.72%

2.92%

0.00%

3.51%

33.56%

63.47%

14.45%

4.67%

0.00%

2.99%

14.42%

(301 counties)

5

27.69%

46.75%

6.48%

0.00%

2.56%

16.52%

55.67%

18.26%

13.80%

0.00%

2.13%

10.14%

20

24.02%

47.93%

10.14%

0.00%

2.56%

15.35%

50.51%

19.07%

18.95%

0.00%

2.13%

9.33%

LYHD counties

1

10.62%

32.97%

0.71%

0.00%

2.16%

53.54%

32.39%

25.83%

4.47%

0.00%

4.85%

32.46%

(186 counties)

5

5.12%

54.41%

7.39%

0.00%

1.40%

31.69%

20.46%

33.98%

21.24%

0.00%

0.00%

24.32%

20

3.36%

58.03%

9.14%

0.00%

1.40%

28.06%

19.62%

33.98%

22.08%

0.00%

0.00%

24.32%
37.77%

LYLD counties

1

3.74%

33.58%

0.37%

0.00%

7.05%

55.27%

13.68%

39.04%

1.58%

0.00%

7.94%

(2399 counties)

5

2.20%

49.61%

1.98%

0.00%

6.97%

39.24%

11.49%

49.87%

4.13%

0.00%

7.57%

26.93%

20

1.74%

52.29%

2.44%

0.00%

6.97%

36.55%

10.31%

50.66%

5.31%

0.00%

7.57%

26.14%

“V” denotes “voice”
“D” denotes “data”

56

Table 7
The CLEC Share of the Voice Market
State

Year

Actual UNE Rates

TELRIC UNE Rates

V onDy

D onDy

V and D

V and V

D and D

Total share

V onDy

D onDy

V and D

V and V

D and D

Total share

All states

1

3.71%

4.77%

1.36%

0.00%

0.82%

10.66%

9.75%

3.13%

2.73%

0.00%

0.91%

16.51%

(3108 counties)

5

1.89%

6.87%

3.31%

0.00%

0.73%

12.79%

8.10%

4.01%

4.94%

0.00%

0.41%

17.46%

20

1.50%

7.14%

3.69%

0.00%

0.73%

13.06%

6.83%

4.05%

6.20%

0.00%

0.41%

17.49%

HYHD counties

1

5.81%

5.03%

3.04%

0.00%

0.95%

14.83%

14.68%

0.59%

5.68%

0.00%

0.62%

21.57%

(222 counties)

5

2.36%

6.53%

6.59%

0.00%

0.86%

16.34%

12.76%

0.76%

8.26%

0.00%

0.02%

21.80%

20

1.88%

6.62%

7.07%

0.00%

0.86%

16.43%

10.06%

0.76%

10.95%

0.00%

0.02%

21.79%

HYLD counties

1

6.51%

4.07%

0.59%

0.00%

0.59%

11.76%

13.85%

2.27%

1.01%

0.00%

0.53%

17.65%

(301 counties)

5

5.95%

6.37%

1.36%

0.00%

0.40%

14.08%

12.21%

2.88%

2.91%

0.00%

0.38%

18.38%

20

5.17%

6.53%

2.14%

0.00%

0.40%

14.24%

11.10%

2.99%

4.02%

0.00%

0.38%

18.49%

LYHD counties

1

2.28%

4.67%

0.15%

0.00%

0.34%

7.44%

7.16%

4.18%

0.91%

0.00%

0.94%

13.20%

(186 counties)

5

1.13%

7.63%

1.55%

0.00%

0.19%

10.51%

4.61%

5.46%

4.51%

0.00%

0.00%

14.59%

20

0.74%

8.15%

1.94%

0.00%

0.19%

11.03%

4.43%

5.46%

4.70%

0.00%

0.00%

14.59%

LYLD counties

1

0.82%

4.76%

0.08%

0.00%

1.10%

6.75%

3.08%

6.28%

0.34%

0.00%

1.61%

11.31%

(2399 counties)

5

0.48%

6.95%

0.43%

0.00%

1.08%

8.95%

2.61%

7.98%

1.09%

0.00%

1.35%

13.04%

20

0.38%

7.31%

0.53%

0.00%

1.08%

9.31%

2.35%

8.10%

1.35%

0.00%

1.35%

13.15%

“V” denotes “voice”
“D” denotes “data”

57

Table 8
The CLEC Share of the Data Market

State

Year

Actual UNE Rates

TELRIC UNE Rates

All states

1

D
onDy
8.47%

V and
D
2.32%

D and
D
2.34%

Total
share
13.13%

D onDy
4.98%

V and
D
4.35%

D and
D
2.80%

Total
share
12.13%

(3108 counties)

5

12.06%

4.33%

2.07%

18.45%

6.27%

5.49%

1.29%

13.05%

20

12.51%

4.03%

2.07%

18.61%

6.33%

6.65%

1.29%

14.27%

HYHD counties

1

8.47%

5.11%

2.16%

15.75%

0.86%

9.02%

1.95%

11.83%

(222 counties)

5

11.12%

8.83%

1.89%

21.83%

1.09%

8.91%

0.06%

10.07%

20

11.27%

7.75%

1.89%

20.91%

1.09%

11.57%

0.06%

12.72%

HYLD counties

1

6.94%

1.10%

1.85%

9.89%

3.41%

1.84%

1.66%

6.91%

(301 counties)

5

10.87%

1.76%

1.31%

13.94%

4.29%

3.82%

1.17%

9.28%

20

11.14%

2.35%

1.31%

14.81%

4.48%

4.39%

1.17%

10.04%

LYHD counties

1

7.61%

0.31%

0.90%

8.82%

5.96%

1.35%

2.77%

10.08%

(186 counties)

5

12.56%

1.70%

0.47%

14.73%

7.84%

5.07%

0.00%

12.91%

20

13.39%

2.11%

0.47%

15.97%

7.84%

5.10%

0.00%

12.94%

1

9.70%

0.16%

3.99%

13.85%

10.94%

0.60%

4.49%

16.03%

LYLD counties
(2399 counties)

5

13.46%

0.54%

3.94%

17.94%

13.46%

1.19%

4.28%

18.94%

20

14.10%

0.56%

3.94%

18.61%

13.65%

1.24%

4.28%

19.16%

“V” denotes “voice”
“D” denotes “data”

58

Table 9
Change in Voice Price Relative to the Regulated Monopoly Price
Assuming Actual UNE Rates
State

Percentage of Households in Counties Where Price Has Changed by:

Year
-(30-20)%

-(20-10)%

-(10-0)%

0-10 %

10-20%

20-30%

30-40%

40-50%

50-60%

60-70%

70-80%

>100%

All states
(3108 counties)

1
5
20

5.58%
5.81%
5.81%

7.41%
7.62%
7.62%

49.29%
33.53%
31.60%

3.76%
5.16%
5.24%

6.83%
8.87%
9.26%

18.67%
23.94%
25.05%

7.40%
13.47%
13.79%

0.44%
0.77%
0.79%

0.21%
0.45%
0.47%

0.17%
0.20%
0.21%

0.01%
0.01%
0.01%

0.12%
0.16%
0.16%

HYHD counties
(222 counties)

1
5
20

7.95%
7.95%
7.95%

11.27%
11.75%
11.75%

39.77%
27.83%
27.16%

2.95%
3.18%
3.18%

7.51%
9.07%
9.07%

22.71%
27.33%
27.55%

7.41%
12.47%
12.91%

0.42%
0.42%
0.42%

0.00%
0.00%
0.00%

0.00%
0.00%
0.00%

0.00%
0.00%
0.00%

0.00%
0.00%
0.00%

HYLD counties
(301 counties)

1
5
20

6.75%
7.36%
7.36%

9.12%
8.85%
8.85%

52.75%
35.37%
34.20%

1.97%
3.70%
3.70%

4.06%
5.21%
6.15%

16.49%
24.67%
24.83%

7.60%
12.66%
12.74%

0.48%
1.39%
1.39%

0.07%
0.07%
0.07%

0.68%
0.68%
0.68%

0.02%
0.02%
0.02%

0.00%
0.00%
0.00%

LYHD counties
(186 counties)

1
5
20

4.19%
4.92%
4.92%

6.69%
6.83%
6.83%

54.72%
33.00%
29.38%

6.35%
10.36%
10.36%

3.71%
6.24%
7.23%

15.74%
20.60%
23.18%

8.19%
17.13%
17.18%

0.00%
0.92%
0.92%

0.00%
0.00%
0.00%

0.00%
0.00%
0.00%

0.00%
0.00%
0.00%

0.00%
0.00%
0.00%

LYLD counties
(2399 counties)

1
5
20

2.76%
2.81%
2.81%

1.59%
1.58%
1.58%

58.07%
42.05%
39.41%

3.38%
4.22%
4.51%

9.36%
11.98%
12.29%

15.70%
21.38%
22.88%

6.66%
12.13%
12.59%

0.83%
0.97%
1.04%

0.77%
1.65%
1.73%

0.41%
0.50%
0.56%

0.03%
0.03%
0.03%

0.46%
0.57%
0.58%

59

Table 10
Change in Voice Price Relative to the Regulated Monopoly Price
Assuming TELRIC UNE Rates
Percentage of Households in Counties Where Price Has Changed by:
State

Year

-(40-30)%

-(30-20)%

-(20-10)%

-(10-0)%

0-10 %

10-20%

20-30%

30-40%

All states
(3108 counties)

1
5
20

5.48%
5.48%
5.48%

19.17%
19.57%
19.57%

33.71%
34.57%
34.57%

29.12%
24.33%
24.29%

8.39%
9.91%
9.99%

2.96%
4.10%
4.21%

0.56%
0.83%
0.91%

0.56%
0.96%
0.98%

HYHD counties
(222 counties)

1
5
20

8.70%
8.70%
8.70%

32.55%
32.55%
32.55%

51.14%
54.01%
54.01%

5.36%
2.16%
2.16%

1.53%
1.73%
1.73%

0.46%
0.46%
0.46%

0.25%
0.38%
0.38%

0.00%
0.00%
0.00%

HYLD counties
(301 counties)

1
5
20

2.40%
2.40%
2.40%

15.61%
15.61%
15.61%

50.50%
51.32%
51.32%

19.73%
17.19%
16.38%

7.99%
9.25%
9.25%

2.45%
2.80%
2.80%

0.07%
0.07%
0.88%

0.77%
1.37%
1.37%

LYHD counties
(186 counties)

1
5
20

4.32%
4.32%
4.32%

12.19%
13.88%
13.88%

24.26%
22.56%
22.56%

42.96%
37.24%
37.86%

12.67%
14.73%
14.73%

3.23%
5.97%
5.97%

0.00%
0.00%
0.00%

0.38%
0.68%
0.68%

LYLD counties
(2399 counties)

1
5
20

2.56%
2.56%
2.56%

5.87%
5.92%
5.92%

10.52%
10.52%
10.52%

55.77%
48.66%
48.23%

15.34%
18.51%
18.78%

6.71%
8.49%
8.89%

1.67%
2.46%
2.51%

1.52%
2.54%
2.59%

60

Table 11
The Change in Voice Prices in Switching from Actual to TELRIC UNE Rates
State

Year

All states
(3108 counties)

Percentage of Households in Counties Where Price Has Changed by
-(50-40)%

-(40-30)%

-(30-20)%

-(20-10)%

-(10-0)%

0-10 %

10-20%

20-30%

30-40%

1

3.09%

18.16%

16.84%

8.28%

46.98%

4.85%

0.57%

0.45%

0.63%

5

7.80%

23.29%

11.65%

7.02%

44.22%

4.66%

0.16%

0.07%

0.86%

20

7.91%

23.43%

11.83%

7.94%

43.25%

4.65%

0.11%

0.05%

0.82%

HYHD counties

1

5.75%

30.29%

18.30%

3.58%

39.73%

2.13%

0.22%

0.00%

0.00%

(222 counties)

5

11.71%

36.39%

8.19%

2.64%

39.11%

1.96%

0.00%

0.00%

0.00%

20

11.84%

36.64%

8.06%

2.68%

39.11%

1.67%

0.00%

0.00%

0.00%

HYLD counties

1

1.54%

19.43%

9.33%

14.34%

45.86%

6.73%

0.79%

0.30%

1.21%

(301 counties)

5

3.96%

28.77%

5.78%

7.92%

46.66%

5.67%

0.00%

0.00%

1.23%

20

3.96%

29.05%

5.73%

7.78%

45.77%

6.47%

0.00%

0.00%

1.23%

LYHD counties

1

2.29%

8.47%

19.82%

10.92%

51.13%

4.80%

0.08%

0.75%

1.32%

(186 counties)

5

9.58%

12.92%

14.43%

9.25%

46.17%

4.95%

0.00%

0.00%

2.08%

20

9.58%

12.92%

14.48%

12.84%

43.16%

4.95%

0.00%

0.00%

2.08%

LYLD counties

1

0.21%

7.49%

14.97%

11.12%

54.54%

8.43%

1.46%

0.91%

0.82%

(2399 counties)

5

1.60%

11.22%

15.91%

11.48%

49.27%

8.19%

0.61%

0.26%

1.01%

20

1.79%

11.28%

16.69%

11.84%

48.56%

8.36%

0.42%

0.18%

0.88%

61

Table 12
Change in Investment and Hiring Outlays Relative to the Monopoly Level with Actual UNE Rates
Percentage of Households in Counties Where Investment Has Changed by:
State

Year

All states

1

0.00%

0.00%

30.35%

5.80%

0.31%

8.47%

10.03%

16.00%

15.81%

5.70%

3.72%

1.58%

0.12%

0.09%

0.50%

1.44%

(3108 counties)

5

0.00%

0.06%

15.07%

6.05%

0.61%

8.46%

21.55%

30.43%

10.40%

4.30%

1.03%

0.05%

0.82%

0.91%

0.25%

0.00%

20

0.00%

0.04%

13.16%

5.53%

1.02%

3.02%

25.66%

34.67%

11.07%

3.57%

0.20%

0.15%

1.20%

0.61%

0.09%

0.00%

1

0.00%

0.00%

13.56%

1.66%

0.00%

13.74%

16.76%

21.93%

20.65%

5.64%

4.24%

1.71%

0.00%

0.00%

0.00%

0.11%

HYHD counties
(222 counties)

-(50-40)%

-(40-30)%

-(30-20)%

-(20-10)%

-(10-0)%

0-10 %

10-20%

20-30%

30-40%

40-50%

50-60%

60-70%

70-80%

80-90%

90-100%

>100%

5

0.00%

0.00%

2.50%

1.26%

0.48%

12.76%

20.64%

42.95%

12.64%

4.96%

1.71%

0.00%

0.00%

0.11%

0.00%

0.00%

20

0.00%

0.00%

1.83%

1.26%

0.38%

1.34%

28.41%

48.28%

13.81%

4.58%

0.00%

0.00%

0.00%

0.11%

0.00%

0.00%

HYLD counties

1

0.00%

0.00%

21.22%

12.34%

0.00%

11.60%

16.48%

10.75%

20.58%

3.38%

1.62%

0.05%

0.15%

0.10%

0.77%

0.96%

(301 counties)

5

0.00%

0.00%

5.01%

14.09%

0.24%

11.46%

30.40%

28.73%

6.50%

1.58%

0.00%

0.19%

0.90%

0.39%

0.50%

0.00%

20

0.00%

0.00%

3.98%

11.37%

1.04%

9.41%

30.03%

34.61%

5.72%

1.86%

0.00%

0.19%

0.90%

0.73%

0.17%

0.00%
0.00%

LYHD counties

1

0.00%

0.00%

41.93%

10.16%

1.03%

5.24%

5.38%

19.40%

7.54%

7.20%

1.70%

0.00%

0.00%

0.00%

0.00%

(186 counties)

5

0.01%

0.00%

20.49%

10.73%

1.03%

3.43%

29.76%

23.34%

9.53%

1.70%

0.00%

0.00%

0.00%

0.00%

0.00%

0.00%

20

0.00%

0.01%

16.86%

10.16%

1.81%

4.02%

29.85%

26.07%

10.77%

0.45%

0.00%

0.00%

0.00%

0.00%

0.00%

#VALUE!
4.83%

LYLD counties

1

0.00%

0.00%

49.07%

6.27%

0.28%

2.15%

1.61%

5.81%

13.91%

5.26%

5.32%

3.21%

0.40%

0.29%

1.59%

(2399 counties)

5

0.00%

0.23%

32.89%

6.75%

0.56%

5.21%

13.08%

17.96%

8.99%

6.38%

1.20%

0.14%

2.76%

3.07%

0.77%

0.00%

20

0.00%

0.15%

30.27%

6.22%

1.32%

2.65%

16.49%

21.27%

8.92%

5.23%

0.75%

0.49%

4.14%

1.84%

0.27%

0.00%

62

Table 13
The Change in Investment and Hiring Outlays Relative to the Monopoly Level with TELRIC UNE Rates
Percentage of Households in Counties Where Investment Has Changed By
State

Year

-(50-40)%

-(40-30)%

-(30-20)%

-(20-10)%

-(10-0)%

0-10 %

10-20%

20-30%

30-40%

40-50%

50-60%

60-70%

70-80%

80-90%

90-100%

>100%

All states

1

0.00%

0.00%

14.04%

5.17%

0.06%

9.48%

21.40%

19.23%

9.61%

12.66%

4.05%

1.43%

0.55%

0.05%

0.18%

2.01%

(3108 counties)

5

0.01%

0.40%

8.50%

4.92%

0.12%

1.96%

21.88%

30.27%

20.09%

8.14%

1.33%

0.16%

0.20%

1.06%

0.90%

0.06%

20

0.00%

0.29%

8.34%

4.80%

0.24%

1.39%

17.87%

33.59%

25.73%

4.61%

0.86%

0.07%

0.34%

1.47%

0.36%

0.03%

HYHD counties

1

0.00%

0.00%

0.23%

0.77%

0.00%

15.97%

26.48%

35.39%

6.18%

11.16%

3.72%

0.00%

0.00%

0.00%

0.00%

0.11%

(222 counties)

5

0.00%

0.00%

0.00%

0.00%

0.00%

2.38%

23.20%

39.89%

23.74%

10.68%

0.00%

0.00%

0.00%

0.00%

0.11%

0.00%

20

0.00%

0.00%

0.00%

0.00%

0.00%

2.30%

19.14%

43.02%

31.52%

3.90%

0.00%

0.00%

0.00%

0.00%

0.11%

0.00%

HYLD counties

1

0.00%

0.00%

4.38%

9.57%

0.00%

4.42%

44.02%

16.62%

8.42%

7.27%

2.55%

0.31%

0.00%

0.22%

0.14%

1.63%

(301 counties)

5

0.00%

0.00%

1.04%

9.56%

0.29%

3.04%

43.60%

22.43%

13.01%

4.74%

0.31%

0.00%

0.36%

0.86%

0.77%

0.00%

20

0.00%

0.00%

0.24%

9.09%

1.27%

1.65%

36.45%

28.34%

18.55%

2.17%

0.24%

0.15%

0.21%

1.29%

0.33%

0.00%

LYHD counties

1

0.00%

0.00%

22.30%

10.16%

0.00%

7.88%

19.29%

9.35%

13.47%

11.36%

6.19%

0.00%

0.00%

0.00%

0.00%

0.00%

(186 counties)

5

0.00%

0.62%

13.54%

10.16%

0.00%

0.33%

20.80%

32.67%

13.83%

8.04%

0.00%

0.00%

0.00%

0.00%

0.00%

0.00%

20

0.00%

0.35%

13.81%

10.16%

0.00%

0.00%

17.25%

33.07%

19.78%

5.58%

0.00%

0.00%

0.00%

0.00%

0.00%

0.00%
6.74%

LYLD counties

1

0.00%

0.00%

31.23%

6.20%

0.23%

2.62%

8.09%

3.85%

11.96%

17.82%

3.23%

5.19%

2.05%

0.10%

0.64%

(2399 counties)

5

0.04%

0.97%

19.60%

6.44%

0.35%

2.34%

13.67%

16.13%

22.18%

5.48%

4.81%

0.57%

0.63%

3.63%

2.93%

0.23%

20

0.00%

0.79%

19.05%

6.15%

0.48%

1.08%

10.38%

21.38%

24.30%

5.66%

3.11%

0.21%

1.21%

5.02%

1.07%

0.12%

63

Table 14
Present Value of Investment and Hiring Outlays Made by Specified Years
State
All states
(3108 counties)

Year
1
5
10
20

$
$
$
$

Actual UNE Rates

TELRIC UNE Rates

82,958,140,000
349,427,220,000
560,126,980,000
758,641,820,000

$ 87,898,900,000
$ 367,314,900,000
$ 585,532,900,000
$ 791,788,900,000

64

Monopoly
$ 72,467,040,000
$ 296,763,220,000
$ 471,994,980,000
$ 636,569,420,000

