                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                              THE TAKE UP OF SOCIAL BENEFITS

                                              Janet Currie

                                         Working Paper 10488
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w10488


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       May 2004




This paper was prepared for a conference in honor of Eugene Smolensky held at Berkeley, December 12 and
13th , 2003. The author thanks Alan Auerbach , David Card , Sheldon Danziger, Irving Garfinkel, Robert
Haveman, John Quigley, , and conference participants for helpful comments. Princeton’s Center for Health
and Well Being provided financial support. Graciana Rucci provided excellent research assistance. The views
expressed herein are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

©2004 by Janet Currie. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Take Up of Social Benefits
Janet Currie
NBER Working Paper No. 10488
May 2004
JEL No. I38
                                           ABSTRACT
       This paper offers a review of recent literature regarding the take up of social programs in the

U.S. and U.K. A few general conclusions are drawn: First, take up is enhanced by automatic or

default enrollment and lowered by administrative barriers, although removing individual barriers

does not necessarily have much effect, suggesting that one must address the whole bundle. Second,

although it may be impossible to devise a definitive test of the “stigma hypothesis”, other, more

concrete types of transactions costs are probably a good deal more important. Third, although people

generally have means-tested programs in the United States in mind when they discuss take up, low

take up is also a problem in many non means-tested social insurance programs and in other

countries.

       Historically, economists have paid little attention to rules about eligibility, and virtually no

attention to how these rules are enforced or made known to eligibles. Hence, the marginal return to

new data about these features of programs is likely to be high in terms of understanding take up. In

an era of social experiments, it might also prove useful to consider experimental manipulations of

factors thought to influence take up.

Janet Currie
Department of Economics
UCLA
405 Hilgard Avenue
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1477
and NBER
currie@simba.sscnet.ucla.edu
        Virtually all developed countries and many developing countries have a system of

income maintenance. In countries with universal programs, the aim of these systems is to

maintain a minimum level of income for all individuals, at a reasonable cost to government. In

the United States, the goal is to maintain such a standard for selected groups of vulnerable or

“deserving” individuals, such as children, the elderly, and the disabled. One of the main

problems with designing such programs, is that the government typically has imperfect

information about the income-generating capacity of any given individual. Hence, a central

problem is to design a system that aids the vulnerable while minimizing work disincentives

given these information asymmetries. For example, Besley and Coate (1995) present a model in

which a negative income tax policy supplemented by workfare for the lowest earning

individuals, is optimal.

        Besley and Coate (1991) argue that redistribution from rich to poor can also be achieved

through the provision of in-kind goods at a quality level such that the rich “opt-out” and

purchase the good privately, while Blackorby and Donaldson (1988) show that in-kind provision

provides a way to get people with special needs to self-select into the group receiving aid, and

can thus be a second-best optimum in a world in which the government cannot judge needs

perfectly. Bruce and Waldman (1991) offer a third, dynamic scenario, in which persons offered

a cash transfer in the first period have incentives to spend it in a way that maximizes their

eligibility for additional transfers in future periods. Offering a tied (i.e. in-kind) transfer to the

target group in the first period avoids this problem. These papers build on an insight from early

work by Nichols, Smolensky, and Tideman (1971) discussing the way that waiting times can be

used to ration public goods.

        Notwithstanding this literature on optimal targeting, most developed countries other than
                                                                                                         3
the United States continue to provide many social programs universally rather than targeting

them to particular groups. Smolensky, Reilly, and Evenhouse (1995) offer an in-depth

discussion of targeting and outline several costs that may offset the potential budgetary benefits.

First, targeting may in fact be administratively expensive, though costs can be reduced by means

of applying categorical screens and providing benefits in a way that causes the target group to

select into the program while others select out. Second, targeting may be socially divisive to the

extent that it divides society into those who give and those who receive. Conversely, programs

that offer universal benefits may enjoy greater political support.

         The third problem with targeting is the subject of this essay, and that is the fact that

targeting will always be imperfect. Some of those who take up benefits will not “deserve” them,

and some of those who are eligible for benefits will not take them up. If take up by eligible

individuals is low, then the targeted program may fail to reach its main goal of providing a

minimum bundle of goods for the target group. If take up by ineligibles is too high, then

government revenues will be diverted from other productive uses.1

         This chapter reviews what we know about the take up of social programs, most of which

offer in-kind benefits in a targeted fashion. Section I provides some comments about an

economic model of take-up. Section II reviews the literature on the take up of means-tested

programs in the United States with an eye towards what we can learn about the way that program

characteristics affect participation. In Sections III and IV, I also consider what can be learned

from the take up of several important non-means tested or universal programs in the United

States, and provide a brief survey of the evidence regarding take up of programs in the United


1 In his comments, Irving Garfinkel identifies another cost of targeted transfers, which is that they create
disincentives for the poor to work and to marry. There is a large literature on the labor supply and demographic

                                                                                                                   4
Kingdom, the country outside of the United States that has inspired the most work on these

questions. Section V offers some conclusions and directions for future research.



1. An Economic Model of Take Up

        Moffitt (1983) was one of the first to model non-participation in social programs as a

utility-maximizing decision. His model emphasizes “stigma” as the main cost of participation in

a means-tested program, but the model can easily be extended to include other types of costs,

such as transactions costs. In Moffitt’s model, utility is given by:

        (1) U = U(Y + aPB) – bP.

Here, Y is income in the absence of the program, and B is the benefit derived from the program.

P is an indicator equal to one if a person participates, and zero otherwise. Moffitt distinguishes

between “flat” stigma, which is a fixed cost associated with participation in the program, and

“variable” stigma, which is a function of the size of the benefit received. Flat and variable

stigma correspond to b and a, respectively.

        The two types of stigma(costs) have different implications for participation, since with

only flat stigma, participation will always be increasing in the size of the benefit, whereas with

variable stigma, this may not be the case. If B=G-tWH-rn, where G is the guarantee level, t is

the marginal tax rate, W is the wage, H is hours of work, r is the marginal tax rate on non-wage

income, and N is non-wage income, then flat stigma implies that the probability of participation

is increasing in G, and decreasing in t, W, H, R, and N, holding Y constant. If there is variable

stigma, then the individual will only participate if a>0.

        Moffitt goes on to add the individual’s leisure to the utility function, and to consider the


effects of such programs, which is beyond the scope of this survey.
                                                                                                       5
fact that eligibility for targeted welfare programs is contingent on being below an income

threshold (as Burtless and Hausman (1978) show, the latter gives rise to a non-linear budget,

which creates work disincentives). In this model, stigma increases the cost of participating in

the program, so that some households who would participate in the absence of stigma choose not

to participate.

        The review of the literature below suggests that other costs associated with the takeup of

social programs are more important than stigma. Individuals eligible for means-tested programs

face costs of learning about, and applying for the programs. These costs may be sufficient to

deter some individuals from using them. Moreover, the costs may be highest for precisely those

individuals in greatest need, and in cases where the beneficiary is a young child or an infirm

adult, the costs may be borne by an individual other than the beneficiary. To the extent that the

principal’s agent bears the costs of utilizing the program while the principal receives the benefit,

agents may be less willing to bear the costs than the principal would be if he/she were in a

position to choose for themselves. Agency problems provide an additional rationale for

providing benefits in kind rather than in cash.

        This basic cost/benefit framework has remained the basis for empirical investigations of

non-participation in social programs. However, there have recently been two interesting

additions to the basic model. First, there is growing interest in the role of social networks in

potentially reducing the costs of participation. For example, Bertrand, Luttmer and Mullainathan

(2000) show that a woman's propensity to use welfare increases with the number of coethnics in

the area, if those coethnics have a high propensity to use welfare nationally. This work builds

on earlier research by Borjas and Hilton (1996) which showed that the types of benefits received

by earlier immigrants influenced the types of benefits received by newly arrived immigrants
                                                                                                     6
from the same origin country. Hence, they speculated that there might be ethnic networks that

transmited information about the availability of particular benefits to new immigrants, or

reduced stigma.

       However, as Manski (1993, 2000), Brock and Durlauf (2001), Moffitt (forthcoming) and

others have highlighted, these correlations could reflect an endogenous effect where the

propensity of an individual to behave in a particular way is causally influenced by the behavior

of other members of the group; an exogenous effect where the individual=s behavior is influenced

by an exogenous characteristic that defines group membership; or a correlated effect where

individuals from the same group tend to behave the same way because they have similar

individual characteristics, or face similar constraints.

       Aizer and Currie (2004) attempt to distinguish between these effects by exploiting a rich

panel of Vital Statistics data from California, and examining the propensities of women in different

groups to use publicly funded prenatal care services. They find that the use of public programs is

highly correlated within groups defined using race/ethnicity and zip codes. These correlations

persist even when they control for many unobserved characteristics by including zip code-year fixed

effects, and when they focus on the interaction between own group behavior and measures of the

potential for contacts with other members of the group (Bertrand, Luttmer and Mullainathan’s

concept of “contact availability”).

       However, the richness of our data allows us to go further and to test the hypothesis that

networks affect take up through information sharing.       In particular, we find that the estimated

effects are as large or larger among women who have previously used the program as among first-

time users.   Thus, these effects cannot represent information sharing, since women who have

already used the program already know about it.
                                                                                                   7
       It is also worth noting Duflo and Saez’s (2001) experimental study of the effects of

information on the take up of a retirement plan option by employees. Employees were randomly

selected to receive payments if they attended a workshop providing information about the benefit.

Duflo and Saez then look at whether giving information to one person in a group affected the

behavior of other members of the employee’s work group. They find effects which are statistically

significant, but small.

       A second theoretical insight comes from the growing field of “behavioral economics”.

O’Donoghue and Rabin (1999) argue that conventional economic models incorrectly assume

exponential discounting—that is that “a person’s relative preference for well-being at an earlier date

over a later date is the same no matter when she is asked” (page 103). They further argue that a

more accurate model would allow time inconsistency in the sense that people tend to put more

weight on the present than on the future in making decisions. The model allows for this feature by

adopting hyperbolic rather than exponential discounting.

       The model has an obvious application here, in that many of the costs (though perhaps not the

stigma) of enrolling in social programs are borne immediately, whereas the benefits are in the future.

Hence, a person with time-inconsistent preferences might put off enrolling the program, even

though she would find it utility maximizing to be a participant at some later date. This might be

particularly true of programs such as public health insurance, where the benefit might not even be

needed until a future health shock occurs.

       So far, there has been little research investigating the applicability of this model to

participation in public programs. Some of the most convincing evidence in favor of the model

comes from studies of the participation in private benefit programs, such as 401K plans.          For

example, Madrian and Shea (2000) analyze a change in one company’s policies towards 401K plans
                                                                                                    8
that replaced a system in which employees had been required to elect participation in the plan, to one

in which they were automatically enrolled in a default plan. They find that participation was

significantly higher after the change, and that a substantial fraction of the enrollees stuck to the

default plan, even though most enrollees prior to the change had not selected the default. These

results suggest substantial stickiness in behavior, even though enrollees could have changed their

plan at any time with a simple phone call.

         While these results are striking, they do not necessarily imply hyperbolic discounting rather

than high costs of changing the default rule. While it is true that a phone call is not costly, most

people would have to spend substantial time and mental effort to inform themselves about the

various options available and make a decision. This too, can be regarded as a cost. Moreover, in

the context of non-participation in social programs, it is not clear that the two hypotheses (i.e. that

non-participants in social programs are “irrational” in the sense that they have time-inconsistent

preferences or that non-participants just face high costs of enrollment) have different policy

implications. Both suggest that reducing the immediate costs associated with enrollment, or

adopting default enrollment, would increase participation. Of course, if participants in social

programs are on average more “present-oriented” than other people, than this may still have

implications for the appropriateness of paternalistic government policy (c.f. O’Donoghue and Rabin,

2003).

   2. Take Up of Means Tested Programs in the United States

         Table 1 provides a selective overview of the literature about the take up of means-tested

transfer programs in the United States, focusing on more recent studies. Most of these programs

are surveyed in more detail in Moffitt (2003). Table 1 provides a thumbnail sketch of each

program in terms of when it started, what it does, who it serves, and at what cost. The programs
                                                                                                     9
are grouped by type and expense.

        Perusal of the Table suggests several broad conclusions. First, take up varies a great deal

across programs. In the case of programs that are not entitlements, take up often appears to be

constrained by the amount of funding available (e.g. public housing programs, and child care

subsidies). However, even among entitlement programs offering similar services, there is a

good deal of variation both across programs and across different groups eligible for the

programs.2

        For example, take up of the new State Children’s Health Insurance Program (SCHIP) has

been very low (8 to 14%), with the result that the number of uninsured children has changed

relatively little since the introduction of the program. Estimates of the take up of Medicaid

coverage among children also suggest that it is low. For example, Currie and Gruber (1996b)

estimated that while the fraction of children eligible for Medicaid increased by 15.1 percentage

points between 1984 and 1992, the fraction covered increased only 7.4 percentage points, while

Card and Shore-Sheppard (2004) find that expansions of eligibility to all poor children born after

September 30, 1983 led to about a 10 percentage point rise in Medicaid coverage for children

born just after the cutoff date. In contrast, they estimate that the further extension of Medicaid

to children under 6 in families with incomes below 133 percent of the poverty line had relatively

small effects.3

        On the other hand, 35 to 40 percent of all U.S. births are now paid for by the Medicaid

program, suggesting extremely high take up of that program by eligible women who are


2 An entitlement program is one in which all qualified applicants are served. In contrast, non-entitlement programs
have fixed budgets, and cannot serve more people than the funding allows.
3 The Card and Shore-Sheppard estimates of take up are lower, because they include child age-specific trends in
their model, while Currie and Gruber (1996), and Cutler and Gruber (1996) (discussed below) did not. Nevertheless,
all three sets of authors emphasize the low take up of the Medicaid expansions, relative to take up of many other
                                                                                                                10
delivering. Interestingly, take up of Medicaid-covered prenatal care lags take up of Medicaid

covered delivery services (Ellwood and Kenney, 1995).



        a) Explanations for Variations in Take Up

        Three explanations for low take up are generally offered in the literature. They are

stigma, transactions costs, and lack of information. Of course, these are not entirely separate

explanations. In particular, a person’s incentive to obtain information about a program, may be

influenced by the size of the benefit relative to the transactions costs/stigma associated with

applying. For example, Daponte, Sanders and Taylor (1998) find that people are more likely to

know about Food Stamps when they are entitled to larger benefits. And it has proven difficult

to define stigma and transactions costs as completely separate constructs. For example, a person

who is required to fill in a 30 page application form that asks about a great deal of personal and

seemingly irrelevant information, may well feel stigmatized.      Nevertheless, the next few

paragraphs will focus on what is known about the relative importance of these factors.

        There is considerable evidence that transactions costs are important determinants of take

up rates.   For example, Currie’s (2000) finding that enrollments in Medicaid among immigrant

children increase with family size strongly suggests that it is benefits relative to transactions

costs (or stigma) that matter. Those with more children benefit more while facing a similar cost

of enrollment. Moreover, her finding that enrollments follow a seasonal pattern, with

enrollments spiking before school entry in the fall also suggests that transactions costs or stigma

rather than information plays the dominant role since people are apparently timing their window

of enrollment to coincide with a period when they know that they will need services.


social programs.
                                                                                                    11
       Blank and Ruggles (1996) study of participation in AFDC and the Food Stamps Program

showed that participation increased with the size of the benefits people were eligible for,

suggesting an important role for transactions costs/stigma. Daponte, Sanders, and Taylor (1999)

conducted an experiment, and found that informing people about their eligibility for the FSP

increased the probability of participation. However, people eligible for larger benefits were

more likely to take them up, once again suggesting a non-trivial role for transactions

costs/stigma.

       On a cautionary note, both sets of authors also find that it is likely to be difficult to assess

eligibility for most social programs accurately using survey data. An important problem is that

most surveys have little information about assets. For example, Hu (1998) found that adding

asset information increased estimated take up of SSI by 60% (since people who were ineligible

because of their assets were excluded from the denominator). This problem may be particularly

acute in the low-income population, where even employment and wages are often inaccurately

reported (Haveman and Wallace, 2003).

       Currie and Grogger (2002) focus directly on transactions costs, and show that reducing

re-certification intervals had a negative effect on participation in the Food Stamp Program,

particularly among single heads and people in rural areas, both groups that could be expected to

have relatively high transactions costs. While it is possible that single mothers and people in

rural areas feel more stigmatized by participation in the Food Stamp Program than others, the

available evidence for rural areas suggests the reverse (McConnell and Ohls, 2000). Moreover,

the introduction of electronic-debit cards for Food Stamps, which might have been expected to

reduce the stigma associated with food stamps by allowing people to use the program more

discretely, had no detectable effect on Food Stamp take up rates, suggesting that stigma is not a
                                                                                                    12
major cause of low take up of the Food Stamp Program.

       There has been a great deal of debate over the extent to which the dramatic decline in

AFDC/TANF roles over the 1990s can be attributed to welfare reforms that increased the

stigma/costs of being on welfare rather than to favorable economic conditions (see Blank (2002)

for a summary) but most studies suggest that at least a third and possibly as much as two thirds

of the decline is due to “reforms” which increased the cost of using the program. Moffitt

(2003c) examines specific policies that accompanied welfare reform and documents that non-

financial factors including work requirements, sanctions, and “diversion” (the practice of trying

to prevent people from applying for welfare by meeting some immediate need) were important

determinants of entry and exit into the TANF program in Boston, Chicago, and San Antonio.

       Grogger (2002) and Grogger and Michaelopolous (2003) examine the effect of the

PWRORA provisions limiting benefit receipt to five years, and provide evidence that this change

had a profound effect on the way that women used their benefits. In models that interact child

age with time limits, they find that women with young children were less likely to use their

benefits other things being equal, presumably because they wanted to conserve benefits “for a

rainy day”. On the other hand, among women with older children the benefits have a “use it or

lose it” quality, so that there was no reduction in the probability of benefits receipt in this group.

These results suggest that women make fairly sophisticated cost-benefit calculations when

deciding to participate in this program, and that such decisions are not driven primarily by

stigma (which presumably would be larger for mothers of older children than for mothers of

young children).

       Medicaid, AFDC/TANF, and the FSP are large, well-established programs and it is likely

that most low income people know of them. Therefore, to the extent that information is lacking,
                                                                                                    13
it is likely to be very specific information about exactly how one qualifies or applies for the

program.

       Lack of information could be a greater problem for take up of some of the smaller

programs. For example, in their study of current and former welfare recipients, Meyers and

Heintze (1999) asked mothers eligible for employment-related child care subsidies why they

were not receiving them. The majority replied that they were not aware of the programs. Still,

given that transactions costs associated with the program have not been systematically examined,

it is impossible to draw any conclusion about their importance relative to lack of information.

       The Bound, Kossoudji, and Ricart-Moes’s (1998) finding that in Michigan, 2/3 of the

people applying for SSI in 1990-1991 had just been kicked off of General Assistance is

particularly striking since the benefits available under SSI were always much higher than those

available under GA. Apparently, people doing the cost/benefit calculation did not find it

worthwhile to pursue SSI when GA was an option. It is also possible that the state helped direct

people who had been kicked off of GA onto the federally-funded SSI program thereby changing

the relative transactions costs associated with the two programs. One would expect the stigma

associated with GA (welfare for the truly indigent) to be much greater than the stigma associated

with SSI, so stigma cannot explain the Bound et al. results.

       Finally, there is considerable evidence that transactions costs associated with WIC

matter. Brien and Swann (1999) show in cross-sectional data that requiring income

documentation of WIC applicants reduced participation rates. Bitler, Currie, and Scholz (2003)

find in a panel, that requiring more frequent visits to the WIC office also reduces participation,

while Chatterji et al. (2002) find that restricting the types of foods that can be purchased (i.e.

reducing the value of the benefit) discourages take up. Hence, even in smaller programs,
                                                                                                     14
transactions costs relative to benefits appear to be very important determinants of take up.

       These observations about the importance of transactions costs and other non-financial

barriers to participation raise two questions: 1) Are the non-financial barriers screening out the

“right” people? That is, are the various administrative requirements attached to these transfer

programs targeting benefits to the neediest eligibles? And 2) To the extent that needy

individuals are not being served, what can be done to increase their take up rates?



b) Do Non-Financial Barriers Screen Out the Right People?

       In many cases attempts to answer the first question are hampered by the fact that we do

not have a very precise idea of who is eligible. For example, in the case of SSI, we need to know

not only that someone has low income, but also that they are “disabled” a concept that is socially

determined and liable to change over time. Benitez-Silva, Buchinsky, and Rust (2003) look at

“classification errors” in the SSI and DI programs (see Table 2 for DI) under the assumptions a)

that the individual’s report to the Health and Retirement Survey about their disability status is

the truth and b) that both the Social Security Administration’s assessment of the individual’s

disability status and the self-report are noisy but unbiased measures of true disability. Under

either assumption, they find that 28% of the SSI/DI applicants who are ultimately awarded

benefits are not disabled (by their own reports to HRS), while 61% of the applicants whose

applications are denied are disabled.

       They construct a computerized model of disability based on a subset of relatively

objective health indicators and argue that it may be possible to do better than the current regime

in terms of reducing both type I and type II errors. In any case, taken at face value, their results

suggest that the SSI system does not do a very good job of identifying and assisting the neediest
                                                                                                    15
individuals, perhaps because the neediest people are least likely to be able to endure a lengthy

and complicated application process. Similarly, Reeder (1995) finds that the poorest households

are less likely than slightly better off households to live in public housing, again perhaps because

these vulnerable households are unable to get through the application process.

       Evidence about racial and ethnic differences in participation also suggests that programs

are not always reaching the neediest people. Duggan has found that conditional on being poor,

Hispanic children are less likely to be enrolled in the SSI program. Similarly, Currie (2000)

finds that immigrant children, many of whom are Hispanic, are less likely to be enrolled in

Medicaid conditional on being eligible. This finding mirrors a large literature on the

determinants of welfare participation among immigrants which generally finds that while

immigrants are more likely to be eligible for welfare, they are less likely to take it up, other

things being equal. However, immigrants become more likely to take up benefits with

assimilation (c.f. Blau (1984); Borjas and Trejo (1991, 1993); and Borjas and Hilton (1996);

Baker and Benjamin (1995) and Regina Riphahn (2002) find similar results for Canada and

Germany, respectively).

       An interesting exception is that, as Hu (1998) documents, elderly immigrants have

similar welfare take up rates to elderly native born persons, and have higher overall usage of

these programs. The difference is particularly pronounced among immigrants who arrived after

age 55. It is possible that barriers to participation are less formidable for elderly immigrants than

for prime-age immigrants with children, or that elderly immigrants are selected differently than

prime age ones. For example, the elderly immigrants might come intending to take up benefits,

while prime aged immigrants come primarily to work.

       On the other hand so programs do seem to serve the neediest applicants. For example,
                                                                                                   16
participation in the National School Lunch program is higher among children in poor families,

and Head Start, which is required to serve the neediest children first, seems to fulfill this

mandate. This may be because Head Start programs are required to set out specific criteria for

identifying needy children. Similarly, the WIC program guidelines lay out a very clear

hierarchy for which groups should be served if funds are insufficient to serve all eligibles, and

WIC participants appear to be much more disadvantaged than other eligibles, on average.

Hoynes (1996) and Moffitt (1998) provide evidence that take up of AFDC decreases with

expected wages, suggesting that at least on average, it is the poorest who take up the benefits.

Hence, the evidence regarding whether the neediest are being served is somewhat mixed, and

program specific.

       Households may also be receiving aid when they do not appear to be eligible, but it is

important not to assume that all these households are in violation of program rules.

Recertification intervals provide a potential reason for households with incomes above the

thresholds to be on public assistance. We know, for example, that households tend to seek out

public assistance when their income is unusually low (c.f. Ashenfelter, 1983). In this case, we

might expect household income to rise after program enrollment, whether or not the family was

involved in a public program. Since families tend to be certified for a fixed period, such a

pattern might lead us to observe many families in a cross section who participated in a public

program even though their incomes were above the threshold. In some programs, families are

required to report any improvement in their incomes, but enforcement of this provision is often

weak. In other programs, such as WIC, families are certified for fixed periods, regardless of

what happens to their income during this period.

       The question of whether benefits have been correctly targeted to those in need has
                                                                                                    17
recently been perhaps most exhaustively studied in the case of the Medicaid program. Many

authors have attempted to judge the extent to which expansions of the Medicaid program led to

increases in the take up of public insurance by the target group--people who would otherwise

have been uninsured. These authors have also attempted to gauge the extent to which the

expansions led people who would otherwise have had private insurance to take up Medicaid.

The latter phenomena has been dubbed “crowd out”.

       Despite the dramatic increases in eligibility for public insurance coverage documented in

Currie and Gruber (1996a,b) the fraction of children without insurance coverage has stayed

remarkably constant in recent years because private health insurance coverage has fallen by

about the same amount that public insurance coverage has risen (U.S. General Accounting

Office, 1995b). However, private health insurance coverage has also been falling among groups

that one would not expect to be affected by the Medicaid expansions, such as single men (Shore-

Shepard, 1996). Thus, it is not obvious to what extent the relationship between increases in

public insurance and decreases in private insurance is causal.

       Estimates of the extent of crowd out are sensitive to the methods used to control for

possibly pre-existing trends in the provision of private health insurance coverage. At the high

end of the spectrum of estimates, Cutler and Gruber (1996, 1997) estimate that for every two

people covered by the Medicaid expansions, one person lost private health insurance. However,

some of these people (such as household heads who decided they would no longer purchase

health insurance once their children became eligible) were not themselves eligible for

Medicaid--so not all of the people crowded out ended up getting insurance at public expense.

They calculate that in fact about 40 percent of those crowded out ended up on Medicaid.

   Other observers have posed the question somewhat differently, and come up with
                                                                                                  18
correspondingly different estimates. For example, Dubay and Kenney (1997) find that about 22

percent of the increase in Medicaid coverage came from people who used to be privately insured.

Since not everyone who became eligible for Medicaid did so as a result of the expansions, this

number is necessarily smaller than Cutler and Gruber's estimate. Finally, one might ask what

share of the overall decline in private insurance coverage is a result of the Medicaid expansions.

The answer to this question is about 15 percent which suggests that a great deal of research

remains to be done on the causes of this decline.

   One issue obscured by the focus on crowd out is the fact that Medicaid insurance coverage

may be better than what is privately available to many families. For example, many private

policies do not cover routine pediatric preventive care such as immunizations, and most have co-

payments and limits on what they will pay. Hence, the substitution of Medicaid for private

insurance coverage may improve children's health care, and this improvement should be valued

when the costs and benefits of the expansions are weighed. Also, from a societal point of view,

it does not matter whether private or public insurers pay for health care, except in so far as

taxation creates a dead-weight loss, and public insurance transfers resources to families with

children. Still, policy makers reluctant to raise (or eager to cut) taxes remain deeply concerned

about crowdout. The crowd out literature suggests that it is extremely difficult to target

programs only to those who need them, such as children who would not otherwise have health

insurance.




c) What Can be Done to Increase Take Up?

       Turning to the second question of what can be done to increase take up among the

                                                                                                 19
“deserving” eligibles, the research summarized in Table 1 suggests some hypotheses but yields

few definitive answers.   For example, it may be the case that the high take up of the EITC

program and of Medicaid among pregnant women reflects the fact that businesses as well as

individuals have a stake in promoting take up of these programs. In the case of the EITC,

anecdotal evidence suggests that commercial tax preparers have moved into low income areas in

response to the EITC. Many preparers advertise instant cash back, which is essentially the

person’s EITC credit less the preparer’s fee. Subsidies for H&R block may not be the most

desirable use of government funds, but the example does illustrate the potential role of

institutions in enhancing take up.

       In the case of Medicaid, hospitals have a stake in getting pregnant women who are

eligible signed up, because they are required to serve women in active labor whether or not the

women can pay (as long as the hospital accepts any payments from Medicare). There is

evidence that pregnant women were responsible for much of the uncompensated care provided

by hospitals prior to the Medicaid expansions (Saywell, 1989). Many hospitals have

subsequently established Medicaid enrollment offices on site. These offices assist people in

completing applications and tell them how to obtain necessary documentation. Hospitals in at

least 32 states and the District of Columbia began to employ private firms to help them enroll

eligible patients in the Medicaid program (GAO, 1994).

       Conversely, Medicaid enrollment rates may have remained low for other groups despite

increases in income cutoffs because of lack of support for the program among vendors of

medical services. Baker and Royalty (1996) use data from a longitudinal survey of California

physicians observed in 1987 and 1991 and find that expansions of Medicaid eligibility to

previously uninsured women and children increased the utilization of care provided by public
                                                                                                  20
clinics and hospitals but had little effect on visits to office based physicians. This is consistent

with much previous evidence that many providers either do not accept Medicaid payments, limit

the number of Medicaid patients in their practice, or otherwise limit the amount of time that they

spend with Medicaid patients (Sloan, Mitchell, and Cromwell, 1978; Decker, 1992).

       This failure of private providers to “take up” the Medicaid program is likely to be related to

the costs of doing business with the states, relative to the benefits represented by reimbursement

levels. Andreano, Smolensky, and Helminiak (1986) document the problems that some vendors in

Wisconsin had getting reimbursed from the Medicaid program. Gruber (2003) summarizes the

literature relating Medicaid reimbursement levels to physician participation (starting with Currie,

Gruber, and Fischer, 1995) and concludes that there is a strong relationship.

       These examples suggest that giving businesses (or other entities) a stake in getting people

enrolled could boost participation rates. This approach has been tried recently in California. Aizer

(2003) studies a program of application assistance in which community organizations were paid $50

per successfully completed Medicaid application. Aizer finds that this program had a large impact

on Medicaid enrollments, particularly in the Hispanic and Asian communities, and that the increase

in Medicaid coverage resulted in fewer preventable hospitalizations among eligible children. In

contrast, statewide advertising of Medicaid and the Healthy Families program seemed to have

effects only on the enrollment of infants. It appears that people with older children already knew

about these services.

       Direct attempts to reduce the barriers to participation by government have not always been

as successful. Currie and Grogger (2002b) show that prior to welfare reform, receipt of Medicaid

by pregnant women was closely tied to receipt of cash welfare, even though earlier expansions of

eligibility meant that most low income women were eligible for coverage of their pregnancies
                                                                                                       21
even if they were not on welfare. The key seems to be that women who are on welfare are

automatically eligible for Medicaid, and do not have to undergo the Medicaid application

process. One might think then, that measures states took to make it easier for pregnant women to

apply for Medicaid would have had some impact. These measures included: presuming that

pregnant women were eligible for Medicaid while their applications were being processed and/or

expediting the processing of applications for pregnant women; Aoutstationing@ Medicaid eligibility

workers in hospitals that serve low income women; dramatically shortening and simplifying

application forms; and eliminating the requirement for face-to-face interviews by allowing mail-in

applications from pregnant women. However, Currie and Grogger (2002b) were unable to find any

consistent effects of these measures, suggesting either that they were insufficient or that they were

ineffective.

        Yelowitz (2000) provides evidence that altering enrollment requirements for one program

can have spillover effects onto the enrollments in other programs. He estimates that for every 10

newly eligible families who took up Medicaid benefits, four also took up the Food Stamp Program.

It is possible that families learned about their eligibility for the FSP when they went to the welfare

office to apply for Medicaid. Alternatively, it may be more worthwhile to bear the application costs

in the case of Medicaid and the FSP together than in the case of FSP alone. Thus, making it easier

to apply for multiple programs might increase take up among eligibles.

        Conversely, reductions in the welfare caseload have impacted enrollments in other programs.

 For example, Zedlewski and Brauner (1999) and Currie and Grogger (2002) find that these

reductions reduced enrollment in the Food Stamps Program. And changes in other programs can

also affect AFDC(TANF) caseloads--Garrett and Glied (2000) find that many families switched

from AFDC to SSI after the 1990 case of Sullivan v. Zebley expanded eligibility for the SSI
                                                                                                         22
program among children. Moreover, families were more likely to switch from AFDC to SSI where

the difference between SSI and AFDC benefit levels was greatest.

       In summary, this section suggests that take up will be higher a) the more people want the

service; b) the fewer the barriers that are place in their way; and c) where institutions (including

private ones) have incentives to assist individuals in taking up their benefits.




3. Take Up of Non Means-Tested Programs

       Take up is generally considered to be a problem associated with means-testing.

Therefore, it is worth considering whether anything further can be learned about take up from

studying a few large non means-tested programs in the United States. For example, one might

expect the stigma involved in participating in a non means-tested program to be less than the

stigma associated with participation in a means-tested one. Hence, if participation rates were

universally higher in the former than the latter, then this might be taken as indirect evidence of

the importance of stigma costs.

       Table 2 provides an overview of four large social security programs in the U.S. that are

not means-tested.   The most striking thing about this table is that there is almost as much

variation in the take up of these non means-tested programs as there is in the take up of the

means-tested programs that were reviewed in Table 1, which would seem to provide some

indirect evidence against the stigma hypothesis.

       For example, Medicare forms an interesting contrast to Medicaid, because there is almost

100% take up of the optional Part B coverage of outpatient services.     This is perhaps surprising

because it is not free--people have to pay premiums for Part B insurance, even though those
                                                                                                     23
premiums are highly subsidized. A key difference between the two programs is that when

people turn 65 years old, they have to fill out a form in order to decline Part B coverage, whereas

people have to go through a complicated process in order to apply for Medicaid coverage.

Thus, Part B works very much like the 401K intervention studied by Madrian and Shea (2001).

       The three other programs outlined in Table 2 all suggest that take up may be a problem

even for non means-tested programs.       It is difficult to estimate the size of the eligible pool for

Social Security Disability Insurance (DI) and Workmen’s Compensation (WC) given that we do

not know which people are truly disabled or injured. However, Table 2 summarizes a good deal

of evidence that participation in these programs varies with the size of the benefits, suggesting

that take up is more likely when benefits are higher relative to costs of enrollment.       Similarly,

take up of Unemployment Insurance (UI) is generally much less than full (generally similar to

take up of programs such as AFDC and Food Stamps), and varies with the size of the expected

benefit, as well as with the tax treatment of benefits (Anderson and Meyer, 1997).

       These less than full take up rates suggest that eligibles perceive substantial costs

associated with participation even in non means-tested programs (otherwise, take up would be

100 percent for any positive benefit).    If those costs were driven primarily by stigma, the

evidence would suggest that the stigma associated with non means-tested social insurance

programs is of the same order of magnitude as stigma associated with using “welfare” programs.

If we believe, on the other hand, that the stigma associated with using non means-tested social

insurance programs (which everyone pays into) is less than that associated with means-tested

programs, then we would have to conclude that transactions costs are major determinants of

participation in all types of programs.


                                                                                                          24
4. Take Up in the UK

    Low take up of social programs is also often perceived as a peculiarly American problem,

possibly because of the U.S.’s heavy reliance on means-tested programs in its social security

system. Hence, it is also of interest to examine take up of social benefits in another country,

such as the United Kingdom.4 Table 3 provides a brief overview of the main social benefits

available in the U.K. It is less complete than Tables 1 and 2, given this author’s relative

unfamiliarity with these programs, and less emphasis on the take up issue in the British literature

(although see Craig (1991) for an early survey).

    The main point, is that many U.K. programs also exhibit less than full take up. Estimates of

take up of the Working Families’ Tax Credit (which is similar to the American EITC) by single

mothers range from 67 to 81%, which is comparable to Scholz’ estimate of 80 to 87% for the

EITC. Take up of Income Support among non-pensioners, which (at least for lone mothers)

corresponds roughly to AFDC, seems to be higher in the U.K. than in the U.S., though at 80%, is

still much less than full. Take up of Income Support for pensioners (which corresponds to SSI

for the elderly) is somewhat higher than in the U.S. at between 64 and 78%, but again, is much

less than full.

         These rough comparisons suggest that perhaps more attention should be paid to factors

determining take up of social benefits outside the U.S. It is interesting to note that the one U.K.

program with near universal take up is the Child Benefit. Mothers receive the application

materials for this program in hospital, which presumably greatly reduces application transactions

costs.


4 Take up estimates for various other countries and programs are also available. C.f. Koning and Ridder (1997)
who study a rental assistance program in the Netherlands and find a 64% take up rate, and Storer and Van

                                                                                                                 25
        The introduction of several new programs, such as the “New Deal” for the unemployed in

1998, would seem to offer an interesting opportunity for research. The New Deal made

participation in jobs programs compulsory for many groups of unemployed. It would be

interesting to know what effect this had on the probability of participating, and which categories

of recipients dropped out. More generally, cross-country collaboration between researchers

might uncover variations in transactions costs and other factors that affect take up, and could

help to isolate their effects.

        The discussion of social benefits in the U.K. might also lead us to think beyond the

question of “who takes up programs?” to “do recipients make optimal use of programs that they

have taken up and if not, why not?” Research on the National Health Insurance program

suggests that although there is universal take up, the rich receive more services than the poor,

conditional on their health status. Possible reasons range from higher transactions costs (e.g.

lack of transportation, or inability to take time off from work); superior connections and

communication skills and/or better rapport with medical providers; and differences in attitudes

towards illness and medical care (Dixon et al, 2003). This example suggests that the same

factors that inhibit take up may also affect utilization of social programs.



5. Summary and Conclusions

        It is generally agreed that people do not take up benefits if the costs outweigh the

benefits. But after many years of research, we still have relatively little insight into precisely

what types of costs matter most, and what types of measures are most likely to reduce them. A

few general conclusions can be drawn, however. First, take up is enhanced by automatic or


Audenrode (1995) for a summary of take up of UI in Canada
                                                                                                     26
default enrollment and lowered by administrative barriers, although removing individual barriers

does not necessarily have much effect, suggesting that one must address the whole bundle.

        Second, although it may be impossible to devise a definitive test of the “stigma

hypothesis”, it seems clear that stigma cannot be the only cost facing participants. Other, more

concrete types of transactions costs are probably a good deal more important to most people than

stigma or lack of information. Third, although people generally have means-tested programs in

the United States in mind when they discuss take up, low take up is also a problem in many non

means-tested social insurance programs and in other countries.

        Historically, economists have paid much attention to rules about eligibility, and virtually

no attention to how these rules are enforced or made known to participants.     This review

suggests that the marginal return to new data about these features of programs is likely to be high

in terms of understanding take up. The anecdotal evidence that exists, suggests that there is a

great deal of variation in the ways that similar types of programs are implemented both within

and across countries, and this variation could be exploited to identify the most important barriers

to participation.

        For example, some states implemented SCHIP as an extension of their Medicaid

programs, while others created separate, stand-alone programs in order to reduce the stigma

associated with receiving public insurance. However, to my knowledge, this difference has not

been exploited to investigate the “stigma hypothesis”. About half of the 109 Food Stamp offices

surveyed in a recent USDA program access study provided services such as extended hours,

while a small number of programs required applicants to attend a series of meetings before they

were even permitted to sign their application forms (Gabor et al., 2003). Procedures such as

requiring third party verification of income are not standardized across locations either, and
                                                                                                  27
could easily explain variation in take up across areas. More systematic collection and analysis of

this type of data would add a great deal to the study of take up.

        In an era of social experiments, it might also prove useful to consider experimental

manipulations of factors thought to influence take up. For example, it might be possible to

design an outreach program that would directly test the hypothesis that take up is influenced by

information exchange among members of social networks. Similarly, parameters such as

application procedures, recertification intervals, payments for community enrollment assistance,

and incentives to service providers to give application assistance could be varied across areas in

order to study their effects.




                                                                                                28
References

Administration for Children and Families. “Access to Child Care for Low-Income Working
Families,” Washington, D.C.,
http://www.actf.dhhs.gov/programs/ccb/research/ccreport/ccreport.htm, 1999.

Aizer, Anna. "Covering Kids: Improving the Health Insurance Coverage of Poor Children",
xerox, Dept. of Economics UCLA, August, 2001.

Aizer, Anna. “Got Health? Advertising, Medicaid, and Child Health?”, UCLA xerox, January,
2003a.

Aizer, Anna. "Low Take-up in Medicaid: Does Outreach Matter and For Whom?" American
Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, May 2003b.

Aizer, Anna and Janet Currie. "Networks or Neighborhoods? Journal of Public Economics,
forthcoming 2004.

Aizer, Anna and Jeffrey Grogger. “Parental Medicaid Expansions and Health Insurance
Coverage”, NBER Working Paper #9907, August 2003.

Anderson, Patricia M. and Bruce D. Meyer. “Unemployment Insurance Takeup Rates and the
After-Tax Value of Benefits”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 112 (3), 2003, 913-937.

Andreano, Ralph, Eugene Smolensky, and Thomas Helminiak. “The Economics of Information
Exchange: Medicaid in Wisconsin,” Health Care Financing Review, v8 #1, Fall 1986, 64-79.

Ashenfelter, Orley. “Determining Participation in Income-Tested Social Programmes,” Journal
of the American Statistical Association, 78, 1983, 517-525.

Autor David H. and Mark G. Duggan. “The Rise in the Disability Rolls and the Decline in
Unemployment”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, February 2003.

Baker, Laurence and Anne Royalty. "Medicaid Policy, Physician Behavior, and Health Care for
the Low-Income Population," Dept. of Economics, Stanford University, xerox, December 1996.

Baker, Michael and Dwayne Benjamin. “The Receipt of Transfer Payments by Immigrants to
Canada,” Journal of Human Resources, 30 #4, 1995, 650-676.

Banks, James, Richard Blundell, R. Disney and C. Emmerson. “Retirement, Pensions and the
Adequacy of Saving: A Guide to the Debate”, Briefing Note No. 29, The Institute for the Fiscal
Studies, 2002.

Benítez-Silva, Hugo, MosheBuchinsky and John Rust. “ How Large Are the Classification errors
in the Social Security Disability Award Process,” NBER Working Paper #10219, Feb. 2004.
                                                                                            29
Bertrand, Marianne, Erzo Luttmer, and Sendhil Mullainathan. “Network Effects and Welfare
Cultures”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, v CXV, August 2000, 1019-1056.

Besley, Timothy and Stephen Coate. “Public Provision of Private Goods and the Redistribution
of Income” The American Economic Review, 81, 1991, 979-984.

Besley, Timothy and Stephen Coate. “The Design of Income Maintenance Programs” The
Review of Economic Studies. 62(2):187-221, April 1995.

Bishop J.A., J.P. Formby, and L.A. Zeager. “Nutrition and Nonparticipation in the United States
Food Stamp Program,” Applied Economics, 24(N9), 1992, 945-949.

Bitler, Marianne, Janet Currie and John Karl Scholz. “WIC Participation and Eligibility”, Journal of
Human Resources, v38, 2003, 1139-1179.

Blackorby, Charles and David Donaldson. “Cash versus Kind, Self-Selection and Efficient
Transfers,” American Economic Review, 78, 1988, 691-700.

Blank, Rebecca. “The Effect of Medical Need and Medicaid on AFDC Participation,” Journal of
Human Resources, 24 #1, 1989, 54-87.

Blank, Rebecca. “What Causes Public Assistance Caseloads to Grow”, Journal of Human
Resources, 36 (1), 2001, 85-118.

Blank, Rebecca. “Evaluating Welfare Reform in the United States,” Journal of Economic Literature,
v40 #4, December 2002.

Blank, Rebecca and Patricia Ruggles. "When Do Women Use AFDC & Food Stamps? The
Dynamics of Eligibility vs. Participation," Journal of Human Resources, 31 #1, 1996, 57-89.

Blank, Rebecca and David Card. "Recent Trends in Insured and Uninsured Unemployment: Is There
an Explanation?," Quarterly Journal of Economics 106, November 1991, 1157-1190.

Blau, David and Janet Currie. Who’s Minding the Kids?: Preschool, Day Care, and After School
Care”, The Handbook of Education Economics, Finis Welch and Eric Hanushek (eds). New York:
North Holland, forthcoming 2004.

Blau, Francine. “The Use of Transfer Payments by Immigrants,” Industrial and Labor Relations
Review, 37 #2, 1984, 222-239.

Blundell, Richard. “Welfare-to-Work: Which Policies Work and Why?,” Keynes Lecture in
Economics: 2001, The Institute for the Fiscal Studies, 2002.

Blundell, Richard, V. Fry and Ian Walker. “ Modeling the Take-up of means-tested Benefits: The
Case of Housing Benefits in the United Kingdom”, The Economic Journal, 98, 1988, 58-74.
                                                                                            30
Borjas, George and Lynette Hilton. “Immigration and the Welfare State: Immigrant Participation in
Means-Tested Entitlement Programs,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 111 #2, 1996, 575-604.

Borjas, George and Stephen Trejo. “Immigrant Participation in the Welfare System,” Industrial and
Labor Relations Review, 44 #2, 1991, 195-211.

Borjas, George and Stephen Trejo. “National Origin and Immigrant Welfare Recipiency,” Journal of
Public Economics, 50 #3, 1993, 325-344.

Bound, John. “The Health and Earnings of Rejected Disability Applicants,” American Economic
Review, 79, 1989, 482-503.

Bound, John. “Self-Reported vs. Objective Measures of Health in Retirement Models,” Journal
of Human Resources, 26, 1991, 106-138.

Bound, John, Sherri Kossoudji and G. Ricart-Mous. “ The Ending of General Assistance and SSI
Disability Growth in Michigan: A Case Study”. In Growth in Disability Benefits: Explanations
and Policy Implications, edited by K. Rupp and D. Stapleton. Kalamazoo, MI: W.E. Upjohn
Institute for Employment Research, 1998.

Bound, John, Michael Schoenbaum, and Timothy Waidman. “Race and Education Differences in
Disability Status and Labor Force Attachment in the Health and Retirement Survey,” Journal of
Human Resources, 30, 1995, S227-S267.

Bound, John, Michael Schoenbaum, and Timothy Waidman. “Race Differences in Labor Force
Attachment and Disability Status,” The Gerontologist, 36, 1996, 311-321.

Bound, John and Timothy Waidmann. “Disability Transfers, Self-Reported Health, and the
Labor Force Attachment of Older Men: Evidence from the Historical Record,” The Quarterly
Journal of Economics, v107 #4, 1992, 1393-1419.

Brewer, Michael. “Comparing In-work Benefits and Financial Work Incentives for Low-Income
Families in the US and the UK”, Working Paper 00/16, The Institute for the Fiscal Studies, 2000.

Brewer, Michael., Tom Clark and Matthew Wakefield. “Five Years of Social Security Reform in
the UK”, Working Paper 02/12, The Institute for Fiscal Studies, 2002.

Brewer, Michael and Paul Gregg. “Eradicating Child Poverty in Britain: Welfare Reform and
Children since 1997”, Working Paper W01/08, The Institute for Fiscal Studies, 2001.

Brien, Michael J. and Christopher A. Swann. "Prenatal WIC Participation and Infant Health:
Selection and Maternal Fixed Effects", University of Virginia Dept. of Economics, unpublished
manuscript, 1999.

                                                                                              31
Brock, William and Steven Durlauf. “Interactions Based Models” in James Heckman and Edward Leamer
(eds.) Handbook of Econometrics, v5 (Amsterdam: North Holland) 2001.

Burghardt, J., A. Gordon, N. Chapman et al. The School Nutrition Dietary Assessment Study:
School Food Service, Meals Offered and Dietary Intake, Alexandria VA, U.S. Dept. of
Agriculture, Food and Nutrition Service, 1993.

Burghardt, J., A. Gordon and Barbara Devaney. “Background of the School Nutritional Dietary
Assessment Study”, American Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 61 (1 Supp). 1995, 178S-181S.

Burkhauser, Richard and Mary Daly. “The Supplemental Security Income Program” in Means
Tested Transfer Programs in the United States Robert Moffitt (ed.) (Chicago: University of
Chicago Press for NBER) 2003.

Card, David, and Lara D. Shore-Sheppard. “Using Discontinuous Eligibility Rules to Identify the
Effects of the Federal Medicaid Expansions on Low Income Children,” Review of Economics and
Statistics, forthcoming, 2004.

Card, David and Phillip Levine (2000) "Extended Benefits and the Duration of UI Spells: Evidence
from the New Jersey Extended Benefit Program," Journal of Public Economics, 78, October 2000.

Card, David and Brian P. McCall. "Is WorkersCompensation covering uninsured medical costs?
Evidence from the 'Monday Effect,'" Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 49 (4), 1996, 690-706.

Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services. “Program Information on Medicare, Medicaid, SCHIP,
and Other Programs of the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services” (Washington D.C.: Office
of Research Development and Information, Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services) June,
2002.

Chatterji, Pinka, Karen Bonuck, Simi Dhawan and Nadnini Deb. “WIC Participation and the
Initiation and Duration of Breast-feeding”, Madison WI, Institute for Research on Poverty,
Working Paper # 1246-02, 2002.

Clark, Tom, Christopher Giles, John Hall. “Does Council Tax Benefit Work,” (London: Institute
for Fiscal Studies) June 1999.

Clark, Tom and Julian McCrae. “Issues arising in Tax and Benefit Modelling: the Case of Family
Credit”, The Institute for Fiscal Studies, 2001.

Coe, R. “Nonparticipation in the SSI Program by Eligible Elderly”, Southern Economic Journal,
51(3), 1985, 891-897.

Craig, Peter. “Costs and Benefits: A Review of Research on Take Up of Income-Related
Benefits,” Journal of Social Policy 20(4), 1991, 537-565.


                                                                                              32
Crew, Amy D. “Self Selection, Administrative Selection, and Aggregation Bias in the Estimation
of the Effect of In-Kind Transfers”, Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, University of Virginia,
1995.

Currie, Janet. "U.S. Food and Nutrition Programs", Means-Tested Transfer Programs in the
United States, Robert Moffitt (ed.) (Chicago: University of Chicago Press for NBER), 2003.

Currie, Janet. "Do Children of Immigrants Make Differential Use of Public Health Insurance?",
Issues in the Economics of Immigration, George Borjas (ed.) (Chicago: University of Chicago
Press for NBER) 2000.

Currie, Janet and Jeffrey Grogger. "Medicaid Expansions and Welfare Contractions: Offsetting
Effects on Maternal Behavior and Infant Health, "Journal of Health Economics, 21, 313-335,
2002.

Currie, Janet and Jeffrey Grogger. “Explaining Recent Declines in Food Stamp Program
Participation”, in Brookings Papers on Urban Affairs, William Gale and Janet Rothenberg-Pack
(eds) 2001.

Currie, Janet and Jonathan Gruber. "Health insurance eligibility and Child Health: lessons from
recent expansions of the Medicaid program," Quarterly Journal of Economics, May, 1996a, 431-
466.

Currie, Janet, and Jonathan Gruber. "Saving Babies: The Efficacy and Cost of Recent Changes in
the Medicaid Eligibility of Pregnant Women," Journal of Political Economy, 104 #6, December
1996b, 1263-1296

Currie, Janet, Jonathan Gruber, and Michael Fischer. "Physician payments and infant health:
Effects of increases in Medicaid reimbursements", American Economic Review, 85 #2, May
1995, 106-111.

Currie, Janet and Matthew Neidell. “Getting Inside the ‘Black-Box’ of Head Start Program
Quality: What Matters and What Doesn’t,” NBER Working Paper #, November 2003.

Currie, Janet and Duncan Thomas. "Does Head Start Make A Difference?" The American
Economic Review, 85 #3, June 1995, 341-364.

Currie, Janet and Duncan Thomas. "School Quality and the Longer-Term Effects of Head Start",
Journal of Human Resources, v35 #4, 2000, 755-774.

Currie, Janet and Aaron Yelowitz. “Are Public Housing Projects Good for Kids?,” Journal of Public
Economics, v75 #1, January 2000, 99-124.

Cutler, David and Jonathan Gruber (1996), "Does Public Insurance Crowdout Private
Insurance?", Quarterly Journal of Economics, CXI, May 1996, 391-430.
                                                                                               33
Cutler, David and Jonathan Gruber. "Medicaid and Private Insurance: Evidence and
Implications", Health Affairs, Jan./Feb. 1997, 194-200.

Daponte, Beth, Sanders, Seth and Lowell Taylor. "Why Do Low-Income Households Not Use
Food Stamps? Evidence from an Experiment", Journal of Human Resources, Summer, 34 #3,
1999, 612-628.

Daly, Mary C. and Richard V. Burkhauser. “ How Family Economic Well-Being Changes
Following the Onset of a Disability: A Dynamic Analysis”, Syracuse University Manuscript,
1998.

Decker, Sandra. "The Effect of Physician Reimbursement Levels on the Primary Care of
Medicaid Patients," xerox, New York University School of Public Service, 1992.

Department for Work and Pensions. “Income-Related Benefits: Estimates of Take-up in
2000/2001,” (London: Department for Work and Pensions: Information and Analysis
Directorate) 2003.

Dion, M. Robin and LaDonna Pavetti. Access and Participation in Medicaid and the Food Stamp
Program: A Review of the Recent Literature" (Washington D.C: Mathematica Policy Research)
March 2000.

Dixon, Anna, Julian Le Grand, John Henderson, Richard Murray, Emmi Poteliakhoff. “Is the
NHS Equitable? A Review of the Evidence,” London School of Economics, Health and Social
Care Discussion Paper #11, 2003.

Dorsett, Richard and Christopher Heady. “The Take-Up of Means Tested Benefits by Working
Families with Children,” Fiscal Studies, 12 #4, 1991, 22-32.

Dubay, Lisa and Genevieve Kenney. "Did Medicaid Expansions for Pregnant Women Crowd out
Private Coverage", Health Affairs, January/February 1997, 185-193.

Duclos, Jean-Yves. “Modelling the Take-Up of State Support,” Journal of Public Economics, 54,
1995, 391-415.

Duflo, Esther and Emmanuel Saez. “The Role of Information and Social Interaction in
Retirement Plan Decisions: Evidence from a Randomized Experiment”, xerox, Dept. of
Economics, Harvard University 2001.

Ellwood, Marilyn and Genevieve Kenney. "Medicaid and Pregnant Women: Who is Being Enrolled
and When?" Health Care Financing Review, 17 #2, 1995, 7-28.

Fuller Bruce, Sharon L. Kagan, J. McCarthy, G. Caspary, D. Lubotsky and L. Gascue. “Who
Selects Formal Child Care? The Role of Subsidies as Low-Income Mothers Negotiate Welfare
                                                                                            34
Reforms”, presented at the Society for Research in Child Development Meeting, Albuquerque
NM, April 1999.

Gabor, Vivan, Brooke Hardison, Christopher Botsko, and Susan Bartlett. “Food Stamp Program
Access Study: Local Office Policies and Practices,” (Washington D.C.: USDA Economic
Research Service) E-Fan-03-013, December 2003.

Garces, Eliana, Duncan Thomas and Janet Currie. "Longer Term Effects of Head Start," The
American Economic Review, v92 #4, Sept. 2002, 999-1012.

Garrett, Bowen and Sherry Glied. “Does State AFDC Generosity Affect Child SSI
Participation?” Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 19 #2, 2000, 272-295.

Glanz, Frederic B., Regina Berg, Diane Porcari et al. School Lunch Eligible Nonparticipants
(Cambridge MA: ABT Associates) 1994.

Gleason, P. M. “ Participation in the National School Lunch Program and the School Breakfast
Program”, American Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 61(1 Supp), 1995, 213S-220S.

Glied, Sherry. “What Can the Take up of Other Programs Teach Us About How to Improve Take
Up of Health Insurance Programs?” NBER Working Paper 8185, March, 2001.

Grogger, Jeffrey and C. Michalopoulos. “Welfare Dynamics under Time Limits”, Journal of
Political Economy, 111 #3, June 2003, 530-554.

Grogger, Jeffrey. “The Effects of Time Limits, the EITC, and Other Policy Changes on Welfare
Use, Work, and Income Among Female-Headed Families”, Review of Economics and Statistics,
85 #2, May 2003, 394-408.

Grogger, Jeffrey. "The Behavioral Effects of Welfare Time Limits," American Economic Review
92, May 2002, 385-389.

Gruber, Jonathan. “Medicaid” in Means Tested Transfer Programs in the United States
Robert Moffitt (ed) (Chicago: University of Chicago Press for NBER) 2003.

Haider, Steven, Robert Schoeni and Alison Jacknowitz. “Food Stamps and the Elderly: Why is
Participation so Low?” RAND xerox, April 29, 2002.

Hancock, Ruth, Stephen Pudney, Geraldine Barker, Monica Hernandez, Holly Sutherland. “The
Take-Up of Multiple Means-Tested Benefits by British Pensioners: Evidence From the Family
Resources Surveys,” Department of Economics, University of Leicester, July 2003.

Haveman, Robert, and Geoffrey Wallace. “Work and Earnings of Low-Skill Women: A Sobering
Comparison of Survey Responses and Administrative Records,” University of Wisconsin

                                                                                              35
Institute for Research on Poverty, xerox, December 2003.

Holtzblatt, J. “Administering Refundable Tax Credits: Lessons from the EITC Experience’,
Proceedings of the Eighty-Fourth Annual Conference on Taxation, National Tax Association,
1991, 180-186.

Hotz, V. Joseph, Charles H. Mullin and J. Karl Scholz. “The Earned Income Tax Credit and
Labor Market Participation of Families on Welfare”, mimeo, Dept. of Economics, UCLA,
Vanderbilt and University of Wisconsin – Madison, March 2000a.

Hotz, V. Joseph, Charles H. Mullin and J. Karl Scholz. “Welfare, Employment, and Income:
Evidence on the Effects of Benefit Reductions from California”, American Economic Review
Papers and Proceedings, May, 2000b, 380-384.

Hotz, V. Joseph and John Karl Scholz. "The Earned Income Tax Credit," (with V. Joseph Hotz), in
Means-Tested Transfer Programs in the U.S., Robert Moffitt, Editor, (Chicago: The University of
Chicago Press for NBER) 2003.

Hoynes, Hilary. “Welfare Transfers in Two-Parent Families: Labor Supply and Welfare
Participation under AFDC-UP”, Econometrica, 64, 1996, 295-332.

Hu, Wei-Yin. “Elderly Immigrants on Welfare” Journal of Human Resources”, XXXIII(3), 1998,
711-741.

Internal Revenue Service. “Participation in the Earned Income Tax Credit Program for Tax Year
1996”, January 31, 2002a, Washington, D.C.

Internal Revenue Service. “Compliance Estimates for Earned Income Tax Credit Claimed on
1999 Returns”, February 28, 2002b, Washington, D.C.

Kabbani, Nader and Parke Wilde. A Short Recertification Periods in the U.S. Food Stamp Program:
Causes and Consequences (Washington D.C.: USDA Economic Research Service) 2002.

Koning, Ruud and Geert Ridder. “Rent Assistance and Housing Demand,” Journal of Public
Economics, 66, 1997, 1-31.

Krueger, Alan and Bruce D., Meyer. “ Labor Supply Effects of Social Insurance”, Handbook of
Public Economics, Vol. 4, Part 7, 2002, Chapter 33.

Krueger, Alan. “ Incentive Effects of Workers’ Compensation Insurance”, Journal of Public
Economics, 41 (1), 1990, 73-99.

Kubik, J. (1999). “ Incentives for the identification and treatment of children with disabilities:
the supplemental security income program”, Journal of Public Economics, 73, 187-215.


                                                                                                     36
Lemieux, Thomas and W. Bentley MacLeod. “Supply Side Hysteresis: The Case of the Canadian
Unemployment System,” Journal of Public Economics, 78 #1-2, 2000, 139-170.

Liebman, Jeffrey. “Who are the Ineligible EITC Recipients?,” National Tax Journal, v. LIII #4, Part
2, 2002, 1164-.

Lindbeck, A., S. Nyberg and J. Weibull. “Social Norms, the Welfare State, and Voting”,
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 114, 1999, 1-35.

LoSasso, Anthony. and Thomas C. Buchmueller. “ The Effect of the State Children’s Health
Insurance Program on Health Insurance Coverage”, Working Paper 9404, National Bureau of
Economic Research, 2002.

Madrian, Brigitte and Dennis Shea. “The Power of Suggestion: Inertia in 401(k) Participation and
Savings Behavior,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2001, 116: 1149-1525.

Manski, Charles. “Identification of Endogenous Social Effects: The Reflection Problem”, The
Review of Economic Studies, 60 #3, July 1993, 531-542.

Manski, Charles. “Economic Analysis of Social Interactions”, Journal of Economic Perspectives,
v14 #3, Summer 2000, 115-136.

McConnell, Sheena and James Ohls. "Food Stamps in Rural America: Special Issues and Common
Themes" (Washington D.C.: Mathematica Policy Research) May 2000.

McCubbin, J. “EITC NonCompliance: The Determinants of the Misreporting of Children”,
National Tax Journal, Vol. LIII, 4 (2), 2000, 1135-1164.

McGarry, Kathleen. “Factors determining participation of the elderly in SSI”, Journal of Human
Resources, 31(12), 1996, 331-358.

McGarry Kathleen. “Public Policy and the U.S. Health Insurance Market: Direct and Indirect
Provision of Insurance,” National Tax Journal, LV (4), 2002, 789-827.

Menefee, J., B. Edwards, S. Schieber. “ Analysis of Nonparticipation in the SSI Program”,
Social Security Bulletin, 44(6), 1981, 3-21.

Meyer, Bruce. “Lessons from the U.S. Unemployment Insurance Experiments”, Journal of
Economic Literature, 33(1), 1995, 91-131.

Meyer, Bruce and Dan Rosenbaum. “Welfare, the Earned Income Tax Credit, and the Labor Supply
of Single Mothers,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics CSVI, August 2001, 1063-1114.

Meyers Marcia K., and T. Heintze. “ The Performance of the Child Care Subsidy System: Target
Efficiency, Coverage Adequacy and Equity”, Social Service Review, 73(1), 1999, 34-64.
                                                                                                37
Mitchell, Olivia S. and J. W. R. Phillips. “ Applications, Denials, and Appeals for Social
Security Disability Insurance”, Working Paper 2002-032, Michigan Retirement Research Center,
Michigan University, 2002.

Moffitt, Robert A. "An Economic Model of Welfare Stigma", American Economic Review, 1983, 73
#5, 1023-1035.

Moffitt, Robert. “Policy Interventions, Low-Level Equilibria and Social Interactions,” in Steven
Durlauf and Peyton Young (eds.) Social Dynamics (Cambridge MA: MIT Press) forthcoming.

Moffit, Robert. “The Effect of Welfare on Marriage and Fertility,” In Welfare, the Family, and
Reproductive Behavior, ed. R. Moffit, Washington, National Academy Press, 1998.

Moffitt, Robert (ed). Means Tested Transfer Programs in the United States (Chicago: University
of Chicago Press for NBER) 2003.

Moffitt, Robert. “The Temporary Assistance for Needy Families Program,” in Means Tested
Transfer Programs in the United States, Robert Moffitt (ed) (Chicago: University of Chicago
Press for NBER) 2003b.

Moffitt, Robert. “The Role of Non-Financial Factors in Exit and Entry in the TANF Program,”
Xerox, Dept. of Economics, Johns Hopkins University, May 2003c.

Moffitt, Robert and Barbara Wolfe. “The Effect of the Medicaid Program on Welfare
Participation and Labor Supply,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 1992, 615-626.

National Governor’s Association. “Earned Income Tax Fact Sheet” (Washington D.C.: National
Governor’s Association) 2002.

National Governor’s Association. “MCH Update 2002: State Health Coverage for Low-Income
Pregnant Women, Children, and Parents” (Washington D.C.: National Governor’s Association)
June 9, 2003.

National Research Council, "Estimating Eligibility and Participation for the WIC Program",
(National Academy Press: Washington D.C.) 2003.

Nichols, D., Eugene Smolensky, and T.N. Tideman. “Discrimination in Waiting Time in Merit
Goods,” The American Economic Review, 61 #3, June 1971, 312-323.

O’Donoghue, Ted and Matthew Rabin. “Studying Optimal Paternalism, Illustrated by a Model of
Sin Taxes,” The American Economic Review, v 93 #2, May 2003, 186.

O’Donoghue, Ted and Matthew Rabin. “Doing It Now or Later,” The American Economic
Review, 89 #1, March 1999, 103-124.
                                                                                                 38
Olsen, Edgar and D. M. Barton. “The benefits and Cost of Public Housing in New York City,”
Journal of Public Economics, 20, 1983, 299-332.

Olsen, Edgar. “Housing Programs for Low-Income Households” in Means Tested Transfer
Programs in the United States Robert Moffitt (ed.) (Chicago: University of Chicago Press for
NBER) 2003.

Reeder, W. J. “The Benefits and Costs of the Section 8 Existing Housing Program”, Journal of
Public Economics, 26, 1985, 349-377.

Riphahn, Regina. “Immigrant Participation in Social Assistance Programs: Evidence from
German Guestworkers,” IZA Working Paper #15, July 1998.

Rossi, Peter. Feeding the Poor: Assessing Federal Food Aid (Washington, D.C.: The AEI Press)
15 #9, 1998.

Saywell, R.M., Zollinger, T.W., Chu, D.K., Macbeth, C.A. et al. "Hospital and Patient
Characteristics of Uncompensated Hospital Care: Policy Implications," Journal of Health
Politics, Policy, and Law, 14, 1989, 287-307.

Scholz, John Karl. "The Earned Income Tax Credit: Participation, Compliance, and Anti-poverty
Effectiveness," National Tax Journal, March, 1994, 59-81

Scholz, John Karl. “The Earned Income Tax Credit: Participation, Compliance, and Antipoverty
Effectiveness,” National Tax Journal, March, 1994, 59-81.

Scholz, John Karl. “Testimony for the House Ways and Means Committee,” May 8, 1997.

Shields, J. F., B. Barnow, K. Chaurette and J. Constantine. “Elderly Persons Eligible for and
Participating in the Supplemental Security Income Program”, Final Report prepared for the U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services, 1990.

Shore-Shepard, Lara. “The Effect of Expanding Medicaid Eligibility on the Distribution of
Chidlren’s Health Insurance Coverage,” Princeton Industrial Relations Section Working Paper
#369, November 1996.

Sloan, Frank, Janet Mitchell, and Jerry Cromwell. "Physician Participation in State Medicaid
Programs", Journal of Human Resources, 13, 1978, 211-245.

Smolensky, Eugene, Siobhan Reilly, and Eirik Evenhouse. “Should Public Assistance be
Targeted,” Journal of Post Keynesian Economics, v 18, 1995, 3-29.

Social Security Administration. “Annual Report of the Supplemental Security Income Program,”
(Washington D.C.: Social Security Administration) May 2003.
                                                                                               39
Storer, Paul and Marc Van Audenrode. “Unemployment Insurance Take Up Rates in Canada:
Facts, Determinants and Implications,” Canadian Journal of Economics, XXVIIII(4a), 1995,
822-835.

U.S. Bureau of the Census. “Poverty in the United States, 1998”, Current Population Report
P60-207, Washington, D.C. http://www.census.gov/prod/99pubd/p60-207 1999.

U.S. Committee on Ways and Means. Green Book 1998, Washington DC, U.S. Government
Printing Office, 1998.

U.S. Committee on Ways and Means. 2000 Green Book (Washington D.C.: U.S. Government
Printing Office), 2000.

U.S. Department of Agriculture. The Healthy Eating Index, Washington D.C., Center for
Nutrition Policy and Promotion, Report No. CNPP-I, 1995.

U.S. General Accounting Office. Food Stamp Program: Various Factors Have Led to Declining
Participation (Washington D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office) GAO/RECD-99-185, July 2,
1999.

U.S. General Accounting Office, Health Care Reform: Potential Difficulties in Determining
Eligibility for Low Income People, (Washington D.C.: Government Printing Office) July, 1994,
document number GAO/HEHS-94.

U. S. General Accounting Office. “SSI Disability: Other Programs May Provide Lessons for
Improving Return-to-Work Efforts,” Report to Congressional Requester, January 2001.

Wallace, J. E, S. P. Bloom, W. L. Williamson, S. Mansfield and D. H. Weinberg. Participation
and Benefits in the Urban Section 8 Program: New Construction and Existing Housing, Volume
1 & 2, Cambridge, MA, Abt Associates Inc., 1981.

Warlick, J.L. “ Participation of the Aged in SSI,” Journal of Human Resources, 17(2), 1982,
236-260.

Witte, Ann Dryden. “Take-up rates and trade offs after the age of entitlement: some thoughts and
empirical evidence for child subsidies”, Working Paper 8886, National Bureau of Economic
Research. 2002.

Yelowitz, Aaron. “Why did the SSI-Disabled Program Grow So Much? Disentangling the Effect
of Medicaid”, Discussion Paper no. 1090-96, Institute for Research on Poverty, 1996.

Yelowitz, Aaron. "Did Recent Medicaid Reforms Cause the Caseload Explosion in the Food Stamps
Program?" Dept. of Economics UCLA, unpublished paper, 2000.

                                                                                              40
Zedlewski, Sheila and Sarah Brauner. "Declines in Food Stamp and Welfare Participation: Is There a
Connection?" (Washington D.C.: The Urban Institute) 1999.




                                                                                               41
Table 1: Take-up of Means-Tested Programs in the United States

   Means-Tested Program                        Take-up estimates                             Reasons for low/high take-up                                            Selected Literature


         Medicaid                  - As of the early 1980s, children on welfare    - Applicants who are not on welfare may be               - Currie and Gruber (1996a) find that the take-up was higher among
Established in 1965. Provides      were automatically eligible and take-up in      required to show birth certificates and/or               newly eligible women who were likely to have had contact with
health insurance for low-          this group was close to full.                   citizenship papers, rent receipts and utility bills to   other welfare programs, than it was among newly eligible women
income women and children,         -By 1996, 31% of children were eligible, but    prove residency, and pay stubs as proof of               of higher income levels. May reflect slow diffusion of information
the disabled, and elderly in       only 22.6% were enrolled, for an average        income. Many states have a time limit on the             about coverage among new eligibles.
nursing homes. Eligibility for     take-up rate of 73% (Gruber, 2003).             number of days the applicant can take to provide         - Currie (2000) finds that immigrant children are more likely to be
the program greatly expanded       - Cutler and Gruber (1996a) and Currie and      documentation and applicants are often required          eligible for Medicaid but less likely to participate given eligibility.
over 80s and 90s to women and      Gruber (1996a,b) estimate that of               to return for several interviews. Up to a quarter of     Probability of participation is higher in larger families and there is a
children who were not on           newly eligible children and women of            Medicaid applications are denied because                 strong seasonal effect in participation with people most likely to
welfare. Income cutoffs depend     childbearing age only 23% and 34%               applicants do not fulfill these administrative           take-up benefits prior to start of school each year (when
on child age, and state.           respectively took up coverage, but many of      requirements: They cannot produce the necessary          immunizations and checkups for school are mandated).
Projected to serve 34 million      these eligibles were already covered by other   documentation within the required time or fail to        - Currie and Grogger (2002) find that loss of welfare leads to loss of
people at a federal cost of $159   insurance.                                      attend all of the required interviews (GAO, 1994).       Medicaid coverage among pregnant women although most women
billion dollars in 2003 (state     - Over 35% of births in the U.S. now covered    - Coverage may need to be re-established as often        leaving welfare remain eligible. They find little impact of state
matching cost will be > 100        by Medicaid (NGA, 2002).                        as every six months.                                     efforts to reduce non-price barriers to Medicaid coverage, such as
billion) (Centers for Medicare     - No take-up estimates are available for the    - Many physicians do not treat publicly insured          shortening enrollment forms.
and Medicaid Services, 2002).      elderly and disabled, although they account     patients because of low reimbursement rates.             - Aizer (2003a,b) compares the effects of application assistance and
                                   for over two-thirds of Medicaid spending.       - Conversely, those who are sick may be able to          advertising on enrollments in California’s Medicaid program. She
                                                                                   retroactively obtain Medicaid coverage.                  finds that while a positive impact of application assistance is found
                                                                                    - The newly eligible may not be aware of their          for children of all ages, the effect of advertising is limited primarily
                                                                                   benefits, particularly if they have not previously       to infants.
                                                                                   used public programs.                                    - Aizer and Grogger (2002) find that making parents eligible for
                                                                                                                                            Medicaid increases child coverage. Effects were largest among
                                                                                                                                            black and Hispanic children.
                                                                                                                                            - Card and Shore-Sheppard (2002) find that the expansion of
                                                                                                                                            eligibility to all children born after September 30, 1983 in poor
                                                                                                                                            families led to about a 10 percentage point rise in Medicaid
                                                                                                                                            coverage for children born just after the cutoff date, and a similar or
                                                                                                                                            rise in overall health insurance coverage. Expansions to children
                                                                                                                                            under 6 in families with incomes below 133 percent of the poverty
                                                                                                                                            line had relatively small effects.
State Children’s Health            LoSasso and Buchmueller (2002) estimate         - The newly eligible may not be aware of their           - LoSasso and Buchmueller (2002) use CPS data from 1996 to 2000
  Insurance Program                take-up rates that range from 8.1% to 14%       benefits, particularly if they have not previously       and find that SCHIP had a small but statistically significant positive
                                   of the newly eligible.                          used public programs.                                    effect on insurance coverage.
A block grant to states begun in
                                                                                                                                            - Aizer (2001) finds that gains in enrollment were larger in status
1998, SCHIP provides funds to
                                                                                                                                            that contracted out outreach for SCHIP.
cover health insurance for
children in families with
incomes > the State’s
Medicaid-eligibility threshold
but<200% of poverty. States
may either expand Medicaid or
develop stand-alone programs.
It is not an entitlement
program.

                                                                                                                                                                                                               1
 Supplemental Security            - Daly and Burkhauser (2003) calculate that     - Low enrollment among the elderly could be due         - Coe (1985) reports that of the SSI nonparticipants classified as
 Income Program (SSI)             participation among the poor elderly            to lack of knowledge about the program and              eligible (48 percent of all eligible individuals), a significant fraction
                                  declined from 78.5 percent in 1974 to 53.6      eligibility criterion; stigma; or transactions costs.   were not aware of the program or did not think they were eligible.
Enacted in 1972, but began
                                  percent in 1982. Since then, participation      - Participation among low-income working age            Coe also finds that benefit levels were positively and significant
paying cash benefits in 1974.
                                  rates have fluctuated from year to year, but    adults and among children is also likely to be          related to participation.
Provides federal assistance for
                                  have remained well below the highs recorded     affected by the benefits and costs of participation     - Warlick (1982) concludes that lack of program information and
aged, blind and disabled
                                  in the early years.                             in SSI relative to other programs.                      difficulty applying were the primary reasons for low participation
individuals with low incomes.
                                  - Recipiency rates among poor working age                                                               rates among the eligible elderly.
It has grown to become the
                                  adults rose from 14.8 percent in 1974 to 20.7                                                           - McGarry (1996) used detailed asset and income information from
largest federal means-tested
                                  percent in 1998.                                                                                        the 1984 SIPP to more accurately identify eligibility. She concludes
cash assistance program.
                                  - Recipiency rates for poor children also                                                               that participation is determined primarily by the financial situation
Served 6.5 million people in
                                  increased rapidly during the 1990s, rising                                                              of eligible individuals and by their health status and finds little
January 2003, total costs for
                                  from 2.1 percent in 1989 to 6.6 percent in                                                              evidence that welfare stigma or informational program costs affect
2002 were $31.6 billion (Social
                                  1998 due to a change in the definition of                                                               participation.
Security Administration, 2003).
                                  disability for children with Sullivan vs.                                                               - Daly and Burkhauser (2003) conclude that the elderly poor are not
                                  Zebley in 1990.                                                                                         generally constrained by transaction costs.
                                  - Estimated participation rates among the                                                               - Bound, Kossoudji and Ricart-Moes (1998) found 2/3 of new
                                  poor elderly range between 45 and 60 percent                                                            applicants for SSI in Michigan between 1990 and 1991, were
                                  (Menefee, Edwards and Schieber (1981);                                                                  people who had been terminated from General Assistance. The
                                  Warlick (1982); Coe (19 85); Shields et al.                                                             Fact that these people had not applied for more generous disability
                                  (1990); McGarry (1996)).                                                                                payments to begin with, suggests that it is onerous to apply.
                                                                                                                                          - Daly and Burkhauser (1998): two-thirds of children found eligible
                                                                                                                                          for SSI in the early 1990s were in families already receiving some
                                                                                                                                          type of welfare assistance.
                                                                                                                                          - Kubik (1999): a 10 percent increase in SSI benefit generosity
                                                                                                                                          increases the probabilty of SSI participation among families with
                                                                                                                                          less educated heads by 0.39 percentage points.
                                                                                                                                          - Benitez-Silva, Buchinsky, and Rust (2003) estimate that 28% of
                                                                                                                                          SSI/DI applicants who get benefits are not disabled, while 61% of
                                                                                                                                          applicants who are denied are disabled.
                                                                                                                                          - Garrett and Glied (2000) find that the larger SSI benefits are
                                                                                                                                          relative to AFDC, the more likely it is that children switched
                                                                                                                                          programs after Sullivan vs. Zebley made it easier for them to
                                                                                                                                          qualify. There was no effect on adults, who were not affected by
                                                                                                                                          SZ.
The Earned Income Tax             - Scholz (1994) calculates that 80 to 86        - The marginal cost of obtaining the EITC for           - IRS (2002) calculations suggest that the EITC
    Credit (EITC)                 percent of taxpayers eligible for the EITC      someone who is filing is simply the cost of filling      changes between 1990 and 1996 had relatively little net effect on
                                  received it in 1990.                            out Schedule EIC.                                       EITC participation.
Established in 1975, it is        - The IRS (2002ª) estimated that between        - Claiming the credit becomes more likely in cases      - Hotzblatt (1991), McCubbin (2000), and others find that a
now the largest cash              82.2 and 87.2 percent of eligible households    where the potential credit is larger and where the      significant fraction of taxpayers receive the EITC when they are not
antipoverty program. There        filed tax returns and hence claimed the EITC.   filer´s familiarity with the program and the U.S.       technically eligilble. Violation of the qualifying child eligibility
were three large expansions       - Scholz (1997) reports that roughly 95         tax system is greater.                                  criteria (i.e. misreporting a child) is a major reason.
of the credit in 1986, 1990       percent of EITC claimants are either legally    - Comercial tax preparation firms can reap              - Hotz, Mullin and Scholz (2000a, 2000b) find that the EITC has
and 1993. The EITC grew           required to file tax returns or would file to   substancial profits by targeting those eligible for     large, positive effects on the employment of adults from welfare
from $3.9 million in 1975 ($99)   recover the over-withheld taxes.                EITC and offering “rapid refunds”.                      families in California. The implied elasticity of labor force
to $31.5 billion in 2000. It is                                                   - The IRS notifies all taxpayers who do not claim       participation with respect to net income ranges from .97 to 1.69.
estimated that 5 million people                                                   the credit but appear to be eligible for it based on    - Similarly, Meyer and Rosenbaum (2001) find that the EITC is
were raised out of poverty by                                                     their filing information.                               responsible for much of the recent rise in labor force participation
the credit in 1999 (NGA,                                                                                                                  among low income single mothers.
2002).                                                                                                                                    - Liebman (2002) matches tax records to CPS data and finds that

                                                                                                                                                                                                              2
                                                                                                                                         most overpayments went to families with children and that
                                                                                                                                         ineligible families are likely similar to eligible ones.
                                                                                                                                         -Hotz and Scholz (2003) provide an overview of the recent
                                                                                                                                         literature.

    The Temporary                  - Recipiency fell from 11.5 to 7.2 million       - The cost of being on welfare is raised by many     - Blank and Ruggles (1996) estimated that single mothers used
  Assistance for Needy             recipients between 1990 and 1999. In 1990,       rules that TANF recipients must obey.                AFDC in 62 to 70 percent of the months in which they are eligible.
                                   12.1% of all children were on AFDC,              - With a few exceptions, the studies show pre-       Women who are eligible but do not participate tend to be older,
   Families Program                compared to 7.2% of all children on TANF         TANF waivers allowing states to impose work          white, and nondisabled, with fewer children and more education.
         (TANF)                    in 1999 (Green Book, 2000).                      requirements and other requirements on AFDC          Higher benefits also encouraged participation. These results suggest
Created in 1996 to replace the     - Blank (2001) estimates AFDC take-up rates      recipients had a negative effect on participation.   that the AFDC was used by those with the greatest long-term need,
Aid to Families with               among familias with female heads over time.                                                           and whose alternative earning opportunities were limited.
Dependent Children (AFDC)          They range from 80 to 90% when she uses                                                               - Hoynes (1996) and Moffit (1998) estimate participation equations
program. To be eligible,           administrative data, and from 60 to 70%                                                               which confirm that confirm that participation is positively
income must be less than a         when she uses CPS data for 12 states (two-                                                            affected by a guaranteed level of benefits and negatively
state-determined needs             thirds of the caseload). Blank (2002)                                                                 affected by the marginal tax rate on benefits. Participation is
standard. In contrast to AFDC,     summarizes literature investigating whether
the TANF program has strong
                                                                                                                                         also negatively affected by the hourly wage rate available
                                   the decline in the caseload should be
work requirements, time limits     attributed to welfare reform or to economic
                                                                                                                                         and by non- program nonlabor income.
on receipt, options for                                                                                                                  - Grogger and Michalopoulos (2003) use data from a randomized
                                   expansion. Welfare reform accounts for
provision of non-cash                                                                                                                    experiment, the Florida Family Transition Program and find that
                                   between 1/3 and 2/3 of the decline.
assistance, and by a block grant                                                                                                         time limits affect welfare use before they become binding (people
                                   - Moffit (2003b) shows TANF participation
financing structure. The                                                                                                                 save their 5 years of eligibility for a “rainy day”). In the absence
                                   rates over time for single mothers and for
federal block grant has been                                                                                                             of other reforms that increased welfare use, FTP’s time limit would
                                   poor single mothers. Both decrease over
16.8 billion through 2002.                                                                                                               have reduced welfare receipt by 16 percent. Grogger (2003) finds
                                   time, and are about 40% for single mothers
States must contribute an                                                                                                                that time limits had a much greater effect on women with younger
                                   and 50-55% for poor single mothers. Moffitt
additional 10.4-11.1 billion.                                                                                                            children, since women with older children had no incentive to
                                   (2003c) shows that non-financial factors had
                                                                                                                                         conserve eligibility for benefits.
                                   a large effect on entry and exit from TANF.

   Housing Programs                - For the entire system of housing subsidies,    - Assistance is available only to a fraction of      - Wallace and others (1981) compare the fraction of eligible
Began in 1937. Programs            the participation rate among eligible            eligible households and many housing authorities     households and participants in the Section 8 Existing and New-
typically reduce rent to 1/3 of    households is far below 50 percent for each      have lengthy waiting lists, and/or closed waiting    Construction Programs. For Section 8 Existing they find that in
the families income. Most          combination of income and family size            lists.                                               1979 the percentage of participants who were elderly was about the
assistance reserved for            (Olson, 2003).                                   - Participants whose income rises above the          same as the percentage of eligibles in this category, that minorities
households with incomes less       - Reeder (1985) examines the percentage of       thresholds for admission are rarely terminated,      were a slightly larger fraction of participants than eligibles, and
than 50% of the local median       households in each income and family size        and local housing authorities are allowed to admit   very-low income households were a noticeably larger fraction of
income. Early programs built       class who participated in any HUD program        people with incomes higher than the 50% of           participants than eligibles. For Section 8 Construction, elderly,
public housing. Since 1982,        in 1977. The highest participation rate in any   median income cutoff. So persons of higher           white, females, and small families were greatly overrepresented in
most new assistance has been       of the 77 classes was less than 25 percent.      income may crowd out persons with lower              the sense that they were a higher fraction of participants than
in the form of voucher             For unknown reasons, the poorest households      income.                                              eligibles.
programs. In 2000, 5.1 million     of each size have very low participation                                                              - Olsen and Barton (1983) finds that in public housing in New York
households were assisted at a      rates. Within each income class, participation                                                        City in 1965, blacks had a much higher participation rate (about 20
cost of $20.3 billion (Green       rates are highest for one-person households,                                                          percentage points) than whites with the same characteristics.
Book, 2000).                       reflecting the strong preference received by                                                          - Crews (1995) used data from 11 metropolitan areas in 1987 and
                                   the elderly in housing programs.                                                                      found that the poorest households, nonwhites, food stamp and
                                                                                                                                         welfare participants, the unemployed, and the elderly had higher
                                                                                                                                         participation rates.
                                                                                                                                         - Currie and Yelowitz (2000) conclude that the participation in
                                                                                                                                         housing programs increases with the size and is influenced by the
                                                                                                                                         sex composition of the family (due to program rules)., It declines
                                                                                                                                         with the age of the head, is much lower for married heads, and is
                                                                                                                                                                                                         3
                                                                                                                                          highest among blacks and those with less than high school
                                                                                                                                          education.




 Food Stamp Program                - Only 69% of households eligible for the         - Possible reasons for non-participation include:    - Three-quarters of non-participating households said that they were
        (FSP)                      FSP participated in 1994. A 40% increase in       lack of knowledge about eligibility; transaction     not aware that they were eligible. Only 7% of households gave
                                   enrollments between 1988 and 1993 was due         costs associated with enrolling in the program;      stigma as their main reason for non-articipation, but half answered
Established in 1961 as a pilot
                                   mainly to a higher participation rate among       and stigma associated with participation.            affirmatively to at least one of the survey questions about stigma
program and became
                                   eligibles rather than to an increase in the       - Transaction costs: The average FSP application     (Currie, 2003).
nationwide in 1975. It serves
                                   number of eligibles (Currie, 2003).               took nearly 5 hours of time to complete, including   - Haider, Schoeni and Jacknowitz (2002) find that many elderly
households with gross incomes
                                   - Take-up of FSP is high among some sub-          at least two trips to a FSP office. Out-of-pocket    people who are eligible for FSP say that they do not need benefits,
< 130% of poverty, without
                                   groups of eligibles, but low among others. In     application costs averaged about $10.31 or 6% of     which may indicate that there is stigma associated with using the
other categorical requirements.
                                   1994, 86% of eligible children participated,      the average monthly benefit (Currie, 2003).          program unless one is very needy.
FSP provides coupons that can
                                   but only one-third of eligible elderly persons.                                                        - Currie and Grogger (2002) show that recertification intervals have
be redeemed for food with few
                                   Virtually all eligible single-parent                                                                   a negative effect on participation. The introduction of electronic
restrictions on the type of
                                   households were enrolled compared to only                                                              debit cards instead of coupons, which might have reduced stigma,
foods. The federal cost is 19
                                   78% of eligible households with children and                                                           had little effect.
billion ($1998) and FSP served
                                   two or more adults. Participation rates were                                                           - Daponte, Sanders and Taylor (1999) conduct an experiment and
20.8 million persons per month
                                   higher in some state than in others.                                                                   find that informing people about their eligibility increases
in 1998 (Currie, 2003).
                                   Participation rates also tended to fall as                                                             participation. The effect is greater, the larger the benefit that
                                   income rose (U.S. Committee on Ways and                                                                people are eligible for.
                                   Means, 1998).                                                                                          - Yelowitz (2000) estimates that for every 10 newly eligible
                                   - Blank and Ruggles (1996) found that                                                                  families who took up Medicaid benefits, 4 also took up FSP. This
                                   participation in the FSP increased with the                                                            fact suggests either that those who applied for Medicaid learned
                                   size of the benefits. They also estimate take-                                                         about FSP, or that it was more worthwhile to apply for both
                                   up rates that range from 54 to 66 of all                                                               programs than to apply for only one (i.e. that benefits relative to the
                                   eligibles.                                                                                             cost of applying matter).
 National School Lunch             -99% of public schools and 83% all (public        - In addition to the usual reasons for non-          - Participation in the NSLP is higher among children from the
   Program (NSLP)                  and private) schools participate. Nationally,     participation, familias may not enroll in the        poorest families.
                                   92% of students have the program available        program if their children are unlikely to eat the    - Gleason (1995) finds that the characteristics of the meals are
Established in 1946. It cost 5.8
                                   at their school (Burghardt et al., 1995).         meals.                                               important determinants of participation. Glantz et al. (1994) find
billion and served 27 million
                                   -In 1996, 57% of the children enrolled in                                                              that if children indicate that they will not eat the meals, then parents
lunches in 1998 (Currie, 2003).
                                   participating institutions participated in the                                                         do not apply.
Lunches are free to those with
                                   NSLP. Eighty-six percent of these                                                                      - Burghardt et al. (1993) found that over half of eligible non-
incomes<130% of poverty.
                                   participants received free lunches.                                                                    participants believed they were ineligible, 10% thought the
                                   - 87.2% of children 5-17 with incomes less                                                             certification process was onerous, and 20% cited stigma.
                                   than 130% of poverty participated in 1998
                                   (Currie, 2003).
     The Special                   - The USDA estimates that 75% of eligible         - Possible reasons for non-participation include:    - Brien and Swann (1999) show that administrative barriers such as
Supplemental Nutrition             persons, participated in the program in 1995.     lack of knowledge about eligibility; transaction     requiring income documentation discourage people from applying
                                   Among infants take-up has been estimated to       costs associated with enrolling in the program;      for WIC.
 Program for Women,                exceed 100% (Rossi, 1998).                        and stigma associated with participation.            - Chatterji et al. (2002) show that in addition, restrictions on the
 Infants and Children              - Bitler, Currie & Scholz (2003) include          - In addition, WIC is not an entitlement program,    type of food that can be purchased discourage participation.
        (WIC)                      those who were adjunctively eligible through      so that funds may not be sufficient to serve all     - Bitler, Currie and Scholz (2003) find that requiring more frequent
Begun in 1972 as a pilot           participation in other programs and calculate     eligibles who present. However, in practice, there   visits to WIC offices also has negative effects on participation.
program and became                 that 58% of all infants in any given month in     have been no waiting lists in recent years
permanent in 1974.                 1998 were eligible for WIC. The take-up rate      (National Research Council, 2003).
                                   among eligible infants was 73.2%. Among           - Estimates of takeup are complicated by the fact
                                                                                                                                                                                                             4
Offers nutrition education,       children 1 to 4, 57% were eligible for WIC        that one must be at nutricional risk to qualify.
supplemental food, and            and 38% of eligible children received             However, it appears that virtually everyone who
referrals to health and social    benefits. Estimates for pregnant and post-        meets income criteria is likely to meet nutricional
services to children (<5),        partum women are less accurate because of         risk criterion (National Research Council, 2003).
                                  lack of information about infant feeding          - Participants in other programs including
pregnant women and                practices: It is estimated that 54% of all
nursing mothers with                                                                Medicaid are automatically eligible for WIC.
                                  pregnant and post-partum women are eligible       USDA has ignored this linkage, resulting in
incomes < 185% of poverty.        for WIC and that 66.5% of these women
The federal cost is 4 billion                                                       under-estimates of the number of eligibles
                                  received benefits.
($1998) and it served 7.4                                                           and over-estimates of participation rates.
million people per month in
1998 (Currie, 2003).
   Child Care Subsidy             - It is estimated that the CCDF serves only       - The enrollment process may be particularly             - Meyers and Heintze (1999) examine a sample of current and
       Programs                   15% of eligible children (Administration for      difficult for working parents.                           former welfare recipients in four counties of California in 1995.
                                  Children and Families, 1999). There is no         - Some child care providers do not accept state          16% of employed mothers received a child care subsidy, 30% of
First established in 1954.
                                  systematic information available on how           subsidies.                                               mothers enrolled in education or training programs received a
PRWORA consolidated 4
                                  CCDF funds are allocated among eligible           - It may be difficult to maintain continuous             subsidy, and 34% of mothers in neither activity received a subsidy
major programs into the Child
                                  children though info is available on type of      eligibility for the subsidy if income is variable.       (including Head Start). The acceptance rate of mothers who
Care Development Fund in
                                  care subsidized.                                  - It is difficult to get information about the various   applied for a subsidy was 72%.
1996. Program provides
                                  - No figures are available on the percentage      programs available.                                      - Fuller et al. (1999) estimate a model of the child care subsidy
subsidies to working/training
                                  of eligible children served by other subsidy      - There is insufficient funding to meet the              take-up decisions of mothers enrolled in TANF using data collected
families with income<85% of
                                  programs.                                         demand. In addition to the CCDF block grants,            in San Francisco, San Jose and Tampa in 1998. Of the women in
state median income (or lower
                                  - Witte (2002), using administrative data and     status reallocated a billion dollars of their TANF       their sample who used any non-maternal child care, 37-44 percent
cutoff). Average monthly
                                  survey data for states that guarantee subsidies   block grants to child care in 1998.                      received a subsidy, depending on the site.
number of families served in
                                  for all eligible families, and estimates the
1998=907,351 at a cost of $5.1
                                  family-level take-up rate for child care
billion (Green Book, 2003).
                                  subsidies to be around 40% in early 2000.
                                  There are large variations across states.
         Head Start               - In 2000, about 2/3 of poor 3 to 4 year old      - Most programs are part-day, which means that           - Currie and Thomas (1995, 2000, 2002) investigate Head Start
Established in 1964. A            children were served. It is not known how         they do not satisfy all child care needs of working      participation. Participation falls with income and maternal AFQT
preschool program for mostly      many of the remaining children were               families.                                                scores, but is higher at all levels of income for blacks than for
poor 3 and 4 year old children.   constrained by lack of supply.                    - Program has never been fully funded and many           whites.
In 2000, Head Start served        - Black and Hispanic children participate at      programs have waiting lists.                             - Currie and Neidell (2003) find little evidence that children in
860,000 children at a cost of     higher rates than other children.                                                                          high-spending programs are selected differently than children in
5.3 billion (see Currie and       - Programs are required to identify and take                                                               low spending programs.
Neidell, 2003).                   the most disadvantaged applicants.




                                                                                                                                                                                                           5
Table 2: Take-up of Non Means-Tested Programs in United States.

                   Program                                   Take-up estimates                          Reasons for low/high take-up                                     Selected Literature
                  Medicare                          In 2002, 33,410,000 people were           One reason for high take-up of Part B is that            McGarry (2002) provides an overview of Medicare:
Signed into law in 1965. Provides health            enrolled in Part A and 32,000,000 in      everyone is automatically enrolled in Part A when        Part A is financed by a payroll tax instituted for this
coverage for the elderly and disabled.              part B. So the implied takeup of Part     they turn 65 years old and they have to fill out a       purpose and accounts for about 60% of Medicare
It consists of two parts: Part A: mandatory         B is 96%.                                 form to decline Part B.                                  spending. Part B is financed from general revenues and
hospital coverage and Part B which provides         (http://www.ssa.gov/OACT/STATS).                                                                   a monthly premium paid by beneficiaries. In 2002, the
optional outpatient insurance. Since 1997 Part                                                                                                         premium was $54 per month, and represented about
C has provided optional insurance for services                                                                                                         25% of the cost of the insurance. In addition, enrollees
not included in the traditional package.                                                                                                               pay deductible and co-payments on most covered
In 2001 40.1 million persons were covered of                                                                                                           services.
whom 34.4 million were elderly and 5.7
million disabled. Expenditures in 2001 totaled
$241 billion or $6,199 per enrollee.
Social Security Disability Insurance                After the 1984 liberalization of the      Applicants provide detailed medical, income, and         Bound and Waidman (1992) find that half of the
                (DI)                                Federal Disability Insurance              asset information to the Social Security                 decline in labor force participation among men 45-54
                                                    Program, the fraction of non-elderly      Administration office. Individuals currently in the      between 1949 and 1987 could be due to the expansion
The largest U.S. income replacement program
                                                    adults receiving DI rose by 60%           labor force are not normally eligible. It is difficult   of programs such as DI.
directed towards non-elderly adults.
                                                    (Autor and Duggan (2003)). The            to estimate the eligible group. Some work suggests       Mitchell and Phillips (2002) find that older people
Established in 1956, it is an insurance program
                                                    number of beneficiaries increased         that minorities and low SES people are more likely       initially in poor health and of low economic status are
that provides monthly cash benefits to workers
                                                    from 2.8 million in 1988 to 5.5           to be disabled (Bound et al. 1995, 1996) though          more likely to apply for DI.
who are unable to work because of long-term
                                                    million in 2002. The number of            self-reports of disability status may be biased          Autor and Duggan (2003) find that DI benefits impact
severe disabilities. In 2001, it provided
                                                    applications increased from 1 to 1.7      (Bound, 1991).                                           labor supply. State-level reductions in benefits induced
benefits to 6.7 millions individuals at a cost of
                                                    million and the number of awards          Benítez-Silva, Buchinsky and Rust (2004) provide         large increases in labor force participation of male and
$55 billion.                                        from 409,000 to 750,000.                  an overview of the long and complicated                  female high school dropouts from 1979-1984, followed
                                                    (http://www.ssa.gov/OACT/STATS/           application process.                                     by large declines during the DI expansion of 1984-
                                                    dibStat.html). These figures suggest      Yelowitz (1996) concludes that rising health             1998.
                                                    that take-up increased since it is        insurance costs over 1987-1993 were an important         Benítez-Silva, Buchinsky and Rust (2004) look at the
                                                    unlikely that the number of disabled      reason for participation in DI, since DI recipients      magnitude of classification errors in the award process
                                                    was rising so rapidly                     are automatically eligible for Medicaid.                 assuming that self-reports of disability status are
                                                                                                                                                       correct and find that 28% of the SSI/DI applicants
                                                                                                                                                       who are ultimately awarded benefits are not disabled
                                                                                                                                                       while 61% of applicants who were denied benefits are
                                                                                                                                                       disabled. This is consistent with Bound’s (1989)
                                                                                                                                                       earlier finding that less than 50% of rejected DI
                                                                                                                                                       applicants work.
              Unemployment                          Blank and Card (1991) estimate a          Blank and Card (1991) find that at least half of the     While Blank and Card (1991) find that about one
              Insurance (UI)                        take-up rate of 70.7 in 1977 falling to   decline in take-up rates over the past decade is due     quarter of the decline in take-up is still unexplained,
                                                    65.8 in 1987. They also find that         to a shift in unemployment from high to low take-        Anderson and Meyer (1997) use administrative data
An unemployed worker must satisfy three sets
                                                    rates vary widely across states. Over     up states. Benefit levels and state unionization rates   from the late 1970s and early 1980s from UI system in
of requirements: 1) no job in the covered sector
                                                    1980-82, they find a take-up rate of      have a strongly positive affect on take-up, while the    six states, and find that a change in the tax treatment of
& searching for work; 2) minimum waiting
                                                    83% using micro data and 72% using        disqualification rate. The average number of weeks       UI benefits could be totally responsible for the
period; 3) previous minimum level of
                                                    state data.                               worked in the last year in the unemployed pool also      unexplained portion of the decline over the early
earnings, weeks, or hours. Approximately,
                                                                                              has a negative impact. In individual-level data,         1980s. (In 1979 UI became subject to income taxes).
97% of all wage and salary workers are in jobs
                                                    Less than 40% of the unemployed           there is little evidence that declining take-up is due   Card and Levine (1998) study the effects of changes in
that are covered by unemployment insurance.
                                                    received UI in the recent years,          to increasing administrative strictness by state         the duration of unemployment insurance on the
UI benefits are typically paid on a weekly
                                                    because many do not meet eligibility      programs or changes in eligibility. Instead,             behavior of UI claimants. They find that the New
basis, and typically replace 50-60% of lost
                                                    requirements (Krueger and Meyer           demographic variables and household                      Jersey Extended Benefit Program (i.e. 13 additional
earnings. Federal law levies a 6.2% tax on the
                                                    (2002)).                                  characteristics are significant determinants.            weeks for the large majority who were initially eligible
first $7,000 in wages per year and the law
                                                                                              Krueger and Meyer (2002) note that individuals           for 26 weeks of benefits) raised the fraction of UI
provides a credit of 5.4% to employers that pay                                            who are new entrants or reentrants to the labor       claimant who exhausted their regular benefits by 1-3
State taxes under an approved UI system. In                                                force, who have irregular work histories, or who      percentage points. Moreover, for individuals who were
2002, the UI system paid out $41.6 billion in                                              quit or are fired are typically ineligible.           receiving UI when the extension was passed, the rate
benefits, and took in $21.4 in revenues                                                    Meyer (1995) surveys a series of experiments that     of leaving UI fell by about 15%.
(http://workforcesecurity.doleta.gov/unemploy/                                             paid bonuses to people who left unemployment and      Anderson and Meyer (1997) estimate that a 10%
contents/data_stats).                                                                      concludes that such economic incentives affect the    increase in the weekly benefit amount would increase
                                                                                           speed with which people leave UI.                     the take-up rate by 2-2.5 percentage points, while a
                                                                                           Lemieux and MacLeod (2000) find that response to      similar increase in the potential duration of the benefits
                                                                                           a 1971 increase in the generosity of the Canadian     would increase take-up by .5-1 percentage points. A
                                                                                           UI system increased with an individual’s experience   tax increase that decreased the value of after-tax
                                                                                           of the system, leading to long-term increases in      benefits by 10% would lower take-up by 1-1.5
                                                                                           unemployment as individuals who became                percentage points. Assuming take-up rates of .40-.60,
                                                                                           unemployed discovered their new entitlements.         they estimate benefit elasticities between .33-.60.
      Workman’s Compensation                        Krueger and Meyer (2002) state that    Benefits are about twice those of UI and are not      Krueger (1990) finds that higher workers’
              (WC)                                  about 97% of the non-federal UI        taxable (hence the actual replacement rate may be     compensation benefits are associated with greater
                                                    covered labor force is covered, plus   near one) (Krueger and Meyer (2002)).                 participation in the case of men, and that the waiting
Each state runs their own program. Employers
                                                    all federal employees. However,                                                              period has a substantial negative effect on
are required to purchase insurance or self-
                                                    many workers ineligible for UI are                                                           participation. In particular, a 10% increase in
insure to provide a specific amount of cash
                                                    eligible for WC since workers are                                                            temporary total benefits would lead to a 4.6-6.7
benefits, medical care, and in some cases
                                                    eligible when they begin work. It is                                                         percentage increase in workers’ compensation
rehabilitation services to workers who are
                                                    difficult to estimate take-up, given                                                         recipiency overall.
disabled.
                                                    the difficulty in accurately                                                                 Card and McCall (1995) ask if workers’ compensation
In 1985, this program covered 87% of the
                                                    identifying the eligible.                                                                    is covering uninsured medical costs. They find that
workforce and paid out a total of 22.5 billion in
                                                                                                                                                 workers without medical coverage are no more likely
benefits (Krueger, 1990).
                                                                                                                                                 to report a Monday injury than other workers; and
                                                                                                                                                 employers are no more likely to challenge a Monday
                                                                                                                                                 injury claim – even for workers who lack medical
                                                                                                                                                 insurance.
                                                                                                                                                 Krueger and Meyer (2002) summarize the empirical
                                                                                                                                                 evidence on WC and say that more generous WC is
                                                                                                                                                 associated with higher reported injury rates, but that
                                                                                                                                                 the effect is small.
Table 3: Take-up rates of Programs in the United Kingdom

                     Program                               Takeup estimates               Reasons for low/high takeup                               Selected literature
    Working Families’ Tax Credit                    Clark and McCrae (2001) find         Because the credit operates            Clark and McCrae (2001) find that 26% of people who
    A refundable tax credit for low-income          that official estimates of take-up   through the tax system, stigma         received the benefit were not eligible. This may reflect the
    families with children and a adult who          of the Family Credit (72%) are       effects should be minimized            fact that the entitlement period is six months regardless of
    works 16 hours a week or more. It began in      much higher than what they           (Blundell (2002)).                     changes in family circumstances.
    1999 as a replacement for the Family            simulate using the TAXBEN            Dorsett and Heady (1991) note
    Credit (introduced in the late 1980s). It is    model: 48%. Take-up rates vary       the close relationship between the
    more generous than FC in terms of               widely across groups: e.g. 67% of    Family Credit and Housing
    maximum benefits, the income level where        single parents take-up compared      Benefit (see below). Finds that
    the phase out begins, and the phase-out rate.   to 40% of couples. Take-up also      HB entitlement is an important
    Once granted, entitlement continued for six     increases with the size of the       determinant of take-up of both FC
    months, regardless of whether the family’s      benefit.                             and HB.
    financial circumstances changed. It             Brewer et al (2002) estimate take-
    includes a new nonrefundable Childcare          up rates as over time: 77% in
    Tax Credit. In addition, the                    1993/4 and 81% in 1998/9 for
    nonrefundable Children’s Tax Credit             lone parents (66% and 58% for
    provides income support to low income           couples).
    families with children.


                Child Benefit                       Brewer (2000): Take-up of the                                               Brewer and Gregg (2001): There has been little change in
    Began in 1945. A universal transfer             child benefit was almost 100% in                                            the Child Benefit over time.
    program for families with children. Fifteen     2000-2001.
    pounds (10) a week for the first
    (subsequent) child. Normally paid to the
    mother. When a child is born, the mother
    receives the claim package at the hospital.


              Income Support                        Brewer (2000): Income Support        Duclos (1995) finds that take-up       Brewer and Gregg (2001): Income Support benefit rates
    Formerly called “Supplemental Benefit”.         take-up is estimated to be           higher when the value of the           have greatly increased since 1998.
    Means-tested benefits paid to the household     around 80%.                          benefit is greater. Less than full
    head in workless families, make up the          Duclos (1995) take-up among          take-up reflects transactions costs.
    difference between income and a minimum         eligibles (in 1985) is 64%, but
    guarantee level.                                about 82.8% of the value of
                                                    the benefit is received. About
                                                    6% of recipients are ineligible.
     Job Seeker’s Allowance                                                          Recipients must abide by a “job
Begun in 1995, it replaced income support                                            seekers agreement” or risk losing
among the unemployed. Benefits are tied to                                           benefits.
previous wages. Must be 18 or older and
have savings less than 8,000 pounds and be
working less than 17 hours per week.
     New Deal Programmes                        At the end of June 2003, there       Participation is compulsory after
Introduced in 1998. Means-tested programs       were 91,380 youths 18-24             6 months for 18-24 year olds and
for the unemployed. For 18-50 year olds         participating (Blundell, 2002).      after 18 months for 25-50 year
include personal advisors, a gateway period                                          olds. Eligible individual who
of 4 months then one of: training or                                                 refuse to participate lose their
education, subsidized work, volunteer work,                                          entitlement to benefits.
public sector employment. Help with
childcare and travel costs. Less intensive
services offered to those over 50, lone
parents, and the disabled (Brewer et al.
2002).
Income Support for Pensioners                   Among those pensioners eligible      Forms are complex and those          Income support for pensioners rose considerably from
(now Minimum Income Guarantee)                  for income support in 2000-2001,     eligible for small amounts may       1997 to 2002: for example, by 31% for a single pensioner
provides the difference between ones            between 64% and 78% received         not apply. Also, stigma may be       under 75, and 25% for a pensioner couple where one is
weekly income and a minimum benefit             the benefit (Department of Social    greater for income support than      aged 75 or over (Brewer et al, 2002).
level. MIG will be replaced in 2003 with a      Security, 2001)                      other forms of support such as
new program called Pension Credit. It is                                             Council Tax Benefit (Hancock et
expected that roughly ½ of elderly will be                                           al. 2003).
eligible for PC (Hancock et al., 2003).
   Programs for the Disabled
Incapacity Benefit: A social insurance
program that pays fixed (high/low) benefits
to people unable to work. Requires medical
evidence.
The Severe disablement allowance and
Disability Living Allowance are non-
contributory, non means-tested programs
that also make small fixed payments.
Those unable to work may also be eligible
for income support.
Disability working allowance: eligibles
must be in paid work >= 16 hours per week,
with an illness or disability which creates a
disadvantage in securing employment, have
savings of 16,000 pounds or less, and be in
receipt of a qualifying benefit such as
Disability Living Allowance.

         Housing Programs                       Brewer et al (2002) estimates        Clark, Giles, and Hall (1999) note   Blundell et al. (1988) use the 1984 Family Household
Housing Benefit: A means tested payment         take-up rates for housing benefits   that the Council Tax Benefit is      Survey and find that there is positive relationship between
designed to subsidize the rent of those with    of : 89% for pensioners, 99% for     very complex which discourages       take-up and the level of entitlement. This support the view
                                                non-pensioners with children and,    take-up. However, those entitled     that there may be significant costs (ignorance or stigma)
low incomes. It is paid by local
                                                92% for non-pensioners without       to Income Support are                associated with claiming. Household characteristics affect
councils.                                       children, in 1999/2000.              automatically entitled to HB and     takeup rates. The effect of extra household income is to
Council Tax Benefit: A means-tested             Department for Work and              CTB and forms are issued             reduce take-up significantly. Those in local authority
program that pays the council “rates” of
eligible families. It is the most   Pensions (2003) estimates that 7%   together which is likely to        rented accommodation are more likely to take-up their
commonly received means-tested      of elderly eligible for HB do not   increase take-up for IS (Hancock   entitlement than those in private rented and rent-free
program in Britain.                 receive it, compared to 31% of      et al., 2003).                     accommodation. Among those either in or seeking
                                    elderly eligible for the CTB.                                          employment, part-time workers and unemployed with no
                                                                                                           record of occupation are more likely to take-up. Those
                                                                                                           under retirement age are substantially less likely to take-up
                                                                                                           than those over that age. Both age and education have a
                                                                                                           negative effect on take-up for the employed/unemployed.
                                                                                                           The presence of both additional adults and older children
                                                                                                           in the family increases the probability of take-up, although
                                                                                                           younger children appear to have no significant impact.
