                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




             A COMPREHENSIVE LOOK AT THE EMPIRICAL PERFORMANCE
                       OF EQUITY PREMIUM PREDICTION

                                               Amit Goval
                                               Ivo Welch

                                          Working Paper 10483
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w10483


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       May 2004




Thanks to Malcolm Baker, Ray Ball, Francis Diebold, Owen Lamont, Sydney Ludvigson, Jeff Wurgler, and
Yihong Xia for comments; and Todd Clark for providing us with some critical McCraken values. The views
expressed herein are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

©2004 by Amit Goval and Ivo Welch. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
A Comprehensive Look at the Empirical Performance of Equity Premium Prediction
Amit Goval and Ivo Welch
NBER Working Paper No. 10483
May 2004
JEL No. G12, G14
                                         ABSTRACT
Given the historically high equity premium, is it now a good time to invest in the stock market?

Economists have suggested a whole range of variables that investors could or should use to predict:

dividend price ratios, dividend yields, earnings-price ratios, dividend payout ratios, net issuing

ratios, book-market ratios, interest rates (in various guises), and consumption-based macroeconomic

ratios (cay). The typical paper reports that the variable predicted well in an *in-sample* regression,

implying forecasting ability.


Our paper explores the *out-of-sample* performance of these variables, and finds that not a single

one would have helped a real-world investor outpredicting the then-prevailing historical equity

premium mean. Most would have outright hurt. Therefore, we find that, for all practical purposes,

the equity premium has not been predictable, and any belief about whether the stock market is now

too high or too low has to be based on theoretical prior, not on the empirically variables we have

explored.

Amit Goval
Goizueta Business School
Emory University

Ivo Welch
Yale University
School of Management
46 Hillhouse Ave.
New Haven, CT 06520-8200
and NBER
ivo.welch@yale.edu
1   Introduction

Attempts to predict stock market returns or the equity premium have a long tradition
in finance. For example, as early as 1920, Dow (1920) explored the role of dividend
ratios. Nowadays, a typical specification regresses an independent lagged predictor on
the stock market rate of return or, as we shall do, on the equity premium,

                    Rm(t) − Rf(t) = γ0 + γ1 · [x(t − 1)] + (t)      .                (1)

γ1 is interpreted as a measure of how significant x is in predicting the equity premium.
The most prominent x variables explored in the literature are


The dividend-price ratio and the dividend yield: Ball (1978), Rozeff (1984), Shiller (1984),
      Campbell (1987), Campbell and Shiller (1988), Campbell and Shiller (1989), Fama
      and French (1988a), Hodrick (1992), Campbell and Viceira (2002), Campbell and
      Yogo (2003), Lewellen (2004), and Menzly, Santos, and Veronesi (2004). Cochrane
      (1997) surveys the dividend ratio prediction literature.

The earnings price ratio and dividend-earnings (payout) ratio: Lamont (1998).

The interest and inflation rates: The short term interest rate: Campbell (1987) and Ho-
      drick (1992). The term spread and the default spread: Avramov (2002), Campbell
      (1987), Fama and French (1989), and Keim and Stambaugh (1986). The inflation
      rate: Campbell and Vuolteenaho (2003), Fama (1981), Fama and Schwert (1977),
      and Lintner (1975). Some papers explore multiple interest rate related variables,
      as well as dividend related variables (e.g., Ang and Bekaert (2003)).

The book-to-market ratio: Kothari and Shanken (1997) and Pontiff and Schall (1998).

The consumption, wealth, and income ratio: Lettau and Ludvigson (2001).

The aggregate net issuing activity: Baker and Wurgler (2000).


    In turn, a large theoretical and normative literature has developed that stipulates
how investors should allocate their wealth as a function of state variables—and promi-
nently the just-mentioned variables.




                                            1
      Our own paper is intentionally simple: as in Goyal and Welch (2003), we posit that
a real-world investor would not have had access to any ex-post information, either to
construct variables or to the entire-sample gamma regression coefficients. An investor
would have had to estimate the prediction equation only with data available strictly
before or at the prediction point, and then make an out-of-sample prediction. There-
fore, instead of running one single in-sample regression and comparing the fitted to the
actual value (or, equivalently, compute the R 2 or F -statistic), we must run rolling fore-
casting regressions and compare the performance of the regression predictions against
the equivalent predictions from simply projecting the then-prevailing historical equity
premium mean. Unlike Goyal and Welch (2003), our current paper expands the set of
variables and horizons to be comprehensive. We are interested in how well any of the
popular variables, which were proposed in existing literature as important in-sample
predictors of the equity premium, hold up out-of-sample.1

      Our paper not only tries out different time horizons and forecasting periods, but also
diagnoses when these variables were of help, using a graphical diagnostic first proposed
in Goyal and Welch (2003). We are also interested in the contradictory results in the
literature: different papers have identified different methods/variables to be important.
Our paper shows that many of the differences can be traced back to choices of sample
period and data frequency: these are not innocuous, but often the primary driver for
the significance of in-sample results.

      Altogether, we find our evidence sobering: we could not identify a single variable
that would have been of solid and robust use to a real-world investor (who did not
have access to ex-post information). Our diagnostic shows that any presumed equity
premium forecasting ability was a mirage. Even before the often-considered anoma-
lous 1990s, many of these variables had little if any statistical forecasting power. It is
also usually not a matter of arguing over whether we computed correct statistical stan-
dard errors. Instead, most variables are just worse than the prevailing historical equity
premium average as a predictor, and some even economically significantly so.
  1
    Goyal and Welch (2003) was not the first paper to explore out-of-sample prediction. There are three
earlier/contemporaneous attempts we are aware of: First, Fama and French (1988a) interpreted out-
of-sample performance to be a success, primarily due to a fortunate sample period. Second, Pesaran
and Timmerman (1995) explore model selection in great detail, exploring dividend-yield, earnings-price
ratios, interest rates, and money in 29 = 512 model variations. Their data series is monthly, from
1954–1992. They conclude that investors could have succeeded, especially in the volatile periods of the
1970s. They do not entertain the historical equity premium mean as a null hypothesis. Third, like Goyal
and Welch (2003), Bossaerts and Hillion (1999) interpreted out-of-sample performance to be a failure.
However, Bossaerts and Hillion (1999) relied more on a large cross-section (14 countries) than on a long
out-of-sample time period (1990–1995).
  Goyal and Welch (2003) was also not first to critique predictive regressions. In particular, the use
of dividend ratios has been critiqued in many other papers (see, e.g., Goetzmann and Jorion (1993)
and Ang and Bekaert (2003); apologies to everyone whose paper we omit to cite here—the literature is
voluminous).




                                                   2
    Overall, the performance of these variables is worse than what we would have ex-
pected: given the data snooping of many researchers looking for variables that predict
stock prices, and given that our out-of-sample regressions often rely on the very same
data points that were used to establish the significance of the in-sample regression, so
we are not really conducting a true out-of-sample test—we would have expected at least
about equal performance. But instead, for example, of 51 predictive regressions on an-
nual frequencies, 46 (!) underperformed the prevailing mean on a the RMSE criterion.
As for the rare regression exceptions in which a variable outpredicts the mean, none are
robust across time-specifications and/or data periodicity, few reach statistical signifi-
cance, and none reaches good economic significance, i.e., surpassing even very modest
transaction costs. (The average annual outperformance is 12 basis points.)

    In sum, despite good in-sample predictive ability for many of these variables, most
had consistently poor or zero out-of-sample forecasting ability. (They were essentially
noise.) Thus, our paper concludes that the evidence that the equity premium has ever
varied predictably with both prevailing variables and prevailing regression specifica-
tions has always been tenuous: a market-timing trader could not have taken advantage
of these variables to outperform the prevailing moving average—and could/should have
known this. By assuming that the equity premium was “like it always has been,” this
trader would have performed at least as well.

    Before we proceed, we wish to point out what our paper does not do: it has nothing
to say about cross-sectional evidence, i.e., whether these variables can predict which
stocks do better than other stocks. It has little to say about models which assume
that agents know all parameters—if the relations are assumed to be known, then out-
of-sample estimates are not required. We are more interested in whether Amit Goyal
and Ivo Welch—agents without full model parameters—should rely on these variables
to time the market.



2    Data

In this section, we describe our data sources and data construction. First, the dependent
variable, the equity premium:

    • Stock Prices: S&P 500 index monthly prices from 1871 to 1926 are from Robert
      Shiller’s website. These are monthly averages for the month. Prices from 1926
      to 2003 are from CRSP’s month-end values. Stock Returns are the continuously
      compunded returns on the S&P 500 index.

    • Risk-free Rate: The risk-free rate for the period 1920 to 2003 is the T-bill rate.
      Because there was no risk-free short-term debt prior to the 1920’s, we had to

                                           3
     estimate it. We obtained commercial paper rates for New York City from NBER’s
     Macrohistory data base. These are available for the period 1871 to 1970. We
     estimated a regression for the period 1920 to 1971, which yielded

                T-bill Rate = −0.004 + 0.886 × Commercial Paper Rate           .        (2)

     with an R 2 of 95.7%. Therefore, we instrumented the risk-free rate for the period
     1871 to 1919 with the predicted regression equation. The correlation for the pe-
     riod 1920 to 1971 between the equity premium computed using the T-bill rate and
     that computed using the predicted commercial paper rate is 99.8%.


Our dependent variable is the equity premium, i.e., the rate of return on the stock market
minus the prevailing short-term interest rate. Note that for frequencies less than 1
year, we do not consider the dividend yield (defined below) in the dependent variable.
There is little month-to-month variation in the yield, so no harm is done by avoiding
complications as to how to apportion low-frequency dividend yields to higher frequency
return data. For frequencies of 1 year and longer, we indeed include the dividend yield.

   As independent variables, our first set of variables relate primarily to characteristics
of stocks:


   • Dividends: Dividends are twelve-month moving sums of dividends paid on the S&P
     500 index. They are from Robert Shiller’s website for the period 1871 to 1970.
     Dividends from 1971 to 2003 are from S&P Corporation.

     The Dividend Price Ratio (d/p) is the difference between the log of dividends and
     the log of prices. The Dividend Yield (d/y) is the difference between the log of
     dividends and the log of lagged prices.

   • Earnings: Earnings are twelve-month moving sums of earnings on the S&P 500 in-
     dex. These are from Robert Shiller’s website for the period 1871 to June 2003.
     Earnings from June 2003 to December 2003 are our own estimates based on in-
     terpolation of quarterly earnings provided by S&P Corporation.

     The Earnings Price Ratio (e/p) is the difference between log of earnings and log
     of prices. Dividend Payout Ratio (d/e) is the difference between log of dividends
     and log of earnings.

   • Book Value: Book values from 1920 to 2002 are from Value Line’s website, specif-
     ically their Long-Term Perspective Chart of the Dow Jones Industrial Average.

     The Book to Market Ratio (b/m): is the ratio of book value to market value for
     the Dow Jones Industrial Average. For the months of March to December, this is
     computed by dividing book value at the end of previous year by the price at the end


                                            4
        of the current month. For the months of January to February, this is computed by
        dividing book value at the end of 2 years ago by the price at the end of the current
        month.

      • Net Issuing Activity: The dollar amount of net issuing activity (IPOs, SEOs, stock
        repuchases, less dividends) for NYSE listed stocks is computed from CRSP data
        via the following equation:

                            Net Issuet = Mcapt − Mcapt−1 · (1 + vwretxt ),                                (3)

        where Mcap is the total market capitalization, and vwretx is the value weighted
        return (excluding dividends) on the NYSE index.2 These data are available from
        1926 to 2003.

        Net Equity Expansion (ntis): is the ratio of twelve-month moving sums of net
        issues by NYSE listed stocks divided by the total market capitalization of NYSE
        stocks. Percent Equity Issuing (eqis): is the ratio of equity issuing activity as a
        fraction of total issuing activity. This is the variable proposed in Baker and Wurgler
        (2000), which we obtained directly from the authors.3


      Our next set of independent variables are interest-rate related:


      • T-bills (tbl): T-bill rates from 1920 to 1933 are the U.S. Yields On Short-Term United
        States Securities, Three-Six Month Treasury Notes and Certificates, Three Month
        Treasury series from NBER’s Macrohistory data base. T-bill rates from 1934 to
        2003 are the 3-Month Treasury Bill: Secondary Market Rate from the economic
        research database at Federal Reserve Bank at St. Louis (FRED).

      • Long Term Yield (lty): Long-term government bond yields for the period 1919 to
        1925 is the U.S. Yield On Long-Term United States Bonds series from NBER’s Macro-
        history database. Yields from 1926 to 2002 are from Ibbotson’s Stocks, Bonds,
        Bills and Inflation Yearbook. Yields for the year 2003 is the Treasury Long-Term
        Average (25 years and above).

        Long Term Rate of Return (ltr): Long-term government bond returns for the period
        1926 to 2003 are from Ibbotson’s Stocks, Bonds, Bills and Inflation Yearbook.

        The Term Spread (tms) is the difference between the long term yield on govern-
        ment bonds and the T-bill.
  2
     This calculation implicitly assumes that the delisting return is –100 percent. Using the actual delisting
return, where available, or ignoring delistings altogether, has no impact on results.
   3
     Baker and Wurgler (2000) are interested in the behavior of firms themselves, not with the prediction
that outside investors may follow. Thus, they are appropriately interested in in-sample outperformance,
not out-of-sample outperformance.




                                                      5
• Corporate Bond Returns: Long-term corporate bond returns for the period 1926
  to 2003 are from Ibbotson’s Stocks, Bonds, Bills and Inflation Yearbook.

  Corporate Bond Yields: Yields on AAA- and BAA-rated bonds for the period 1919
  to 2003 are from FRED.

  The Default Yield Spread (dfy): is the difference between BAA- and AAA- rated
  corporate bond yields.

  The Default Return Spread (dfr): is the difference between the return on long-term
  corporate bonds and returns on the long-term government bonds.

• Inflation (infl): Inflation is the Consumer Price Index (All Urban Consumers) for
  the priod 1919 to 2003 from the Bureau of Labor Statistics. Because inflation
  information is released only in the following month, in our monthly regressions,
  we inserted one month of waiting before use.


Our final single variable could be considered a macro-economic variable:


• Consumption, wealth, income ratio (cay) is suggested in Lettau and Ludvigson (2001).
  Data for its construction is available from Martin Lettau’s website at quarterly fre-
  quency from the second quarter of 1952 to the second quarter of 2003, and for
  annual frequency from 1948 to 2001. Lettau-Ludvigson estimate the following
  equation:

                                k
                                X                     k
                                                      X
   c t = α + βw w t + βy yt +          bw,i ∆wt−i +          by,i ∆yt−i + t ,   t = k + 1, . . . , T − k, (4)
                                i=−k                  i=−k


  where c is the aggregate consumption, w is the aggregate wealth, and y is the
  aggregate income. The estimates of the above equation provide c[
                                                                 ay t = ct −
  β̂a at − β̂y yt ,   t = 1, . . . , T . Eight leads/lags are used in quarterly estimation
  (k = 8) while two lags are used in annual estimation (k = 2). (For further details,
  see Lettau and Ludvigson (2001).)

  However, the Lettau-Ludvigson measure of cay is constructed using look-ahead (in-
  sample regression coefficients). We thus modified cay to use only prevailing data.
  In other words, if the current time period is ‘s’, then we estimated equation (4)
  using only the data up to ‘s’ through

                                k                       k
                                        s                       s
                                X                       X
  ct = α + βsw wt + βsy yt +           bw,i ∆wt−i +            by,i ∆yt−i + t ,    t = k + 1, . . . , s − k,
                                i=−k                   i=−k
                                                                                                          (5)
  where the superscript on betas indicates that these are rolling estimates. This
  measure is called caya (“ante”) to distinguish it from the traditional variable cayp
  constructed with look-ahead bias (“post”).


                                                6
      Finally, we also entertain two methods that rely on multiple variables:


    • A “model selection” approach, named “ms.”. If there are K variables, we consider
        2K models essentially consisting of all possible combinations of variables. Every
        time period, we select one of these models that gives the minimum cumulative
        prediction errors up to that time period t. This method is based on Rissanen (1986)
        and is recommended by Bossaerts and Hillion (1999). Essentially, this method
        uses our criterion of mimimum out-of-sample prediction errors to choose amongst
        competing models in each time period t. This is also similar in spirit to the use
        of more conventional criteria (like R 2 ) in Pesaran and Timmerman (1995), who
        however do not entertain our null hypothesis.

        Avramov (2002) and Cremers (2002) also use model selection procedures, but with
        empirically motivated priors (empirical Bayes procedure) which are formed after
        looking at the whole data. We do not follow their approach because we want to
        stay in the framework of real-time forecasting. Additionally, the focus of Avramov
        (2002) is cross-sectional predictability while we study only time-series evidence of
        predictability of the market returns.

    • A “kitchen sink” regression, named “all.” (This regression throws caya rather than
        cayp into our kitchen sink, because we want no look-ahead bias.) We do not report
        coefficients, just prediction statistics. (Consequently, variable deletion to prevent
        perfect multicollinearity does not change anything.)




3     Results

3.1     Format

Our result tables are all in the same format. (Table 1 is a good example.) The panel name
describes the timing for the forecasting equation and for the out-of-sample prediction.
The “sample start” column describes when the forecasting equation is first fed data.
The “forecast start” column describes when the first out-of-sample forecast is made.

      The in-sample columns provide the mean absolute error and root mean-square-error
of the residuals for observations which are predicted in the out-of-sample forecasts.
Our goal is to allow comparison of our in-sample and out-of-sample predictions on the
                                                                        2
very same observations. We also report the adjusted r-square (R ), which is starred
to designate the statistical significance of the independent variables in predicting the
equity premium (based on the F -statistic). The first four columns in the out-of-sample



                                                7
columns describe the statistics of the out-of-sample forecast error: the mean, which mea-
sures forecast bias; the standard deviation, which measures noise; the mean absolute
error (MAE); and the root mean-squared error (RMSE). Naturally, we would expect the
in-sample MAE/RMSE to outperform the out-of-sample MAE/RMSE, but hopefully only
modestly so. More important than the per-sé deterioration is the relative deterioration
of the regression model’s predictive power, i.e., relative to the prevailing mean’s pre-
dictive power. If the prevailing mean’s forecasting power deteriorates faster than that
of the regression, the regression would perform even better out-of-sample in relative
terms.

   Consequently, of most interest to us are the final three columns, which measure
how much better an investor would have fared if he had used the known observations
on the variable relative to the known historical equity mean at that point. The ∆MAE
is the MAE of an out-of-sample forecast using the prevailing mean minus the MAE of
an out-of-sample forecast of the linear regression using the variable(s) described in the
first column. Equivalently, the ∆RMSE is the out-of-sample root mean-square error of
the prevailing mean minus out-of-sample root mean-square error of the linear regres-
sion. For both measures, a positive number means that the variable outperformed the
historical prevailing mean; a negative number means that the historical prevailing mean
outperformed the variable. It is important to point out that the MAE, the RMSE, and their
differences have easily interpretable economic meaning: If the ∆MAE or ∆RMSE is 0.01%,
it means that the predictive regression outperforms the prevailing historical mean by 1
basis point. These numbers are no annualized, but simple multiplication/division gives
a rough idea of annual importance.

   Diebold and Mariano (1995) propose a t-test for checking equal-forecast accuracy
from two models. If e1t and e2t denote the two forecast errors, then defining dt =
 2     2
e1t − e2t , the Diebold Marianno (DM) statistic for h-step ahead forecast is calculated as
                                                                   
                                                                 d̄ 
                         q
                     DM = T + 1 − 2h + h(h − 1)/T ·               ,                 (6)
                                                              se
                                                              ˆ d̄

where

                                T
                             1 X
                     d̄ =          dt                                                  (7)
                             T t=1
                                   h−1      N
                           1     X        X                          
                se
                ˆ d̄   =                             dt − d̄ × dt−|τ| − d̄ ,           (8)
                             T   τ=−(h−1) t=|τ|+1


and T is the total number of forecast observations. However, although the Diebold and
Mariano (1995) statistic is normally distributed when testing non-nested models (as it
was in their context), McCracken (1999) shows that the DM statistic is not asymptoti-


                                             8
cally normally distributed when testing nested models—which is the relevant case for
our application. Critical values for our tests are, therefore, taken from McCracken’s
paper. Note that the null hypothesis is that the unconditional forecast is superior to
the conditional forecast. The critical values are therefore for a 1-sided test. The statis-
tical significance levels are only valid for the non-overlapping regressions, because the
McCracken statistic does not apply to overlapping observations. For overlapping obser-
vation regressions, we bootstrapped the significance of the Diebold-Mariano statistic,
rather than rely on the McCracken closed form statistical significance levels. In our
bootstrap, the x variable follows the historical time-series process of the x variable,
thereby adjusting for the Stambaugh (1999) effect.



3.2     Monthly and Quarterly Data

                                        Insert Table 1 here.
                                   Forecasts at Monthly Frequency



      Table 1 presents monthly results, i.e., where both the predictive regression and pre-
dicted equity premium are based on monthly data. The three panels are variations on
the predictive regression window and out-of-sample window. Panel A uses all available
data for the regressions and predictions; Panel B uses all available data for the regres-
sion, but keeps the prediction window the same for all variables (1964–2003); Panel C
uses both the same regression (beginning 1927) and the same prediction window for all
variables (1964–2003). There are 15 models, based on 13 variables.
                                                                                             2
      In-sample, our full all-variables regression has the best predictive ability (R ) in all
three panels. In Panels A and B, all is followed by the the dividend payout ratio (d/e),
the book-to-market ratio (b/m), the term-spread (tms), and the T-bill rate (tbl). (Only the
first three models are statistically significant at ordinary significance levels. The other
variables fall off because of the sample period end. But all afore-mentioned variables
have reasonably strong in-sample predictive ability.) In Panel C, the earnings-price ratio
(e/p) and the book-to-market ratio (b/m) come in statistically significant.

      Out-of-sample, as expected, the RMSE and MAE deteriorate relative to the same-set-
of-observations in-sample RMSE and MAE. The drop seems especially stark for the all
prediction. In Panel C, we also see that the historical mean shows almost no out-of-
sample deterioration.

      Not in the table, we used the CUSUMSQ statistic to test for stability of a regression
model based on out-of-sample errors.4 These tests are often critiqued as being too weak.
  4
    The CUSUM test provides identical inferences to CUSUMSQ in all cases. Their out-of-sample perfor-
mance tests use all observations/residuals, not just the residuals after our initial estimation period.



                                                  9
(See Greene (2003) for more details.) However, for our monthly data, the test has no
difficulty rejecting the NULL hypothesis of stability: CUSUMSQ can reject stability for
each and every model (including the historical mean prediction) at the 1% level.

   Of most interest to us is consideration for what an individual investor could have
profitably used, i.e., the predictive ability of the variables relative to the predictive ability
of the historical mean itself. Even if a model is unstable, if it helped an investor predict
better, it might have been useful—though caution would of course be well-advised. Alas,
it is immediately apparent that, on the ∆RMSE statistic, of our 15 predictive regressions,
13 regressions in Panel A (forecasts begin 20 years after data is available), 12 regressions
in Panel B (estimation begins as soon as possible, forecasts begin in 1964), and 11
regressions in Panel C (estimation begins in 1927, forecasts begin in 1964) underperform
the prevailing historical mean in their equity premium predictions. The picture is similar
for the ∆MAE statistic.

   The underperformance occasionally reaches economically meaningful proportions:
the all regressions underperform the prevailing mean by about 2–3% per annum. (Of
course, we would like to find variables with better performance, not worse performance,
so this variable is of no use to us; it is merely noise.) The term-spread (tms) is really the
only variable that potentially qualifies as a candidate for positive predictive power. Its
relative performance is statistically significant in all the three panels. How economically
significant is this variable? The largest RMSE increase is 0.011% per month in Panel B.
This translates into 12 · 0.011% ≈ 0.13% (13 basis points) per annum. Although one
should not expect miracles from stock return predictions, this kind of performance gain
does appear tiny. Even one trade’s transaction costs could wipe out this advantage. To
add to our confusion, on a monthly frequency, our large in-sample regressions was not
statistically significant.

   In Section 4.1, we further investigate adjustment methods on monthly prediction
to correct for stationarity and increasing non-stationarity in the dividend price ratios,
as proposed in Stambaugh (1999), and enhanced by Campbell and Yogo (2003), and
Lewellen (2004). We also explored an instrumented method in Goyal and Welch (2003)
that adjusted for both increasing non-stationarity in the dividend ratios and the divi-
dend growth process.

   We are not reporting the same tables for quarterly data. (Results are available on our
website.) The results were practically identical. The only novelty is the inclusion of the
cay variable. In-sample, cayp performed fabulously, almost as good as the all regres-
sion, again our best regression. cayp is the variable constructed with look-ahead bias,
as in Lettau and Ludvigson (2001). Removing the variable construction look-ahead bias
(caya), i.e., running one in-sample regression on cayp, drops about half of its in-sample
forecasting power in Panel A, and all of its in-sample forecasting power in Panels B


                                               10
and C.5 It still remains an excellent variable. However, cayp’s out-of-sample perfor-
mance is also worse than the performance of the historical sample mean—which can be
also be seen in the annual data (next).



3.3     Annual Data

Annual Data: Tables


                                        Insert Table 2 here.
                                    Forecasts at Annual Frequency



      We deem annual data to be most appealing, because it is a good compromise between
the need to use moving averages for some ratios and the need to use corrections for
overlapping data. Thus, we will pay some extra attention to these regressions, which
are detailed in Table 2.

      In-sample, only eqis, cay (both forms) and all systematically managed to predict well
in all three panels. cayp performs almost as well as the all regression, which explains
the profession’s enthusiasm for it: this one variable outperforms everything else by
a wide margin. Eliminating the variable’s look-ahead bias, however, we see that caya
loses much of its forecasting power. Nevertheless, caya remains the best known in-
sample predictor, albeit now together with eqis. In-sample, the b/m ratio also has good
persistent predictions in Panels A and B, but not Panel C. The dividend and earnings
ratios (d/p, d/y, e/p) and the T-bill rate (tbl) have good in-sample predictive ability in
Panel C only.

      Out-of-sample,6 however, of 18 · 3 = 54 regressions, 49 failed to outpredict the
prevailing historical mean on the ∆RMSE metric (and 47 on the ∆MAE metric). This
is worse than chance—after all, as before, except for the beginning observations that
cannot be used in an out-of-sample test, the dependent and independent variables are
the very same as those we used in the in-sample tests that helped us/researchers identify
these variables. Of the four variables that outpredicted out-of-sample, each panel (time
periods) believes in different ones: the percent equity issuing (eqis), book-to-market
(b/m), earnings-price ratio (e/p), and dividend yield (d/y) are our four candidates. The
best and only statistically significant variable out-of-sample is eqis (at the 10% level, not
the 5% level!). In Panel A, it is not only statistically but also not entirely economically
insignificant with 23.5 basis points per annum superior performance. Unfortunately,
  5
     Brennan and Xia (2002) similarly point out that the look-ahead bias for cay, and find no superior
performance in out-of-sample prediction.
   6
     The CUSUMSQ statistic now has too few observations to have enough power to reject the NULL of
stability for all regressions. We can now do so only for some regressions In Panel A: tbl, ltr, tms, dfs,
ntis, and b/m are again unstable at the 1% level.


                                                  11
eqis does not remain significant in the other panels (time periods). It is still positive
in Panel B. We were almost ready to declare victory, but eqis then turned in negative
in Panel C. The other three variables are not statistically significant. In terms of mean
economic effects, these have superior performance that amounts to no more than 10
basis points per year, not enough to make a single trade worthwhile.

      For the remaining 49 predictive regressions, negative performance means that we
can avoid arguing about whether we have used the proper statistical methods to com-
pute standard errors. It is not a matter of argument whether we have the wrong standard
errors. It is simply that these variables—when used in simple linear regressions—failed
to predict.

Annual Data: Figures

      Figure 1 plot the out-of-sample performance for annual predictive regressions, specif-
ically the cumulative squared prediction errors of the prevailing mean minus the cu-
mulative squared prediction error of the predictive variable from the linear historical
regression. (This is also the running statistic on which the Diebold-Marianno standard
error is computed.) Whenever a line increases, the regression predicted better; when it
decreases, the prevailing mean predicted better. The standard error of the observations,
based on translating McCracken statistics into standard error equivalents, are marked
in blue: the reader can thus interpret the blue areas as plus or minus two standard
deviations. All scales are identical, except for the ms and all predictions. (They were so
bad, we had to change the scale.) The units are in percent and meaningful: The range
from –0.2 to 0.2 means 20 basis points underperformance up to outperformance. (This
is cumulative, not average!7 It is also easy to mentally shift to any other data starting
or data ending period: one would only have to draw a different y = 0 line at the first
data point.

      Although graphing recursive residuals is not novel, the fact that it has been neglected
in this literature means that some rather startling facts about predictability are often
overlooked (except by Pesaran and Timmerman (1995)). In our sample period, some
years stand out: a variable that can predict poor stock market performance in 1929–
1932 (the S&P500 dropped from 24.35 to 6.89) and 1973–1974 (118.05 to 48.56) can
gain a good predictive advantage. Of course, a variable that can predict the superior
stock market performance of the 1990s (and its demise in 2001–2002) can also gain a
good advantage.

      Although there is a bit of tea-leaf reading to the exercise, it is interesting to see when
ratios performed well and when they performed worse. We begin with the stock-related
variables:
  7
      We could not plot the running ∆RMSE, because this graph would be too noisy at the first few years.




                                                   12
d/p (Dividend price ratio) Panel A shows that if the entire sample is used, the dividend
        price ratio really had few particularly good years. The exceptions are 1898–1900
        and the aforementioned disaster years of 1973–1974 and 2002. (Not reported,
        even in-sample, much of the statistical importance of this ratio hinges on the pres-
        ence of these two oil-shock years.) d/p has poor performance from 1900–1930,
        zero performance from 1930–1990 performance, then poor performance again.
        Panel B shows that if we use all available data in the regression estimation, again
        only 1973 and 1974 do well. Not much is happening before the mid-1990s, the
        point when the dividend price ratio’s predictive ability collapses. However, Panel C
        shows that if regressions are run only post-war and estimation begins in 1962,
        then we get good dividend price ratio performance up to 1974. Thereafter, the
        ratio consistently underperformed.

d/y (Dividend yield) The dividend yield looks similar to the dividend price ratio in
        Panels B and C, but not in Panel A. There, it shows poor performance 1900–1940,
        good performance 1940–1955, poor performance 1955–1972, again the two good
        oil-crisis year predictions 1973 and 1974, and then consistently poor performance.

e/p (Earnings-price) The earnings price ratio showed solid performance post-2000. In
        Panel A, it only showed good performance in the 1950s. In Panel C, it performed
        well from 1962–1975, and poorly thereafter.

d/e (Net Payout [Dividend Yield+ )] The dividend payout ratio performed even less
        well than the earnings-price ratio. It had poor performance 1890–1940, and es-
        sentially zero performance thereafter. In Panel C, it failed to predict the oil-shock
        year performance.

b/m (Book-To-Market) The book-to-market ratio generally did well from 1940–1975,
        after which it did rather poorly.

ntis (Net Equity Expansion) Poor performance in 1973–1974, zero performance other-
        wise.

eqis (Percent Equity Expansion) Displayed good performance, forecasting the 1973–
        1974 oil shock, bad performance from 1999–2002, mostly indescriptive in other
        periods. Rapach and Wohar (2002) use a sample from 1927–1999, beginning their
        out-of-sample forecasts in 1964—and do find superior out-of-sample performance
        (in their Table 2). This is borne out by our Panel A, where the 95% confidence in-
        tervals almost include 0—the single (significance) star eqis in our own Table 2
        denotes the 90% confidence level. It is perhaps divine justice that the overperfor-
        mance of eqis, which came from only three years (the 1973–75 oil-shock) is pretty
        much undone by another three years (the 1999-2002 market correction).8
  8
      We also replicated the Rapach and Wohar (2002) result of statistical significance if the sample ends


                                                    13
    The next set are the interest-related variables.


tbl (T-bill) The short-term rate had consistently good performance until around 1973,
      after which it had consistently bad performance.

lty (Long-Term Yield) The long-term yield shows essentially the same pattern as the
      short-term rate.

ltr (Long-Term Rate) The long-term rate of return did well from 1950 to 1978, and then
      performed very poorly.

tms (Term-Spread) The term-spread has mostly zero performance. In Panel A, it had a
      tiny positive drift until around 2000, in Panel C, it collapsed in the late 1970s.

dfy (Default Yield Spread) The default yield spread had pretty consistently zero or neg-
      ative performance.

dfr (Default Return Spread) The default return spread had pretty consistently zero or
      negative performance.

infl (Inflation) The inflation rate showed consistently zero or negative performance. It
      did particularly poorly in 1973–1974.


    The final three plots are


caya (Consumption, Wealth, Income) Consistently zero or poor predictor.

ms (Model-Selection) Please note the scale change. Model selection only worked during
      the oil-shock years, and performed very poorly in all other time periods.

all (Kitchen-Sink) Please note the scale change. Good predictor from 1968–1973. Re-
      markably poor predictor thereafter




in 1999. Finally, we can also replicate beta similarity if we split the Baker and Wurgler (2000) ending in
1997 sample into two. But, as the evidence shows, this is not sufficient evidence that eqis can predict
out of sample.


                                                   14
3.4     5-Year Horizons

                                          Insert Table 3 here.
                                      Forecasts at 5-year Frequency



      Table 3 presents the 5-year predictions. (Like quarterly predictions, 3-year predic-
tions are not reported but available on the authors’ websites.) The observations are
overlapping (i.e., two consecutive observations have 4-years of shared data.) The re-
ported in-sample R 2 is therefore upward biased. However, the reported regression sig-
nificance stars are based on Newey-West overlap corrections in our regressions, and
thus valid. Also, we do not have closed-form McCracken critical values for overlapping
observations, so we had to bootstrap the significance for the ∆RMSE metric.

      In-sample, as in the annual regressions, all and cayp perform best, and by a wide
margin. But many other variables come in significant, too, confirming again the litera-
ture’s plethora of variables that seem to have explanatory power. The most important
variables across the three panels are the percent equity issuing activity eqis and caya,
the term-spread (tms), and the T-Bill rate (tbl). In Panels A and B, the dividend and
earnings-price ratios (d/p, d/y, e/p) and the net issues (ntis) also have statistically sig-
nificant power; in Panel C, the inflation rate matters.9

      The dividend ratio deserves a detour. We know from Cochrane (1997) that, on long
horizons, the dividend ratios should predict either dividend growth rates or the market
rate of return. (In Goyal and Welch (2003), we show how the ratios have primarily
predicted themselves [instead of dividend growth ratios or stock returns] over shorter
horizons; over 3–5 year horizons, Cochrane’s effect starts kicking in.) We already know
from casual observations that the dividend price ratios have not predicted dividend
growth rates well. This gives us some hope that they may predict stock returns. We can
see the Cochrane effect in the in-sample regressions.

      Out-of-Sample, “only” 41 out of 3 · 17 = 51 regressions underperform the prevail-
ing mean on the ∆RMSE metric.10 Not one of the variables is statistically significant.
On the ∆MAE metric, 44 out of 57 regressions underperform the prevailing mean. Re-
markably, here we see the first variable (caya) which outperforms the historical mean
in all three panels, though it is not statistically significant in any of them. Its largest
outperformance is about 0.881%/5 ≈ 0.18% per annum. The magnitudes of the positive
outperformance is similarly economically small for the other variables.
  9
    caya comes in significant in Panel B and C only in the 3-year, but not the 5-year horizon.
 10
    In the 3-year regressions, e/p worked in Panel A. In the 5-year regressions, e/p is no longer significant
in Panel A—in fact, it cannot even outperform the prevailing mean.




                                                    15
4     Robust Non-Performance

4.1     Process Stationarity of Independent Variables

                                      Insert Table 4 here.
                    Forecasts at Monthly Frequency with Alternative Procedures



      Stambaugh (1999) points out that if the independent variable is itself generated by
an autoregressive process, with an autocorrelation close to 1 (which is the case for vir-
tually all of our variables), then the predictive regression should be corrected for the
autoregression in the dependent variable. (Stambaugh points out that high estimated
autocorrelation in the predictor variable suffers from a downward bias in the autocor-
relation. The negative correlation between residuals of the predictive and predictor
equation then causes upward bias in the beta.) Table 4 repeats the estimation using
the Stambaugh correction. Comparing Panel B to Panel A shows that the Stambaugh
correction reduces both the in-sample and out-of-sample performance in almost all re-
gressions.

      Lewellen (2004) and Campbell and Yogo (2003) suggest that the Stambaugh (1999)
procedure can be improved, if one is willing to assume that the independent variable
cannot be a random walk. This clearly makes sense for most of our independent vari-
ables: variables such as dividend-price ratios and interest rates should not wander off
to infinity. However, Panel C shows that this correction fails to improve both the in-
sample and out-of-sample performance in almost all regressions, too. Only the term-
spread (tms) and the inflation rate (infl) survive as significant predictors, but with only
12 · 0.006% ≈ 8 basis points per annum and 12 · 0.002% ≈ 2 basis points per annum
superior performance, there is nothing here that is economically meaningful.

      Campbell and Yogo (2003), Goyal and Welch (2003), and Lewellen (2004) further show
that the time-series process of the dividend-ratios is not only near-stationary, but has
itself changed over the sample. Lewellen (2004) incorporates this into the predictive
regression via a sub-sample procedure. Goyal and Welch (2003) incorporate this by
instrumenting changes in the time-series process of both dividend ratios and dividend
growth rates into the prediction equation. However, neither of these procedures reliably
improves the out-of-sample performance of the dividend yield.



4.2     Moving Means as Alternatives?

                                      Insert Table 5 here.
                      Forecasts Using Moving Average Historical Equity Premia



                                                16
      Fama and French (1988b) point out that stock returns seem to be mean-reverting
at 3-year to 5-year intervals. To what extent does our NULL hypothesis pick up this
mean-reversion? Can one use the mean-reversion as a momentum-like predictor? Ta-
ble 5 explores whether the most recent 5-year performance or the most-recent 10-year
performance outpredict the prevailing historical mean. The answer is no. The most re-
cent equity premium moving average cannot outpredict the since-inception prevailing
equity premium means.



4.3     Price Ratios Revisited

                                     Insert Table 6 here.
                            Forecasts Using Various e/p and d/p Ratios



      Lamont (1998) explores variations of the E/P ratio and the payout ratio. Table 6 thus
explores variations on the computation of earnings and dividend ratios. For example,
Earning(10Y) are the moving average 10-year earnings. We explore two different hori-
zons: one in which the forecast begins in 1902, another in which the forecast begins in
1964.

      Panel A shows that there is both statistically significant outperformance (both in-
sample and out-of-sample!) the price variables (e/p and d/p) if we use longer-term
moving average price ratios and if we begin our forecasts in 1902. The economic sig-
nificance reached 33 basis points for the Earnings(10Y)/Price ratio, though it is below
10 basis points for all other variations. The payout ratio (d/e) does not work. Unfortu-
nately, if we begin our forecasts in 1964, it is not just that our variables are no longer
statistically significant, they outright underperform.

      Panels B through D explore 3-year, 5-year, and 10-year horizons, respectively. Panel B
shows that the 3-year horizon predictions look like the one-year horizons: significant
outperformance of long-memory price ratios if we begin in 1902, but underperformance
if we begin in 1964. Panel C and D show that the 5-year and 10-year horizon predictions
become progressively worse. The 10-year horizon predictions, however, show statisti-
cally insignificant overperformance when we begin predictions in 1964, but none if we
begin predictions in 1902.

      In sum, there is a tiny hint that long-memory earnings-price ratios might have better
in-sample and out-of-sample performance than the prevailing mean; but the empirical
evidence is so modest that it is better interpreted as not speaking against e/p, instead
of speaking in favor for e/p. It looks decent primarily because the other predictive
variables look so incredibly bad.




                                               17
4.4   Earlier Robustness Checks

In Goyal and Welch (2003), we also tried numerous variations, trying to find some
method with out-of-sample power for our two dividend ratios. None of these variations
impact our conclusion that their out-of-sample performance has always been poor. Nec-
essarily, many of these variations were dividend-ratio specific.


  1. Instead of the equity premium, we predicted stock market returns. Most of the
      time-series variation is driven by the stock market, so the results do not change
      much.

  2. In addition to our method for instrumenting process changes in dividend ratios
      and dividend-growth ratios (because the dividend ratio is close to stationary at the
      sample end; see the preceding section), we tried changes in dividend ratios. These
      changes in dividend ratios performed worse in forecasting than the dividend ratios
      themselves.

  3. We tried simple returns and yields, instead of log returns and yields. Again, the
      unconditional model beats the dividend yield models and performs no worse sta-
      tistically than the dividend-price ratio model.

  4. We tried to reconcile our definitions to match exactly the variables in Fama and
      French (1988a). This included using only NYSE firms, predicting stock returns
      (rather than premia), and a 30-year estimation window. None of these changes
      made any difference. The only important differences are the start and end of the
      prediction window.

  5. We tried different “fixed number of years” estimation windows. The unconditional
      model typically performs better or as well as the dividend ratio models if five or
      more years are used for parameter estimation.

  6. We tried standardized forecasts to see if the regressions/means could identify
      years ex-ante in which it was likely to perform unreliably. (In other words, we used
      the regression prediction standard error to normalize forecast errors.) Again, the
      unconditional model (its forecast also standardized by its standard deviation) beat
      the conditional models.

  7. We tried a convex combination of the dividend yield model prediction and the
      unconditional prediction. Such a “shrunk dividend yield” model does not produce
      meaningfully better forecasts than the unconditional model alone.

  8. We also explored a more complex measure based on analysts’ forecasts (Lee, Myers,
      and Swaminathan (1999)). It similarly does not appear to predict equity premia
      well out-of-sample.

                                            18
    A VAR specification in Ang and Bekaert (2003)) also rejects the dividend ratios’ fore-
casting power.

    In sum, variations on the specification and variables did not produce instances which
would lead one to believe that dividend yields or other variables can predict equity
premia in a meaningful way. The data do not support the view that dividend ratios
were ever an effective forecasting tool, even if we end the sample before the 1990 market
boom. It is not likely that there is a simple dividend ratio model which has superior
out-of-sample performance. More likely, we believe that these two ratios, as well as our
other variables, just fail to predict.11



5    Conclusion

Our paper has systematically investigated the empirical real-world out-of-sample per-
formance of plain linear regressions to predict the equity premium. We find that none
of the popular variables has worked—and not only post-1990. In our monthly tests, we
can solidly reject regression model stability for all variables we examined, even though
we use the CUSUMSQ test which is known to be fairly weak. For successful out-of-
sample prediction, we will either need a different technique or a different variable. If a
researcher finds such, we would like to urge her to produce figures similar to those in
Figure 1: they are an immediate diagnostic for when a variable has worked and when it
has not worked. For example, to the (very small) extent that dividend ratios ever seemed
not to have bad out-of-sample performance, the figures make it obvious that this was
driven by the two years of the oil-shock, 1973 and 1974, and by the 2002 collapse of
the stock market. In most other years, the dividend ratios simply predicted worse than
the prevailing historical equity premium mean.

    Our paper may be simple, even trivial, but its implications are not. The belief that the
state variables which we explored in our paper can predict stock returns and/or equity
premia is not only widely held, but the basis for two entire literatures: one literature on
how these state variables predict the equity premium, and one literature of how smart
investors should use these state variables in better portfolio allocations. This is not to
argue that an investor would not update his estimate of the equity premium as more
equity premium realizations come in. Updating will necessarily induce time-varying
opportunity sets (see Xia (2001) and Lewellen and Shanken (2002)). Instead, our paper
  11
     Please recognize that different published papers on dividend ratios may have come to slightly dif-
ferent results not just based on their exact sample periods (which matters!), but also depending on how
they lag the price deflator (which also matters!). For example, Bossaerts and Hillion (1999) employ the
dividend yield (D(t)/P (t −1)) rather than the dividend price ratio (D(t)/P (t)). Consequently, our results
explain why they find such poor out-of-sample performance in their 5-year out-of-sample period. Fama
and French (1988a) report both measures, but emphasize the better out-of-sample performance of the
D(t)/P (t) measure.


                                                   19
suggests only that our profession has yet to find a variable that has had meaningful
robust empirical equity premium forecasting power, at least from the perspective of a
real-world investor. We hope that the simplicity of our approach has strengthened the
credibility of our evidence.

   We close by paraphrasing Mark Twain’s famous line, admittedly with some tongue-
in-cheek:


                               The rumors of the predictability of the
                             equity premium are greatly exaggerated.




       Definitely not for publication (just a curiosity): The following is an observation that deserves a
       few words. Based on our own earlier submissions and conversations with other researchers and
       referees, the publication process in this literature seems unusually idiosyncratic. The not-so-
       unusual problems are

            • Some referees seem to believe that there is predictive ability, and their priors are difficult
              to move.

            • Some referees seem to believe that there is no predictive ability, and their priors are
              difficult to move.

       The more unusual problems are

            • Some referees seem to believe that there is no predictive ability, and this is so well-known,
              that this is no longer publishable news.

            • Some referees believe that there is no predictive ability, and this is publishable news.

       Strange outcomes can result. For example, a paper that does find in-sample predictive ability
       can be published based on one’s referee’s recommendation; but a critique of the paper can be
       rejected by another referee, who does not find it surprising that the variable does not predict.
       A rough survey of the literature shows that a reader will find 10 published papers claiming
       predictive ability for every 1 paper claiming the predictive ability is spurious, for one reason or
       another. The current running tally among submitted and accepted papers is probably closer to
       3:1, but still in favor of papers finding predictive ability. This explains the overwhelming folklore
       in the profession and the impression of many an external reader, that predictability via these
       variables is possible. We hope our paper helps dispell it.




                                                        20
References

Ang, A., and G. Bekaert (2003): “Stock Return Predictability: Is it There?,” Discussion paper, Columbia
  Business School.

Avramov, D. (2002): “Stock Return Predictability and Model Uncertainty,” Journal of Financial Economics,
  64(3), 423–458.

Baker, M., and J. Wurgler (2000): “The Equity Share in New Issues and Aggregate Stock Returns,”
  Journal of Finance, 55(5), 2219–2257.

Ball, R. (1978): “Anomalies in Relationship Between Securities’ Yields and Yield-Surrogates,” Journal of
  Financial Economics, 6(2/3), 103–126.

Bossaerts, P., and P. Hillion (1999): “Implementing Statistical Criteria to Select Return Forecasting
  Models: What Do We Learn?,” Review of Financial Studies, 12(2), 405–428.

Brennan, M. J., and Y. Xia (2002): “tay’s as good as cay,” Working Paper, UCLA and Wharton.

Campbell, J. Y. (1987): “Stock returns and the Term Structure,” Journal of Financial Economics, 18(2),
  373–399.

Campbell, J. Y., and R. J. Shiller (1988): “Stock Prices, Earnings, and Expected Dividends,” Journal of
  Finance, 43(3), 661–676.

       (1989): “The Dividend-Price Ratio and Expectations of Future Dividends and Discount Factors,”
  Review of Financial Studies, 1(3), 195–227.

Campbell, J. Y., and L. M. Viceira (2002): Strategic Asset Allocation: Portfolio Choice for Long-Term
  Investors. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.

Campbell, J. Y., and T. Vuolteenaho (2003): “Inflation Illusion and Stock Prices,” Discussion paper,
  Harvard University.

Campbell, J. Y., and M. Yogo (2003): “Efficient Tests of Stock Return Predictability,” Discussion paper,
  Harvard University.

Cochrane, J. H. (1997): “Where is the Market Going? Uncertain Facts and Novel Theories,” Federal
  Reserve Bank of Chicago - Economic Perspectives, 21(6), 3–37.

Cremers, K. M. (2002): “Stock Return Predictability: A Bayesian Model Selection Perspective,” Review of
  Financial Studies, 15(4), 1223–1249.

Diebold, F. X., and R. S. Mariano (1995): “Comparing Predictive Accuracy,” Journal of Business &amp;
  Economic Statistics, 13(3), 253–263.

Dow, C. H. (1920): “Scientific Stock Speculation,” The Magazine of Wall Street.

Fama, E. F. (1981): “Stock Returns, Real Activity, Inflation, and Money,” American Economic Review, 71(4),
  545–565.

Fama, E. F., and K. R. French (1988a): “Dividend Yields and Expected Stock Returns,” Journal of Financial
  Economics, 22(1), 3–25.

       (1988b): “Permanent and Temporary Components of Stock Prices,” Journal of Political Economy,
  96(2), 246–73.

       (1989): “Business Conditions and Expected Returns on Stocks and Bonds,” Journal of Financial
  Economics, 25(1), 23–49.




                                                    21
Fama, E. F., and G. W. Schwert (1977): “Asset Returns and Inflation,” Journal of Financial Economics,
  5(2), 115–146.

Goetzmann, W. N., and P. Jorion (1993): “Testing the Predictive Power of Dividend Yields,” Journal of
  Finance, 48(2), 663–679.

Goyal, A., and I. Welch (2003): “Predicting the Equity Premium with Dividend Ratios,” Management
  Science, 49(5), 639–654.

Greene, W. H. (2003): Econometric Analysis. Boston, USA: Pearson Education, 5 edn.

Hodrick, R. J. (1992): “Dividend Yields and Expected Stock Returns: Alternative Procedures for Inference
  and Measurement,” Review of Financial Studies, 5(3), 257–286.

Keim, D. B., and R. F. Stambaugh (1986): “Predicting Returns in the Stock and Bond Markets,” Journal
  of Financial Economics, 17(2), 357–390.

Kothari, S., and J. Shanken (1997): “Book-to-market, Dividend Yield, and Expected Market Returns: A
  Time-Series Analysis,” Journal of Financial Economics, 44(2), 169–203.

Lamont, O. (1998): “Earnings and Expected Returns,” Journal of Finance, 53(5), 1563–1587.

Lee, C. M., J. Myers, and B. Swaminathan (1999): “What is the Intrinsic Value of the DOW?,” Journal of
  Finance, 54(5), 1693–1741.

Lettau, M., and S. Ludvigson (2001): “Consumption, Aggregate Wealth, and Expected Stock Returns,”
  Journal of Finance, 56(3), 815–849.

Lewellen, J. (2004): “Predicting Returns with Financial Ratios,” Journal of Financial Economics, ?(?).

Lewellen, J., and J. Shanken (2002): “Learning, Asset-Pricing Tests, and Market Efficiency,” Journal of
  Finance, 57(3), 1113–1145.

Lintner, J. (1975): “Inflation and Security Returns,” Journal of Finance, 30(2), 259–280.

McCracken, M. W. (1999): “Asymptotics for Out-of-Sample Tests of Causality,” Discussion paper,
  Louisiana State University.

Menzly, L., T. Santos, and P. Veronesi (2004): “Understanding Predictability,” Journal of Political Econ-
  omy, 112(1), 1–47.

Pesaran, H. M., and A. Timmerman (1995): “Predictability of Stock Returns: Robustness and Economic
  Significance,” Journal of Finance, 50(4), 1201–1228.

Pontiff, J., and L. D. Schall (1998): “Book-to-Market Ratios as Predictors of Market Returns,” Journal
  of Financial Economics, 49(2), 141–160.

Rapach, D. E., and M. E. Wohar (2002): “In-Sample vs. Out-of-Sample Tests of Stock Return Predictability
  in the Context of Data Mining,” Working Paper.

Rissanen, J. (1986): “Order Estimation by Accumulated Prediction Errors,” Journal of Applied Probability,
  23A, 55–61.

Rozeff, M. S. (1984): “Dividend Yields Are Equity Risk Premiums,” Journal of Portfolio Management,
  11(1), 68–75.

Shiller, R. J. (1984): “Stock Prices and Social Dynamics,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2,
  457–498.

Stambaugh, R. F. (1999): “Predictive Regressions,” Journal of Financial Economics, 54(3), 375–421.

Xia, Y. (2001): “Learning about Predictability: The Effects of Parameter Uncertainty on Dynamic Asset
  Allocation,” Journal of Finance, 56(1), 205–246.



                                                     22
Website Data Sources

Robert Shiller’s Website: http://aida.econ.yale.edu/∼shiller/data.htm. Note that even earlier
     stock returns are available from www.unifr.ch.
NBER Macrohistory Data Base:
     http://www.nber.org/databases/macrohistory/contents/chapter13.html.
FRED: http://research.stlouisfed.org/fred2/categories/22.
Value-Line: http://www.valueline.com/pdf/valueline_2002.html.
Bureau of Labor Statistics Webpage: http://www.bls.gov/cpi/
Martin Lettau’s Webpage: (cay), http://pages.stern.nyu.edu/∼mlettau/.
Jeff Wurgler’s Webpage: (eqis), http://pages.stern.nyu.edu/∼jwurgler/




                                                23
                                                                 Table 1: Forecasts at Monthly Frequency
     This table presents statistics on forecast errors (in-sample and out-of-sample) for stock return forecasts at the monthly frequency (both in the forecasting equation and forecast).
     Variables are explained in Section 2. Panel A uses the full sample period for each variable and constructs first forecast 20 years after the first data observation. Panel B uses
     the full sample period for each variable and constructs first forecast in January 1964. Panel C uses only the sample period January 1927 to December 2003 and constructs
                                                           2                                                  2
     first forecast in January 1964. All numbers, except R , are in percent per month. A star next to R in-sample denotes significance of the in-sample regression (as measured
     by F -statistic). Mean and standard deviation are on out-of-sample forecast errors; RMSE is the root mean square error, MAE is the mean absolute error. Most important to
     us, ∆RMSE is the RMSE difference between the unconditional forecast and the conditional forecast for the same sample/forecast period (positive numbers signify superior
     out-of-sample conditional forecast). DM is the Diebold and Mariano (1995) t-statistic for difference in MSE of the unconditional forecast and the conditional forecast. One-sided
     critical values of DM statistic are from McCracken (1999). Significance levels at 90%, 95%, and 99% are denoted by one, two, and three stars, respectively.


                                                         Panel A: Full data, Forecasts begin 20 years after the first sample date



                           Variable                   Sample      Sample     Forecast            In-Sample                            Out-of-Sample
                                                                                                              2
                                                        Begin         End       Begin     MAE RMSE        R        Mean StdDev MAE RMSE           ∆MAE ∆RMSE          DM


                    d/p    Dividend Price Ratio    1871-M02     2003-M12    1891-M02      3.53    5.05   –0.06     –0.19     5.07   3.55   5.07   –0.006   –0.013   –0.89




24
                    d/y    Dividend Yield          1871-M02     2003-M12    1891-M02      3.53    5.05   –0.04     –0.26     5.06   3.56   5.07   –0.015   –0.011   –1.23
                    e/p    Earning Price Ratio     1871-M02     2003-M12    1891-M02      3.53    5.05    0.09     –0.26     5.06   3.55   5.06   –0.012   –0.002   –0.26
                    d/e    Dividend Payout Ratio   1871-M12     2003-M12    1891-M12      3.54    5.06    0.17*    –0.04     5.08   3.55   5.08   –0.000   –0.012   –0.70
                    b/m    Book to Market          1921-M03     2003-M12    1941-M03      3.26    4.20    0.16     –0.09     4.22   3.28   4.22   –0.037   –0.015   –0.79
                    ntis   Net Equity Expansion    1927-M01     2003-M12    1947-M01      3.22    4.20   –0.11     –0.06     4.21   3.23   4.21   –0.002   –0.002   –1.46
                    tbl    T-Bill Rate             1920-M02     2003-M12    1940-M02      3.25    4.29    0.14     –0.34     4.30   3.27   4.31    0.005    0.003    0.16
                    lty    Long Term Yield         1919-M01     2003-M12    1939-M01      3.31    4.38   –0.00     –0.38     4.39   3.33   4.41   –0.005   –0.014   –0.59
                    ltr    Long Term Return        1926-M01     2003-M12    1946-M01      3.25    4.21    0.04      0.01     4.26   3.29   4.26   –0.040   –0.029   –2.00
                    tms    Term Spread             1920-M01     2003-M12    1940-M01      3.25    4.29    0.15     –0.02     4.30   3.27   4.30    0.006    0.007    0.64**
                    dfy    Default Yield Spread    1926-M01     2003-M12    1946-M01      3.25    4.23   –0.02     –0.05     4.24   3.26   4.24   –0.007   –0.010   –1.63
                    dfr    Default Return Spread   1919-M01     2003-M12    1939-M01      3.32    4.39   –0.09     –0.08     4.40   3.33   4.40   –0.007   –0.005   –2.11
                    infl   Inflation               1919-M02     2003-M12    1939-M02      3.30    4.37   –0.02     –0.11     4.39   3.32   4.39    0.001   –0.000   –0.09

                    all    Kitchen Sink            1927-M01 2003-M12 1947-M01             3.23    4.17    1.36**   –0.15     4.45 3.44     4.45 –0.212 –0.243 –3.92
                    ms     Model Selection         1927-M01 2003-M12 1947-M01             ——      ——      ——       –0.07     4.22 3.23     4.21 –0.006 –0.009 –0.01
                                                   Panel B: Full data, Forecasts begin in 1964-M01



            Variable                  Sample     Sample    Forecast          In-Sample                          Out-of-Sample
                                                                                          2
                                       Begin       End       Begin    MAE RMSE        R        Mean StdDev MAE RMSE         ∆MAE ∆RMSE         DM


     d/p    Dividend Price Ratio    1871-M02   2003-M12   1964-M01    3.34    4.39   –0.06     –0.07   4.41   3.35   4.40   –0.006   –0.006   –1.24
     d/y    Dividend Yield          1871-M02   2003-M12   1964-M01    3.35    4.39   –0.04     –0.22   4.40   3.37   4.40   –0.025   –0.007   –0.87
     e/p    Earning Price Ratio     1871-M02   2003-M12   1964-M01    3.36    4.40    0.09     –0.17   4.41   3.37   4.41   –0.031   –0.009   –0.67
     d/e    Dividend Payout Ratio   1871-M12   2003-M12   1964-M01    3.34    4.40    0.17*     0.20   4.41   3.34   4.41   –0.002   –0.016   –1.10
     b/m    Book to Market          1921-M03   2003-M12   1964-M01    3.36    4.41    0.16      0.04   4.45   3.40   4.44   –0.072   –0.040   –1.51
     ntis   Net Equity Expansion    1927-M01   2003-M12   1964-M01    3.33    4.40   –0.11      0.10   4.41   3.33   4.40   –0.001   –0.002   –1.44
     tbl    T-Bill Rate             1920-M02   2003-M12   1964-M01    3.32    4.38    0.14     –0.30   4.39   3.33   4.40    0.006    0.002    0.07
     lty    Long Term Yield         1919-M01   2003-M12   1964-M01    3.33    4.39   –0.00     –0.44   4.40   3.34   4.42   –0.006   –0.018   –0.47
     ltr    Long Term Return        1926-M01   2003-M12   1964-M01    3.33    4.38    0.04      0.14   4.41   3.36   4.41   –0.026   –0.007   –0.45
     tms    Term Spread             1920-M01   2003-M12   1964-M01    3.31    4.38    0.15      0.22   4.39   3.32   4.39    0.010    0.011    0.63*
     dfy    Default Yield Spread    1926-M01   2003-M12   1964-M01    3.33    4.39   –0.02      0.09   4.41   3.34   4.40   –0.002   –0.003   –0.40
     dfr    Default Return Spread   1919-M01   2003-M12   1964-M01    3.33    4.39   –0.09      0.10   4.40   3.34   4.40   –0.003   –0.002   –1.01
     infl   Inflation               1919-M02   2003-M12   1964-M01    3.32    4.39   –0.02      0.06   4.40   3.33   4.40    0.004    0.003    0.49*




25
     all    Kitchen Sink            1927-M01 2003-M12 1964-M01        3.34    4.36    1.36**   –0.41   4.54 3.48     4.56 –0.145 –0.157 –2.47
     ms     Model Selection         1927-M01 2003-M12 1964-M01         ——     ——      ——       0.23    4.51 3.48     4.51 –0.144 –0.112 –0.02
                                          Panel C: Data begins in 1927-M01, Forecasts begin in 1964-M01



            Variable                  Sample     Sample    Forecast          In-Sample                          Out-of-Sample
                                                                                          2
                                       Begin       End       Begin    MAE RMSE        R        Mean StdDev MAE RMSE         ∆MAE ∆RMSE         DM


     d/p    Dividend Price Ratio    1927-M01   2003-M12   1964-M01    3.34    4.39    0.01     –0.13   4.41   3.37   4.40   –0.035   –0.005   –0.33
     d/y    Dividend Yield          1927-M01   2003-M12   1964-M01    3.35    4.39    0.08     –0.23   4.41   3.39   4.41   –0.053   –0.010   –0.49
     e/p    Earning Price Ratio     1927-M01   2003-M12   1964-M01    3.36    4.40    0.29*    –0.06   4.43   3.40   4.43   –0.064   –0.028   –1.02
     d/e    Dividend Payout Ratio   1927-M01   2003-M12   1964-M01    3.33    4.40    0.04      0.35   4.43   3.36   4.44   –0.023   –0.035   –2.29
     b/m    Book to Market          1927-M01   2003-M12   1964-M01    3.37    4.41    0.19*    –0.05   4.45   3.42   4.45   –0.087   –0.049   –1.64
     ntis   Net Equity Expansion    1927-M01   2003-M12   1964-M01    3.33    4.40   –0.11      0.10   4.41   3.33   4.40   –0.001   –0.002   –1.44
     tbl    T-Bill Rate             1927-M01   2003-M12   1964-M01    3.32    4.38    0.09     –0.28   4.40   3.33   4.40    0.005    0.000    0.00
     lty    Long Term Yield         1927-M01   2003-M12   1964-M01    3.33    4.39   –0.03     –0.43   4.40   3.34   4.42   –0.009   –0.019   –0.52
     ltr    Long Term Return        1927-M01   2003-M12   1964-M01    3.33    4.38    0.04      0.15   4.41   3.36   4.41   –0.026   –0.007   –0.39
     tms    Term Spread             1927-M01   2003-M12   1964-M01    3.31    4.38    0.08      0.21   4.39   3.32   4.39    0.009    0.007    0.47*
     dfy    Default Yield Spread    1927-M01   2003-M12   1964-M01    3.33    4.39   –0.02      0.09   4.41   3.33   4.40   –0.002   –0.003   –0.44
     dfr    Default Return Spread   1927-M01   2003-M12   1964-M01    3.33    4.39   –0.09      0.10   4.40   3.34   4.40   –0.003   –0.001   –0.36
     infl   Inflation               1927-M01   2003-M12   1964-M01    3.32    4.39    0.02      0.03   4.40   3.33   4.40    0.006    0.004    0.44*




26
     all    Kitchen Sink            1927-M01 2003-M12 1964-M01        3.34    4.36    1.36**   –0.41   4.54 3.48     4.56 –0.145 –0.157 –2.47
     ms     Model Selection         1927-M01 2003-M12 1964-M01        ——      ——      ——       0.23    4.51 3.48     4.51 –0.144 –0.112 –0.02

            Historical Mean         1927-M01 2003-M12 1964-M01        3.33    4.40    ——       0.09    4.40 3.33     4.40     ——       ——      ——
                                                                  Table 2: Forecasts at Annual Frequency
     This table presents statistics on forecast errors (in-sample and out-of-sample) for stock return forecasts at the annual frequency (both in the forecasting equation and forecast).
     Variables are explained in Section 2. Panel A uses the full sample period for each variable and constructs first forecast 20 years after the first data observation. Panel B uses
     the full sample period for each variable and constructs first forecast in 1964. Panel C uses only the sample period 1948 to 2001 and constructs first forecast in 1964. All
                        2                                            2
     numbers, except R , are in percent per year. A star next to R in-sample denotes significance of the in-sample regression (as measured by F -statistic). Mean and standard
     deviation are on out-of-sample forecast errors; RMSE is the root mean square error, MAE is the mean absolute error. Most important to us, ∆RMSE is the RMSE difference
     between the unconditional forecast and the conditional forecast for the same sample/forecast period (positive numbers signify superior out-of-sample conditional forecast).
     DM is the Diebold and Mariano (1995) t-statistic for difference in MSE of the unconditional forecast and the conditional forecast. One-sided critical values of DM statistic are
     from McCracken (1999). Significance levels at 90%, 95%, and 99% are denoted by one, two, and three stars, respectively.


                                                         Panel A: Full data, Forecasts begin 20 years after the first sample date



                             Variable                Sample Sample Forecast                  In-Sample                              Out-of-Sample
                                                                                                           2
                                                       Begin      End      Begin      MAE RMSE         R        Mean StdDev      MAE RMSE       ∆MAE ∆RMSE         DM


                      d/p    Dividend Price Ratio       1872     2003      1892      14.60   18.30    0.63      –2.82   18.69   15.16   18.82   –0.147   –0.099   –0.46




27
                      d/y    Dividend Yield             1872     2003      1892      14.53   18.26    1.05      –3.35   18.59   15.13   18.81   –0.113   –0.086   –0.23
                      e/p    Earning Price Ratio        1872     2003      1892      14.42   18.33    1.10      –2.43   18.74   15.21   18.81   –0.196   –0.085   –0.43
                      d/e    Dividend Payout Ratio      1872     2003      1892      14.76   18.53   –0.76      –1.64   19.06   15.32   19.05   –0.307   –0.323   –2.36
                      b/m    Book to Market             1921     2003      1941      12.77   15.73    3.21*      0.01   16.26   12.92   16.13    0.235   –0.013   –0.02
                      ntis   Net Equity Expansion       1927     2003      1947      12.82   15.91   –0.09       0.62   16.30   13.09   16.17   –0.174   –0.085   –0.33
                      eqis   Pct Equity Issuing         1927     2002      1947      12.41   15.52    8.99***    0.80   15.93   12.64   15.81    0.182    0.235    0.34*
                      tbl    T-Bill Rate                1920     2003      1940      13.11   15.68    0.53      –1.97   16.25   13.69   16.24   –0.425   –0.096   –0.15
                      lty    Long Term Yield            1919     2003      1939      13.18   15.75   –0.55      –3.57   16.24   14.18   16.51   –1.036   –0.478   –0.55
                      ltr    Long Term Return           1926     2003      1946      12.69   15.72    1.03       1.47   16.90   13.76   16.82   –0.835   –0.776   –0.91
                      tms    Term Spread                1920     2003      1940      13.00   15.78    0.29       1.16   16.27   13.29   16.18   –0.023   –0.033   –0.08
                      dfy    Default Yield Spread       1926     2003      1946      12.74   15.68    0.46       0.96   16.18   12.86   16.07    0.063   –0.025   –0.07
                      dfr    Default Return Spread      1920     2003      1940      13.08   15.95   –1.15       0.91   16.36   13.33   16.25   –0.061   –0.105   –0.74
                      infl   Inflation                  1919     2003      1939      13.15   15.86   –1.00      –0.27   16.36   13.42   16.24   –0.274   –0.206   –1.34
                      cayp   Cnsmptn, Wlth, Incme       1948     2001      1968      10.24   12.80   26.36***
                      caya   Cnsmptn, Wlth, Incme       1948     2001      1968      11.50   14.79    8.22**     4.55   16.34 12.68 16.73       0.016 –0.616 –0.32

                      all    Kitchen Sink               1948     2001      1968       9.85 12.19     24.42**    –4.18   20.24 18.24 20.37 –5.548 –4.254 –1.70
                      ms     Model Selection            1948     2001      1968       ——      ——      ——        –3.27   18.54 15.99 18.56 –3.292 –2.443 –0.01
                                                    Panel B: Full data, Forecasts begin in 1964



            Variable                Sample Sample Forecast               In-Sample                            Out-of-Sample
                                                                                       2
                                     Begin    End      Begin      MAE RMSE         R        Mean StdDev     MAE RMSE        ∆MAE ∆RMSE         DM


     d/p    Dividend Price Ratio     1872    2003      1964      13.01   15.56    0.63      –2.17   15.98   13.53   15.93   –0.537   –0.081   –0.13
     d/y    Dividend Yield           1872    2003      1964      12.94   15.57    1.05      –3.13   16.06   13.64   16.17   –0.646   –0.322   –0.33
     e/p    Earning Price Ratio      1872    2003      1964      12.91   15.54    1.10      –0.34   15.95   13.14   15.75   –0.150    0.094    0.17
     d/e    Dividend Payout Ratio    1872    2003      1964      12.89   15.78   –0.76       0.86   16.21   13.10   16.03   –0.112   –0.182   –1.90
     b/m    Book to Market           1921    2003      1964      12.86   16.21    3.21*      2.06   17.16   13.40   17.07   –0.613   –0.806   –0.88
     ntis   Net Equity Expansion     1927    2003      1964      12.77   15.94   –0.09       2.31   16.36   13.04   16.32   –0.186   –0.165   –0.56
     eqis   Pct Equity Issuing       1927    2002      1964      12.30   15.42    8.99***    3.91   15.66   12.54   15.94    0.179    0.157    0.17
     tbl    T-Bill Rate              1920    2003      1964      12.93   15.79    0.53      –1.11   16.58   13.53   16.41   –0.710   –0.257   –0.25
     lty    Long Term Yield          1919    2003      1964      13.02   15.93   –0.55      –3.38   16.80   14.39   16.93   –1.585   –0.755   –0.55
     ltr    Long Term Return         1926    2003      1964      12.62   15.77    1.03       4.60   16.96   14.08   17.37   –1.229   –1.206   –1.11
     tms    Term Spread              1920    2003      1964      12.56   15.64    0.29       3.86   16.01   12.89   16.27   –0.073   –0.116   –0.18
     dfy    Default Yield Spread     1926    2003      1964      12.64   15.66    0.46       2.89   16.10   12.76   16.15    0.093    0.006    0.01
     dfr    Default Return Spread    1920    2003      1964      12.61   15.89   –1.15       3.11   16.23   12.81   16.33    0.006   –0.172   –1.55
     infl   Inflation                1919    2003      1964      12.79   15.85   –1.00       2.18   16.29   13.01   16.23   –0.202   –0.054   –0.34




28
     cayp   Cnsmptn, Wlth, Incme     1948    2001      1964      10.07   12.52   26.36***
     caya   Cnsmptn, Wlth, Incme     1948    2001      1964      11.17   14.53   10.62***   5.68    16.32 12.96 17.08 –0.567 –1.149 –0.65

     all    Kitchen Sink             1948    2001      1964       9.67 12.13 26.82***       –3.62   20.24 17.91 20.30 –5.521 –4.368 –1.92
     ms     Model Selection          1948    2001      1964       ——      ——      ——        –2.48   18.32 15.46 18.24 –3.073 –2.318 –0.01
                                             Panel C: Data begins in 1948, Forecasts begin in 1964



            Variable                Sample Sample Forecast             In-Sample                            Out-of-Sample
                                                                                     2
                                     Begin    End     Begin     MAE RMSE         R        Mean StdDev     MAE RMSE        ∆MAE ∆RMSE         DM


     d/p    Dividend Price Ratio     1948    2001     1964     11.95   15.16    6.95**    –0.33   16.42   13.13   16.21   –0.738   –0.279   –0.22
     d/y    Dividend Yield           1948    2001     1964     11.85   15.04    5.66**     0.75   16.03   12.43   15.83   –0.046    0.093    0.09
     e/p    Earning Price Ratio      1948    2001     1964     12.18   15.21    4.52*      2.02   16.18   12.76   16.10   –0.376   –0.169   –0.20
     d/e    Dividend Payout Ratio    1948    2001     1964     12.23   15.20   –0.91       2.31   16.76   13.44   16.70   –1.054   –0.770   –1.23
     b/m    Book to Market           1948    2001     1964     12.05   15.32   –0.71       4.04   17.06   13.00   17.31   –0.616   –1.387   –1.06
     ntis   Net Equity Expansion     1948    2001     1964     11.98   15.23   –1.78       3.07   16.42   12.85   16.49   –0.458   –0.564   –1.14
     eqis   Pct Equity Issuing       1948    2001     1964     11.54   14.49    6.67**     4.90   15.97   13.05   16.50   –0.661   –0.577   –0.45
     tbl    T-Bill Rate              1948    2001     1964     12.36   15.15    5.09*     –5.05   16.56   14.35   17.11   –1.958   –1.179   –0.50
     lty    Long Term Yield          1948    2001     1964     12.40   15.41    0.71      –5.98   16.58   14.92   17.42   –2.531   –1.490   –0.69
     ltr    Long Term Return         1948    2001     1964     11.79   15.15   –0.23       5.91   16.86   14.10   17.66   –1.713   –1.730   –1.47
     tms    Term Spread              1948    2001     1964     11.91   14.71    2.66       4.57   16.05   13.49   16.48   –1.101   –0.553   –0.46
     dfy    Default Yield Spread     1948    2001     1964     12.01   15.23   –0.51       4.19   16.33   12.53   16.65   –0.145   –0.720   –0.88
     dfr    Default Return Spread    1948    2001     1964     11.80   15.14   –1.57       5.16   16.23   12.77   16.83   –0.385   –0.902   –1.18
     infl   Inflation                1948    2001     1964     12.28   15.19    0.52       1.34   17.18   13.39   17.01   –1.001   –1.079   –0.58
     cayp   Cnsmptn, Wlth, Incme     1948    2001     1964     10.07   12.52   26.36***




29
     caya   Cnsmptn, Wlth, Incme     1948    2001     1964     11.17   14.53   10.62***   5.68    16.32 12.96 17.08 –0.567 –1.149 –0.65

     all    Kitchen Sink             1948    2001     1964      9.67 12.13     26.82***   –3.62   20.24 17.91 20.30 –5.521 –4.368 –1.92
     ms     Model Selection          1948    2001     1964      ——      ——      ——        –2.48   18.32 15.46 18.24 –3.073 –2.318 –0.01

            Historical Mean          1948    2001     1964     11.97 15.23      ——        3.29    15.79 12.39 15.93         ——       ——      ——
                                                                   Table 3: Forecasts at 5-year Frequency
     This table presents statistics on forecast errors (in-sample and out-of-sample) for stock return forecasts at the 5-year frequency (both in the forecasting equation and forecast).
     These are overlapping series. Variables are explained in Section 2. Panel A uses the full sample period for each variable and constructs first forecast 20 years after the first data
     observation. Panel B uses the full sample period for each variable and constructs first forecast in 1968. Panel C uses only the sample period 1948 to 2001 and constructs first
                                              2                                              2
     forecast in 1968. All numbers, except R , are in percent per 5-year. A star next to R in-sample denotes significance of the in-sample regression (as measured by F -statistic).
     Mean and standard deviation are on out-of-sample forecast errors; RMSE is the root mean square error, MAE is the mean absolute error. Most important to us, ∆RMSE is the RMSE
     difference between the unconditional forecast and the conditional forecast for the same sample/forecast period (positive numbers signify superior out-of-sample conditional
     forecast). The gray stars on ∆RMSE are based on bootstrapped standard errors. Significance levels at 90%, 95%, and 99% are denoted by one, two, and three stars, respectively.


                                                         Panel A: Full data, Forecasts begin 20 years after the first sample date



                            Variable                 Sample Sample Forecast                 In-Sample                                Out-of-Sample
                                                                                                          2
                                                       Begin     End      Begin      MAE RMSE         R          Mean StdDev      MAE RMSE        ∆MAE    ∆RMSE      DM


                     d/p    Dividend Price Ratio       1876     2003       1896     28.18   35.28   10.99**    –17.67    36.09   33.35   40.03 –1.033 –0.200 –0.01
                     d/y    Dividend Yield             1876     2003       1896     28.86   36.31    6.00*     –16.63    37.48   32.92   40.85 –0.600 –1.015 –0.06




30
                     e/p    Earning Price Ratio        1876     2003       1896     29.76   36.79    5.71*     –10.59    39.32   32.90   40.54 –0.585 –0.711 –0.06
                     d/e    Dividend Payout Ratio      1876     2003       1896     29.70   37.39    0.33      –11.59    38.63   32.49   40.16 –0.179 –0.333 –0.05
                     b/m    Book to Market             1921     2002       1941     28.06   34.12    6.52        0.24    40.12   32.76   39.80 –3.777 –3.774 –0.10
                     ntis   Net Equity Expansion       1927     2002       1947     27.91   34.62    3.04*     –11.76    45.45   36.10   46.55 –6.804 –10.348 –0.18
                     eqis   Pct Equity Issuing         1927     2002       1947     27.33   33.61   13.09**     –3.24    37.46   30.35   37.26 –1.053 –1.058 –0.06
                     tbl    T-Bill Rate                1920     2003       1940     25.12   31.03    3.91*     –12.91    37.07   32.91   38.98 –3.697 –2.760 –0.07
                     lty    Long Term Yield            1919     2003       1939     26.13   32.51   –0.11      –28.06    46.48   45.47   53.98 –16.246 –17.877 –0.31
                     ltr    Long Term Return           1926     2003       1946     27.52   34.15   –1.37       –6.32    40.78   35.30   40.92 –5.460 –4.261 –0.30
                     tms    Term Spread                1920     2003       1940     24.95   31.37    7.79**      5.24    40.60   31.65   40.62 –2.441 –4.398 –0.11
                     dfy    Default Yield Spread       1926     2003       1946     27.12   34.03   –1.23       –7.22    40.18   32.63   40.48 –2.789 –3.820 –0.16
                     dfr    Default Return Spread      1920     2003       1940     27.49   34.30    3.02*      –7.81    45.22   36.17   45.54 –6.959 –9.318 –0.22
                     infl   Inflation                  1919     2003       1939     26.75   33.43   –1.20       –0.21    38.09   30.50   37.80 –1.282 –1.696 –0.20
                     cayp   Cnsmptn, Wlth, Incme       1948     2001       1968     17.17   22.57   38.17***
                     caya   Cnsmptn, Wlth, Incme       1948     2001       1968     24.43   30.91    6.42*       20.93   35.32 33.42 40.61       –0.310     0.881   0.04

                     all    Kitchen Sink               1948     2001       1968     17.46 20.53 60.21***       –21.89    65.10 56.17 67.76 –23.067 –26.276 –0.39
                     ms     Model Selection            1948     2001       1970       ——     ——      ——        –32.85    50.13 46.52 59.28 –14.353 –18.360 –0.02
                                                    Panel B: Full data, Forecasts begin in 1968



            Variable                Sample Sample Forecast             In-Sample                              Out-of-Sample
                                                                                     2
                                     Begin    End    Begin      MAE RMSE         R         Mean StdDev     MAE RMSE       ∆MAE     ∆RMSE    DM


     d/p    Dividend Price Ratio     1876    2003     1968     26.13   33.88   10.99**    –17.20   34.10   28.28   37.77 –1.596 –4.805 –0.05
     d/y    Dividend Yield           1876    2003     1968     26.31   33.15    6.00*     –12.84   33.74   26.21   35.66   0.473 –2.701 –0.03
     e/p    Earning Price Ratio      1876    2003     1968     27.39   33.73    5.71*       1.74   34.86   28.06   34.42 –1.379 –1.455 –0.04
     d/e    Dividend Payout Ratio    1876    2003     1968     26.57   32.86    0.33       –0.64   33.46   26.85   33.00 –0.173 –0.038 –0.01
     b/m    Book to Market           1921    2002     1968     32.04   38.33    6.52       12.17   46.56   40.97   47.47 –11.858 –11.266 –0.16
     ntis   Net Equity Expansion     1927    2002     1968     26.26   33.04    3.04*       7.99   34.97   28.55   35.38   0.898   1.220 0.06
     eqis   Pct Equity Issuing       1927    2002     1968     25.01   31.12   13.09**     11.35   34.16   29.13   35.53   0.316   1.066 0.03
     tbl    T-Bill Rate              1920    2003     1968     27.97   33.85    3.91*      –9.02   42.48   37.08   42.85 –7.653 –6.543 –0.07
     lty    Long Term Yield          1919    2003     1968     28.07   34.81   –0.11      –15.34   47.93   43.12   49.69 –13.732 –13.423 –0.11
     ltr    Long Term Return         1926    2003     1968     27.25   33.88   –1.37        7.37   38.19   32.10   38.37 –1.837 –1.014 –0.05
     tms    Term Spread              1920    2003     1968     24.56   30.86    7.79**     14.51   32.28   28.30   34.99   1.123   1.318 0.04
     dfy    Default Yield Spread     1926    2003     1968     26.66   33.64   –1.23        9.40   35.26   29.11   36.02   1.155   1.336 0.09
     dfr    Default Return Spread    1920    2003     1968     26.73   34.04    3.02*      11.57   35.13   29.32   36.52   0.100 –0.220 –0.03
     infl   Inflation                1919    2003     1968     27.19   34.28   –1.20       14.12   36.24   31.10   38.42 –1.717 –2.158 –0.13




31
     cayp   Cnsmptn, Wlth, Incme     1948    2001     1968     17.17   22.57   38.17***
     caya   Cnsmptn, Wlth, Incme     1948    2001     1968     24.43   30.91    6.42*     20.93    35.32 33.42 40.61      –0.310    0.881   0.04

     all    Kitchen Sink             1948    2001     1968     17.46 20.53     60.21***   –21.89   65.10 56.17 67.76 –23.067 –26.276 –0.39
     ms     Model Selection          1948    2001     1970      ——      ——      ——        –32.85   50.13 46.52 59.28 –14.353 –18.360 –0.02
                                              Panel C: Data begins in 1948, Forecasts begin in 1968



            Variable                Sample Sample Forecast            In-Sample                              Out-of-Sample
                                                                                    2
                                     Begin    End    Begin     MAE RMSE         R         Mean StdDev     MAE RMSE       ∆MAE     ∆RMSE    DM


     d/p    Dividend Price Ratio     1948    2001    1968     28.65   35.00   13.84        1.35   43.97   36.50   43.34 –3.395 –1.851 –0.01
     d/y    Dividend Yield           1948    2001    1968     28.69   34.51   14.48        2.37   41.81   34.33   41.26 –1.226    0.230 0.00
     e/p    Earning Price Ratio      1948    2001    1968     27.76   34.64    6.32       10.26   44.56   38.15   45.09 –5.046 –3.597 –0.03
     d/e    Dividend Payout Ratio    1948    2001    1968     25.00   32.69   –1.49       14.77   41.45   35.57   43.43 –2.464 –1.940 –0.14
     b/m    Book to Market           1948    2001    1968     25.06   32.15   –1.66       21.29   51.84   45.77   55.33 –12.660 –13.845 –0.10
     ntis   Net Equity Expansion     1948    2001    1968     25.75   32.93   –2.09       11.46   40.32   33.27   41.34 –0.168    0.146 0.01
     eqis   Pct Equity Issuing       1948    2001    1968     24.28   29.94    5.42       15.12   43.82   36.67   45.74 –3.564 –4.247 –0.21
     tbl    T-Bill Rate              1948    2001    1968     26.64   32.74   10.53*     –32.64   47.03   41.16   56.68 –8.054 –15.187 –0.05
     lty    Long Term Yield          1948    2001    1968     26.82   33.78    1.52      –47.86   44.92   51.64   65.19 –18.533 –23.699 –0.09
     ltr    Long Term Return         1948    2001    1968     25.11   32.49   –1.37       13.02   40.65   34.08   42.11 –0.976 –0.620 –0.13
     tms    Term Spread              1948    2001    1968     22.64   29.42   10.03**     14.69   40.76   33.83   42.75 –0.723 –1.265 –0.03
     dfy    Default Yield Spread     1948    2001    1968     25.26   32.27    0.62**     12.18   40.02   32.39   41.27   0.715   0.221 0.02
     dfr    Default Return Spread    1948    2001    1968     26.16   32.87   –1.16        8.78   46.98   38.32   47.11 –5.212 –5.622 –0.21
     infl   Inflation                1948    2001    1968     24.20   31.35    4.71**      7.21   44.77   36.64   44.69 –3.533 –3.200 –0.17
     cayp   Cnsmptn, Wlth, Incme     1948    2001    1968     17.17   22.57   38.17***




32
     caya   Cnsmptn, Wlth, Incme     1948    2001    1968     24.43   30.91    6.42*     20.93    35.32 33.42 40.61      –0.310    0.881   0.04

     all    Kitchen Sink             1948    2001    1968     17.46 20.53     60.21***   –21.89   65.10 56.17 67.76 –23.067 –26.276 –0.39
     ms     Model Selection          1948    2001    1970       ——     ——      ——        –32.85   50.13 46.52 59.28 –14.353 –18.360 –0.02

            Historical Mean          1948    2001    1968     25.55 32.81      ——        15.21    39.18 33.11 41.49        ——       ——     ——
                                            Table 4: Forecasts at Monthly Frequency with Alternative Procedures
     This table presents statistics on forecast errors (in-sample and out-of-sample) for stock return forecasts at the monthly frequency. Variables are explained in Section 2. Panel
     A uses the unadjusted betas (and is the same as Panel A of Table 1), Panel B corrects betas following Stambaugh (1999), and Panel C corrects betas following Lewellen (2004).
                           2                                               2
     All numbers, except R , are in percent per month. A star next to R in-sample denoted the significance of the regression (as measured by F -statistic). RMSE is the root mean
     square error, MAE is the mean absolute error, and ∆RMSE is the RMSE difference between the unconditional forecast and the conditional forecast for the same sample/forecast
     period (positive numbers signify superior out-of-sample conditional forecast). DM is the Diebold and Mariano (1995) t-statistic for difference in MSE of the unconditional forecast
     and the conditional forecast. One-sided critical values of DM statistic are from McCracken (1999). Significance levels at 90%, 95%, and 99% are denoted by one, two, and three
     stars, respectively.


                                                                                  Panel A: Unadjusted betas



                           Variable                   Sample      Sample       Forecast          In-Sample                          Out-of-Sample
                                                                                                              2
                                                        Begin        End         Begin    MAE RMSE        R       Mean StdDev MAE RMSE          ∆MAE ∆RMSE         DM


                    d/p    Dividend Price Ratio    1871-M02     2003-M12   1891-M02       3.53    5.05   –0.06    –0.19    5.07   3.55   5.07   –0.006   –0.013   –0.89
                    d/y    Dividend Yield          1871-M02     2003-M12   1891-M02       3.53    5.05   –0.04    –0.26    5.06   3.56   5.07   –0.015   –0.011   –1.23




33
                    e/p    Earning Price Ratio     1871-M02     2003-M12   1891-M02       3.53    5.05    0.09    –0.26    5.06   3.55   5.06   –0.012   –0.002   –0.26
                    d/e    Dividend Payout Ratio   1871-M12     2003-M12   1891-M12       3.54    5.06    0.17*   –0.04    5.08   3.55   5.08   –0.000   –0.012   –0.70
                    b/m    Book to Market          1921-M03     2003-M02   1941-M03       3.26    4.21    0.23*   –0.06    4.23   3.28   4.23   –0.033   –0.012   –0.61
                    ntis   Net Equity Expansion    1927-M01     2002-M12   1947-M01       3.23    4.21   –0.11    –0.03    4.22   3.24   4.22   –0.002   –0.002   –1.42
                    tbl    T-Bill Rate             1920-M02     2003-M12   1940-M02       3.25    4.29    0.14    –0.34    4.30   3.27   4.31    0.005    0.003    0.16
                    lty    Long Term Yield         1919-M01     2003-M12   1939-M01       3.31    4.38   –0.00    –0.38    4.39   3.33   4.41   –0.005   –0.014   –0.59
                    ltr    Long Term Return        1926-M01     2003-M12   1946-M01       3.25    4.21    0.04     0.01    4.26   3.29   4.26   –0.040   –0.029   –2.00
                    tms    Term Spread             1920-M01     2003-M12   1940-M01       3.25    4.29    0.15    –0.02    4.30   3.27   4.30    0.006    0.007    0.64**
                    dfy    Default Yield Spread    1926-M01     2003-M12   1946-M01       3.25    4.23   –0.02    –0.05    4.24   3.26   4.24   –0.007   –0.010   –1.63
                    dfr    Default Return Spread   1919-M01     2003-M12   1939-M01       3.32    4.39   –0.09    –0.08    4.40   3.33   4.40   –0.007   –0.005   –2.11
                    infl   Inflation               1919-M02     2003-M12   1939-M02       3.30    4.37   –0.02    –0.11    4.39   3.32   4.39    0.001   –0.000   –0.09
                                                    Panel B: Betas adjusted for Stambaugh correction



            Variable                  Sample      Sample    Forecast           In-Sample                         Out-of-Sample
                                                                                            2
                                        Begin        End       Begin    MAE RMSE        R       Mean StdDev MAE RMSE         ∆MAE ∆RMSE         DM


     d/p    Dividend Price Ratio    1871-M02    2003-M12   1891-M02     3.53    5.05   –0.10    –0.13   5.08   3.55   5.08   –0.009   –0.022   –1.14
     d/y    Dividend Yield          1871-M02    2003-M12   1891-M02     3.53    5.05   –0.04    –0.25   5.07   3.56   5.07   –0.015   –0.013   –1.28
     e/p    Earning Price Ratio     1871-M02    2003-M12   1891-M02     3.53    5.05    0.06    –0.24   5.06   3.55   5.06   –0.009   –0.003   –0.74
     d/e    Dividend Payout Ratio   1871-M12    2003-M12   1891-M12     3.54    5.06    0.17*   –0.03   5.09   3.55   5.09   –0.003   –0.015   –0.79
     b/m    Book to Market          1921-M03    2003-M02   1941-M03     3.26    4.21    0.20*   –0.05   4.22   3.27   4.22   –0.023   –0.007   –0.49
     ntis   Net Equity Expansion    1927-M01    2002-M12   1947-M01     3.23    4.21   –0.11    –0.03   4.22   3.24   4.22   –0.001   –0.002   –0.98
     tbl    T-Bill Rate             1920-M02    2003-M12   1940-M02     3.25    4.29    0.14    –0.35   4.30   3.27   4.31    0.004    0.001    0.07
     lty    Long Term Yield         1919-M01    2003-M12   1939-M01     3.31    4.38   –0.01    –0.40   4.40   3.33   4.41   –0.009   –0.022   –0.79
     ltr    Long Term Return        1926-M01    2003-M12   1946-M01     3.25    4.21    0.04     0.01   4.26   3.29   4.26   –0.040   –0.028   –1.99
     tms    Term Spread             1920-M01    2003-M12   1940-M01     3.25    4.29    0.15    –0.01   4.30   3.27   4.30    0.005    0.007    0.59**
     dfy    Default Yield Spread    1926-M01    2003-M12   1946-M01     3.25    4.23   –0.02    –0.05   4.24   3.26   4.24   –0.007   –0.010   –1.63
     dfr    Default Return Spread   1919-M01    2003-M12   1939-M01     3.32    4.39   –0.09    –0.03   4.40   3.33   4.39   –0.002   –0.003   –1.06
     infl   Inflation               1919-M02    2003-M12   1939-M02     3.30    4.37   –0.02    –0.11   4.39   3.32   4.39    0.001   –0.000   –0.08




                                                     Panel C: Betas adjusted for Lewellen correction




34
            Variable                  Sample      Sample    Forecast           In-Sample                         Out-of-Sample
                                                                                            2
                                       Begin        End       Begin    MAE RMSE         R       Mean StdDev MAE RMSE          ∆MAE ∆RMSE         DM


     d/p    Dividend Price Ratio    1871-M02    2003-M12   1891-M02    3.53     5.06 –0.28       0.02   5.10   3.56   5.10   –0.014   –0.044   –1.82
     d/y    Dividend Yield          1871-M02    2003-M12   1891-M02    3.53     5.05 –0.04      –0.23   5.07   3.55   5.07   –0.011   –0.011   –1.13
     e/p    Earning Price Ratio     1871-M02    2003-M12   1891-M02    3.53     5.06 –0.30      –0.21   5.07   3.55   5.07   –0.007   –0.015   –2.61
     d/e    Dividend Payout Ratio   1871-M12    2003-M12   1891-M12    3.54     5.06   0.17*    –0.03   5.08   3.55   5.08    0.001   –0.012   –0.67
     b/m    Book to Market          1921-M03    2003-M02   1941-M03    3.25     4.21 –0.32       0.01   4.22   3.25   4.22    0.001   –0.007   –1.17
     ntis   Net Equity Expansion    1927-M01    2002-M12   1947-M01    3.42     4.48 –18.82      0.42   4.45   3.41   4.46   –0.178   –0.247   –3.62
     tbl    T-Bill Rate             1920-M02    2003-M12   1940-M02    3.25     4.29   0.14     –0.35   4.30   3.27   4.31    0.004    0.001    0.07
     lty    Long Term Yield         1919-M01    2003-M12   1939-M01    3.31     4.38 –0.01      –0.35   4.39   3.33   4.40   –0.007   –0.013   –0.58
     ltr    Long Term Return        1926-M01    2003-M12   1946-M01    3.31     4.26 –1.62       0.06   4.31   3.36   4.31   –0.112   –0.083   –1.62
     tms    Term Spread             1920-M01    2003-M12   1940-M01    3.25     4.29   0.15     –0.01   4.31   3.27   4.30    0.004    0.006    0.54**
     dfy    Default Yield Spread    1926-M01    2003-M12   1946-M01    3.29     4.28 –1.18      –0.07   4.31   3.31   4.31   –0.059   –0.078   –2.48
     dfr    Default Return Spread   1919-M01    2003-M12   1939-M01    3.32     4.39 –0.17       0.07   4.40   3.32   4.39    0.004   –0.003   –0.38
     infl   Inflation               1919-M02    2003-M12   1939-M02    3.30     4.37 –0.07      –0.13   4.39   3.32   4.38    0.003    0.002    0.36*
                                               Table 5: Forecasts Using Moving Average Historical Equity Premia
                                                                                                                                                             2
     This table presents statistics on forecast errors (in-sample and out-of-sample) for stock return forecasts at 1-year frequency. All numbers, except R       , are in percent corresponding
                                                2
     to the annual frequency. A star next to R in-sample denoted the significance of the regression (as measured by F -statistic). RMSE is the root mean square error, MAE is the
     mean absolute error, and ∆RMSE is the RMSE difference between the unconditional forecast and the conditional forecast for the same sample/forecast period (positive numbers
     signify superior out-of-sample conditional forecast).


                                                                   Panel A: 5-year Moving Average vs. Prevailing Mean



                                      Variable Sample Sample Forecast               In-Sample                            Out-of-Sample
                                                                                                2
                                                    Begin    End     Begin      MAE RMSE R            Mean StdDev MAE RMSE          ∆MAE ∆RMSE         DM


                                                    1872    2003      1902      ——     —— ——           0.00     0.23 0.18     0.22 –0.018 –0.025 –0.03
                                                    1872    2003      1964      ——     —— ——           0.01     0.18 0.14     0.18 –0.008 –0.014 –0.01




35
                                                            Panel C: 10-year Moving Average Prediction vs. Prevailing Mean



                                      Variable Sample Sample Forecast               In-Sample                            Out-of-Sample
                                                                                                2
                                                    Begin    End     Begin      MAE RMSE R            Mean StdDev MAE RMSE          ∆MAE ∆RMSE         DM


                                                    1872    2003      1902      ——     —— ——           0.00     0.21 0.16     0.20 –0.001 –0.004 –0.01
                                                    1872    2003      1964      ——     —— ——           0.01     0.17 0.14     0.17 –0.001 –0.006 –0.01
                                                          Table 6: Forecasts Using Various e/p and d/p Ratios
     This table presents statistics on forecast errors (in-sample and out-of-sample) for stock return forecasts at various frequencies. Variables are explained in Section 2. All numbers,
              2                                                                            2
     except R , are in percent corresponding to the panel frequency. A star next to R in-sample denoted the significance of the regression (as measured by F -statistic). RMSE is
     the root mean square error, MAE is the mean absolute error, and ∆RMSE is the RMSE difference between the unconditional forecast and the conditional forecast for the same
     sample/forecast period (positive numbers signify superior out-of-sample conditional forecast). The gray stars are based on bootstrapped standard errors.


                                                                               Panel A: Forecasting 1 year return



                                                                           Forecast Begins 1902                                                  Forecast Begins 1964

           Variable                                       In-Sample                        Out-of-Sample                        In-Sample                        Out-of-Sample
                                                                       2                                                                     2
                                                   MAE RMSE        R             MAE RMSE      ∆MAE ∆RMSE       DM       MAE RMSE        R             MAE RMSE       ∆MAE ∆RMSE      DM


     e/p   Earning(1Y) Price Ratio                14.96   18.87   1.26          15.86   19.52 –0.242 –0.221 –0.82       12.88   15.54   1.26          13.11   15.77   –0.134 0.098 0.17
     e/p   Earning(3Y) Price Ratio                14.77   18.70   2.79**        15.34   19.28 0.278 0.026 0.07*         12.99   15.65   2.79**        13.37   15.93   –0.387 –0.062 –0.08




36
     e/p   Earning(5Y) Price Ratio                14.92   18.66   3.06**        15.53   19.24 0.083 0.068 0.17*         13.08   15.73   3.06**        13.56   16.10   –0.584 –0.231 –0.28
     e/p   Earning(10Y) Price Ratio               14.71   18.40   5.17***       15.42   18.97 0.196 0.332 0.60***       13.11   15.84   5.17***       14.00   16.61   –1.026 –0.749 –0.63

     d/p Dividend(1Y) Price Ratio                 15.02 18.79     1.57*         15.62 19.34 –0.007 –0.039 –0.11         12.96 15.57     1.57*         13.65 16.07 –0.676 –0.203 –0.24
     d/p Dividend(3Y) Price Ratio                 15.02 18.71     2.16*         15.65 19.32 –0.038 –0.014 –0.03*        13.01 15.61     2.16*         13.76 16.18 –0.785 –0.315 –0.33
     d/p Dividend(5Y) Price Ratio                 15.02 18.63     2.83**        15.76 19.22 –0.143 0.085 0.17*          13.10 15.67     2.83**        14.00 16.37 –1.020 –0.501 –0.47
     d/p Dividend(10Y) Price Ratio                15.08 18.65     2.39**        15.92 19.28 –0.307 0.026 0.05**         13.19 15.68     2.39**        14.11 16.35 –1.126 –0.484 –0.50

     d/e Dividend(1Y) Earning(1Y) Ratio           15.40 19.06 –0.78             15.95 19.55 –0.333 –0.246 –1.02         12.97 15.76 –0.78             13.22 16.00 –0.240 –0.137 –0.91
     d/e Dividend(1Y) Earning(3Y) Ratio           15.30 19.08 –0.77             15.67 19.66 –0.053 –0.356 –1.84         12.83 15.84 –0.77             12.96 16.45 0.022 –0.583 –1.50
     d/e Dividend(1Y) Earning(5Y) Ratio           15.32 19.08 –0.68             15.96 19.77 –0.340 –0.465 –1.56         12.84 15.92 –0.68             12.98 16.71 –0.005 –0.847 –1.66
     d/e Dividend(1Y) Earning(10Y) Ratio          15.09 18.84 1.45*             15.51 19.36 0.106 –0.059 –0.10          12.69 16.26 1.45*             12.66 16.91 0.321 –1.045 –1.31

     d/e Dividend(3Y) Earning(3Y) Ratio           15.40 19.06 –0.81             15.99 19.63 –0.374 –0.330 –3.08         12.94 15.75 –0.81             13.14 16.05 –0.157 –0.187 –2.31
     d/e Dividend(5Y) Earning(5Y) Ratio           15.42 19.02 –0.54             16.06 19.60 –0.440 –0.301 –1.22         13.02 15.70 –0.54             13.25 15.96 –0.273 –0.095 –0.49
     d/e Dividend(10Y) Earning(10Y) Ratio         15.28 19.08 –0.68             15.85 19.78 –0.239 –0.476 –1.94         12.76 15.85 –0.68             12.95 16.44 0.029 –0.575 –1.61

           Historical Mean                        15.32 19.01     ——            15.62 19.30       ——    ——     ——       12.89 15.70     ——            12.98 15.86       ——     ——    ——
                                                                        Panel B: Forecasting 3 year return



                                                                    Forecast Begins 1902                                                 Forecast Begins 1964

           Variable                                 In-Sample                      Out-of-Sample                         In-Sample                      Out-of-Sample
                                                                2                                                                    2
                                            MAE RMSE        R            MAE RMSE      ∆MAE ∆RMSE       DM       MAE RMSE        R            MAE RMSE       ∆MAE ∆RMSE         DM


     e/p   Earning(1Y) Price Ratio          22.52   29.76 7.16**        23.88   31.31 –0.225    0.577   0.87**   19.02   25.01 7.16**        20.46   25.86   –1.082   –0.022   –0.01
     e/p   Earning(3Y) Price Ratio          22.42   29.57 7.76**        23.72   31.16 –0.069    0.725   0.87**   18.92   25.33 7.76**        20.90   26.70   –1.532   –0.858   –0.42
     e/p   Earning(5Y) Price Ratio          22.07   29.15 9.95**        23.56   30.91 0.096     0.982   0.91**   18.97   25.76 9.95**        21.55   27.82   –2.177   –1.979   –0.76
     e/p   Earning(10Y) Price Ratio         21.51   28.42 13.37**       23.95   31.03 –0.299    0.857   0.55**   18.36   25.63 13.37**       22.06   28.92   –2.684   –3.081   –0.89

     d/p Dividend(1Y) Price Ratio           21.99 29.48     7.28**      24.38 31.54 –0.731      0.351   0.31**   18.11 24.72     7.28**      21.02 27.50 –1.645 –1.663 –0.56
     d/p Dividend(3Y) Price Ratio           22.00 29.26     8.32**      24.48 31.49 –0.826 0.402        0.31**   18.30 24.93     8.32**      21.43 27.88 –2.057 –2.039 –0.67
     d/p Dividend(5Y) Price Ratio           21.84 29.05     9.33**      24.34 31.57 –0.683 0.318 0.22**          18.36 25.02     9.33**      21.68 28.19 –2.304 –2.354 –0.76
     d/p Dividend(10Y) Price Ratio          22.28 29.33     7.25**      25.55 32.48 –1.899 –0.590 –0.40          18.64 25.12     7.25**      21.93 27.99 –2.553 –2.152 –0.80

     d/e Dividend(1Y) Earning(1Y) Ratio     23.36 31.04 –0.79           24.39 32.78 –0.739 –0.887 –2.30          19.34 25.82 –0.79           19.88 26.57 –0.510 –0.737 –2.38
     d/e Dividend(1Y) Earning(3Y) Ratio     23.35 31.03 –0.74           24.56 33.58 –0.903 –1.686 –1.43          19.28 25.68 –0.74           20.37 27.16 –0.999 –1.321 –2.61
     d/e Dividend(1Y) Earning(5Y) Ratio     23.40 31.11 –0.77           24.32 32.71 –0.670 –0.820 –1.42          19.46 26.25 –0.77           21.50 29.12 –2.124 –3.281 –2.55




37
     d/e Dividend(1Y) Earning(10Y) Ratio    23.16 30.77 1.36            24.21 32.56 –0.561 –0.673 –0.57          19.53 27.02 1.36            20.39 28.33 –1.019 –2.495 –1.90

     d/e Dividend(3Y) Earning(3Y) Ratio     23.26 30.89 –0.27           24.88 33.31 –1.222 –1.419 –1.89          19.26 25.56 –0.27           19.65 26.10 –0.272 –0.261 –1.54
     d/e Dividend(5Y) Earning(5Y) Ratio     23.36 30.87 –0.23           24.66 32.75 –1.004 –0.863 –2.11          19.28 25.41 –0.23           19.75 26.15 –0.377 –0.314 –2.18
     d/e Dividend(10Y) Earning(10Y) Ratio   23.35 31.11 –0.58           24.17 32.67 –0.515 –0.778 –1.92          19.39 26.21 –0.58           21.17 28.03 –1.799 –2.197 –2.56

           Historical Mean                  23.29 30.82     ——          23.65 31.89        ——    ——     ——       18.81 25.20     ——          19.37 25.84        ——      ——      ——
                                                                         Panel C: Forecasting 5 year return



                                                                     Forecast Begins 1902                                               Forecast Begins 1964

           Variable                                 In-Sample                        Out-of-Sample                      In-Sample                       Out-of-Sample
                                                                 2                                                                  2
                                            MAE RMSE         R             MAE RMSE       ∆MAE ∆RMSE     DM     MAE RMSE        R             MAE RMSE       ∆MAE ∆RMSE         DM


     e/p   Earning(1Y) Price Ratio          30.22   37.25 5.64*           32.70   39.91   –0.680 –0.072 –0.08   26.27   32.42 5.64*          27.16   33.34   –1.627   –1.520   –0.76
     e/p   Earning(3Y) Price Ratio          29.29   36.34 9.23**          32.73   39.71   –0.710 0.121 0.09*    26.14   33.12 9.23**         28.21   35.22   –2.672   –3.402   –1.13
     e/p   Earning(5Y) Price Ratio          27.82   35.20 14.01***        32.41   39.48   –0.398 0.354 0.21**   25.79   33.50 14.01***       28.57   36.65   –3.033   –4.824   –1.34
     e/p   Earning(10Y) Price Ratio         27.66   34.80 14.45***        33.35   40.97   –1.333 –1.140 –0.59   24.44   32.84 14.45***       28.43   37.37   –2.892   –5.546   –1.32

     d/p Dividend(1Y) Price Ratio           28.59 35.77 10.41**           33.83 40.50 –1.813 –0.663 –0.35       24.66 32.18 10.41**          29.54 38.18 –4.006 –6.358 –1.50
     d/p Dividend(3Y) Price Ratio           28.21 35.41    11.27**        33.59 40.77 –1.570 –0.935 –0.50       24.65 32.15 11.27**          29.38 37.93 –3.845 –6.112 –1.50
     d/p Dividend(5Y) Price Ratio           27.81 35.18 11.96***          33.40 41.13 –1.389 –1.291 –0.64       24.71 32.30 11.96***         29.77 38.29 –4.236 –6.462 –1.60
     d/p Dividend(10Y) Price Ratio          28.90 36.11 7.47**            35.41 43.60 –3.400 –3.764 –1.72       25.25 32.22 7.47**           29.24 37.09 –3.709 –5.271 –1.44

     d/e Dividend(1Y) Earning(1Y) Ratio     30.38 38.17     0.00          33.82 41.88 –1.807 –2.046 –2.04       25.66 31.92     0.00         25.77 31.82 –0.233 –0.001 –0.00
     d/e Dividend(1Y) Earning(3Y) Ratio     30.60 38.42 –0.63             35.80 44.27 –3.780 –4.438 –2.29       25.75 31.92 –0.63            26.45 32.75 –0.913 –0.923 –3.03
     d/e Dividend(1Y) Earning(5Y) Ratio     30.59 38.55 –0.32             33.12 41.36 –1.102 –1.529 –1.94       26.41 33.10 –0.32            28.11 35.38 –2.578 –3.556 –2.96




38
     d/e Dividend(1Y) Earning(10Y) Ratio    30.36 38.38 –0.15             33.15 41.96 –1.134 –2.129 –1.98       25.96 32.69 –0.15            25.88 32.81 –0.347 –0.985 –1.76

     d/e Dividend(3Y) Earning(3Y) Ratio     30.46 38.20 –0.12             34.47 42.71 –2.452 –2.879 –2.69       25.70 31.75 –0.12            26.04 31.94 –0.499 –0.120 –0.29
     d/e Dividend(5Y) Earning(5Y) Ratio     30.63 38.45 –0.76             34.46 42.46 –2.443 –2.623 –3.60       25.81 32.12 –0.76            26.50 32.81 –0.967 –0.986 –3.61
     d/e Dividend(10Y) Earning(10Y) Ratio   30.62 38.59 –0.35             34.96 43.17 –2.943 –3.339 –3.92       26.07 32.61 –0.35            27.65 34.55 –2.116 –2.731 –3.13

           Historical Mean                  30.14 37.98     ——            32.01 39.83       ——    ——     ——     24.30 30.66     ——           25.54 31.82       ——       ——      ——
                                                                        Panel D: Forecasting 10 year return



                                                                      Forecast Begins 1902                                                    Forecast Begins 1964

           Variable                                 In-Sample                         Out-of-Sample                         In-Sample                         Out-of-Sample
                                                                  2                                                                       2
                                            MAE RMSE          R            MAE RMSE       ∆MAE     ∆RMSE      DM    MAE RMSE          R             MAE RMSE     ∆MAE ∆RMSE       DM


     e/p   Earning(1Y) Price Ratio          38.34   44.27   17.55***      48.50   59.36   –4.961   –5.059   –1.51   40.47   45.04   17.55***       37.94   44.12 –0.476   1.627   0.57
     e/p   Earning(3Y) Price Ratio          37.23   43.92   17.92***      47.37   58.40   –3.835   –4.095   –1.45   38.66   43.52   17.92***       36.48   42.90 0.985    2.847   0.96
     e/p   Earning(5Y) Price Ratio          37.15   44.15   16.73***      46.03   56.96   –2.496   –2.656   –1.15   36.58   42.62   16.73***       35.10   42.36 2.364    3.380   1.10
     e/p   Earning(10Y) Price Ratio         36.86   44.60   14.44***      45.40   55.75   –1.868   –1.452   –0.88   35.39   41.68   14.44***       35.17   42.95 2.300    2.792   0.82

     d/p Dividend(1Y) Price Ratio           37.38 44.55 13.36**           45.30 55.29     –1.768   –0.990 –0.51     35.92 43.04 13.36**            36.47 45.00    0.997   0.748   0.18
     d/p Dividend(3Y) Price Ratio           37.64 45.19     10.75**       45.32 55.75     –1.782   –1.448 –0.82     36.33 43.79 10.75**            37.21 46.01 0.258 –0.265 –0.07
     d/p Dividend(5Y) Price Ratio           38.02 45.58      9.43**       45.57 55.76     –2.032   –1.463 –0.89     37.01 44.39 9.43**             38.49 47.02 –1.023 –1.273 –0.33
     d/p Dividend(10Y) Price Ratio          38.22 45.94      8.08*        47.29 57.97     –3.752   –3.667 –1.78     38.33 45.31 8.08*              42.72 50.67 –5.248 –4.924 –1.14

     d/e Dividend(1Y) Earning(1Y) Ratio     41.49 49.47      0.64         47.41 58.11     –3.874   –3.808 –3.68     40.16 48.25      0.64          41.15 50.20 –3.686 –4.453 –2.70
     d/e Dividend(1Y) Earning(3Y) Ratio     40.97 49.42 1.18              50.03 59.99     –6.492   –5.691 –4.29     39.98 48.20 1.18               43.07 52.35 –5.607 –6.605 –3.01
     d/e Dividend(1Y) Earning(5Y) Ratio     40.71 49.57 0.30              47.33 58.50     –3.800   –4.199 –2.99     39.45 47.76 0.30               41.12 49.87 –3.656 –4.123 –2.62




39
     d/e Dividend(1Y) Earning(10Y) Ratio    41.00 49.60 –0.84             44.95 56.74     –1.420   –2.443 –2.40     39.42 47.50 –0.84              38.42 46.99 –0.949 –1.243 –2.47

     d/e Dividend(3Y) Earning(3Y) Ratio     41.40 49.49      0.88         48.66 58.95     –5.125   –4.649 –4.67     39.79 47.88      0.88          41.71 50.74 –4.242 –4.995 –2.88
     d/e Dividend(5Y) Earning(5Y) Ratio     41.30 49.64 0.38              49.28 60.11 –5.750 –5.811 –5.56           39.33 47.56 0.38               42.11 50.90 –4.639 –5.160 –3.38
     d/e Dividend(10Y) Earning(10Y) Ratio   41.18 49.70 –0.67             62.50 74.08 –18.970 –19.780 –4.21         38.97 47.30 –0.67              45.32 53.37 –7.856 –7.623 –8.00

           Historical Mean                  38.62 47.71      ——           43.53 54.30        ——       ——     ——     35.70 43.87      ——            37.47 45.74       ——    ——     ——
                                                                 Table 7: Forecasts at Quarterly Frequency
     This table presents statistics on forecast errors (in-sample and out-of-sample) for stock return forecasts at the quarterly frequency (both in the forecasting equation and forecast).
     Variables are explained in Section 2. Panel A uses the full sample period for each variable and constructs first forecast 20 years after the first data observation. Panel B uses the
     full sample period for each variable and constructs first forecast in January 1964. Panel C uses only the sample period October 1951 to June 2003 and constructs first forecast
                                             2                                                  2
     in January 1964. All numbers, except R , are in percent per quarter. A star next to R in-sample denotes significance of the in-sample regression (as measured by F -statistic).
     Mean and standard deviation are on out-of-sample forecast errors; RMSE is the root mean square error, MAE is the mean absolute error. Most important to us, ∆RMSE is the RMSE
     difference between the unconditional forecast and the conditional forecast for the same sample/forecast period (positive numbers signify superior out-of-sample conditional
     forecast). DM is the Diebold and Mariano (1995) t-statistic for difference in MSE of the unconditional forecast and the conditional forecast. One-sided critical values of DM
     statistic are from McCracken (1999). Significance levels at 90%, 95%, and 99% are denoted by one, two, and three stars, respectively.


                                                         Panel A: Full data, Forecasts begin 20 years after the first sample date



                              Variable                  Sample    Sample Forecast                   In-Sample                           Out-of-Sample
                                                                                                                  2
                                                         Begin        End      Begin     MAE RMSE             R        Mean StdDev MAE RMSE         ∆MAE ∆RMSE         DM


                       d/p    Dividend Price Ratio    1871-Q2    2003-Q4    1891-Q1      6.84        9.78   –0.12      –0.81   9.89   6.97   9.91   –0.077   –0.085   –1.02




40
                       d/y    Dividend Yield          1871-Q2    2003-Q4    1891-Q2      6.84        9.79   –0.13      –0.77   9.87   6.97   9.89   –0.076   –0.053   –1.60
                       e/p    Earning Price Ratio     1871-Q2    2003-Q4    1891-Q2      6.85        9.77    0.40*     –0.82   9.82   6.96   9.84   –0.063   –0.004   –0.11
                       d/e    Dividend Payout Ratio   1871-Q4    2003-Q4    1891-Q4      6.83        9.82    0.22      –0.18   9.93   6.91   9.92   –0.001   –0.077   –0.82
                       b/m    Book to Market          1921-Q1    2003-Q4    1941-Q1      6.01        7.85    1.12**    –0.31   8.02   6.18   8.01   –0.214   –0.169   –1.21
                       ntis   Net Equity Expansion    1927-Q1    2003-Q4    1947-Q1      5.99        7.82    3.55***   –0.74   7.91   6.09   7.92   –0.135   –0.114   –1.44
                       tbl    T-Bill Rate             1921-Q1    2003-Q4    1941-Q1      5.89        7.75    0.11      –0.84   7.82   6.02   7.85   –0.050   –0.016   –0.17
                       lty    Long Term Yield         1919-Q1    2003-Q4    1939-Q1      6.06        7.97   –0.13      –1.07   8.05   6.19   8.10   –0.104   –0.092   –0.71
                       ltr    Long Term Return        1926-Q1    2003-Q4    1946-Q1      5.86        7.77    0.36       0.02   7.87   5.91   7.85    0.062    0.019    0.29*
                       tms    Term Spread             1921-Q1    2003-Q4    1941-Q1      5.89        7.75    0.11       0.07   7.85   5.93   7.84    0.038    0.003    0.05
                       dfy    Default Yield Spread    1926-Q1    2003-Q4    1946-Q1      5.95        7.88   –0.21      –0.03   8.12   6.12   8.10   –0.144   –0.228   –2.65
                       dfr    Default Return Spread   1919-Q1    2003-Q4    1939-Q1      6.10        7.99   –0.20      –0.51   8.08   6.17   8.08   –0.087   –0.067   –2.32
                       infl   Inflation               1919-Q2    2003-Q4    1939-Q2      6.02        7.89   –0.17      –0.43   7.95   6.06   7.95   –0.019   –0.003   –0.19
                       cayp   Cnsmptn, Wlth, Incme    1951-Q4    2003-Q2    1971-Q4      6.13        8.14    8.48***
                       caya   Cnsmptn, Wlth, Incme    1951-Q4    2003-Q2    1971-Q4      6.34        8.42    3.41***   0.89    8.67 6.41     8.68   0.062 –0.109 –0.36

                       all    Kitchen Sink            1951-Q4 2003-Q2 1971-Q4            6.01        7.95    8.62***   –0.35   8.78 6.63     8.75 –0.158 –0.176 –0.62
                       ms     Model Selection         1951-Q4 2003-Q2 1971-Q4            ——          ——      ——        –0.73   8.87 6.70     8.86 –0.221 –0.287 –0.01
                                                   Panel B: Full data, Forecasts begin in 1964-Q1



            Variable                 Sample    Sample Forecast            In-Sample                           Out-of-Sample
                                                                                        2
                                      Begin      End      Begin    MAE RMSE         R        Mean StdDev MAE RMSE         ∆MAE ∆RMSE          DM


     d/p    Dividend Price Ratio    1871-Q2   2003-Q4   1964-Q1    6.30    8.23   –0.12      –0.64   8.28   6.38   8.28   –0.103   –0.032   –0.80
     d/y    Dividend Yield          1871-Q2   2003-Q4   1964-Q1    6.30    8.23   –0.13      –0.63   8.28   6.39   8.28   –0.113   –0.032   –0.76
     e/p    Earning Price Ratio     1871-Q2   2003-Q4   1964-Q1    6.34    8.25    0.40*     –0.62   8.31   6.42   8.30   –0.137   –0.061   –0.65
     d/e    Dividend Payout Ratio   1871-Q4   2003-Q4   1964-Q1    6.21    8.26    0.22       0.47   8.32   6.26   8.31    0.023   –0.066   –0.97
     b/m    Book to Market          1921-Q1   2003-Q4   1964-Q1    6.37    8.37    1.12**    –0.03   8.63   6.63   8.60   –0.404   –0.334   –1.79
     ntis   Net Equity Expansion    1927-Q1   2003-Q4   1964-Q1    6.13    8.15    3.55***    0.04   8.20   6.16   8.17    0.075    0.092    1.14**
     tbl    T-Bill Rate             1921-Q1   2003-Q4   1964-Q1    6.19    8.19    0.11      –0.59   8.28   6.28   8.28   –0.058   –0.010   –0.07
     lty    Long Term Yield         1919-Q1   2003-Q4   1964-Q1    6.24    8.23   –0.13      –1.23   8.31   6.37   8.38   –0.144   –0.119   –0.61
     ltr    Long Term Return        1926-Q1   2003-Q4   1964-Q1    6.08    8.14    0.36       0.50   8.24   6.16   8.23    0.074    0.034    0.37
     tms    Term Spread             1921-Q1   2003-Q4   1964-Q1    6.10    8.16    0.11       0.75   8.24   6.16   8.25    0.067    0.023    0.27
     dfy    Default Yield Spread    1926-Q1   2003-Q4   1964-Q1    6.20    8.28   –0.21       0.37   8.46   6.32   8.44   –0.081   –0.179   –1.81
     dfr    Default Return Spread   1919-Q1   2003-Q4   1964-Q1    6.22    8.22   –0.20       0.22   8.28   6.25   8.25   –0.021    0.007    0.37
     infl   Inflation               1919-Q2   2003-Q4   1964-Q1    6.20    8.21   –0.17       0.16   8.27   6.24   8.25   –0.008    0.012    0.49*
     cayp   Cnsmptn, Wlth, Incme    1951-Q4   2003-Q2   1964-Q1    5.89    7.92    8.48***




41
     caya   Cnsmptn, Wlth, Incme    1951-Q4   2003-Q2   1964-Q1    6.18    8.22    0.38      0.79    8.43 6.17     8.44   0.094 –0.127 –0.49

     all    Kitchen Sink            1951-Q4 2003-Q2 1964-Q1        5.73    7.69    7.90***   –0.28   8.66 6.47     8.63 –0.207 –0.316 –1.23
     ms     Model Selection         1951-Q4 2003-Q2 1964-Q1        ——      ——      ——        –0.72   8.70 6.50     8.70 –0.233 –0.384 –0.01
                                          Panel C: Data begins in 1951-Q4, Forecasts begin in 1964-Q1



            Variable                 Sample    Sample Forecast           In-Sample                          Out-of-Sample
                                                                                     2
                                      Begin      End      Begin   MAE RMSE       R         Mean StdDev MAE RMSE         ∆MAE ∆RMSE         DM


     d/p    Dividend Price Ratio    1951-Q4   2003-Q2   1964-Q1   6.23    8.23 0.65         0.18   8.38   6.37   8.35   –0.101   –0.037   –0.34
     d/y    Dividend Yield          1951-Q4   2003-Q2   1964-Q1   6.23    8.22 0.94*        0.07   8.39   6.43   8.36   –0.162   –0.044   –0.31
     e/p    Earning Price Ratio     1951-Q4   2003-Q2   1964-Q1   6.23    8.24 0.15         0.46   8.40   6.34   8.39   –0.072   –0.070   –0.95
     d/e    Dividend Payout Ratio   1951-Q4   2003-Q2   1964-Q1   6.23    8.25 –0.15       –0.27   8.43   6.44   8.41   –0.176   –0.094   –0.41
     b/m    Book to Market          1951-Q4   2003-Q2   1964-Q1   6.22    8.25 –0.44        0.71   8.49   6.38   8.49   –0.111   –0.176   –1.75
     ntis   Net Equity Expansion    1951-Q4   2003-Q2   1964-Q1   6.11    8.17 0.44         0.56   8.36   6.31   8.35   –0.042   –0.031   –0.42
     tbl    T-Bill Rate             1951-Q4   2003-Q2   1964-Q1   6.17    8.22 1.44**      –1.57   8.39   6.41   8.51   –0.150   –0.188   –0.61
     lty    Long Term Yield         1951-Q4   2003-Q2   1964-Q1   6.23    8.25 0.06        –1.31   8.40   6.39   8.48   –0.125   –0.161   –0.61
     ltr    Long Term Return        1951-Q4   2003-Q2   1964-Q1   6.08    8.13 1.72**       0.73   8.29   6.20   8.30    0.060    0.018    0.15
     tms    Term Spread             1951-Q4   2003-Q2   1964-Q1   6.10    8.18 1.45**       1.03   8.42   6.24   8.46    0.028   –0.143   –0.57
     dfy    Default Yield Spread    1951-Q4   2003-Q2   1964-Q1   6.23    8.23 0.11         0.44   8.39   6.32   8.37   –0.054   –0.053   –0.50
     dfr    Default Return Spread   1951-Q4   2003-Q2   1964-Q1   6.21    8.23 –0.34        0.98   8.40   6.33   8.43   –0.062   –0.109   –0.94
     infl   Inflation               1951-Q4   2003-Q2   1964-Q1   6.18    8.20 1.51**      –0.40   8.37   6.28   8.35   –0.013   –0.033   –0.13
     cayp   Cnsmptn, Wlth, Incme    1951-Q4   2003-Q2   1964-Q1   5.89    7.92 8.48***
     caya   Cnsmptn, Wlth, Incme    1951-Q4   2003-Q2   1964-Q1   6.18    8.22 0.38        0.79    8.43 6.17     8.44   0.094 –0.127 –0.49




42
     all    Kitchen Sink            1951-Q4 2003-Q2 1964-Q1       5.73    7.69   7.90***   –0.28   8.66 6.47     8.63 –0.207 –0.316 –1.23
     ms     Model Selection         1951-Q4 2003-Q2 1964-Q1       ——      ——     ——        –0.72   8.70 6.50     8.70 –0.233 –0.384 –0.01

            Historical Mean         1951-Q4 2003-Q2 1964-Q1       6.21    8.25   ——        0.54    8.33 6.27     8.32     ——       ——      ——
                                                                   Table 8: Forecasts at 3-year Frequency
     This table presents statistics on forecast errors (in-sample and out-of-sample) for stock return forecasts at the 3-year frequency (both in the forecasting equation and forecast).
     These are overlapping series. Variables are explained in Section 2. Panel A uses the full sample period for each variable and constructs first forecast 20 years after the first data
     observation. Panel B uses the full sample period for each variable and constructs first forecast in 1968. Panel C uses only the sample period 1948 to 2001 and constructs first
                                              2                                              2
     forecast in 1968. All numbers, except R , are in percent per 3-year. A star next to R in-sample denotes significance of the in-sample regression (as measured by F -statistic).
     Mean and standard deviation are on out-of-sample forecast errors; RMSE is the root mean square error, MAE is the mean absolute error. Most important to us, ∆RMSE is the RMSE
     difference between the unconditional forecast and the conditional forecast for the same sample/forecast period (positive numbers signify superior out-of-sample conditional
     forecast). The gray stars on ∆RMSE are based on bootstrapped standard errors. Significance levels at 90%, 95%, and 99% are denoted by one, two, and three stars, respectively.


                                                         Panel A: Full data, Forecasts begin 20 years after the first sample date



                            Variable                 Sample Sample Forecast                 In-Sample                               Out-of-Sample
                                                                                                          2
                                                       Begin      End     Begin      MAE RMSE         R          Mean StdDev      MAE RMSE        ∆MAE ∆RMSE          DM


                     d/p    Dividend Price Ratio       1874     2003       1894     21.89   28.96    5.78**      –9.16    30.01   24.35   31.25   –0.619    0.198    0.03*
                     d/y    Dividend Yield             1874     2003       1894     22.22   29.15    4.68*       –9.16    30.34   24.69   31.56   –0.962   –0.109   –0.02




43
                     e/p    Earning Price Ratio        1874     2003       1894     22.33   29.19    6.44**      –5.46    30.72   24.11   31.06   –0.383    0.389    0.09**
                     d/e    Dividend Payout Ratio      1874     2003       1894     22.90   30.29   –0.78        –4.38    31.83   24.29   31.99   –0.565   –0.540   –0.51
                     b/m    Book to Market             1921     2003       1941     20.60   26.48    8.09*        1.38    30.09   23.65   29.88   –2.197   –2.076   –0.14
                     ntis   Net Equity Expansion       1927     2003       1947     19.93   26.53    1.33*       –4.75    29.19   22.17   29.32   –1.727   –2.393   –0.27
                     eqis   Pct Equity Issuing         1927     2002       1947     21.02   26.96   15.65*       –1.71    28.98   22.30   28.77   –2.185   –2.096   –0.23
                     tbl    T-Bill Rate                1920     2003       1940     19.37   25.41    2.15*       –4.97    28.11   22.66   28.33   –1.496   –0.744   –0.11
                     lty    Long Term Yield            1919     2003       1939     20.40   26.34   –0.12        –9.79    29.10   24.41   30.49   –3.068   –2.809   –0.27
                     ltr    Long Term Return           1926     2003       1946     19.89   26.27   –1.14        –2.24    29.07   22.52   28.90   –2.058   –2.046   –0.42
                     tms    Term Spread                1920     2003       1940     19.22   26.20    2.85*        2.32    29.23   21.55   29.09   –0.385   –1.508   –0.21
                     dfy    Default Yield Spread       1926     2003       1946     19.94   26.25   –1.35        –1.61    27.91   21.31   27.72   –0.847   –0.863   –0.25
                     dfr    Default Return Spread      1920     2003       1940     20.53   26.81    0.18        –2.23    30.70   23.60   30.54   –2.438   –2.953   –0.49
                     infl   Inflation                  1919     2003       1939     20.64   26.85   –1.22         2.05    28.55   21.68   28.40   –0.331   –0.725   –0.31
                     cayp   Cnsmptn, Wlth, Incme       1948     2001       1968     12.50   16.23   44.46***
                     caya   Cnsmptn, Wlth, Incme       1948     2001       1968     17.68   23.07   10.24***     12.50    26.34 23.70 28.80 –2.698 –1.454 –0.18

                     all    Kitchen Sink               1948     2001       1968     13.05 16.74 43.12***        –11.45    30.71 25.56 32.35 –4.556 –4.997 –0.17
                     ms     Model Selection            1948     2001       1968       ——     ——      ——          –3.74    29.93 21.59 29.72 –0.590 –2.373 –0.01
                                                    Panel B: Full data, Forecasts begin in 1968



            Variable                Sample Sample Forecast              In-Sample                             Out-of-Sample
                                                                                      2
                                     Begin    End     Begin      MAE RMSE         R         Mean StdDev     MAE RMSE        ∆MAE ∆RMSE         DM


     d/p    Dividend Price Ratio     1874    2003      1968     20.02   26.08    5.78**     –7.03   27.15   21.06   27.67   –0.676   –0.833   –0.04
     d/y    Dividend Yield           1874    2003      1968     20.20   26.27    4.68*      –6.13   27.43   21.75   27.73   –1.366   –0.893   –0.05
     e/p    Earning Price Ratio      1874    2003      1968     20.80   26.35    6.44**      1.50   26.95   21.23   26.62   –0.849    0.223    0.02
     d/e    Dividend Payout Ratio    1874    2003      1968     20.67   27.17   –0.78        3.95   27.80   20.91   27.70   –0.532   –0.857   –0.34
     b/m    Book to Market           1921    2003      1968     24.24   30.46    8.09*       8.59   35.36   30.06   35.91   –8.471   –7.182   –0.37
     ntis   Net Equity Expansion     1927    2003      1968     19.63   27.00    1.33*       4.94   27.38   20.09   27.44    1.429    1.153    0.26
     eqis   Pct Equity Issuing       1927    2002      1968     20.69   27.59   15.65*       6.80   28.77   22.20   29.16   –1.167   –0.899   –0.07
     tbl    T-Bill Rate              1920    2003      1968     21.16   27.93    2.15*      –3.68   29.58   23.93   29.40   –2.422   –0.776   –0.08
     lty    Long Term Yield          1919    2003      1968     21.46   28.14   –0.12       –6.05   30.95   25.87   31.11   –4.474   –2.614   –0.19
     ltr    Long Term Return         1926    2003      1968     20.31   27.36   –1.14        6.25   28.55   21.99   28.83   –0.328   –0.056   –0.02
     tms    Term Spread              1920    2003      1968     19.30   27.47    2.85*       9.64   27.38   20.19   28.67    1.312   –0.044   –0.01
     dfy    Default Yield Spread     1926    2003      1968     20.55   27.51   –1.35        6.60   27.91   21.37   28.31    0.292    0.474    0.20
     dfr    Default Return Spread    1920    2003      1968     20.84   27.90    0.18        8.49   27.97   21.70   28.86   –0.199   –0.233   –0.13
     infl   Inflation                1919    2003      1968     20.62   27.95   –1.22        9.62   28.05   22.11   29.28   –0.716   –0.785   –0.42




44
     cayp   Cnsmptn, Wlth, Incme     1948    2001      1968     12.50   16.23   44.46***
     caya   Cnsmptn, Wlth, Incme     1948    2001      1968     17.68   23.07   10.24***   12.50    26.34 23.70 28.80 –2.698 –1.454 –0.18

     all    Kitchen Sink             1948    2001      1968     13.05 16.74     43.12***   –11.45   30.71 25.56 32.35 –4.556 –4.997 –0.17
     ms     Model Selection          1948    2001      1968      ——      ——      ——         –3.74   29.93 21.59 29.72 –0.590 –2.373 –0.01
                                             Panel C: Data begins in 1948, Forecasts begin in 1968



            Variable                Sample Sample Forecast            In-Sample                             Out-of-Sample
                                                                                    2
                                     Begin    End    Begin     MAE RMSE         R         Mean StdDev     MAE RMSE        ∆MAE ∆RMSE         DM


     d/p    Dividend Price Ratio     1948    2001    1968     19.35   25.74    8.72        0.14   31.24   24.63   30.78   –3.629   –3.432   –0.13
     d/y    Dividend Yield           1948    2001    1968     19.61   25.65    5.12        2.21   29.16   22.58   28.82   –1.577   –1.466   –0.09
     e/p    Earning Price Ratio      1948    2001    1968     19.50   25.39    7.24        6.40   29.53   25.25   29.79   –4.249   –2.441   –0.15
     d/e    Dividend Payout Ratio    1948    2001    1968     18.75   24.90   –1.99        7.77   27.95   21.64   28.62   –0.631   –1.266   –0.48
     b/m    Book to Market           1948    2001    1968     18.50   24.62   –1.77       12.72   33.48   28.51   35.35   –7.503   –7.998   –0.36
     ntis   Net Equity Expansion     1948    2001    1968     17.76   24.59   –0.60        8.03   27.01   20.91   27.79    0.095   –0.442   –0.28
     eqis   Pct Equity Issuing       1948    2001    1968     18.48   24.11    1.30        8.93   29.59   23.70   30.49   –2.696   –3.140   –0.42
     tbl    T-Bill Rate              1948    2001    1968     18.69   25.24    6.51**    –13.59   28.88   24.87   31.53   –3.861   –4.180   –0.17
     lty    Long Term Yield          1948    2001    1968     19.56   25.52    2.65      –22.10   27.30   29.28   34.81   –8.278   –7.457   –0.26
     ltr    Long Term Return         1948    2001    1968     18.70   24.94   –2.04        6.76   29.90   23.11   30.22   –2.103   –2.875   –0.33
     tms    Term Spread              1948    2001    1968     17.36   24.37    0.70*       8.27   29.09   21.86   29.83   –0.857   –2.481   –0.22
     dfy    Default Yield Spread     1948    2001    1968     18.43   24.67   –1.03        7.41   27.19   21.30   27.79   –0.298   –0.443   –0.25
     dfr    Default Return Spread    1948    2001    1968     19.04   24.66    1.43        3.38   30.82   24.27   30.55   –3.269   –3.201   –0.45
     infl   Inflation                1948    2001    1968     17.57   24.49    3.82**      3.36   27.48   20.18   27.28    0.821    0.074    0.03
     cayp   Cnsmptn, Wlth, Incme     1948    2001    1968     12.50   16.23   44.46***




45
     caya   Cnsmptn, Wlth, Incme     1948    2001    1968     17.68   23.07   10.24***   12.50    26.34 23.70 28.80 –2.698 –1.454 –0.18

     all    Kitchen Sink             1948    2001    1968     13.05 16.74     43.12***   –11.45   30.71 25.56 32.35 –4.556 –4.997 –0.17
     ms     Model Selection          1948    2001    1968       ——     ——      ——         –3.74   29.93 21.59 29.72 –0.590 –2.373 –0.01

            Historical Mean          1948    2001    1968     18.28 24.20      ——          7.19   26.78 21.00 27.35         ——       ——      ——
                                                                                                          (Stock Related Variables I)




                Panel A                                      Panel B                                        Panel C
0.2




                                       0.2




                                                                                       0.2
          dp                                         dp                                              dp
0.1




                                       0.1




                                                                                       0.1
0.0




                                       0.0




                                                                                       0.0
−0.1




                                       −0.1




                                                                                       −0.1
−0.2




                                       −0.2




                                                                                       −0.2
       1900 1920 1940 1960 1980 2000          1960        1970    1980   1990   2000          1960        1970      1980       1990     2000
0.2




                                       0.2




                                                                                       0.2
          dy                                         dy                                              dy
0.1




                                       0.1




                                                                                       0.1
0.0




                                       0.0




                                                                                       0.0
−0.1




                                       −0.1




                                                                                       −0.1
−0.2




                                       −0.2




                                                                                       −0.2




       1900 1920 1940 1960 1980 2000          1960        1970    1980   1990   2000          1960        1970      1980       1990     2000
0.2




                                       0.2




                                                                                       0.2




          ep                                         ep                                              ep
0.1




                                       0.1




                                                                                       0.1
0.0




                                       0.0




                                                                                       0.0
−0.1




                                       −0.1




                                                                                       −0.1
−0.2




                                       −0.2




                                                                                       −0.2




       1900 1920 1940 1960 1980 2000          1960        1970    1980   1990   2000          1960        1970      1980       1990     2000
0.2




                                       0.2




                                                                                       0.2




          de                                         de                                              de
0.1




                                       0.1




                                                                                       0.1
0.0




                                       0.0




                                                                                       0.0
−0.1




                                       −0.1




                                                                                       −0.1
−0.2




                                       −0.2




                                                                                       −0.2




       1900 1920 1940 1960 1980 2000          1960        1970    1980   1990   2000          1960        1970      1980       1990     2000




                                                                 46
                                                                                                      (Stock Related Variables II)




                Panel A                                      Panel B                                       Panel C
0.2




                                       0.2




                                                                                       0.2
         bm                                          bm                                              bm
0.1




                                       0.1




                                                                                       0.1
0.0




                                       0.0




                                                                                       0.0
−0.1




                                       −0.1




                                                                                       −0.1
−0.2




                                       −0.2




                                                                                       −0.2
       1900 1920 1940 1960 1980 2000          1960        1970    1980   1990   2000          1960        1970   1980       1990     2000
0.2




                                       0.2




                                                                                       0.2
         ntis                                    ntis                                            ntis
0.1




                                       0.1




                                                                                       0.1
0.0




                                       0.0




                                                                                       0.0
−0.1




                                       −0.1




                                                                                       −0.1
−0.2




                                       −0.2




                                                                                       −0.2




       1900 1920 1940 1960 1980 2000          1960        1970    1980   1990   2000          1960        1970   1980       1990     2000
0.2




                                       0.2




                                                                                       0.2




         eqis                                    eqis                                            eqis
0.1




                                       0.1




                                                                                       0.1
0.0




                                       0.0




                                                                                       0.0
−0.1




                                       −0.1




                                                                                       −0.1
−0.2




                                       −0.2




                                                                                       −0.2




       1900 1920 1940 1960 1980 2000          1960        1970    1980   1990   2000          1960        1970   1980       1990     2000




                                                                 47
                                                                                                       (Interest Related Variables I)




                Panel A                                       Panel B                                        Panel C
0.2




                                       0.2




                                                                                        0.2
          tb                                         tb                                               tb
0.1




                                       0.1




                                                                                        0.1
0.0




                                       0.0




                                                                                        0.0
−0.1




                                       −0.1




                                                                                        −0.1
−0.2




                                       −0.2




                                                                                        −0.2
       1900 1920 1940 1960 1980 2000          1960         1970    1980   1990   2000          1960         1970    1980       1990     2000
0.2




                                       0.2




                                                                                        0.2
          lty                                        lty                                              lty
0.1




                                       0.1




                                                                                        0.1
0.0




                                       0.0




                                                                                        0.0
−0.1




                                       −0.1




                                                                                        −0.1
−0.2




                                       −0.2




                                                                                        −0.2

       1900 1920 1940 1960 1980 2000          1960         1970    1980   1990   2000          1960         1970    1980       1990     2000
0.2




                                       0.2




                                                                                        0.2




          ltr                                        ltr                                              ltr
0.1




                                       0.1




                                                                                        0.1
0.0




                                       0.0




                                                                                        0.0
−0.1




                                       −0.1




                                                                                        −0.1
−0.2




                                       −0.2




                                                                                        −0.2




       1900 1920 1940 1960 1980 2000          1960         1970    1980   1990   2000          1960         1970    1980       1990     2000
0.2




                                       0.2




                                                                                        0.2




         tms                                     tms                                              tms
0.1




                                       0.1




                                                                                        0.1
0.0




                                       0.0




                                                                                        0.0
−0.1




                                       −0.1




                                                                                        −0.1
−0.2




                                       −0.2




                                                                                        −0.2




       1900 1920 1940 1960 1980 2000          1960         1970    1980   1990   2000          1960         1970    1980       1990     2000




                                                                  48
                                                                                                        (Interest Related Variables II)




                Panel A                                        Panel B                                         Panel C
0.2




                                       0.2




                                                                                         0.2
         dfy                                         dfy                                               dfy
0.1




                                       0.1




                                                                                         0.1
0.0




                                       0.0




                                                                                         0.0
−0.1




                                       −0.1




                                                                                         −0.1
−0.2




                                       −0.2




                                                                                         −0.2
       1900 1920 1940 1960 1980 2000          1960          1970    1980   1990   2000          1960          1970    1980       1990     2000
0.2




                                       0.2




                                                                                         0.2
         dfs                                         dfs                                               dfs
0.1




                                       0.1




                                                                                         0.1
0.0




                                       0.0




                                                                                         0.0
−0.1




                                       −0.1




                                                                                         −0.1
−0.2




                                       −0.2




                                                                                         −0.2

       1900 1920 1940 1960 1980 2000          1960          1970    1980   1990   2000          1960          1970    1980       1990     2000
0.2




                                       0.2




                                                                                         0.2




         infl                                        infl                                              infl
0.1




                                       0.1




                                                                                         0.1
0.0




                                       0.0




                                                                                         0.0
−0.1




                                       −0.1




                                                                                         −0.1
−0.2




                                       −0.2




                                                                                         −0.2




       1900 1920 1940 1960 1980 2000          1960          1970    1980   1990   2000          1960          1970    1980       1990     2000




                                                                   49
                                                                                                  (Macroeconomic and All Variables)




                 Panel A                                         Panel B                                        Panel C
0.2




                                          0.2




                                                                                           0.2
         caya                                       caya                                             caya
0.1




                                          0.1




                                                                                           0.1
0.0




                                          0.0




                                                                                           0.0
−0.1




                                          −0.1




                                                                                           −0.1
−0.2




                                          −0.2




                                                                                           −0.2
       1900 1920 1940 1960 1980 2000             1960         1970    1980   1990   2000          1960         1970   1980   1990     2000
0.2




                                          0.2




                                                                                           0.2
          ms                                            ms                                               ms
0.1




                                          0.1




                                                                                           0.1
0.0




                                          0.0




                                                                                           0.0
−0.1




                                          −0.1




                                                                                           −0.1
−0.2




                                          −0.2




                                                                                           −0.2
−0.3




                                          −0.3




                                                                                           −0.3




       1900 1920 1940 1960 1980 2000             1960         1970    1980   1990   2000          1960         1970   1980   1990     2000




           all                                          all                                              all
0.1




                                          0.1




                                                                                           0.1
−0.1




                                          −0.1




                                                                                           −0.1
−0.3




                                          −0.3




                                                                                           −0.3
−0.5




                                          −0.5




                                                                                           −0.5




       1900 1920 1940 1960 1980 2000             1960         1970    1980   1990   2000          1960         1970   1980   1990     2000




       Explanation: These figures plot the out-of-sample performance for annual predictive regressions. It is
       the cumulative prediction errors of the prevailing mean minus the cumulative prediction error of the
       predictive variable from a linear historical regression. An increase in a line indicates better performance
       of the named variable; a decrease in a line indicates better performance of the prevailing mean.

           The blue band are the equivalent 95% two-sided levels, based on correct DM statistics, that can be
       used to reject the hypothesis that the observed error is different from the value on the y-axis. (Conve-
       niently, start-values in time can be mentally shifted to another beginning period simply by resetting the
       0 value on the y-axies.)

           All scales are identical, except for the msand all predictions, which were so bad, we had to change
       the scale. The units are in percent and meaningful: “0.2” means 20 basis points outperformance per
       year.
                                                                     50
6     Section for the Referee Only

The following sections need not be published. If not desired, they can appear on the website only.



6.1    Quarterly Data

                                                 Insert Table 7 here.
                                        Forecasts at Quarterly Frequency


   Table 7 presents quarterly results. In contrast to the monthly tables, we can now add cay, which relies on
macroeconomic quarterly data, so we can entertain 16 models.

     In-sample, the table also helps point out why there are so many variables entertained in the literature. First,
data frequency has changed the variables that seem meaningful. Second, depending on the specification of period,
different variables come in significant. Only all and cayp work in all three panels. In Panels A and B, ntis, b/m, and
e/p matter. In Panel A, caya matters. In Panel C, d/y, tbl, and infl matter, but not ntis, b/m, e/p, or caya. Again,
this is consistent with the published evidence, in which different papers find different variables to have statistically
significant explanatory power.

     Out-of-sample, the out-of-sample RMSE’s and MAE’s seem to indicate more deterioration relative to their in-
sample equivalents than we saw on monthly frequency. This deterioaration now also applies to the prevailing mean.
The CUSUMSQ statistic suggests that all regression models in Panel A are unstable, except for caya and all. The
primary reason is that we only have data beginning in 1951 for these predictions. (When graphed, one sees that for
all other series, the 1930’s were especially problematic.)

    Again, of most interest to us is the relative out-of-sample performance. On the ∆MAE metric, 13 out of 16
regressions underperform the prevailing mean in Panel A; 11 out of 16 underperform in Panel B; and 13 out of 16
underperform in Panel C. On the ∆RMSE metric, the performance is even worse: 15 out of 16 regressions under-
perform the prevailing mean in Panel C; 14 out of 16 underperform in Panel A; and 11 out of 16 underperform in
Panel B.

    In Panel A, the term-spread (tms) has statistical significance, but minimal economic significance (0.028% · 4 ≈
0.1% per annum). It has no significance in Panel B, and underperformance in Panel C. Ironically, in-sample, tms only
has statistical significance in Panel C, but not Panels A and B.

     In Panel B, only the net issuing activity (ntis) does succeed statistically out-of-sample, and with an economic
significance of only 4 · 0.11 ≈ 0.45% per annum. But it underperforms in the other two panels. In Panel C, nothing
works on the ∆RMSE metric; nothing works statistically significantly on the ∆MAE metric.



6.2    3-Year Regressions

                                                 Insert Table 8 here.
                                          Forecasts at 3-year Frequency


     Table 8 presents the 3-year predictions. Out-of-Sample, in the 3-year horizon regressions, 38 out of 42 regres-
sions underperform the prevailing mean on the ∆RMSE metric; 39 out of 42 on the ∆MAE metric. The only statistically
significant out-of-sample performance comes from the earnings-price ratio e/p in Panel A (0.389%/3 ≈ 0.13% per
annum), but e/p underperforms in Panels B and C. (Incidentally, e/p is only the second case where we had both
statistically significant in-sample regression performance and statistically significant out-of-sample performance on
the same line! Nothing else matters, except that the kitchen sink regression seems to statistically significantly
underperform in its ability to predict.




                                                          51
