                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




            GLOBAL IMBALANCES AND THE LESSONS OF BRETTON WOODS

                                           Barry Eichengreen

                                         Working Paper 10497
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w10497


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       May 2004




The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

©2004 by Barry Eichengreen. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Global Imbalances and the Lessons of Bretton Woods
Barry Eichengreen
NBER Working Paper No. 10497
May 2004
JEL No. F0, F3, N0
                                        ABSTRACT

An influential school of thought views the current international monetary and financial system as
Bretton Woods reborn. Today, like 40 years ago, the international system is composed of a core,
which has the exorbitant privilege of issuing the currency used as international reserves, and a
periphery, which is committed to export-led growth based on the maintenance of an undervalued
exchange rate. In the 1960s, the core was the United States and the periphery was Europe and Japan.
Now, with the spread of globalization, there is a new periphery, Asia, but the same old core, the
United States, with the same tendency to live beyond its means.

This view suggests that the current pattern of international settlements can be maintained
indefinitely. The United States can continue running current account deficits because the emerging
markets of Asia and Latin America are happy to accumulate dollars. There is no reason why the
dollar must fall, since there is no need for balance of payments adjustment; in particular, the Asian
countries will resist the appreciation of their currencies against the greenback.

I argue that this image of a new Bretton Woods System confuses the incentives that confronted
individual countries under Bretton Woods with the incentives that confronted groups of countries.
It imagines the existence of a cohesive bloc of countries called the periphery ready and able to act
in their collective interest. I argue, to the contrary, that the countries of Asia constituting the new
periphery are unlikely to be able to subordinate their individual interest to the collective interest.
This image of the current system as Bretton Woods reborn also overlooks how the world has
changed since the 1960s. This alternative reading of history and current circumstances suggests that
even if there exists today something vaguely resembling the Bretton Woods System, it is not long
for this world.

Barry Eichengreen
University of California, Berkeley
Department of Economics
549 Evans Hall, #3880
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and NBER
eichengr@econ.berkeley.edu
                     Global Imbalances and the Lessons of Bretton Woods
                                     Barry Eichengreen
                              University of California, Berkeley
                                          May 2004

1. Introduction

           An influential school of thought views the current international monetary and

financial system as Bretton Woods reborn.1 Today, like 40 years ago, the international

system is composed of a core and a periphery. The core has the exorbitant privilege of

issuing the currency used as international reserves and a tendency to live beyond its

means. The periphery, which still has a way to go in catching up to the core, is

committed to export-led growth based on the maintenance of an undervalued exchange

rate, a corollary of which is its massive accumulation of low-yielding international

reserves issued by and denominated in the currency of the center country. In the 1960s,

the core was the United States and the periphery was Europe and Japan, many developing

countries not yet having been fully integrated into the international system. Now, with

the spread of globalization, there is a new periphery, the emerging markets of Asia and

Latin America, but the same old core, the United States, with the same tendency to live

beyond its means. The main difference between now and then, aside from the names of

the players, is the existence of a third bloc, Europe, which has neither the periphery’s

scope for catch-up nor the reserve-currency country’s ability to live beyond its means,

which is why it feels under pressure.

           This view yields strong predictions. It suggests that the current pattern of

international settlements can be maintained indefinitely. The United States can continue

running current account deficits because the emerging markets of Asia and Latin America


1
    See Dooley, Folkerts-Landau and Garber (2003).


                                                     1
are happy to accumulate dollars. There is no reason why the dollar must fall further,

since there is no need for balance of payments adjustment; in particular, the Asian

countries will resist the appreciation of their currencies against the greenback. That

China has as a rural population of 200 million underemployed workers yet to be absorbed

into the modern sector, something that it can do at the rate of only 10 million to 20

million a year, suggests that it will remain committed to its strategy of export-led growth

for a decade and perhaps even two. The current pattern of exchange rates and

international payments can be preserved for at least as long.

       This way of viewing the pattern of international settlements and the structure of

the international monetary and financial system has much to recommend it. For one

thing, it encourages us to consider how national balances of payments fit together as

interdependent elements of a larger system. Systemic analyses were once commonplace

in the literature on the international monetary and financial system; in recent decades

they have fallen out of fashion. Proponents of the new view should be commended for

reminding us that there is such a thing as the international monetary system and of the

fact that the global balance of payments (inclusive of reserve changes) must sum to zero,

something that should have implications for how we think about the world.

       In addition, this new view helps us to understand how the current pattern of global

imbalances arose in the first place. Asian countries have long been committed to policies

of export-led growth. Pegged exchange rates and resistance to pressures for revaluation

as their economies and current accounts strengthen have been at the center of their

development strategies. In pursuing this approach China is following in the footsteps of

the newly industrializing economies of East Asia which are themselves following in the




                                             2
footsteps of Japan. There is no question that their accumulation of reserves is a

concomitant of intervention in the foreign exchange market to keep their currencies

down, which is in turn a concomitant of the strategy of promoting exports as a way of

stimulating growth. If this means lower incomes and living standards for the time being,

relative to those that could be achieved in the short run if currencies were allowed to

appreciate, then this is perfectly fine so long as it translates into faster growth and even

higher living standards down the road.

        The analogy with Europe in the 1950s and 1960s is direct. I myself have

characterized the European social compact in this period as a willingness to trade wage

restraint and accept lower levels of consumption in return for faster investment and

export growth rates that promised to deliver significantly higher living standards down

the road.2 Other authors (e.g. Ohkawa and Rosovsky 1973) have emphasized the role of

the same factors in the high-growth period in Japan. Exchange rates that were

increasingly undervalued as the period progressed were integral to this process.3

        There is no question that the United States plays a unique role in the international

monetary and financial system today, as it did 40 years ago. It has been able to run

persistent current account deficits without seeing the dollar fall significantly against the

currencies of the periphery because the latter are concerned to preserve their position in

the U.S. market. This prompts countries in the periphery to intervene with purchases of

dollars in order to keep their exchange rates from appreciating. Their willingness to

2
  In Eichengreen (1996a).
3
  Another way of seeing that the yen and many European currencies became increasingly undervalued as
the postwar period progressed was that the current account no longer bound as a constraint during upswings
(when imported input requirements had traditional risen even more quickly than export revenues) in the
second half of the 1960s. Indeed, one way of calculating European and Japanese real exchange rates in this
period is by converting European and Japanese wages into dollars at the prevailing nominal rate and
comparing them with U.S. wages. This reminds us that wage restraint and undervalued exchange rates are
simply two sides of the same coin.


                                                    3
accumulate reserves is a consequence of expanding economies and expanding trade. It is

reinforced by a lesson drawn from the emerging market crises of the 1990s, namely that

the world is a risky place and that governments must insure against sudden shifts in

financial flows.4

        In turn, these policies affect the incentive for the United States to adjust its policy

mix. It feels less pressure rein in public spending – to choose between guns and butter in

the 1960s terminology – because the additional dollar-denominated securities that it is

pumping into the world economy are happily absorbed by Asian central banks. The

result is less dollar depreciation and less imported inflation. This means less pressure on

the Fed to raise interest rates, relieving the central bank of the need to choose between

price stability and growth- and employment-friendly monetary policies. The federal

government, enjoying low funding costs, can have its cake and eat it too, boosting

spending on both defense and social programs without having to resort to tax increases.

        So much for praise. In this paper I will argue that this image of a new Bretton

Woods System is a misleading way of thinking about the prospects for the international

monetary and financial system in the 21st century. It confuses the incentives that

confronted individual countries under Bretton Woods with the incentives that confronted

groups of countries. It imagines the existence of a cohesive bloc of countries called the

periphery ready and able to act in their collective interest. The idea that such a cartel

existed in the 1960s is not entirely farfetched; it was called the Gold Pool.5 But history

shows that this cartel, like most cartels, proved impossible to hold together when the need

4
 Insurance that can be obtained by augmenting their reserves.
5
 The Gold Pool, made up of Belgium, France, Germany, Italy, the Netherlands, Switzerland, the United
Kingdom and the United States, is discussed at further length below. It was a formalization of an ad hoc
agreement between the U.S. and other countries to intervene to stabilize prices in the London gold market
following the “excitement” created by the 1960 presidential election.


                                                    4
was greatest – that is, when collective action was needed for the maintenance of the

system. I will argue that the same point applies today: that the countries of Asia

constituting the new periphery are similarly unlikely to be able to subordinate their

individual interest to the collective interest.

        The other way that this picture of a new Bretton Woods System misleads is that it

underestimates how dramatically the world has changed. First, the members of the

periphery are more numerous and heterogeneous today than in the 1960s. Back then we

were talking about Europe and Japan. The countries of Europe had a shared historical

experience and had already moved down the road toward building institutions to facilitate

collective action and transnational governance. In today’s Asia, in contrast, stages of

economic development and hence policy priorities are less homogeneous. This makes

defining the collective interest more difficult. Moreover, regional cooperation is more

weakly institutionalized than in Europe even 40 years ago. All this renders dubious the

assumption that Asian countries will collectively work to maintain the status quo.

          Second, shifting out of dollars is only as attractive as the next best alternative.

By the mid-1960s U.S. monetary gold reserves had fallen to barely half the $25 billion

reached in the second half of the 1940s. Globally, gold was in inelastic supply. Sterling,

the second most important reserve currency, was hardly an attractive alternative.

Whether or not central banks liked this situation, it lent stability to the prevailing

international system. Now, in contrast, there is the euro.

        Third, the readiness of foreign central banks to hold onto dollars and the

cohesiveness of their cartel depend on their perception of the reserve-currency country’s

commitment to maintaining the value of their claims. Under Bretton Woods there was at




                                                  5
least a putative commitment to maintain the dollar’s convertibility into gold at a fixed

price. Now, in contrast, the intentions of U.S. policy makers are more obscure. The

prospects for the dollar maintaining its value against foreign currencies are also more

dubious than they were in the 1960s to the extent that U.S. external deficits today reflect

the country’s low savings rate, which does not bode well for the future sustainability of

its debt at current price levels. In contrast, U.S. capital outflows in the 1960s reflected

high savings rates, which should have had more favorable implications for debt

sustainability.

        Fourth, the removal of capital controls makes it harder to bottle up private

financial transactions which apply pressure to the current constellation of exchange rates.

This forces central banks today to undertake more extensive, more costly, and more

difficult sterilization and intervention operations in order to maintain the status quo.

        Fifth, the liberalization of domestic financial markets means that keeping the

exchange rate low and domestic savings high no longer guarantees that additional

investment will be centered in the traded goods sector. In the present deregulated

financial environment there is a tendency for loose credit conditions to pump up

investment in nontradables, notably property, fueling building booms and heightening

financial fragility. Asian governments are increasingly aware that the current strategy

entails these risks, creating an incentive to modify it sooner rather than later.

        The final point is that Asian policy makers are not ignorant of this history. They

understand that the world has changed in ways that diminish the attractions of systematic

undervaluation designed to promote export led growth. This makes it less likely that they

will blindly repeat the policies of the past.




                                                6
         This alternative reading of history and current circumstances has very different

implications for the process of global adjustment. It suggests that even if there exists

today something vaguely resembling the Bretton Woods System, it is not long for this

world.

         In the remainder of this paper I elaborate this argument in three ways. First I

review the history of Bretton Woods in order to highlight the collective action problem

facing countries seeking to support the operation of this kind of international system.

Next I describe in more detail how current circumstances differ from those of 40 years

ago. Finally I suggest an alternative scenario for how events could unfold from here.



2. Back to the Future

         Bretton Woods was a compromise between competing visions of the post-World

War II monetary order. For present purposes it is sufficient to adopt the conventional

distinction between the British view and the U.S. view, or between the Keynes Plan and

the White Plan, although in reality there were a number of additional visions represented

at the 1944 meeting convened in Bretton Woods, New Hampshire. The U.S. attached

priority to stable money, understandably given the monetary turmoil that the country had

endured in the 1930s, while the British attached priority to monetary room for maneuver,

again understandably given how the Bank of England had been inhibited from adapting

policy to the needs of the economy in the 1920s. The compromise was one in which gold

was made the ultimate anchor of the Bretton Woods System but subject to qualifications

that enhanced the autonomy of central banks. The United States accepted, indeed

embraced, the obligation of paying out gold at $35 an ounce. But this obligation was




                                              7
extended only to its official foreign creditors, not to private market participations.6 And

other currencies could be pegged to the dollar rather than gold.

         This first compromise was related to a second, namely between the U.S. desire for

pegged exchange rates to promote the recovery of international trade, and the British

desire for exchange rate adjustments to accommodate the policies necessary for the

maintenance of internal balance. Here the result was the awkwardly-named “adjustable

peg,” which was more adjustable in theory than in practice. Exchange rates could be

changed, at least in principle, under carefully unspecified conditions.7 This was what

allowed Keynes in his famous speech to the House of Lords to insist that the United

Kingdom was not in fact tying itself to a new gold standard.

         And, in turn, that second compromise was related to a third, namely between the

U.S. desire for currency convertibility and British insistence on the maintenance of

controls. The result was a commitment to the early restoration of current account

convertibility, which occurred in Europe at the end of 1959 and in Japan several years

later, but combined with authorization to maintain controls on capital account

transactions for an indefinite period, which for some countries has meant up to the

present day.8

         The parallels with our current international monetary system will be evident.

While the Bretton Woods System was nominally gold based, from the start it was really a

gold-dollar system, and from 1968 with the creation of the two-tier gold market, and

especially from the summer of 1971 with the closure of the gold window, it was

6
  The U.S. having demonetized gold in 1934.
7
  Namely, if the currency was in a position of fundamental disequilibrium. By “carefully unspecified
conditions” I refer to the fact that a conscious decision was taken not to define the meaning of this term.
8
  It took a couple of additional years for Article VIII convertibility to be recognized by the International
Monetary Fund.


                                                       8
effectively a dollar standard. Given the inelasticity of global gold supplies, dollars

provided essentially the entire increase over time in international reserves, other

currencies playing a negligible role. Agreement to create Special Drawing Rights in

1968, which took several additional years to operationalize, came too late to change this

fundamental fact.9

        While countries other than the United States could only acquire additional

reserves if the U.S. ran balance of payments deficits, those deficits created discomfort for

a number of reasons.10 Its status as the reserve-currency country evidently allowed the

United States to live beyond its means: the U.S. could import foreign merchandise,

acquire foreign companies, and engage in foreign military adventures all at the same

time. Charles De Gaulle and many of his countrymen found these last two privileges

particularly objectionable. Pressure on the dollar price of gold and official gold losses

were a chronic preoccupation of U.S. policy makers in the 1960s, but their existence did

nothing to assuage complaints that the U.S. had an “exorbitant privilege” by virtue of the

dollar’s exceptional position under Bretton Woods.

        Another reason why large stocks of dollar reserves were uncomfortable for

foreign central banks and governments was growing uncertainty about whether dollars

would maintain their value. If the dollar was devalued against gold or other currencies,

foreign central banks would incur capital losses. If they sought to protect themselves by

swapping dollars for gold, they might precipitate the very crisis of which they were

increasingly concerned. If the United States attempted to defend the dollar by adopting

more restrictive monetary and fiscal policies or, more likely given domestic political

9
 The first allocation of SDRs was only issued in 1970-72.
10
  This aspect of the process created discomfort for academics as well, notably for Robert Triffin, my Yale
professor of international economics, who had warned of the problem in Triffin (1960) and even before.


                                                     9
imperatives, resorting to protectionism to curtail the demand for imported merchandise,

foreign economies would lose access to the major export market on which they were so

dependent. These same considerations rendered foreign governments reluctant to revalue

against the dollar, despite their relatively rapid growth, rising competitiveness, accretion

of reserves, and reservations about U.S. balance of payments deficits.11

        All this has a remarkably contemporary ring. Then as now, other countries

welcomed their ability to acquire dollar reserves, and they valued their access to a

buoyant U.S. export market. They were reluctant to revalue for fear of how this would

affect both the prospects for export-led growth and the stability of the international

monetary and financial system. Discerning no alternative, they resorted to a variety of ad

hoc measures to keep the system running for more than a decade. One possible

implication is that contemporary policy makers see no alternative to doing the same.

        At the same time, the 1960s differed in important ways. For one thing, in contrast

to the current position, the U.S. trade balance and current account were in substantial

surplus all through the period. The U.S. trade balance had been in surplus continuously

since World War II. The U.S. current account was similarly in surplus every year from

1954 to 1971 (when the combination of leads and lags and J-curve effects did it in), with

the single exception of 1959. The U.S. current account continued to strengthen through

the first half of the 1960s until mounting U.S. military expenditure abroad led to the

progressive diminution of the surplus balance.12 But a surplus there was.




11
   The only noteworthy revaluations of the period were those of Germany and the Netherlands in 1961 and
Germany in 1969.
12
   U.S. direct military expenditures abroad rose sharply after 1965. The deterioration of the balance on
government account was almost a mirror image.


                                                   10
        Throughout this period, then, the United States was a net investor in the rest of the

world. Contemporaries were conscious of the fact; these were the very years when critics

in France and elsewhere became aware of the growing presence of U.S.-based

multinational corporations and worried that the United States was buying up their assets

on the cheap.

        To some extent this foreign investment was a natural consequence of America’s

status as banker to the world, a mantle she had taken over from Britain. As the country

with the deepest, most liquid and most sophisticated financial markets, the U.S. provided

financial intermediation services to the rest of the world by importing short-term capital

and exporting long-term capital. Foreigners were attracted to the liquidity provided by

U.S. treasury bills and bank deposits, but they also needed the long-term investments of

U.S.-based multinational corporations.13 With a comparative advantage in financial

intermediation, the country had a natural tendency to provide maturity transformation

services, as emphasized by authors like Charles Kindleberger.14 There was an

unfortunate tendency to confuse what was a competitive strength in the provision of

financial-intermediation services with problems of inadequate international

competitiveness. That tendency was aggravated by the publication of balance of

payments accounts using concepts like the basic balance, which excluded short-term

capital flows from the balance-of-payments accounts while including long-term flows.15

        But that the United States, the country with the deepest and most liquid financial

markets, possessed a comparative advantage in exporting financial services was no

13
   Solomon (1982) rightly refers to French views of U.S. foreign direct investment as “schizophrenic.”
Even while opinion leaders worried about U.S. dominance of the French economy, practical policy makers
recognized the fundamental need for long-term U.S. investment.
14
   See Kindleberger (1965).
15
   On the grounds that short-term flows were more volatile and subject to unpredictable reversals.


                                                  11
guarantee that this would remain the case. While the U.S. had a head start in the

development of financial markets, given the draconian controls imposed by other

countries in the wake of World War II, increasingly well-developed bank intermediation

provided an alternative to securitized finance. Moreover, financial liberalization and

financial development were ongoing. Catch-up in finance was simply one aspect of the

broader catch-up process in the OECD over the quarter century following World War II.

           And, as Peter Garber has noted elsewhere, if accelerating inflation raised the

danger of capital losses on U.S. investments, other countries would find it less attractive

to obtain these maturity-transformation services by investing in liquid bank deposits and

treasury securities in the United States and receiving less liquid foreign direct investment

in return.16 At some point, the terms of trade would be sufficiently unattractive that

short-term capital inflows might stop and even reverse direction. If long-term flows were

slower to reverse, as contemporaries assumed, the result could be a crisis for the United

States whether or not the country had been serving as banker to the world.

           Still, from the present perspective, the composition of capital flows is a subsidiary

concern. The key point is that the net direction of flows was strongly outward. Domestic

savings exceeded domestic investment all through the 1960s (albeit by a small margin in

1968 and 1969). The excess savings could be invested abroad in earning assets – the

foreign branch plants of U.S.-based corporations, foreign government securities, and a

variety of other foreign assets – the interest and dividends on which would represent a

credit item on the balance of payments down the road. In the event, these expectations of

future credits did not suffice to reassure the markets. But imagine how much worse

things would have been – how much more quickly confidence in the system would have
16
     Garber (1993), pp.470-474. This is of course the same author referred to in footnote 2 above.


                                                      12
ebbed – had there exited in addition other distortions depressing U.S. savings rates and

resulting in current account deficits.

         In retrospect, it is striking for how many years jerry-rigged solutions kept the

system afloat. Determining whether this should be regarded as promising for future

efforts to keep the current “non-system” afloat requires examining the motives and tactics

of officials in more detail. Although the reallocation of monetary gold from U.S. coffers

to those of the rest of the world was a fundamentally healthy phenomenon – circa 1947

the U.S. had possessed an unsustainably large 70 per cent of the world total – by the end

of the 1950s the U.S. share had fallen to less than 50 per cent and the trend was viewed

with alarm. There had been a particularly large drop in U.S. gold reserves in 1958 in the

aftermath of the Suez crisis.17 The shift of the current account from surplus to deficit in

1959 created worries of more deficits to come. For much of 1960, the international

monetary intentions of the Democratic presidential candidate, John F. Kennedy, were

obscure; his emphasis on “getting the economy going again” did not reassure dollar

bears. Although Kennedy asserted even before the election that he had no intention of

devaluing the dollar, there was still a tendency on the part of market participants to

reason by analogy with 1933, the last time that a Democrat had taken over from a

Republican as president, and when one of the new president’s first actions had been to

raise the dollar price of gold.18 Thus, prices in the London gold market shot up in


17
   This is the emphasis of Block (1977). In 1956 the United States had insisted that France, the UK and
Israel withdraw from Suez, and Washington threatened to use its political leverage for force their
compliance if necessary. This episode there led to political problems and economic difficulties, most
notably in France in 1957-8. In turn this may have hardened French opposition to a dollar-based
international monetary system.
18
   “First, we pledge ourselves to maintain the current value of the dollar. If elected President I shall not
devalue the dollar from the present rate. Rather I shall defend the present value and its soundness,” spoke
candidate Kennedy in Philadelphia on 31 October 1960 (Roosa 1967, p.268). Now there is a strong dollar
policy if I have ever heard one.


                                                     13
October 1959 to $40 shortly before the U.S. election. Only concerted intervention by

European central banks, led by the Bank of England, brought them back down.

         Any divergence between the official U.S. and London market prices of gold

created a temptation for central banks to buy gold from the United States for $35 and sell

it on the London market at a higher price. Their ability to do so was limited only by their

liquid dollar reserves. From a collective standpoint doing so might be undesirable insofar

as it depleted U.S. gold reserves and cast doubt over the country’s commitment to convert

gold into dollar as a fixed price. But for the individual central bank there was an

incentive to engage in such conversions before the gold window slammed shut, as

ultimately happened in 1971, leaving those who had exercised restraint without options.

This created an obvious problem of collective action.19

         This is the context in which the Gold Pool was created in 1961. The Gold Pool

was an arrangement whereby central banks sought to share the cost of maintaining the

London price of gold at $35 an ounce rather than depleting U.S. gold reserves.20 It

encouraged collective action by establishing an understanding of how the costs of these

operations would be divided – that is, of what share of the gold that needed to be sold in

London in order to stabilize the market price would be provided by each participating

central bank.
19
   Private investors, in contrast, could not undertake these arbitrage operations directly, but many of them
had the right to buy gold on the London market, in anticipation of the fact that its price would rise if U.S.
gold reserves were exhausted. In addition, foreigners could “put” their dollar holdings to their own central
banks by exchanging dollars for the local currency to avoid the losses that would follow if the dollar was
devalued. By enlarging the dollar positions of European central banks, this raised the stakes for countries
seeking to exercise individual self restraint in the collective interest. As Garber (1993) notes, it is
surprising that contemporaries focused on liquid foreign dollar holdings to the exclusion of liquid dollar
holdings in the United States. In principle, there would seem to have been myriad ways in which U.S.
residents could have used their domestic balances to buy gold or foreign currencies in London. Whether
their failure to do so on a larger scale reflects the operation of the Interest Equalization Tax, the Buy
American Program or some other device is unclear. I return to this below.
20
   The actual intervention price was $35.20, the official $35 U.S. price plus the costs of shipping and
insurance of getting gold to London.


                                                     14
         But foreign central banks were not prepared to continue sharing these costs

indefinitely. Even in its heyday, central banks other than the Fed provided barely more

than a third of the gold reserves sold into the pool.21 In principle, the Gold Pool shifted

only some of the pressure of maintaining the $35 gold price in London away from the

United States. And, in practice, other central banks were still free to offset their sales

into the pool with purchases from the U.S. authorities. As a group, members of the pool

other than the U.S. actually added to their gold reserves in this period, while the U.S. was

forced to make additional gold sales outside the pool in roughly matching amounts. This

may have been inconsistent with the spirit of the cartel agreement, but there was nothing

that the U.S. could do about it. France was the most blatant case: it bought $884 million

of gold from the United States in 1965, despite running an overall balance of payments

surplus of only $619 million (as measured by the total increase in its reserves). In 1966 it

bought $601 million of gold from the U.S. despite a total increase in reserves of only

$390 million.22 And the more gold that France acquired from the United States, the

greater was the temptation for other central banks to do the same.23

         In part the incentive problem arose from the fact that there did not exist a limit on

the obligations of other central banks: there was no adjustment mechanism that

guaranteed to return prices in the London market to the official price of $35 an ounce and




21
   It is revealing that the U.S. share was especially high as the arrangement drew to an end and other central
banks, notably the Bank of France, grew increasingly reluctant to participate in the system. Solomon
(1982) notes how the U.S. had to airlift gold to London using Air Force planes in order to keep the Gold
Pool afloat at the end of 1967.
22
   In the summer of 1967 it discontinued sales into the pool, a fact that became known later in the year (see
below).
23
   According to Meltzer (1991), the Gold Pool never worked as an effective cartel, these replacement
purchases of gold by European central banks functioning in the same manner as surreptitious oil sales by
members of the OPEC cartel.


                                                     15
thereby allow the Gold Pool to be disbanded.24 France demanded a more contractionary

U.S. monetary policy as a quid pro quo for its continued participation. When this was not

forthcoming, it withdrew, and the pool collapsed.

         There followed a “Gentlemen’s Agreement” in which central banks promised not

to convert their inherited dollar balances but remained free to convert any additional

dollars they accumulated starting in 1968. But since there was no other way by which

their need for additional reserves could be satisfied, the writing was on the wall. In the

short run, the U.S. could replenish its reserves by attracting capital and purchasing gold

from France, where the events of May 1968 created uncertainty about future policy. But

this was only a temporary respite. The holes in the Gentlemen’s Agreement became

gaping in 1970, when Belgium and the Netherlands exchanged dollars for gold, Germany

signalled its desire to do likewise, and France indicated that it would demand gold for

dollars in order to make a repayment to the IMF. The last straw came on 13 August,

when Britain requested gold. The gold window was then shut in short order.

         It is worth asking whether things might have turned out differently. Would more

monetary and fiscal restraint in the United States have allowed this system to continue on

for a longer period? Could the United States have devalued the dollar against gold and



24
   Robert Solomon, then working for the Federal Reserve Board, recognized this problem, and proposed
linking the continuation of the gold pool with the creation of a new reserve asset (along the lines of what
eventually became the SDR). See Solomon (1982), pp.115-116. As it happened, the collapse of the Gold
Pool and the creation of a two-tier gold market in 1968 with one price (the London market price) for private
transactions and a second price ($35 an ounce) for officials transactions did help to restore equilibrium after
a fashion. The rise in the market price created an incentive for South Africa to expand its gold production
and sales, eventually driving the market price back down to $35. But this response occurred only after the
official and market prices of gold were decoupled, and it took a considerable period of time to operate.
This was precisely how the maintenance of price stability was supposed to work under the classical gold
standard. (For a modern statement of the mechanism, see Barro 1979.) Under the classical gold standard
as well, the problem was that the induced response of the gold mining industry took a considerable period
of time to operate (Eichengreen 1996b). In the meantime, the signals sent by the divergence of the two
prices reminded central banks of the incentives to hedge their bets.


                                                     16
foreign currencies as a way of stemming the secular decline in its current account surplus

in the second half of the 1960s?

         The answer to the second question has two aspects. First, if the U.S. chose to

raise the price of gold once, it would have almost certainly excited expectations that it

was prepared to do so again.25 An early run on U.S. gold reserves would have become

correspondingly more likely. A way around this would have been to allow the dollar

price of gold to float, as proposed by Meltzer (1966), but this would have represented

breaking the gold-dollar link once and for all – something that the U.S. was unwilling to

contemplate until it found itself with no choice in 1973.

         Second, there is the question of whether the U.S. in fact had the capacity to

devalue against the currencies of countries which pegged to the dollar rather than gold.

Foreign central banks could simply follow dollar for dollar, as it were, if the U.S. raised

the dollar price of gold. There are indications that at least some of them were prepared to

do so.26 More than a few countries in fact did so in 1971, when the U.S. finally raised the

gold price. This is not unlike the current situation, in which Asian central banks have

been prepared to follow the U.S., in their case preventing their currencies from

appreciating by buying dollars and accumulating reserves.

         On the other hand, would more monetary and fiscal restraint by the United States

have permitted this system to stagger on for a significant additional period? In principle,

the government could have raised taxes, and the Fed could have raised interest rates. By



25
   Opting to raise the dollar price of gold would have also politicized subsequent decisions, since the
Administration would have had to go to the Congress for approval to raise the $35-an-ounce price.
26
   See Shultz and Dam (1977) and Gowa (1983). Nixon’s import surcharge, however, regrettable on other
grounds, provided the U.S. with a bargaining chip that could be used to discourage other countries from
following the U.S. dollar for dollar. The problem with the unilateralism of the import surcharge was that it
greatly complicated efforts to cooperate in good faith on redesign of the international monetary system.


                                                    17
curtailing domestic demand and enhancing U.S. export competitiveness, this would have

further strengthened the current account. It is not clear how other countries would have

responded. On the one hand, the slower growth of U.S. markets for their exports would

have slowed the expansion of their own economies, limiting the incentive for them to

respond with parallel policy adjustments. Less inflation in the United States would have

enhanced the attractions of tapping the New York market for maturity-transformation

services, stimulating capital inflows. For all of these reasons, U.S. gold reserves

presumably would have declined less rapidly in this counterfactual. The revaluation of

the deutschemark in 1969, which did so much to signal the impending demise of the

dollar standard, would presumably have been delayed.

        But it would not have been delayed indefinitely. As the world economy

continued to grow, other countries would have continued to require additional reserves,

and there were few forms in which to obtain them other than liquid claims on the U.S.

government or U.S. gold reserves. Seeing their current accounts weaken and short-term

capital outflows to the U.S. accelerate in response to the American policy initiative,

foreign central banks and governments would have had an incentive to tighten in order to

offset these effects. The main way in which the day of reckoning would have been

delayed under this counterfactual was by slowing the rate of growth of the world

economy and thereby the growth in demand for international reserves. In other words,

while the Triffin Dilemma would not have disappeared under this counterfactual, its

consequences would have taken longer to play themselves out.27




27
  The simulation model developed and analyzed in Bordo and Eichengreen (1998) points to precisely this
conclusion.


                                                  18
        In practice, central banks would probably have staked out a middle ground

between the extremes of doing nothing in order to sustain domestic growth and tightening

in order to augment their reserves.28 When push came to shove, the imperatives of

domestic growth dominated the desire to defend the dollar and sustain the operation of

the international monetary system. This was nowhere more true than in the United States

itself, where policy makers went to great lengths to avoid having to adopt restrictive

macroeconomic initiatives in support of the exchange rate, insofar as these might slow

the rate of growth of the economy and hinder the pursuit of social- and foreign-policy

objectives.29 This explains the extraordinary variety of ad hoc devices to which they

resorted to strengthen the U.S. balance of payments without having to change monetary

and fiscal policies, from soliciting European support for U.S. military commitments

abroad, to tying foreign aid, to tightening limits on the value of duty-free goods that

American tourists could bring into the country, to Operation Twist, to the Interest

Equalization Tax.30

        In sum, from the U.S. point of view the Bretton Woods System was all too similar

to a gold standard of the late 19th century variety. Given the obligation to convert dollars

into gold at $35 an ounce and use of the dollar as international reserves by the other

participants in the system, the only way that the U.S. could maintain the gold

convertibility of the dollar was through internal deflation, which raised the real value of

both monetary gold stocks and official foreign dollar balances and encouraged the

28
   This implies that the day of reckoning would have been delayed even less than suggested by the second
of these two counterfactuals.
29
   On those rare occasions when the Fed did tighten and the executive and legislative branches did agree on
a tax hike, as in 1968, the balance of payments recovered, but economic growth suffered. And the counter-
reaction was intense.
30
   Operation Twist involved attempting to twist the yield curve by selling short-term treasury bills while
buying long-term bonds, and thus to stimulate domestic investment with lower long-term rates while
attracting capital inflows with higher short-term yields. See Meltzer (1991) and Eichengreen (2002).


                                                    19
production of additional gold in South Africa and elsewhere. In this respect the dilemma

was not unlike that facing gold standard countries in the 1870s and 1880s. But political

constraints on the pursuit of deflation were stronger than they had been a century before.

This was true not only in the U.S., where there was a demand for both social spending at

home and military spending abroad, but also in Europe and Japan, where revaluation

would have meant more deflation and less export-led growth. Inflation rather than

deflation made it less attractive for foreigners to utilize the country’s deep and liquid

financial markets for maturity transformation services, limiting short-term capital flows

toward the United States. Given catch up and productivity growth broad, too much

inflation in the U.S. meant too small a current account surplus to finance the country’s

other obligations.31 Dollars thus piled up in the coffers of foreign central banks. This in

turn led to desperate efforts to negotiate collective restraints on the individual desire to

convert those dollars into an alternative asset that might hold its value better before the

bottom fell out of the dollar market. These efforts proved reasonably successful between

1961 and 1968, but when they collapsed it took barely three years for exchange rate

stability to break down.



3. How the World Has Changed

        One way in which the image of a new Bretton Woods System misleads, I have

argued, is that it underestimates how dramatically the world has changed since the 1960s.

First, the Asian countries that make up the “new periphery” are a less cohesive grouping


31
  This phraseology is designed to be consistent with the fact that U.S. wholesale and consumer price
inflation was generally lower than inflation in other industrial countries, but insufficiently so for the
maintenance of external balance, given rapid catch-up growth (and the operation of the Balassa-Samuelson
effect) in these other countries. See Eichengreen (2002).


                                                   20
than the European countries that dominated the periphery in forty years ago. By the

1960s the Europeans had already begun to construct the web of bargains that constitutes

the European Union nee European Economic Community. They consulted regularly with

one another and with the United States in the OECD.32 Indeed, the immediate impetus

for transforming the OEEC into the OECD was to provide a mechanism for collective

action on the U.S. gold problem.33 From October 1963 to June 1964 central bank and

finance ministry deputies met monthly in Paris under the aegis of the Group of Ten to

discuss the operation of the international monetary system. The outcome of their

discussions was agreement to establish a monitoring technology whereby shirking on the

commitment to collective action could be detected: a “multilateral surveillance” system

obliging all members of the G-10 to provide the BIS with data on the means used to

finance their payments surpluses and deficits.34 G-10 finance ministers and central

governors (and their deputies) continued to meet together thereafter to discuss collective

management of the international monetary system. Central bank governors continued to

meet at the BIS on a monthly basis. European countries and the United States also

worked together in the IMF, where they were the dominant voices (and where they could

thus agree, eventually, to responses like the creation of the SDR). Thus, governments

and central banks had a variety of mechanisms for addressing their collective action

problems – for acting on the recognition that they had a collective interest in supporting

the dollar, partly because its depreciation would undermine their export competitiveness



32
   For example, in Working Party 3 of the OECD’s Economic Policy Committee (see Roosa 1967).
33
   See Roosa (1967). It is revealing that Kennedy had proposed U.S. membership in his balance of
payments message (a special message to the Congress on the balance of payments delivered on 6 February
1961 (barely three weeks after the new president took office).
34
   These data were then circulated among the members of the G-10 and to Working Party 3 of the OECD on
a confidential basis.


                                                 21
and slow their growth – and they created a monitoring technology that increased the costs

of shirking on that agreement. All this may not have been enough to prevent France from

defecting from the Gold Pool, but it increased the cost of noncooperative behavior.

        In Asia, in contrast, integration is less advanced. Regional free trade initiatives

continue to stumble. The ASEAN countries’ insistence on exempting sensitive sectors is

impressive even compared to European countries’ insistence on protecting their

agricultural trade. There is no agreement on whether to proceed regionally (China’s

preference) or through bilateral agreements (Japan’s preferred alternative). This is just

one illustration of the broader inability of the two big Asian countries to work together, in

part reflecting their very different stages of economic development (contrast France and

Germany in the 1960s) and therefore their very different policy priorities.35

        Also symptomatic of the obstacles to regional cooperation is the weakly

institutionalized nature of Asian integration. While there exist a variety of groupings

(ASEAN, ASEAN+3, EMEAP and APEC, among others), few are backed by formal

institutions (not even a permanent secretariat, much less a Parliament, a Commission, and

a Court of Justice).36 The peer pressure, firm surveillance and political sanctions that

encouraged cooperation in Europe in the 1960s still barely exist in Asia. For all these

reasons, mechanisms for containing free rider problems are even less well developed

there. Collective action may have sustained the Bretton Woods constellation of exchange

rates for 13 years from the elimination of current account restrictions at the end of 1958


35
   Another example is efforts to promote financial-market development in the region, which have similarly
produced more in the way of appearance than substance. Japan is pushing for a regional financial market
centered on Tokyo with transactions denominated in yen, while other countries, including China but with
the leadership of Thailand, prefer an Asian Bond Fund and Asian Bond Market Initiative structured to
encourage the development of an integrated regional financial market in which many centers can flourish
and transactions can be denominated in a variety of regional currencies.
36
   Although ASEAN for one has a modest permanent secretariat.


                                                   22
to the closing of the Gold Window in 1971, but these differences in the institutional

setting yield a rather more pessimistic forecast of for how many years the current system

will endure.

         Second, there exist more attractive alternatives to the dominant reserve currency

than in the 1960s. Back then the temptation for central banks to diversify out of dollars

in order to limit capital losses on their reserve holdings was limited by the fact that the

alternatives were hardly more attractive. The second most important reserve currency,

the pound sterling, was issued by Europe’s “sick man.” The events of 1967 made clear

that shifting out of dollars into sterling was not a way of avoiding capital losses. The

French franc was hardly a more attractive reserve asset, a fact driven home in 1969 when

the franc was devalued. Japanese financial markets were not sufficiently open to make it

attractive to hold yen-denominated assets. While this was the period when the Euro-

markets and Roosa bonds gained prominence, central banks were reluctant to dabble in

private securities or to encourage the development of the Euro-markets, which were seen

as undermining their monetary control. What alternatives did this leave the

Bundesbank’s reserve managers? Swiss francs? Switzerland was hardly large enough to

solve the problem. And, so long as Germany had no alternative to dollars, the likelihood

that all European countries would collectively scramble out of the currency was

correspondingly less.37

         The difference today, obviously, is the euro. The large, liquid market in euro-

denominated government securities provides an attractive alternative to the U.S.

treasuries for the central banks of the “new periphery.” To the extent that the other


37
  There was always gold, but shifting into gold would have jeopardized the stability of the international
system (something that impressed the Germans more than the French).


                                                    23
pressures enumerated here suggest the need for the dollar to decline against foreign

currencies, not excluding the euro, that alternative becomes more attractive still.

           In addition, Asian central banks and governments are attempting to promote the

development of regional bond markets by creating an Asian Bond Fund and pursuing an

Asian Bond Market Initiative. The first $1 billion of reserves devoted to the Asian Bond

Fund is being invested in the dollar-denominated bonds of Asian governments, but Asian

Bond Fund II, which is already widely anticipated, is expected to entail the investment of

reserves in local-currency bonds. For the time being the Asian Bond Fund initiative is

still small potatoes, but it creates scope for reallocating reserve portfolios toward assets

denominated in regional currencies – scope that is likely to increase over time. As such it

opens up an avenue for reserve reallocation that did not exist in Europe in the 1960s.

           Third, there is the fact that trepidation on the part of foreign central banks and

governments about the value of their dollar reserves in the 1960s occurred against the

backdrop of large – and, through the first half of the decade, growing – current account

surpluses. Because the United States. was saving more than it was investing at home, by

definition of the current account, it was also investing abroad. Its accumulation of

foreign assets, which critics like De Gaulle found so objectionable, implied that the

balance of payments would strengthen as the returns on these investments started rolling

in. This should have provided at least some reassurance to nervous foreigners.38 Now, in

contrast, the current account is in deficit. While there is dispute over the causes, majority

opinion would assign at least part of the blame to low U.S. savings rates. This means that

there is no accumulation of net long-term foreign investments to reassure nervous



38
     As authors like Kindleberger sought to argue (see above).


                                                      24
foreigners that, even in the absence of exchange rate changes, the balance of payments

will naturally strengthen down the road.39

         Fourth, the removal of capital controls makes it harder to bottle up the private-

sector portfolio adjustments that must be offset by central banks seeking to maintain

current exchange rates. Perhaps governments are aware that they have a collective

interest in maintaining their dollar reserves, since if they sell them the dollar will only

weaken further, undermining their collective competitive position. But whether or not

the public sector is able to act on this collective interest, it is clear that collective interest

is not something that motivates private investors, each of whom is interested in

maximizing his individual return. A large number of individual and institutional

investors, both American and foreign, inhabit the U.S. treasury market. In the 1960s the

United States could use the Interest Equalization Tax and foreign governments could use

regulations and controls to limit the reallocation of private investment portfolios and

short-selling of the dollar. In principle U.S. residents still might have found ways “put”

their dollar-denominated assets to foreign central banks.40 In practice, however, this

seems to have happened only to a limited extent.41 Now, in contrast, international

financial markets and transactions are less regulated and more open. Such transactions

are easier to undertake. If private investors are quicker to act in anticipation of future

changes in asset prices, the pressure on central banks and governments will be

correspondingly greater.




39
   Although there is a peculiar tendency for U.S. long-term investments abroad to yield a higher rate of
return than foreign long-term investments in the United States.
40
   Which would have thereby increased the pressure on the latter to convert their dollar overhang into gold.
41
   As noted by Garber (1993) and commented on above.


                                                    25
         That financial markets are more open today suggests that the same dynamics are

likely to operate more quickly and powerfully, frustrating official efforts to put off the

day of reckoning. This fact is evident even in China, whose capital account is still far

from open (although it is growing more so every day). Massive amounts of private

financial capital have been flowing into China in response to the recognition that the

current undervaluation of the renminbi will not be sustainable indefinitely. This has

forced the Chinese authorities to attempt large-scale sterilization of capital inflows. It is

revealing of the difficulties that by the end of last year the commercial banks had grown

increasingly reluctant to buy the bills that the central bank issues in its efforts to sterilize

the impact of financial inflows on the money supply.42

         Fifth, the domestic financial market structures in which the consequences of

current policies are unfolding are different than 40 years ago. Financial deregulation has

limited the scope for funneling forced saving into capital formation in the traded goods

sector, which was the strategy of many countries in the 1960s. Keeping exchange rates

low in the periphery means keeping interest rates low. Intervening by purchasing dollars

means pumping additional domestic credit into the economy, given the limited

effectiveness of sterilized intervention. In Japan in the 1960s, much of that additional

credit was devoted to capacity building in the traded goods sector because it was

channeled that way by the Postal Savings System, which was controlled by the

government, and by the commercial banks, whose investment options were tightly

regulated. The situation in Europe was not dissimilar. It is thus possible to argue that the

first set of distortions – undervalued exchange rates, artificially depressed consumption,

42
  See Eichengreen (2004). And, of course, these difficulties will deepen as the state banks are further
commercialized and, ultimately, privatized, limiting further the scope for using direct pressure to guide
their investment decisions.


                                                     26
and forced savings – was welfare improving because it offset another set of distortions –

that there would have otherwise been too little investment in a traded goods sector that

was the source of positive productivity and growth externalities.

       In today’s more diversified and deregulated financial environment, in contrast,

low interest rates and abundant credit have a greater tendency to spill over into the

nontraded goods sector and the property market in particular. Thus in the 1990s, the first

time Asian countries pursued policies of export-led growth supported by systematic

undervaluation in a significantly deregulated financial environment, a number of them

experienced dramatic property-market booms that heightened the fragility of their

financial institutions and markets. Recall the tales of cranes and half finished high-rises

dotting the Bangkok skyline on the eve of the crisis. Now, less than a decade later, the

same policies are again producing frightening real-estate booms, not least in coastal

China. Policy makers in the region are not oblivious of these dangers. As they come to

see that undervaluation is now doing less to promote exports and more to heighten

financial risks, they will have more reason to let their exchange rates rise.

       Sixth and finally, governments in the periphery are aware of this history. Bretton

Woods reminds them of Herb Stein’s adage that something which can’t go on forever

generally won’t. In addition they are aware, precisely because of the historical

experience referred to above, that a policy of export-led growth has not just benefits but

also costs. They are seeking to build more diversified economies that rely on domestic

demand as well as exports. South Korea, which has sought to stimulate the growth of

consumer credit, is a prominent, if not entirely reassuring example (since the initiative




                                             27
soon led to a crisis in the credit-card industry). China is another case where consumption

and not exports are now the most rapidly growing component of aggregate demand.



4. An Alternative Scenario

       The United States has little incentive to precipitate the consequent adjustment. To

the contrary, it is happy living beyond its means. Rather, adjustment will have to be

forced by Asia. Eventually there will be a recognition that policies of export-led growth

have reached the point of diminishing returns. This recognition will entail the

observation that the traditional traded goods sectors are no longer the exclusive locus of

productivity- and growth-promoting externalities and that activities like software

development, back-office services, and financial intermediation are also sources of

positive spillovers. Growth will thus require balanced investment in nontraded and well

as traded-goods sectors. Asian countries will have to invest more in higher education.

They will have to invest more in housing and urban amenities to make themselves

attractive to knowledge workers.

       Doing so will require allowing the real exchange rate to rise. The obvious way of

allowing the real rate to rise without compromising the commitment to price stability is to

curtail intervention in the foreign exchange market. Once one or more Asian countries

acknowledge that export-led growth is encountering diminishing returns and curtail their

intervention, the cartel of central banks that had been supporting the dollar and

preventing Asian currencies from rising will begin to fray. One can imagine a gradual

migration out of dollars and into alternative reserve assets like that which occurred after

1968. Given the low yields on yen-denominated assets, the euro is the obvious direction




                                             28
for such migration.43 In addition, the commitment of Asian governments to encourage

the development of a regional bond market may lead them to allocate a growing share of

their reserve portfolios toward assets denominated in one another’s currencies.

         Inertia is still the single strongest determinant of the composition of central bank

reserve portfolios. Central banks are buy-and-hold investors; they rarely manage their

reserve portfolios actively and have a high tolerance for capital losses. It is thus

reasonable to anticipate that Asian central banks will not dump all their dollars at once.

But there is good reason to think that the adjustment will accelerate with the passage of

time.

         This move to greater exchange rate flexibility will be a good thing for Asia. The

further decline in the dollar will be a good thing for the adjustment of global payments

imbalances. That decline may force the Fed to raise rates more sharply, curtailing

domestic absorption. Who knows – the increase in funding costs may even cause some

future U.S. administration to do something about the country’s fiscal problem. This may

not be good news for Europe insofar as public and private portfolio reallocation drives up

the value of the euro. While Asian currencies may rise against the dollar, the euro will

rise also – and to the extent that currencies are driven in the short run mainly by capital

flows, on impact it may rise against the dollar even more.

         Much of this is necessarily conjectural. Writing the history of the future is harder

than writing the history of the past. My reading of the relevant international monetary


43
   Europe faces many problems and challenges, to be sure, including high inherited debt burdens and a
looming demographic time bomb. If these simply lead to higher tax rates and slower growth, they will not
make the euro any less appealing as a reserve asset, for Europe will still have the deep and liquid bond
markets required to make a reserve asset attractive. If on the other hand they lead to secularly declining
terms of trade, high inflation as the ECB seeks to inflate away the member state’s debt burdens, and/or debt
default, the story would be very different. How the debt-cum-demographic crisis will play itself out is of
course a different paper.


                                                    29
history is that, while there may be patterns, those patterns do not repeat themselves

mechanically. Indeed, there were significant parallels between the Bretton Woods

System and classical the gold standard system that preceded it. But those two systems

evolved differently, and their final stages played out in different ways. Among other

things, the Bretton Woods System was quicker to collapse.

       Similarly, there are parallels between the Bretton Woods System of the 1960s and

the “revived Bretton Woods System” of our day, as Dooley, Folkerts-Landau and Garber

so compellingly argue. But that the original Bretton Woods System lasted between one

and two decades, depending on how its birth and death are dated, does not mean that the

revived Bretton Woods System will last as long. Both this reading of the history and an

appreciation of the extent of changes in the world economy suggest that the end will not

be as long in coming this time around.




                                            30
                                      References

Barro, Robert (1979), “Money and the Price Level under the International Gold
Standard,” Economic Journal 89, pp.13-33.

Block, Fred L. (1977), The Origins of International Economic Disorder: A Study of
United States International Monetary Policy from World War II to the Present, Berkeley:
University of California Press.

Bordo, Michael and Barry Eichengreen (1998), “Implications of the Great Depression for
the Development of the International Monetary System,” in Michael Bordo, Claudia
Goldin and Eugene White (eds), The Defining Moment: The Great Depression and the
American Economy in the Twentieth Century, Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
pp.402-453.

Cooper, Richard N. (2000), “Foreign Economic Policy in the 1960s: An Enduring
Legacy,” in George L. Perry and James Tobin (eds), Economic Events, Ideas, and
Policies: The 1960s and After, Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution, pp.139-184.

Dooley, Michael, David Folkerts-Landau and Peter Garber (2002), “An Essay on the
Revived Bretton Woods System,” NBER Working Paper no. 9971 (September).

Eichengreen, Barry (1996a), “Institutions and Economic Growth: Europe After World
War II,” in Nicholas Crafts and Gianni Toniolo (eds), Economic Growth in Europe Since
1945, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp.38-72.

Eichengreen, Barry (1996b), Globalizing Capital: A History of the International
Monetary System, Princeton: Princeton University Press.

Eichengreen, Barry (2002), “From Benign Neglect to Malignant Preoccupation: U.S.
Balance of Payments Policy in the 1960s,” in George Perry and James Tobin (eds),
Economic Events, Ideas, and Policies: The 1960s and After, Washington, D.C.: The
Brookings Institution, pp.185-242.

Eichengreen, Barry (2004), “Chinese Currency Controversies,” Asian Economic Papers
(forthcoming).

Garber, Peter (1993), “The Collapse of the Bretton Woods Fixed Exchange Rate
System,” in Michael Bordo and Barry Eichengreen (eds), A Retrospective on the Bretton
Woods System: Lessons for International Monetary Reform, Chicago: University of
Chicago Press, pp.461-494.

Gowa, Joanne S. (1983), Closing the Gold Window, Ithaca: Cornell University Press.

Ohkawa, Kazushi and Henry Rosovsky (1973), Japanese Economic Growth, Stanford:
Stanford University Press.



                                           31
Kindleberger, Charles P. (1965), “Balance of Payments Deficits and the International
Market for Liquidity,” Princeton Essays in International Finance no. 46, International
Finance Section Department of Economics, Princeton University.

Meltzer, Allan H. (1966), “The Regulation of Bank Payments Abroad, Another Failure
for the Government’s Balance of Payments Program,” in George P. Shultz and Robert Z.
Aliber (eds), Guidelines, Informal Controls, and the Market Place, Chicago: University
of Chicago Press, pp.183-208.

Meltzer, Allan H. (1991), “U.S. Policy in the Bretton Woods Era,” Federal Reserve Bank
of St. Louis Review 73 (May/June), pp.54-83.

Roosa, Robert (1967), The Dollar and World Liquidity, New York: Random House.

Shultz, George and Kenneth Dam (1977), Economic Policy Beyond the Headlines,
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Solomon, Robert (1982), The International Monetary System, 1945-1981, New York:
Harper & Row.

Triffin, Robert (1960), Gold and the Dollar Crisis, New Haven: Yale University Press.




                                            32
                                                    Figure 1
              Monetary gold and dollar holdings, the United States and the rest of
                                      the world, 1951-71
         billio ns o f U.S. $
         80


         70                                                                         external dollar liabilities


         60
                                                                                    external dollar liabilities
         50                                                                         held by monetary
                                                                                    authorities

         40

                                                                                    Rest of the World
         30                                                                         monetary gold stock


         20

                                                                                    U.S. monetary
         10                                                                         gold stock


           0
           1951 1953 1955 1957 1959 1961 1963 1965 1967 1969 1971


Sources: IMF, International Financial Statistics; U.S. Congress, Report to the Congress of the Commission on the Role
of Gold in the Domestic and International Monetary Systems, vol. 1




                                                         33
                                           Figure 2

                                  U.S. gold reserves, 1951-71
   billio ns o f U.S. $
   25

   23

   21

   19

   17

   15

   13

   11

    9

    7

    5
    1951         1953     1955   1957   1959   1961   1963   1965   1967   1969   1971


Source: IMF, International Financial Statistics




                                                       34
                                      Figure 3

                              London gold price, 1954-72
    U.S.$ per o unce
  70


  65


  60


  55


  50


  45


  40


  35


  30
   1954        1956    1958   1960   1962   1964   1966     1968   1970   1972


Source: IMF, International Financial Statistics




                                                           35
                    U.S. trade balance and current account balance, 1951-71
     millio ns o f U.S.$
   8000




   6000                                                           trade balance



   4000




   2000

                                                current account balance

      0
      1951        1953     1955   1957   1959   1961   1963    1965       1967   1969   1971


  -2000




  -4000


Source: Economic Report of the President, Transmitted to the Congress, 1984.




                                                                 36
                                                Figure 5

                    Total official liabilities and gold holdings, quarterly, 1959-73
      millio ns o f U.S. $
  80000


  70000

                                                                   total official liabilities
  60000


  50000


  40000


  30000


  20000
                                                                                         gold holdings
  10000


      0
       1959                  1961   1963     1965       1967      1969             1971          1973


Source: IMF, International Financial Statistics




                                                           37
                                              Figure 6
Official reserve composition by country foreign exchange reserves, gold reserves, and total reserves
                                 for each member of the Gold Pool

                      United States                                                          Belgium

 25000                                                                6000


                                                                      5000
 20000

                                        total                         4000
                                                                                                           total
 15000

                                                                      3000
 10000
                                       gold                           2000
                                                                                                             gold
  5000
                                       foreign exchange               1000
                                                                                                         foreign exchange
     0                                                                   0
         61 62 63 64 65 66 67 68 69 70 71 72 73                               61 62 63 64 65 66 67 68 69 70 71 72 73




                         France                                                             Germ any

 14000                                                                40000

                                                                      35000
 12000
                                                                      30000
 10000
                                              total                   25000
  8000
                                                                      20000                                total

  6000                                                                15000

  4000                     gold                                       10000                                 foreign exchange
                                                                       5000
  2000                                                                                                             gold
                                              foreign exchange
                                                                         0
     0                                                                        61 62 63 64 65 66 67 68 69 70 71 72 73
         61 62 63 64 65 66 67 68 69 70 71 72 73



                          Italy                                                            Netherlands
  8000                                                                8000



  6000                                                                6000
                                      total
                                                                                                              total

  4000                                                                4000
                                       gold

                                                                                                              gold
  2000                                                                2000


                                        foreign exchange
                                                                                                             foreign exchange
    0                                                                    0
         61 62 63 64 65 66 67 68 69 70 71 72 73                               61 62 63 64 65 66 67 68 69 70 71 72 73




                                                                 38
                       Sw itzerland                                                United Kingdom

  10000                                                         10000


   8000                                                         8000

                                            total
                                                                                                    total
   6000                                                         6000


   4000                                                         4000


                                                    gold                                              foreign exchange
   2000                                                         2000

                                      foreign exchange                                                      gold
      0                                                            0
          61 62 63 64 65 66 67 68 69 70 71 72 73                        61 62 63 64 65 66 67 68 69 70 71 72 73


Source: IMF, International Financial Statistics




                                                           39
