                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       ARE PERKS PURELY MANAGERIAL EXCESS?

                                          Raghuram Rajan
                                            Julie Wulf

                                        Working Paper 10494
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w10494


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      May 2004




We are grateful to Katie Donohue for assistance in data collection on perquisites and to Severin
Borenstein for the airline data, and we would like to thank both for helpful comments. We also
would like to thank Carliss Baldwin, Wayne Guay, Charlie Himmelberg, Ulrike Malmendier,
Bob Inman, Felix Oberholzer-Gee, Paul Oyer, Reed Shuldiner, Adrian Tschoegl, Premal Vora,
Joel Waldfogel, David Yermack, Peter Zemsky, an anonymous referee, and seminar participants
at the NBER Corporate Finance Summer Institute, American Economic Association Annual
Meeting, Harvard Business School Strategy Conference, Harvard Business School Seminar,
University of Minnesota, Philadelphia Federal Reserve, University of Chicago, and Wharton.
Wulf acknowledges research support from the Reginald H. Jones Center for Management Policy,
Strategy and Organization at the Wharton School and Rajan thanks the National Science
Foundation for research support. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2004 by Raghuram Rajan and Julie Wulf. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Are Perks Purely Managerial Excess?
Raghuram Rajan and Julie Wulf
NBER Working Paper No. 10494
May 2004, Revised June 2020
JEL No. G3,J3

                                          ABSTRACT

A widespread view is that executive perks exemplify agency problems -- they are a route through
which managers misappropriate a firm’s surplus. Accordingly, firms with high free cash flow,
operating in industries with limited investment prospects, should offer more perks, and firms
subject to more external monitoring should offer fewer perks. The evidence for agency as an
explanation of perks is, at best, mixed. Perks are, however, offered in situations in which they
enhance managerial productivity. While we cannot rule out the occasional aberration, and while
we have little to say on the overall level of perks, our findings suggest that treating perks purely
as managerial excess is incorrect.


Raghuram Rajan
Booth School of Business
University of Chicago
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
raghuram.rajan@ChicagoBooth.edu

Julie Wulf
760 West End Ave #PH
New York, NY 10025
julie@jmwulf.com
1. Introduction

       Some firms offer their executives enormous perquisites or “perks.” NorthWestern, a

cash-strapped utility based in South Dakota, which had suspended its dividend, yet was

scheduled to spend $450,000 in 2003 on the use of a corporate jet by its newly appointed

CEO, on top of a $565,000 salary, $600,000 signing bonus, and up to $423,000 in

potential incentives. In contrast, the CEO of pharmaceutical giant AstraZeneca proudly

states, “We use normally scheduled flights. You’ll see me at the airport like everyone

else.” 1 Why do some firms offer employees such lavish perks instead of giving

employees more choice and perhaps greater utility by giving them the monetary

equivalent in additional pay?

       By the term perk, we refer to forms of nonmonetary compensation offered to select

employees. These range from the use of an executive jet or a chauffeur-driven car to a

giant corner office and country club memberships. Implied in the definition is that the

perk is not strictly necessary for the accomplishment of the employee’s duties (scheduled

commercial flights are available or the executive only works out of a small portion of the

office).

       In fact, the leading theory of perks in the corporate finance literature, following

Grossman and Hart (1980), Jensen and Meckling (1976), and Jensen (1986), is that they

are a way for managers to misappropriate some of the surplus the firm generates.

Managers can do so because perks are hard to observe by distant outsiders, and the value

of perks is typically underreported to shareholders, if disclosed at all (there was public

amazement at the size of the perks in former GE CEO Jack Welch’s retirement package

and these came to light only through court documents filed by his wife during divorce

1
    From an article in USA Today, “Pricey Perks let Executives fly High”, August 5, 2003.


                                                                                             1
proceedings). 2 Moreover, perks are one sign that the firm has a free cash flow “problem”

with more cash than it knows how to spend (Jensen, 1986), so excessive perks are

typically only the tip of an iceberg of wasteful corporate practices such as overinvestment

and lax management. Legions of theoretical papers have been written in which managers

extract value through perks.

     Despite the theoretical and popular focus on managerial excess as the explanation for

why some firms offer so much more in terms of perks than others, there are other, more

benign, explanations. While perks have been excoriated in the popular press, some may

well help managers in the performance of their duties, i.e., they aid productivity even if

they are not strictly necessary for the performance of the manager’s duties. For instance,

a firm may benefit if its senior executives arrive fresh to a crucial negotiation after

traveling by corporate jet rather than arriving tired and jet-lagged after traveling in

economy class. A senior executive may not be willing to pay out of his own pocket for

executive jet travel if it were not offered as a perk since his private value for it may be far

smaller than the benefit to the company. Hence, payment via perk rather than via

monetary compensation. There are also other benign explanations that we will explore.

     Our objective in this paper is to examine whether there is systematic evidence in

favor of either the malign or benign interpretations of the use of perks as compensation.

To do this, we use a detailed database of job descriptions of top managers and their perk

and compensation structures in over 300 large U.S. firms tracked over a period of up to

2
  Securities and Exchange Commision disclosure rules require that perquisites worth more than a certain
value must be reported as other annual compensation in the proxy statement for the five-highest paid
executives. However, compliance and perquisite valuation vary across firms. For example, AIG discloses
no costs of perks provided to management, stating they are a business expense that facilitates the
performance of management responsibilities (USA Today, Aug 5, 2003). As another example, Warren
Buffet recognized shareholder sensitivity to excessive perks in his response to a reporter about Berkshire
Hathaway’s acquisition of a corporate jet, named “The Indefensible.” He responded, “I put it in our annual
report in the tiniest type I could find. So, I kind of tip-toed into the arena.” (The Age, September 24, 2002).


                                                                                                             2
14 years. Since there is so little work on perks, we document the nature of perks offered

to Chief Executive Officers (CEOs) and divisional managers across firms as well as how

they change over time.

    We then test the implications of the theories we outline. Since there is limited time

variation in perks in our sample, we focus on the cross-sectional variation. Broadly

speaking, even though in some industries or in individual firms perks may be a form of

excess, the systematic evidence in favor of existing theories of perks as private benefits is

mixed at best. Moreover, there is systematic evidence for other explanations – primarily,

that perks appear to be used when they contribute to improved managerial productivity.

In particular, time-saving perks are far more common in settings in which the time saved

is the greatest, and for employees whose time is most valuable. For example, we find

that company planes are less common in firms headquartered in counties with larger

populations and in firms headquartered in close proximity to larger airports, but more

common in firms with operations that are more geographically dispersed.

    The closest paper to this work is Yermack (2004), who studies the use of corporate

jets by business executives on personal account. Few would deny that the use of company

planes for shuttling one’s family or friends for golf or shopping trips, without revealing

the full extent to shareholders, is a misuse of firm resources. It is interesting but not

surprising therefore that when such actions are revealed to the shareholder, there is a

measurable negative stock price reaction. More surprising is that shareholders penalize

managers more than could be accounted for by the value of benefits consumed,

suggesting that shareholders draw broader inferences about the managers’ trustworthiness

from such data.




                                                                                             3
    Yermack’s paper focuses on uncovering more egregious misuse and its

consequences. Our paper is different in two respects. First, the possession of corporate

jets itself has come to be associated with excess (the canonical example being RJR

Airforce popularized in Burroughs and Helyar, 2003). Thus, it is also important to see

whether perks such as jets could also have a business purpose that is justifiable – that is,

we focus on overall use rather than just use for personal reasons. Second, we would like

to determine whether there are well-defined patterns in the data, consistent with the

theories, that can explain who uses perks. Our paper does not rule out the possibility that

the occasional firm manager may abuse perks, and consequently should be consistent

with Yermack’s results. However, the systematic patterns we observe in the data are

consistent with a more responsible use of perks in business. Furthermore, we find

theories of agency that suggest certain patterns have very mixed success when taken to

the data. This suggests that we need to rethink whether perk consumption should be the

canonical example of systematic forms of agency (such as the agency costs of free cash

flows) as has been suggested in the past.

2. Theories and their implications

    We start by outlining theories of why firms might offer perks and the patterns they

predict in the data. Let us begin with the most benign view, namely, that perks could

enhance productivity.

2.1. Perks and productivity

    The firm may benefit more than the individual manager by offering management

perks. For instance, a manager who arrives fresh after traveling in First Class on a

transatlantic flight may be much better positioned to negotiate a multibillion dollar




                                                                                               4
contract than one who has been cramped in Economy class. The manager may not

internalize the full value to the firm of being fresh, so he might prefer a cheaper form of

travel if the firm did not pay for it.

     It may also be more cost effective (in a broad sense) for the firm to provide some

perks. The presence of an executive dining room obviates the need for executives to

spend time away from work traveling to lunch. The dining room (or the coffee machine)

may also increase serendipitous encounters among top executives, fostering greater

communication. Finally, the firm may enjoy scale economies in providing a perk to its

employees. For all these reasons, it may be cheaper for the firm to provide the perk than

to have employees make individual uncoordinated choices.

     The conjecture that perks are awarded so that the firm can enhance the productivity

of its employees leads to a number of empirical implications. 3 First, more productive

employees should get more perks. Second, in situations in which the time saved by a perk

is particularly high, more perks should be provided. Finally, since time-saving is most

valuable to the most productive employees, perks should increase disproportionately to

such employees when the potential for time-saving increases.

2.2. Perks and private benefits

     Now consider the detailed implications of theories that suggest perks are private

benefits. 4 An immediate question is why perks and not pay? After all, would managers


3
  In the absence of more sophisticated models, we do not distinguish between productivity-enhancing and
cost-minimizing perks. The key distinction between productivity and private benefits explanations is that
productive perks increase firm value, while perks that are private benefits do not.
4
  Hart (2001) defines perks as nonpecuniary benefits such as “fancy offices, private jets, the easy life,
etc…. that are attractive to management but are of no interest to shareholders—in fact they reduce firm
value. Moreover, it is reasonable to assume that they are inefficient in the sense that one dollar of perks
reduces firm value by more than a dollar.” Conceptually, perks as private benefits implies that the financial
cost of the perk exceeds the associated productivity gain. Perks as private benefits are distinct from
pecuniary forms of compensation in that they are not transferable (or difficult to transfer).


                                                                                                            5
not prefer more fungible pay that they can use as desired? The answer has to be that perks

are the preferred form of compensation because managers can get away with them more

easily than with higher pecuniary pay – perhaps because the full value of perks is less

likely to be disclosed to investors and investors are usually not in physical contact with

management, so that they cannot see the extent of perk consumption for themselves.

    Jensen (1986) points out that it is easier for managers to spend money on themselves

in mature firms with few growth prospects (they have little by way of productive

alternative investment) and substantial free cash flows (they do not have to go outside to

raise resources from questioning investors). So perk consumption should be negatively

related to the firm’s growth prospects, and positively related to the “free” cash the firm

generates. According to Jensen, it is the combination of low investment opportunities and

high cash flow that is particularly conducive to perk consumption. Of course, since perks

are a form of compensation, it is important to correct for performance in checking

whether free cash matters.

    If perks are primarily a form of private benefit, better-governed firms will offer

managers lower perks. Also, if perks are easier to pay because they are not disclosed,

perks should be disproportionately more valuable to CEOs who disclose pay than to

lower-level managers who don’t. Again, these effects should be most pronounced for

firms that are prone to waste.

    While the above are the leading explanations for perks, there are others.

1.3. Perks and status




                                                                                             6
     Perks may also be a form of status or positional good (Hirsch, 1976) that reinforces

an employee’s standing in the organization. In the colorful words of compensation expert

Graef Crystal, 5

     “We don’t wear crowns in this country or carry such symbols of office as a field
marshal’s baton. So it is hard to tell the players apart, to spot the chairman of the board in
a crowd. He’s the one wearing the Saville Row suit, but you have to be knowledgeable
about clothes to pick him out. You’re more certain when you see him go by in a
chauffeur driven limousine. Or when you are ushered into his office, which is of such
size that you think the New York Knicks must use it for practice in off-hours.”


     More prosaically, employees may care both about their standing and the fact that it is

well known within the organization. Unlike an employee’s pay, which is not widely

known within the firm (except for the top managers whose pay is publicly disclosed), the

fact that an employee has a chauffeur-driven car or that he uses the corporate jet is widely

seen and noticed by other employees within the firm. If relative standing within the firm

is an important element of the utility derived from compensation (see Frank,

1985a,1985b), then perks can motivate far more cost-effectively than equivalent amounts

of cash. In fact, even if everyone’s compensation were disclosed, perks may still play an

additional role in conveying status. There are only so many corner offices or so many

places on the corporate jet, and who gets them can signal the recipient’s place in the

pecking order better than cash compensation (which is subject to noise of its own) can.

     The army recognizes these sorts of motivation well by giving out medals for bravery

that have a value far greater than the metal they are stamped on. 6 But this raises a number

of questions. First, why can corporations not invent their own medals or ribbons, which

will cost them virtually nothing, instead of paying with perks? In truth, most perks do not

5
 Crystal (1978) cited in Evans (1984).
6
 Napoleon Bonaparte, the great French military commander, marveled at the motivational power of a small
piece of ribbon (a decoration): “If I had enough ribbon, I could conquer the world.”


                                                                                                     7
cost much relative to managerial compensation, so they may in fact be ribbons. Second,

why does the CEO need perks – after all, everyone knows who he is and how much he

earns. One explanation may be that the CEO needs to be offered perks (in fact, the most

perks) so as to legitimize the status attached to the perk: a prestigious country club

membership would not convey as much status for other executives if the CEO did not

belong to it. Finally, if perks are rationed by the firm to convey status, it becomes clear

why employees cannot be allowed to bid for them with their own money – the entire

status value of medals for bravery would be lost if one could simply buy them at Macys.

Moreover, the firm could head off a perk race and gross overinvestment by determining

allocations itself.

     If perks are meant to enhance status, they are likely to be used in organizations that

emphasize status by carefully delineating positions. Large firms are more likely to have

well-defined hierarchies, so they are likely to have more perks (though they are also

likely to have scale economies in offering perks). Also, the steeper the hierarchy, the

more likely perks are to be used at the top.

1.4. Perks and taxes

     Finally, we have taxes. Some perks (such as a beautiful office) may be seen by the

employee as a form of compensation, but may not be taxed as such by the Internal

Revenue Service. Thus they may be a tax-advantaged way to pay. One way of testing for

this is to verify whether if perks are more likely to be offered in states that have higher

marginal taxes.

2.5. Summary




                                                                                              8
    We outline above a number of explanations for why some firms pay their employees

with perks rather than their monetary equivalent. Our explanations are not mutually

exclusive. In fact, they may be mutually reinforcing. For instance, the firm could let the

CEO signal his status by paying him more and letting him indulge in “conspicuous

consumption” (see Veblen, 1899; Frank, 1985a, 1985b; Bagwell and Bernheim,1996).

But it may be cheaper to pay him with a perk that performs the dual role of enhancing his

productivity on the job and letting him signal. Our endeavor here is to determine whether

the private benefit explanation accounts in reasonable measure for the patterns in the

data, and if not, what other explanations are tenable. Our aim is not, however, to arrive at

a monocausal explanation.

3. Data description

3.1. Sample description

    The primary dataset used in this study includes a panel of more than 300 publicly

traded U.S. firms over the years 1986 to 1999, spanning a number of industries. The data

are collected from a confidential compensation survey conducted by Hewitt Associates, a

leading human resources consulting firm specializing in executive compensation and

benefits. The survey is the largest private compensation survey (as measured by the

number of participating firms) and is comprehensive in that it collects data on more than

50 senior and middle management positions including both operational positions (e.g.,

Chief Operations Officer and Divisional CEO) and staff positions (e.g., Chief Financial

Officer and Head of Human Resources).

    The survey typically covers all the positions at the top of the hierarchy and a sample

of positions lower down. In this study, we use a subset of the survey’s benchmark




                                                                                             9
positions: Chief Executive Officer (CEO) and Divisional Manager (DM). The data for

each position include all components of compensation including salary, bonus, restricted

stock, stock options, and other forms of long-term incentives (e.g., performance units) as

well as a list of perks made available to that position. To ensure consistency in matching

these positions across firms, the survey provides benchmark position descriptions and

collects additional data for each position including: job title, number of employees under

the position’s jurisdiction, the title of the position that the job reports to (i.e., the

position’s boss), and the number of reporting levels between the position and the board of

directors.

    We believe the survey data are accurate for several reasons. First, Hewitt personnel

are knowledgeable about survey participants because they are typically assigned to

specific participants for several years. Furthermore, while the participating firms initially

match their positions to the benchmark positions in the survey, Hewitt personnel follow

up to verify accuracy and spend an additional eight to ten hours on each questionnaire

evaluating the consistency of responses with public data (e.g., proxy statements) and

across years. Finally, participants have an incentive to match positions correctly and

provide accurate data because they use the survey results to set pay levels and design

management compensation programs.

    We supplement the survey data with information from several other data sets:

Compustat for financial information, CDA Spectrum for institutional shareholdings,

Directory of Corporate Affiliations for year of founding, U.S. Census Bureau for data on

county population and travel time to work, U.S. Department of Transportation for

commercial flights by airport, and the U.S. Federation of Tax Administrators for




                                                                                            10
marginal state tax rates. While the Hewitt survey is conducted in April of each year and

the perk data describe the firm in the year of survey completion, some statistics (e.g.,

number of employees in the firm) represent the end of the most recent fiscal year. To

maintain consistency, we match the supplemental data sets using the year prior to the

year of the survey. Finally, not all variables are available for all positions, firms, and

years, and due to limitations in matching with the supplemental data sets, our samples are

smaller for some parts of the analysis.

    In Table 1, we present descriptive statistics for the firms in the sample. While the

data set includes more than 300 firms, the exact number varies over the period, as firms

enter and exit as survey participants. The firms in the sample are large, well established,

and profitable, with an average size of approximately 44,000 employees, age of 93 years

since founding, and operating return on assets of 16.7%. The typical firm in the sample

is thus a large, mature, and stable firm. The sample firms span many industrial sectors of

the economy, with some concentration in the food, paper, chemical, machinery,

electrical, transportation equipment, instrumentation, communications and utilities

industries.

3.2 Sample representativeness

   Clearly, an important issue in datasets such as this one is the question of sample

selection and whether the firms in the dataset are distinctive from, or representative of,

employers of similar size in their industry. The survey participants are typically the

leaders in their sectors and, in fact, more than 75% percent of the firms in the data set are

listed as Fortune 500 firms in at least one year and more than 85% are listed as Fortune

1,000 firms. In general, Hewitt survey participants also participate in other compensation




                                                                                             11
consulting firm surveys (e.g., Hay Associates, Mercer, Towers Perrin, to name a few),

primarily to receive information about pay practices to use as a competitive benchmark in

evaluating their own compensation programs. It is important to note that the sample

includes many more firms than those in Hewitt’s consulting client base, with at least 50%

of the firms as survey participants with no client relationship to Hewitt.

   We evaluate the representativeness of our sample by comparing key financial

measures of our survey participants to a matched sample from Compustat. We begin by

matching each firm in the Hewitt data set to the Compustat firm that is closest in sales

within its two-digit SIC industry in the year the firm joins the sample. We then perform

Wilcoxon signed rank tests to compare the Hewitt firms with the matched firms. While

the firms in the Hewitt data set are, on average, slightly larger in sales than the matched

sample, we find no statistically significant difference in employment and profitability

(return on sales). The Hewitt firms are larger in sales than the matched sample of firms

because in a number of cases, the Hewitt firm is the largest firm in the industry thus

forcing us to select a matched firm smaller in size. We also find no statistically

significant difference in sales growth, employment growth, or annual changes in

profitability for all sample years. In sum, while the Hewitt firms are larger (measured by

sales) on average than the matched sample, there is little additional evidence that these

firms are not representative of the population of industrial firms that are leaders in their

sectors.

   We also calculate financial measures for the sample of Compustat firms with 10,000

employees or greater over the period from 1986 to 1999 (excluding firms operating in

financial services). We find that, on average, survey participants are more profitable, but




                                                                                               12
grow at a slower rate relative to the sample of large Compustat firms. Specifically, the

sample average return on sales for survey participants is 17.8% versus 15.7% for the

sample of large Compustat firms, and the average sales growth is 5.7% vs. 7.4%. This is

consistent with our observation that the firms in our sample are likely to be industry

leaders (hence slightly more profitable) and also large (hence the slightly slower growth).

There is no reason why this should dramatically skew the inferences from the sample.

       To summarize, the survey sample is probably most representative of Fortune 500

firms.

3.3. Perk measures

        As part of the annual compensation survey, Hewitt includes a section on perquisites

in which they request detailed information on approximately 15 categories of perks. The

term perquisite can represent several types of employee benefits including time off

without pay, executive services, nonperformance awards, healthcare, survivor protection,

and retirement coverage. 7 Perks covered by the Hewitt survey are primarily executive

services (e.g., company plane, chauffer service, financial counseling), with only a few

classified as nonperformance awards (e.g., loans) and healthcare (e.g., hospital

examination). A list and description of the perquisites covered in the 1995 survey are

included in the Appendix.

        Detailed information is collected for each perk including (i) eligibility criteria, e.g.,

number of domestic employees eligible and pay of the lowest position eligible, (ii)

limitations, e.g., conditions for use of the company plane (i.e., when the plane can be




7
    Categories outlined in Ellig (1981) for purposes of tax discussion.


                                                                                                13
scheduled without higher-level approval), and (iii) charge for use. 8 Finally, the survey

includes a perquisites eligibility table that asks the respondent to indicate which perks, if

any, are provided to each survey position including multiple incumbents. We use the

data from the eligibility table to construct our perk measures.

     For each perk, we create an indicator variable equal to one if the perk is offered to

the employee and zero otherwise. Note that unlike Yermack (2004), we do not focus on

perks used for personal purposes only.

     An alternative measure is the Hewitt valuation of each perk. However, valuation is

not as precise as one might desire and while valuations provide some useful comparative

benchmarks to survey participants, they suffer from significant measurement error.

Because of these limitations, we use measures that simply indicate whether a perk is

offered (or not offered) to a position in a given year.

     In this study, we focus on two positions, namely, Chief Executive Officer (CEO) and

the Division Manager (DM). The CEO is the highest executive in the corporation and the

Division Manager is the highest authority in the division, which is defined as the “lowest

level of profit center responsibility for a business unit that engineers, manufactures, and

sells its own products.” For a thorough description of both of these positions, see Rajan

and Wulf (2003). We primarily analyze CEO perks with the unit of observation in the

CEO data set being a perk offering to a CEO in a given year. The divisional manager

perk variable is equal to the proportion of divisional managers within the firm receiving

the perk. We also construct a perk differential measure that captures perk differences

across the hierarchical levels within the firm. Using the company plane as an example,


8
  In a paper related to charges for use, Marino and Zabojnik (2004) derive optimal pricing contracts for
firms offering discounts and benefits to employees.


                                                                                                           14
we construct a CEO-DM differential by subtracting the proportion of divisional managers

with access to the plane from the CEO company plane indicator variable. A value of one

in this example means that the CEO has access to the company plane while no divisional

manager does. Perk differentials defined in this way ignore the variation in the economic

difference of the divisional manager positions across firms. While we report the raw

differentials in Table 2, we control for differences in the relative importance of divisional

managers across firms by including average division size in the differential regressions in

Tables 5 through 7.

4. Facts about perks

     We start by reporting summary statistics on a number of perks including company

plane, chauffer service, company car, club memberships (country, lunch, health), and

individual financial counseling (financial planning, tax preparation, estate planning). We

also group the perks into three packages: travel perks, club membership perks, and

financial counseling perks. 9 We define TRAVEL3 as an indicator variable equal to one if

a firm offers access to the company plane, chauffer service, and a company car to the

CEO. Analogously, we define CLUB3 for country, lunch, and health club memberships

and FINANCIAL3 for financial planning, tax preparation, and estate planning. We focus

on these perks because they are potentially the most valuable to the executive, most

costly to the company, and they have been consistently defined in all years in the

survey. 10 Ultimately, we sharpen our focus to company plane, which scores high on all




9
  Oyer (2004) uses similar “package” measures in analyzing employee benefits.
10
   Other perks covered by the survey change slightly over time. For example, in earlier years, the types of
company cars included luxury, full-size, and intermediate. In the last year of the survey, car types included
super, luxury i, luxury ii, and full-size. Our company car measure is an indicator of whether any type of car
is offered.


                                                                                                          15
these attributes and has the additional merit of being the canonical example of an

excessive perk.

     Table 2 presents summary statistics for the perks for CEO and Divisional Manager

(DM) positions and the differential between the CEO and Divisional Manager. The CEO

has access to the company plane in 66% of the firm-years, enjoys chauffer service in

38%, and receives a company car in 56% of the firm-years; 17% of the firms offer all

three travel perks to the CEO (column (i)). Almost half of the firms offer country club

memberships to their CEOs (47%), while 48% offer lunch club memberships, 17% offer

health club memberships, and 12% offer all three club membership perks. Finally,

individual financial counseling for the CEO is quite common: 70% obtain financial

planning assistance, 65% tax preparation, and 59% estate planning; 52% are offered all

three types of financial counseling.

     In comparison to CEOs, divisional managers (column iii) are much less likely to

have access to the company plane (30% vs. 66%) or receive chauffer services (6% vs.

38%), but the probabilities are much closer for the company car (46% vs. 56%). 11 The

differences in incidence of club memberships or financial counseling services between

divisional managers and CEOs are not as great as those in planes and chauffer services

(29% vs. 47% for country club; 32% vs. 48% for lunch club; 34% vs. 52% for the

financial counseling package).

     An obvious question to ask is what is the relation between pay and perks? Are high-

paying firms more likely to offer perks? In general, the answer is yes. The logarithm of

CEO salary plus bonus is positively correlated with access to the company plane

11
  Frank (1985a) argues that relative standing matters more than the absolute level of consumption with
certain types of goods. In the example of the company plane, the CEO places more value on access to the
company plane when the division manager does not have access.


                                                                                                      16
(correlation coefficient =0.30 (p-value=0.000)), chauffer service (0.28 (0.000)), club

memberships (0.05 (0.009)), and financial counseling (0.20 (0.000)), but negatively

correlated with a company car (-0.06, (0.002)). Of course these relations might be

explained by firm size, performance, or industry effects—larger, better-performing firms

in given industries pay more and also grant more perks. To evaluate this, we regress the

logarithm of CEO salary plus bonus on firm size, market-to-book ratio (industry-

adjusted), and industry and year indicators, and we estimate comparable regressions with

each perk as the dependent variable (again controlling for size, market-to-book, industry,

and year). The correlations of the residuals from these regressions are smaller, but similar

to the raw correlations listed above, with one exception: pay and company car are now

weakly positively correlated (0.02). So, on average, firms that pay well also perk

well. 12   13



     Another interesting question is whether perk offerings have changed over time. One

might imagine that perks have come under increased scrutiny with additional SEC

disclosure requirements and pressure from the IRS to declare perks as taxable income. 14

With the caveat that our data do not allow us to distinguish between business and

personal use, we find little variation in perks over the period in our sample. Focusing on

12
   Yermack (2004) finds no statistically significant relation between use of perks on personal account and
“excess” compensation defined as the residual from CEO total pay regressed on firm size, CEO tenure,
stock performance, and industry and year indicators. He also finds no relation between use of perks on
personal account and CEO fractional ownership.
13
   Also, individual perks offered to the CEO are positively correlated within firms: for example, planes and
chauffer service (correlation coefficient =0.28), chauffer and country club memberships (0.12), and planes
and country club memberships (0.10). We find similar correlations among divisional manager perks.
14
   While our data do not allow us to distinguish between business and personal use, the change in disclosure
requirements might have an effect on overall trends. The SEC adopted more stringent disclosure
requirements (effective January, 1993) for all pay components of the top five-highest paid executives. In
this new ruling, perks worth more than $50,000 or 10% of the executive’s total salary and bonus must be
disclosed as other compensation in the proxy statement, and any perquisite worth more than 25% of the
total of these extras must be detailed in a footnote. The stated purpose of the new rules is to “provide
shareholders with a clear and concise presentation of compensation paid or awarded to executive officers,
and the directors’ bases for making such compensation decisions.”


                                                                                                         17
CEO perks and limiting the sample to firms that appear for two consecutive years (to

minimize bias from exit and entry), we find that access to a company plane decreases

slightly on average over the period from 0.74 in 1987 to 0.64 in 1999. We see similar

declines in chauffer service (decreasing from 0.40 to 0.31), company cars (0.58 to 0.49),

and country club memberships (0.53 to 0.41), but an increase in the financial counseling

package (0.45 to 0.56). The slow downward trend in most perk offerings is notable given

that pay has been increasing substantially over this period.

    The limited change over time in perks within firms suggests that cross-sectional

analyses that explore the variation in perks across firms and across positions within firms

might be more informative than the time-series changes.

    One place to begin analysis of cross-sectional variation is to ask whether the

propensity to offer perks differs across industries. In Table 3, we present the average of

the sum of five perk indicators (Sum5) and each individual perk for the CEO: company

plane, chauffer, company car, country club membership, and financial counseling

package (FINANCIAL3). We include only industries in which we have 50 or more firm-

year observations and rank the industries for the sum of CEO perks (rank of 1 is highest).

Firms operating in the petroleum refining industry (SIC 29) offer the most CEO perks

overall (rank of 1 in column ii) and rank the highest in each category (with the exception

of company car). In contrast, firms operating in the machines and computers industry

(SIC 35) offer the fewest CEO perks (rank of 14). To evaluate the exclusivity of perks to

CEOs by industry, we turn to the industry ranks of the sum of the five perk differentials.

Again, the petroleum refining industry ranks the highest in the average of the difference

between CEO and divisional manager perks, and firms in the machines and computers




                                                                                         18
industry rank the lowest (rank of 14) (unreported). It is interesting that the industry

singled out by Jensen in his seminal 1986 paper as a canonical example of corporate

excess caused by free cash -- the oil and gas industry -- seems to have a very high level of

perks and also a high differential.

     To summarize, we find that CEOs receive more perks than lower-level managers

within firms. This is not surprising since CEOs are also paid more. Across firms, we

find that high-paid CEOs are more likely to receive perks. The perks in our sample of

firms do not vary much over time. We also find important differences in industry-

specific perk practices, with oil and gas firms being more likely to offer perks and

machine and computer firms being less likely. We now turn to regression analysis.



5. Analysis

5.1. Testing for productivity

     We begin with the explanation that perks are offered to enhance the productivity of

recipients. To evaluate the evidence in favor of productivity, we turn to two time-saving

perks, the company plane and chauffer service. Managers that operate larger firms

should receive additional time-saving perks because their time is more valuable (e.g.,

Rosen,1982). In addition to firm size, the location of a firm’s headquarters has

implications for perks improving CEO productivity. In particular, the use of company

planes may be more efficient for firms located far from airports relative to those in close

proximity to airline hubs. Also, chauffer service may be more efficient for CEOs that

face longer commute times. 15


15
  For an analysis of establishments offering employee benefits to ease employee costs of working long
hours, see Oyer (2004). He finds support for the complementarity between effort and benefits in which


                                                                                                        19
     In Table 4, we estimate probit regressions of perks related to travel. In column (i)

we begin with the company plane indicator as the dependent variable and include the

logarithm of the number of employees in the firm. Since large airports, airline hubs, and

thus convenient commercial flights are more easily accessible in large urban areas, we

include the logarithm of population for the county in which the firm is headquartered.

Population by county is the number of people in thousands for the county in which the

firm is headquartered. Population figures are those reported by the U.S. Census Bureau

in the years 1990 and 2000 (interleaving years are extrapolated using the annual growth

rate between these years). We also include industry and year indicators, cluster errors by

firm, and report estimates of marginal coefficients (evaluated at the mean). 16 The

coefficient on firm size is positive and significant. A one-standard deviation increase in

the logarithm of the number of employees is associated with an increase of 24.6% in the

probability of a firm offering a company plane. The coefficient estimate for log of county

population is indeed negative and statistically significant (t= -4.41), with a one-standard

deviation increase in population being correlated with a decrease of 12.4% in probability.

Larger firms are more likely to operate a company plane and firms headquartered in more

populated counties are less likely to do so.

     Certainly, we would expect counties with high populations to also be near airports

with lots of scheduled flights that offer choice of timing and destination. To test this

further, we construct a more refined measure of commercial flight accessibility by using

data for the largest 200 airports in the U.S. We define FLIGHTS as the logarithm of the


harder working employees are more likely to receive time-saving benefits (or benefits that reduce disutility
from working additional hours). For example, workers who work more than full-time are more likely to
receive employer-provided meals.
16
   We report robust standard errors by clustering by firm to address both heteroskedasticity and non-
independence of errors within firms across time.


                                                                                                         20
annual number of departing flights in a given year from airports within a 50-mile radius

of the center of the county in which the firm is headquartered. The data source for the

number of flights and airport location is the U.S. Department of Transportation T-100

database. The data source for the longitude and latitude of county centers is from the U.S.

Census Bureau. We calculate the spherical distance between airport locations and county

centers as specified by both longitude and latitude coordinates. In Table 4 column (ii), we

include this measure in place of county population in the earlier regression. The

coefficient estimate on the number of flights is negative and statistically significant

(t= -3.28) and the magnitude of the association is economically significant. A one-

standard deviation increase in the number of flights is correlated with a decrease of

10.3% in the probability of a firm offering a company plane. CEOs that work in

headquarters located in close proximity to larger airports are less likely to have access to

a company plane. This evidence supports the productivity explanation of why firms

provide CEOs access to corporate jets.

    Turning to our other perk that is directly related to travel; chauffer service, firms that

are headquartered in more populated areas should be more likely to offer chauffer service

to CEOs in order to increase productivity during their commute. We define CHAUFFER

as an indicator variable equal to one if the CEO has access to chauffer service and zero

otherwise. In Table 4 column (iii), we regress CHAUFFER on the log of firm employees,

the log of population for the county in which the firm is headquartered, and industry and

year indicators. The coefficient estimate on firm size is positive and significant: larger

firms are more likely to offer chauffer service. Moreover, the coefficient estimate on

population is now positive and highly significant (t= 3.43). Larger firms and firms




                                                                                             21
headquartered in more populated counties are more likely to offer chauffer service to

their CEOs. The difference in the sign of the estimated coefficient on county population

in explaining air travel from that in explaining chauffer service suggests we are not

simply picking up the effects of some omitted variable associated with county population.

     While county population of headquarters should be positively correlated with the

length of the CEO’s commute, we construct a more refined measure by defining TRAVEL

as the median travel time to work in number of minutes for workers residing in the

county in which the firm is headquartered. In Table 4 column (iv), we include this

measure in place of county population in the earlier regression. The coefficient estimate

on TRAVEL is again positive and highly statistically significant (t= 5.07). 17 CEOs that

work in headquarters located in either larger counties or counties with longer median

commute times are more likely to have access to chauffer service. This evidence strongly

supports the productivity explanation of why firms provide CEOs with chauffer service. 18

     Let us explore the productivity explanation for access to a company plane further. A

company plane should be more prevalent in firms with geographically dispersed

operations. If all of the divisional offices and the majority of the firm’s employees work

at headquarters, this should reduce the CEO’s travel needs. In contrast, if a firm’s

divisions are geographically dispersed, the productivity argument for a company plane is

17
   The data source for the median travel time to work is the U.S. Census Bureau. We use data reported from
the 1990 and 2000 surveys, and based on the average annual growth rate over the decade, we extrapolate
data for the intervening years and the years prior to 1990. The ideal measure for our purposes is the travel
time for individuals who work in a county instead of those who reside in a county. This measure probably
understates the commuting time for many CEOs because in some counties, the proportion of those living in
a county that also work in a county is low. For example, New York City headquartered firms draw many
people from surrounding suburbs and not many NYC residents work outside of the city, so median travel
time for NYC residents will understate travel time for NYC workers.
18
   While the company car is a travel perk, it is not directly related to productivity (although driving in a
nicer car is more comfortable, thereby making longer hours less distasteful to busy managers). We find that
company car is not correlated with firm size. However, this is confounded by the fact that chauffer and
company car might be substitutes for CEOs.


                                                                                                         22
more compelling. We know the state of location for each division that is reported in the

Hewitt survey, so we construct a measure of a firm’s geographic dispersion based on this

information. We define DISTANCE as the sum of the distance between the location of

headquarters and each division in the firm (i.e., the number of miles between the county

of the location of headquarters and the most-populated county in the state of the

division’s location). Unfortunately, we only know the state of location of the division and

cannot determine divisional proximity to large airports. In Table 5 column (i), we regress

COPLANE on the logarithm of number of employees, the logarithm of the county

population of the headquarters, the logarithm of DISTANCE, and year indicators. We

include industry indicators in column (ii). The coefficient on DISTANCE is positive and

significant in both regressions, suggesting that more geographically dispersed firms are

more likely to offer a company plane to their CEO even when controlling for firm size.

A one-standard deviation in DISTANCE is associated with a 6.1% increase in the

probability of a firm offering access to a company plane. 19

     To further refine the tests, we focus on two categories of firms: (i) firms that would

enhance CEO productivity the most by offering a company plane—represented by an

indicator (DISPERSED_FAR) if a firm is above median distance and below median

proximity to larger airports (FLIGHTS), and (ii) firms that would enhance productivity

the least—represented by an indicator (CONCENTRATED_CLOSE) if a firm is below

median distance and above median proximity to larger airports. In a regression (not


19
   Another finding that supports the productivity argument is that the offer of a company plane to the CEO
is positively correlated with sales per employee. If we regress sales/employee on the company plane
indicator, firm size, and industry and year indicators, the coefficient on COPLANE is positive and
significant. We find a similar result if we replace COPLANE in this regression with an “excess plane”
measure defined as the residual from a regression that controls for plane demand (proxied by population
and distance). These findings are the opposite of that found by Yermack (2004) and are further evidence
that our perk measures of plane use are different.


                                                                                                        23
reported) with these two indicators and controls for firm size, industry, and year

indicators, we find a positive and significant coefficient on DISPERSED_FAR and a

negative and significant coefficient on CONCENTRATED_CLOSE. Firms with the

greatest opportunity to enhance productivity are more likely to offer plane access to their

CEOs, while firms with the least opportunity are less likely. Put differently, access to a

company plane is more likely in a setting in which the time saved is the greatest.

    A more subtle implication of the productivity hypothesis is that more time-saving

perks should be offered to managers who are more productive. A number of economists

argue (see, for example, Calvo and Wellisz, 1979; Rosen, 1982) that heads of larger units

are likely to be more productive both because more talented managers are hired to head

larger units and because their decisions impact more people at the margin. One measure

of the productivity of a manager is therefore the size of the unit they head.

So we should see that being more distant from a large airport should make it more likely

that CEOs of larger firms should have access to a company plane. Therefore, we include

interactions between firm size and population. We find the coefficients on the interaction

to be negative and significant as expected (Table 5 column (iii)).

    Finally, the perk differential between the CEO and the divisional manager should

increase in the size of the firm and decrease in the size of the unit headed by the

divisional manager. Moreover, it should increase as the travel needs of the CEO increase.

In Table 5 column (iv), we regress the company plane differential on firm size,

population, distance, division size, and industry and year indicators. We find that the

differential goes up in the size of the firm and falls in the average size of the division,

consistent with the productivity explanation. We also find a positive and significant




                                                                                              24
coefficient for DISTANCE, suggesting that greater travel demands for CEOs warrant

substantially different access to the company plane.

     As we mention earlier, pay and perks are positively correlated. Since they are jointly

determined, we could obtain biased coefficients if we include pay directly. However, the

omission of pay may also bias our results. While we choose to exclude pay in our

reported regressions, the results are qualitatively similar when we include the logarithm

of CEO salary plus bonus.

     In sum, there is evidence in support of the productivity explanation. Company

planes are less common in firms that are headquartered in counties with larger

populations and less common in firms that are in close proximity to larger airports. They

are also more common in firms with operations that are more geographically dispersed.

Larger firms tend to offer more use of the company plane when the time saving entailed

for their CEO is more substantial. Larger firms tend to offer more plane access to CEOs

relative to divisional managers, though the differential is lower when divisional managers

run larger units. Finally, the differential is larger when the firm operations are more

geographically dispersed, which makes sense because the CEO is likely to travel more.

5.2. Testing for private benefits

     We turn now to evaluating Jensen’s free cash flow hypothesis, which states that

consumption of private benefits should be larger in firms with lots of free cash that

operate in industries with limited investment opportunities. In these tests, we focus on

the company plane as the canonical example of an excessive perk. 20


20
  Our data do not allow us to distinguish between perks that are for business purposes versus perks that are
for personal use. However, it seems reasonable to assume that there is some relation between the two. At
minimum, owning a corporate jet is necessary (but not sufficient) to granting personal use. Refer to
Yermack (2004) for a detailed study of the personal use of corporate jets based on disclosures in company


                                                                                                         25
     We begin by analyzing the relation between a firm’s free cash flow and the use of a

company plane. Of course, to include a measure of free cash flow, we have to deduce

how much cash is truly free; accounting can obscure this. We measure free cash flow

(CASHFLOW) as lagged operating income before depreciation minus the sum of interest,

taxes paid, and capital expenditures all divided by beginning-of-year assets. 21

      We expect compensation to increase in performance. If we do not correct for

performance, an observed positive correlation between free cash and perks could simply

reflect the fact that better performance is rewarded than the fact that free cash flow is

being misused. As a measure of a firm’s performance, we include an industry adjusted

market-to-book ratio for the firm defined as the market value of assets divided by the

book value of assets in a given year minus the three-digit SIC industry average. 22 In

Table 6 column (i), when we include both of these measures in addition to firm size and

industry and year indicators, the coefficient estimates on free cash flow and market-to-

book are negative, but both are insignificant.

     A more subtle implication of Jensen’s hypothesis is that perk consumption should be

greatest in firms that are generating free cash and operating in industries with weak

investment prospects. Executives in these “Jensen-type” firms are the most likely to be

extracting firm surplus through private benefits. To test this, we compute industry



proxy filings. Yermack discusses in detail five possible scenarios under which firms may avoid disclosing
the use of the corporate plane for personal travel with one possibility being that companies choose not to
disclose personal aircraft use as a perquisite if at least some part of a plane trip involves business.
21
   Free cash could be thought of as the cash left after necessary and pre-committed expenses and
investments. We calculate two measures of free cash, one that subtracts capital expenditures and one that
does not. The measure used in the reported regressions is the former and is defined as lagged operating
income before depreciation (data 13) - interest (data 15) - taxes paid [taxes (data 16) - change in deferred
taxes (data 74)] - capital expenditures (data 128) all divided by beginning-of-year assets (data 6). All
results are robust to the alternative measure of free cash flow that doesn’t subtract capital expenditures.
22
   The market value of assets equals the book value of assets plus the market value of common equity less
the sum of the book value of common equity and balance sheet deferred taxes.


                                                                                                          26
investment opportunities (GROWTH) in a given year as follows. We average the

percentage change in a firm’s rate of investment (capital expenditures divided by lagged

assets) in the future three periods for all firms in Compustat. We then average this

prospective growth rate across three-digit SIC industries to obtain GROWTH for each

industry.

     In Table 6 column (ii), we include this industry measure directly, CASHFLOW, and

an interaction term between this measure and firm cash flow while controlling for firm

size, market-to-book, and year indicators. 23 The coefficient estimate on GROWTH is

positive and significant (t= 4.44). Firms in industries that are investing at a growing rate

also seem to invest more in providing company planes to their CEOs. It may be that these

firms have more access to funds or it may be that CEO time is more valuable in these

firms. The coefficient estimate on the interaction term is negative and significant

(t= -2.80), which deserves further investigation.

     The negative coefficient on the interaction term could mean either slow growth firms

with high cash flow have more perks or high growth firms with low cash flow have more

perks. The former would be consistent with Jensen, the latter not. To test this, we

construct an indicator (JENSEN) for “Jensen-type” firms, i.e., those in the lowest quartile

of growth and the highest quartile of cash flow in a year. We also construct an indicator

(HiGrLoCF) for firms in the highest quartile of growth and the lowest quartile of cash

flow. 24


23
   We exclude industry indicators from this specification because our measure of growth is an industry
measure. If we included industry indicators, we would only pick up the time series variation in GROWTH
plus the differences between three-digit SICcategories (used to define GROWTH) and three-digit SIC
indicators.
24
   For completeness, we also include indicator variables for firms in the highest quartiles of growth and
cash flow and the lowest quartiles of growth and cash flow. The coefficients on these indicators are
insignificant (unreported) and the regression results are not qualitatively different when the indicators are


                                                                                                           27
     In Table 6 column (iii), we include the two indicators while controlling for firm size,

market-to-book, and industry and year indicators. The coefficient estimate for JENSEN

is insignificant. Notably, the coefficient estimate for HiGrLoCF is positive and

significant (t= 3.32). Firms operating in high growth industries and that generate low

levels of free cash flow are 13.6% more likely to offer CEO access to the company plane.

     A more subtle prediction of private benefits--since perks are easier to hide from

shareholders and CEOs disclose pay while divisional managers do not-- is that CEOs

should get greater access to the company plane relative to divisional managers, i.e.,

divisional managers can get paid through pay while CEOs can get paid through corporate

jet travel (both on company and personal account). So, one implication of the free cash

flow hypothesis is that Jensen firms should have a higher differential. We estimate a

specification similar to that in column (iii) but with the CEO-DM company plane

differential as the dependent variable. We also include the average of the logarithm of

division employees to control for differences in the importance of divisional managers

across firms. In Table 6 column (iv), we find a positive and significant coefficient

estimate on the HiGrLoCF indicator (t= 3.09) and a negative, but not significant,

coefficient on the JENSEN indicator.

     Thus, growing firms offer more perks, especially firms that are growing but not

financing through internal cash flow. The latter also offer their CEOs relatively more

perks, unlike Jensen-type firms. Our findings are somewhat in contradiction to the spirit

of the free cash flow hypothesis, but may well reflect a form of agency (Jensen and



excluded. Also, the results are qualitatively similar when we include both cash flow and GROWTH directly
in the regressions in addition to the JENSEN and HiGrLoCF indicators; for exposition, we exclude cash
flow and growth in the reported regressions.


                                                                                                     28
Meckling, 1976), where by managers of growing firms financed from outside are less

careful with other people’s money.

    If perks reflect some sort of agency problem, we should see that better external

governance leads to lower perks. We compute two measures of governance. According to

Shleifer and Vishny (1986), large shareholders should prevent managers from consuming

excessive private benefits. So, one measure of good governance is FRACINST, the

fraction of the firm’s stock held by institutions with greater than 5% ownership in the

prior year. Another measure is LARGEINST, an indicator if the firm has an institutional

investor owning 10% or more of the firm’s stock in the prior year. Again, we include

interactions between these governance variables and the two firm type indicators (as well

as the indicators directly).

    In Table 6 column (v) we find a negative, but insignificant, coefficient estimate on

FRACINST and positive, but insignificant, coefficient estimates on JENSEN and

HiGRLoCF. Most notably, we find a negative and significant coefficient estimate on the

interaction term between JENSEN and FRACINST (t= -2.35), but no significance on that

between HiGRLoCF and FRACINST. These results are qualitatively similar in an

analogous regression using the other measure of governance, LARGEINST (not reported).

So, on average, we find no direct relation between governance and access to corporate

jets and no direct effect of being a Jensen firm. Yet, in these Jensen firms, we find that

better governance is associated with a lower incidence of plane ownership. However, we

find no association between governance and high growth, low cash flow firms

(HiGRLoCF).




                                                                                             29
    The bottom line is that we do not see a pattern that is fully consistent with a free cash

flow explanation or a broader agency explanation. Some firms offer more perks but these

are not the firms predicted by the free cash flow hypothesis. On the other hand,

governance does seem to be associated with lower perks in free cash flow firms but not in

the firms earlier identified as having more perks than the norm.

    Yermack (2004) finds that disclosure of the personal use of the corporate jet has a

strong negative announcement effect on the firm’s stock price. Furthermore, it leads to

long-term underperformance. He also finds a negative relation between sales per

employee and the use of a corporate jet for personal purposes. This is more suggestive of

agency than our findings, though the forms of agency suggested by his results include

both greed as well as incompetence. It may well be that the personal use of corporate jets

is a strong signal of agency problems, even though the general use of corporate jets is a

much weaker signal, so our findings are not incompatible. But he also finds no relation

between perks used for personal purposes and CEO ownership, a measure of “excess

compensation,” and measures of external monitoring such as board size, fraction of

outside directors, institutional investor ownership, and the degree of analyst coverage.

These results tend to suggest that even if there is an agency problem, typical remedies

seem to have little impact on the problem. This raises some questions about whether

perks, even excessive personal use of them, should be treated as canonical examples of

our most important theories of agency (such as the agency cost of free cash flow

(Jensen,1986)).

    Before concluding this section, consider an alternative explanation for Yermack’s

and our inability to find strong evidence consistent with agency: endogeneity. Firms that




                                                                                            30
have more serious agency problems are more likely to have greater outside monitoring so

that, on average, there is a very noisy relation between measures of agency such as perk

consumption and measures of outside monitoring.

    One way to address this is either to examine the effects of exogenous changes in

governance on perks or to use predetermined measures of governance as explanatory

variables. Bertrand and Mullainathan (2000) propose changes in state takeover laws (the

adoption of Business Combination (BC) laws strengthened the power of boards to resist

disciplinary takeovers) as an exogenous change in governance. For our sample of firms,

we determine the state of incorporation as listed by Compustat and create an indicator

variable equal to one for the year in which the state adopts a BC law and the years

following. In a regression of COPLANE on the BC indicator, firm employees, cash flow,

market-to-book, growth, state of incorporation indicators, and industry and year

indicators, we find an insignificant coefficient on the BC indicator. A second possibility

is to use measures of governance that are largely pre-determined like the ones in

Gompers, Ishii, and Metrick (2003). Their “governance index” has little explanatory

power for the cross-sectional distribution of perks.

5.3. Discussion of productivity and private benefits

    Let us now turn to simultaneously evaluating the evidence supporting the

productivity and private benefits explanations. In the regressions in Table 7, we include

both productivity and private benefit measures to evaluate the robustness of the statistical

significance and the relative magnitude of the association between these measures and

company plane access. We estimate the same basic regressions as in Table 6, but also

include population as a proxy for airport proximity and geographic dispersion or distance




                                                                                          31
as a proxy for travel demand in each regression. In Table 7 columns (i) through (iv), the

sign and significance of almost all coefficient estimates are qualitatively similar to the

earlier analyses presented in Tables 5 and 6. Hence, we conclude that the earlier results

are robust to regressions that include both productivity and private benefits variables.

6. Alternative explanations

    Of course, there are other explanations for the variation in perks across firms, two of

which we mentioned earlier: firms may use perks to enhance the status or authority of

the recipient and perks may be a tax-advantaged form of compensation. In Table 8, we

evaluate the evidence for these alternative explanations by analyzing five perks: company

plane, chauffer services, company car, country club membership, and a financial package

(financial planning, tax preparation, and estate planning). We first include a measure of

the flatness of a firm’s hierarchy in the basic regression (i.e., including controls for firm

size, population, distance, and industry and year indicators): SPAN represents the breadth

of hierarchy or the span of control and is defined as the number of positions that report

directly to the CEO (developed in Rajan and Wulf, 2003).

    We also include a measure of income tax rates. Since different states have different

income tax rates, executives living in high-tax states may value perks they would

otherwise have to buy (with after-tax dollars) more than those living in low-tax states. Of

course, this assumes the personal use and value of the perk is not fully disclosed to the

tax authorities, which is, ultimately, an empirical question. We cannot distinguish

between business and personal use—the former is not taxable, while the latter is. We

preliminarily evaluate the empirical merit of this argument by including STATETAX,




                                                                                             32
defined as the highest marginal state income tax rate for 2003 (published by the

Federation of Tax Administrators) for the state in which the firm is headquartered.

       In the company plane regression in Table 8 column (i), the coefficient on SPAN is

negative and significant. Steeper firms, or firms with narrower spans of control, are more

likely to give access to a company plane even controlling for firm size. These are also

firms that delegate less responsibility and for which the CEO is more remote from

employees (see Rajan and Wulf, 2003). A plane is a very conspicuous perk – at least to

employees of the firm who see the CEO travel or hear about it -- which may serve to

consolidate the CEO’s status in the eyes of distant employees and allow his orders to be

obeyed more readily. The coefficient for span in the regression with chauffer as the

dependent variable is also negative but not significant while it is weakly positive for

company car. While one could argue that company cars do not signal status as much as

the use of a corporate jet or a chauffer-driven car, the evidence is admittedly weak. The

fact that financial counseling seems unrelated to span is, however, consistent with the

theory, for these are not perks that are likely to enhance status.

    Turning to state marginal tax rates, we find positive and significant coefficients on

STATETAX in the regressions for company car, country club memberships, and financial

counseling (columns (iii)-(v)) and insignificant coefficients in the plane and chauffer

regressions (columns (i)-(ii)). A one-standard deviation increase in state tax rates is

associated with approximately a 7% increase in the probability of offering a company car,

country club memberships, or financial counseling. The fact that the coefficient is

insignificant for company plane or chauffer is consistent with the tax hypothesis.

Employees may not value a corporate jet or a chauffer as compensation since they would




                                                                                            33
not “buy” them out of their pay if given a choice, but may indeed value the company

paying for cars, country clubs, and financial counseling. These findings are indeed

suggestive that perks, especially routine ones, may be offered as a tax advantaged (i.e.,

easier for the firm to claim as business expense) form of payment. 25

7. Conclusion

    Overall, we do not see a systematic pattern that is fully consistent with a free cash

flow explanation or a broader agency explanation of perks. The firms that offer more

perks are not those predicted by the free cash flow hypothesis and while governance does

seem to be associated with lower perks in Jensen-type firms, it is has no such association

in “perk-intensive” firms. In contrast, there is more systematic evidence of other (not

necessarily mutually exclusive) explanations—especially perks as a means to enhance

productivity. More productive employees at the top of a firm’s hierarchy are more likely

to receive perks. Time-saving perks are more common in settings in which the time

saved by the perk is higher and more frequently offered to the most productive employees

as the potential for time-saving increases.

     The narrow implication of these findings is that a blanket indictment of the use of

perks is unwarranted. The broader implication is that nonmonetary forms of

compensation need far more careful investigation. This is therefore a call for further

study.




25
   It may also be that the personal use of a plane or a chauffer are better disclosed so they are not good ways
to compensate if the objective is tax minimization. Similarly, one could argue that financial services for
employees may be hard to pass off as a business expense. An alternative explanation for the positive
coefficient on marginal tax rates is that financial counseling (which includes tax planning) might be higher
in states with higher tax rates simply because they are more valuable to the recipient.


                                                                                                            34
References

Bagwell, L.S., Bernheim, B.D., 1996. Veblen effects in a theory of conspicuous
consumption. American Economic Review. 86, 349-73.

Bertrand, M., Mullainathan, S., 2000. Corporate governance and executive pay:
evidence from takeover legislation. Unpublished working paper. University of Chicago
and MIT.

Burroughs, B., Helyar, J., 2003. Barbarians at the gate. Harper Business, New York.

Calvo, G., Wellisz, S., 1979. Hierarchy, ability, and income distribution. The Journal of
Political Economy. 87, 991-1010.

Crystal, G.S., 1978. Executive Compensation: Money, Motivation, and Imagination.
AMACOM, New York.

Ellig, B.R., 1981. Perquisites: the intrinsic form of pay. Personnel. 23.

Evans, K.M., 1984. The power of perquisites. Personnel Administrator. 45-52.

Frank, R.H., 1985. The demand for unobservable and other nonpositional goods.
American Economic Review. 75, 101-16.

Frank, R.H., 1985. Choosing the right pond: human behavior and the quest for status.
Oxford University Press, New York.

Gompers, P.A., Ishii, J.L., Metrick, A., 2003. Corporate governance and equity prices.
The Quarterly Journal of Economics. 118, 107-55.

Grossman, S.J., Hart, O.D., 1980. Takeover bids, the free-rider problem, and the theory
of the corporation. The Bell Journal of Economics. 11, 42-64.

Hart, O.D., 2001. Financial contracting. Journal of Economic Literature. 39, 1079-1100.

Hirsch, F., 1976. Social limits to growth. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.

Jensen, M.C., 1986. Agency costs of free cash flow, corporate finance, and takeovers.
American Economic Review. 76, 323-329.

Jensen, M.C., Meckling, W.H., 1976. Theory of the firm: managerial behavior, agency
costs and ownership structure. Journal of Financial Economics. 3, 305-60.

Marino, A., Zabojnik, J., 2004. Optimal pricing of employee discounts and benefits: a
rent extraction view. Unpublished working paper. University of Southern California.




                                                                                         35
Oyer, P., 2004. Salary or benefits? Unpublished working paper. Stanford University.

Rajan, R., Wulf, J., 2003. The flattening firm: evidence from panel data on the changing
nature of corporate hierarchies. Unpublished NBER Working Paper, w9633. University
of Chicago and University of Pennsylvania.

Rosen, S., 1982. Authority, control, and the distribution of earnings. The Bell Journal of
Economics. 13, 311-23.

Shleifer, A., Vishny, R.W., 1986. “Large shareholders and corporate control. The
Journal of Political Economy. 94, 461-488.

Veblen, T., 1899/1994. The theory of the leisure class: an economic study of institutions.
London: Unwin Books, New York: Dover Publications.

Yermack, D., 2004. Flights of fancy: corporate jets, CEO perquisites and inferior
shareholder returns. Unpublished working paper. New York University.
.




                                                                                        36
                                                                        Table 1: Summary Statistics

                                                                                                                                                              Firm-
            Variable                                                                              Mean            STD            Min            Max           Yrs (N)

            Firm Size (000’s employees)                                                            43.82          69.38          0.94          825.00            2355
            Sales ($M)                                                                            7752.46       12656.70       121.65        153627.00           2369
            Return on Assets                                                                       0.167          0.078        -0.071          0.965             2359
            Firm Age (Years since founding)                                                         93.0           38.0           1.0          197.0             1107
            Population by County of Headquarters (000’s) (POPULATION)                              1645.8        1999.4          21.5          9329.9            2405
            Annual Flights Within 50 Mile Radius of Headqtrs (000’s) (FLIGHTS)                     328.8          275.8            0           961.7             2393
            Median Travel Time to Work in County of Headquarters (TRAVEL)                           24.6            3.9          16.0           33.9             2369
            Sum of Distance Between Headquarters & Each Division (DIVISION)                        2001.2        2995.5           0.0         17665.8            2425
            Cash Flow                                                                              0.040          0.070        -0.319          0.539             2108
            Market-to-Book Ratio (Industry-adjusted)                                               -0.261         1.122        -4.577           3.788            2308
            Growth (Industry growth in rate of investment)                                         -0.053         0.119        -0.650          0.575             2418
            Jensen (Low Growth/ High Cashflow)                                                     0.077          0.267         0.000          1.000             2124
            High Growth/ Low Cashflow (HiGRLoCF)                                                   0.070          0.255         0.000          1.000             2124
            Business Combination Law (BCDUM)                                                        0.84           0.37          0.00           1.00             2311
            Fraction Owned by Institutions (FRACTINST)                                             0.083          0.102         0.000          0.648             1908
            Presence of Large Institutional Shareholder (LARGEINST)                                0.179          0.384         0.000          1.000             1908
            Number of Positions Reporting to CEO (SPAN)                                              5.5            2.6           1.0           14.0             2425
            State Income Tax Rate-Highest Marginal Rate (%) (STATETAX)                               4.2            3.6           0.0            9.3             2405
AGE is the number of years since firm founding as reported by the Directory of Corporate Affiliations. POPULATION is the number of people in thousands in the county in which the
firm is headquartered. FLIGHTS is defined as the annual number of departing flights in a given year from airports within a 50-mile radius of the center of the county in which the firm
is headquartered. TRAVEL as the median travel time to work in number of minutes for workers residing in the county in which the firm is headquartered. DISTANCE is defined as the
logarithm of the sum of the distance between the location of headquarters and each division in the firm (i.e., the number of miles between the county of the location of headquarters
and the most-populated county in the state of the division’s location). CASHFLOW is defined as operating income before depreciation minus the sum of interest, taxes paid, and
capital expenditures all divided by beginning-of-year assets. MARKET-TO-BOOK RATIO (industry-adjusted) is defined as the market value of assets divided by the book value of
assets in a given year minus the three-digit SIC industry average, where market value of assets equals the book value of assets plus the market value of common equity less the sum of
the book value of common equity and balance sheet deferred taxes. GROWTH is defined as the average three-digit SIC industry growth in the rate of investment (capital expenditures
divided by lagged assets) in the future three periods. JENSEN and HiGRLoCF are indicator variables for firms in the lowest quartile of industry growth/highest quartile of cash flow,
and highest quartile of industry growth /lowest quartile of cash flow, respectively, in a given year. BCDUM is an indicator variable equal to one for the year in which the state of
incorporation for the firm adopts a Business Combination law and the years following. FRACTINST is the fraction of shares owned by institutional shareholders with more than 5%
ownership. LARGEINST is a dummy variable equal to one if there is an institutional shareholder with greater than or equal to 10% ownership. SPAN is the number of positions
reporting to the CEO (see Rajan and Wulf, 2003). STATETAX is the highest marginal state tax rate in 2003 as published by the Federation of Tax Administrators.




                                                                                                                                                                                 37
                                     Table 2: Perquisites for CEO, Divisional Manager, CEO-DM Differential
                                              Sample Averages and Standard Deviations (1986-1999)

                                                                                                                  CEO-Divisional
                                                     CEO                   Divisional Manager (DM)              Manager Differential


                                                                                                                                                    Firm-Years
Perquisite                                   Mean           STD               Mean              STD               Mean               STD                N
                                              (i)            (ii)             (iii)             (iv)               (v)               (vi)

Company Plane                                 0.66           0.47              0.31              0.46              0.35              0.48               2352
Chauffer Service                              0.38           0.49              0.06              0.25              0.32              0.47               2352
Company Car                                   0.56           0.50              0.46              0.48              0.10              0.34               2352
Travel Package (TRAVEL3)                      0.17           0.38              0.02              0.12              0.16              0.36               2352

Country Club Membership                       0.47           0.50              0.29              0.45              0.19              0.42               2352
Lunch Club Membership                         0.48           0.50              0.32              0.45              0.17              0.36               2352
Health Club Membership                        0.17           0.38              0.12              0.32              0.05              0.22               2352
Club Package (CLUB3)                          0.12           0.33              0.07              0.24              0.06              0.23               2352

Financial Counseling                          0.70           0.46              0.50              0.48              0.21              0.38               2352
Tax Preparation                               0.65           0.48              0.46              0.48              0.20              0.38               2352
Estate Planning                               0.59           0.49              0.42              0.48              0.17              0.36               2352
Financial Package (FINANCIAL3)                0.52           0.50              0.34              0.46              0.18              0.37               2352


Each CEO perk variable is an indicator variable equal to one if the position is offered the perk in a given year and zero otherwise. Each divisional manager perk
variable is the proportion of divisional managers within the firm that are offered the perk in a given year. TRAVEL3 is an indicator variable equal to one if a
firm offers access to the company plane, chauffer service, and a company car to the CEO and zero otherwise; CLUB3 for country, lunch, and health club
memberships, and FINANCIAL3 for financial planning, tax preparation, and estate planning. CEO-Divisional Manager Differential is the difference between
the CEO perks and the proportion of divisional manager perks within the firm in a given year. The differential takes the value of one when the CEO receives the
perk and no divisional manager does and zero when both the CEO and all of the divisional managers receive the perk or when no position receives the perk.




                                                                                                                                                               38
                                  Table 3: Distribution of Sample by Two-digit SIC Code
                                                 CEO Perks for Five Perks
                                       Sample Average and Rank Among Industries
                                                   (rank of 1 as highest)

                                                  Company          Company Country Financial Firm-
  SIC             Industry             Sum5 Rank   Plane  Chauffer   Car    Club   Counseling yrs
                                        (i)  (ii)   (iii)   (iv)     (v)    (vii)    (viii)

  29     Petroleum Refining             4.03      1       1.00         0.80        0.37        0.93         0.93         59
  48     Communications                 3.57      2       0.91         0.59        0.73        0.50         0.85        119
  37     Transportation Equip.          3.27      3       0.90         0.38        0.68        0.54         0.77        201
  20     Food                           3.27      4       0.86         0.51        0.63        0.39         0.87        165
  13     Oil & Gas Extraction           3.12      5       0.85         0.31        0.53        0.81         0.62         68
  28     Chemical                       3.07      6       0.72         0.68        0.51        0.41         0.75        407
  38     Instrumentation                2.82      7       0.61         0.38        0.57        0.44         0.81        127
  36     Electronic Equipment           2.70      8       0.76         0.29        0.53        0.50         0.63        128
  73     Business Services              2.70      9       0.42         0.40        0.79        0.60         0.49         53
  33     Primary Metals                 2.61     10       0.68         0.04        0.58        0.63         0.68         71
  49     Utilities                      2.53     11       0.52         0.23        0.65        0.51         0.62        134
  26     Paper                          2.46     12       0.92         0.32        0.23        0.36         0.64        132
  30     Rubber & Misc. Plastics        2.40     13       0.59         0.19        0.49        0.44         0.68         63
  35     Machines & Computers           1.76     14       0.36         0.12        0.33        0.30         0.65        249


Industries represented include only those with 50 or more firm-year observations. Sum5 is the sum of CEO perk indicators for
company plane, chauffer service, company car, country club membership, and financial counseling (FINANCIAL3). Refer to
Table 2 for additional variable definitions.




                                                                                                                               39
                     Table 4: CEO Travel Perks and Productivity—Probit Specification
                                CEO Company Plane and Chauffer Service

                                              (i)              (ii)             (iii)             (iv)
              Dependent Variable          Company          Company           Chauffer          Chauffer
                                           Plane            Plane            Service           Service

              FIRM SIZE                   0.205***         0.192***          0.162***          0.173***
                                           (0.029)          (0.030)           (0.031)           (0.032)
              POPULATION                 -0.113***                           0.117***
                                           (0.027)                            (0.034)
              FLIGHTS                                      -0.089***
                                                             (0.028)
              TRAVEL                                                                           0.045***
                                                                                                (0.009)

              SIC Indicators                 Yes              Yes               Yes               Yes
              Year Indicators                Yes              Yes               Yes               Yes

              Observations                  2146             2073              2165              2129
              (pseudo) R-squared            0.356            0.355             0.284             0.318


Coefficients are marginal effects evaluated at the mean on the probability that the firm provides the perk. Company Plane
(COPLANE) is an indicator variable equal to one if the CEO has access to a company plane and zero otherwise. Chauffer
Service (CHAUFFER) is an indicator variable equal to one if the CEO is provided chauffer service and zero otherwise. All
specifications include both industry (two-digit SIC) and year indicator variables. FIRM SIZE is defined as the logarithm of
the number of employees in the firm. POPULATION is defined as the logarithm of the number of people in thousands in the
county in which the firm is headquartered. FLIGHTS is defined as the logarithm of the annual number of departing flights in
a given year from airports within a 50-mile radius of the center of the county in which the firm is headquartered. TRAVEL is
defined as the median travel time to work in number of minutes for workers residing in the county in which the firm is
headquartered. All specifications report robust standard errors by clustering by firm and all variables are winsorized at the
99th percentile. ***/**/* represent significance at the 1%/5%/10% level.




                                                                                                                                40
                               Table 5: Company Planes and Productivity—Probit Specification
                               CEO Company Plane and CEO-DM Company Plane Differential

                                               (i)                       (ii)                   (iii)                  (iv)
       Dependent Variable                    Company                  Company                 Company               CEO-DM
                                              Plane                     Plane                  Plane              Company Plane
                                                                                                                   Differential

       FIRM SIZE                             0.159***                 0.206***                1.027***               0.147***
                                               (0.026)                  (0.030)                (0.377)                (0.030)
       POPULATION                            -0.079***                -0.116***                 0.047                  -0.005
                                               (0.025)                  (0.030)                (0.076)                (0.025)
       DISTANCE                              0.036***                  0.029**                 0.031**               0.060***
                                               (0.014)                  (0.014)                (0.014)                (0.016)
       FIRM SIZE*POPULATION                                                                   -0.059**
                                                                                               (0.027)
       DIVISION SIZE                                                                                                 -0.066***
                                                                                                                       (0.024)

       SIC Indicators                           No                       Yes                     Yes                    Yes
       Year Indicators                          Yes                      Yes                     Yes                    Yes

       Observations                             2195                    1982                     1982                  2031
       (pseudo) R-squared                      0.166                    0.387                   0.400                  0.197

Coefficients are marginal effects evaluated at the mean on the probability that the firm provides the perk. Company Plane (columns i-iii) is an
indicator variable equal to one if the CEO has access to a company plane and zero otherwise. CEO-DM Company Plane Differential (column
iv) is an indicator variable equal to one if the CEO has access to a company plane and no Divisional Manager has access and zero otherwise.
All specifications include both industry (two-digit SIC) and year indicator variables. FIRM SIZE is defined as the logarithm of the number of
employees in the firm. POPULATION is defined as the logarithm of the number of people in thousands in the county in which the firm is
headquartered. DISTANCE is defined as the logarithm of the sum of the distance between the location of headquarters and each division in the
firm (i.e., the number of miles between the county of the location of headquarters and the most-populated county in the state of the division’s
location). DIVISION SIZE is defined as the log of the average number of employees for divisions within a firm. All specifications report
robust standard errors by clustering by firm and all variables are winsorized at the 99th percentile. ***/**/* represent significance at the
1%/5%/10% level.




                                                                                                                                                  41
                       Table 6: Company Planes and Private Benefits—Probit Specification
                        CEO Company Plane and CEO-DM Company Plane Differential

                                                             (i)           (ii)           (iii)           (iv)         (v)
 Dependent Variable                                        Company       Company        Company        CEO-DM        Company
                                                            Plane         Plane          Plane           Plane        Plane
                                                                                                      Differential

 FIRM SIZE                                                 0.199***       0.160***      0.199***       0.163***       0.207***
                                                            (0.032)        (0.026)       (0.031)        (0.030)        (0.033)
 CASH FLOW                                                   -0.307         -0.330
                                                            (0.383)        (0.406)
 MARKET-TO-BOOK RATIO                                        -0.007         0.012         -0.010         0.026          -0.014
                                                            (0.020)        (0.021)       (0.021)        (0.022)        (0.022)
 GROWTH                                                                   0.609***
                                                                           (0.137)
 CASHFLOW*GROWTH                                                         -5.711***
                                                                           (2.043)
 Low Growth/ High CF (JENSEN)                                                             0.001          -0.041         0.068
                                                                                         (0.059)        (0.056)        (0.066)
 High Growth/ Low CF (HiGRLoCF)                                                         0.136***       0.170***         0.034
                                                                                         (0.041)        (0.055)        (0.085)
 FRACTINST (Fraction Held by Institutions)                                                                              -0.101
                                                                                                                       (0.262)
 Low Growth/ High CF (JENSEN)*FRACTINST                                                                               -1.206**
                                                                                                                       (0.514)
 High Growth/ Low CF (HiGRLoCF)*FRACTINST                                                                               0.545
                                                                                                                       (0.522)
 DIVISION SIZE                                                                                        -0.068***
                                                                                                        (0.024)

 SIC Indicators                                               Yes           No             Yes            Yes             Yes
 Year Indicators                                              Yes           Yes            Yes            Yes             Yes

 Observations                                                1891           2066          1891           1879             1524
 (pseudo) R-squared                                          0.321          0.143         0.325          0.176            0.328


Coefficients are marginal effects evaluated at the mean on the probability that the firm provides the perk. Company Plane
(columns i-iii and v) is an indicator variable equal to one if the CEO has access to a company plane and zero otherwise. CEO-
DM Plane Differential (column iv) is an indicator variable equal to one if the CEO has access to a company plane and no
Divisional Manager has access and zero otherwise. FIRM SIZE is defined as the logarithm of the number of employees in the
firm. CASHFLOW is defined as operating income before depreciation minus the sum of interest, taxes paid, and capital
expenditures, all divided by beginning-of-year assets. MARKET-TO-BOOK RATIO (industry-adjusted) is defined as the
market value of assets divided by the book value of assets in a given year minus the three-digit SIC industry average, where
market value of assets equals the book value of assets plus the market value of common equity less the sum of the book value
of common equity and balance sheet deferred taxes. GROWTH is defined as the average three-digit SIC industry growth in
the rate of investment (capital expenditures divided by lagged assets) in the future three periods. JENSEN and HiGRLoCF
are indicator variables for firms in the lowest quartile of industry growth + highest quartile of cash flow, and highest quartile
of industry growth + lowest quartile of cash flow, respectively, in a given year. FRACTINST is the fraction of shares owned
by institutional shareholders with more than 5% ownership. DIVISION SIZE is defined as the log of the average number of
employees for divisions within a firm. All specifications report robust standard errors by clustering by firm and all variables
are winsorized at the 99th percentile. ***/**/* represent significance at the 1%/5%/10% level.




                                                                                                                     42
            Table 7: Company Planes: Productivity and Private Benefits—Probit Specification
                     CEO Company Plane and CEO-DM Company Plane Differential

                                                          (i)                 (ii)                (iii)                (iv)
    Dependent Variable                                  Company             Company             Company             CEO-DM
                                                         Plane               Plane               Plane                Plane
                                                                                                                   Differential

    FIRM SIZE                                           0.204***            0.156***            0.202***            0.160***
                                                         (0.031)             (0.027)             (0.031)             (0.031)
    POPULATION                                         -0.121***           -0.088***           -0.119***              -0.014
                                                         (0.030)             (0.027)             (0.030)             (0.026)
    DISTANCE                                             0.030**             0.036**             0.030**            0.065***
                                                         (0.014)             (0.014)             (0.014)             (0.017)
    CASHFLOW                                              -0.414              -0.508
                                                         (0.378)             (0.403)
    MARKET-TO-BOOK RATIO                                  0.004               0.019               -0.002              0.033
                                                         (0.021)             (0.023)             (0.023)             (0.022)
    GROWTH                                                                  0.551***
                                                                             (0.137)
    CASHFLOW*GROWTH                                                         -4.313**
                                                                             (2.181)
    Low Growth/ High CF (JENSEN)                                                                  -0.006              -0.044
                                                                                                 (0.066)             (0.057)
    High Growth/ Low CF (HiGRLoCF)                                                               0.101**            0.165***
                                                                                                 (0.047)             (0.056)
    DIVISION SIZE                                                                                                   -0.065**
                                                                                                                     (0.025)

    SIC Indicators                                         Yes                 No                  Yes                 Yes
    Year Indicators                                        Yes                 Yes                 Yes                 Yes

    Observations                                          1747                1934                1747                1796
    (pseudo) R-squared                                    0.386               0.181               0.387               0.207



Coefficients are marginal effects evaluated at the mean on the probability that the firm provides the perk. Company Plane (columns i-
iii) is an indicator variable equal to one if the CEO has access to a company plane and zero otherwise. CEO-DM Company Plane
Differential (column iv) is an indicator variable equal to one if the CEO has access to a company plane and no Divisional Manager has
access and zero otherwise. FIRM SIZE is defined as the logarithm of the number of employees in the firm. POPULATION is defined
as the logarithm of the number of people in thousands in the county in which the firm is headquartered. DISTANCE is defined as the
logarithm of the sum of the distance between the location of headquarters and each division in the firm (i.e., the number of miles
between the county of the location of headquarters and the most-populated county in the state of the division’s location). CASHFLOW
is defined as operating income before depreciation minus the sum of interest, taxes paid, and capital expenditures all divided by
beginning-of-year assets. MARKET-TO-BOOK RATIO (industry-adjusted) is defined as the market value of assets divided by the
book value of assets in a given year minus the three-digit SIC industry average where market value of assets equals the book value of
assets plus the market value of common equity less the sum of the book value of common equity and balance sheet deferred taxes.
GROWTH is defined as the average three-digit SIC industry growth in the rate of investment (capital expenditures divided by lagged
assets) in the future three periods. JENSEN and HiGRLoCF are indicator variables for firms in the lowest quartile of industry growth +
highest quartile of cash flow, and highest quartile of industry growth + lowest quartile of cash flow, respectively, in a given year.
FRACTINST is the fraction of shares owned by institutional shareholders with more than 5% ownership. DIVISION SIZE is defined
as the log of the average number of employees for divisions within a firm. All specifications report robust standard errors by clustering
by firm and all variables are winsorized at the 99th percentile. ***/**/* represent significance at the 1%/5%/10% level.




                                                                                                                               43
             Table 8: CEO Perks: Span and Taxes—Probit Specification
    Company Plane, Chauffer Service, Company Car, Country Club Membership, and
                                Financial Counseling

                              (i)             (ii)           (iii)          (iv)               (v)
   Dependent Variable       Company         Chauffer       Company        Country           Financial
                             Plane          Service          Car           Club            Counseling
                                                                         Membership

  FIRM SIZE                  0.215***      0.158***         -0.060*        -0.048*             0.045
                              (0.030)       (0.032)         (0.032)        (0.028)           (0.029)
  POPULATION                -0.121***      0.122***        0.102***         0.051*             0.034
                              (0.030)       (0.035)         (0.035)        (0.029)           (0.028)
  DISTANCE                    0.032**         0.015           0.019       0.060***            -0.026
                              (0.014)       (0.018)         (0.017)        (0.017)           (0.017)
  STATETAX                     -0.011         0.009         0.024**        0.018**          0.024***
                              (0.008)       (0.010)         (0.010)        (0.009)           (0.008)
  SPAN                       -0.018**        -0.010          0.017*         -0.003             0.013
                              (0.008)       (0.009)         (0.009)        (0.008)           (0.009)

  SIC indicators               Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes              Yes
  Year indicators              Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes              Yes

  Observations                1982           2030            2027           2073             2097
  (pseudo)-Rsquared           0.397          0.279           0.144          0.127            0.095



Coefficients are marginal effects evaluated at the mean on the probability that the firm provides the perk.
FIRM SIZE is defined as the logarithm of the number of employees in the firm. POPULATION is defined as
the logarithm of the number of people in thousands in the county in which the firm is headquartered.
DISTANCE is defined as the logarithm of the sum of the distance between the location of headquarters and
each division in the firm (i.e., the number of miles between the county of the location of headquarters and the
most-populated county in the state of the division’s location). SPAN is the number of positions reporting to the
CEO (see Rajan and Wulf, 2003). STATETAX is the highest marginal state tax rate in 2003 as published by
the Federation of Tax Administrators. Each CEO perk variable is an indicator variable equal to one if the
position is offered the perk in a given year and zero otherwise. FINANCIAL COUNSELING is an indicator
equal to one if financial planning, tax preparation, and estate planning are all offered to the CEO
(FINANCIAL3). All specifications report robust standard errors by clustering by firm and all variables are
winsorized at the 99th percentile. ***/**/* represent significance at the 1%/5%/10% level.




                                                                                                            44
Appendix—Perquisite Descriptions—1995 Hewitt survey


Company plane: The ability to schedule the company plane, not merely use it on a space-
available basis.

Chauffer Service: Chauffer service exclusively for executives, over and above general limousine
service for business travel (e.g., to and from the airport).

Club Memberships: Company-paid memberships in luncheon, country, and health (athletic)
clubs. Does not include company-sponsored membership available to broad groups of
employees.

First-Class Air Travel: The opportunity to travel first class on an unlimited basis or under certain
specified conditions.

Airline VIP Club Memberships: Company-paid memberships in airline VIP clubs (e.g., Red
Carpet, Ambassador, or Admiral Club).

Spouse Travel: The opportunity for spouses to accompany executives on business trips on a
company-paid basis.

Company Car: Company cars provided to executives and managers only. Does not include car
policy for sales personnel.

Executive Dining Room: Executive dining facilities that are separate and apart from those
provided for the broad-based employee group.

Individual Financial or Tax Counseling/ Estate Planning/ Income Tax Preparation: Any type of
individual, one-on-one financial counseling, income or gift tax return preparation, tax planning,
and financial counseling.

Financial Seminars: Seminars conducted for small groups of executives or managers. Such
seminars are distinguishable from financial counseling by the lack of individually tailored
recommendations.

Physical Examinations: Routine physicals, comprehensive hospital examinations, and
cardiovascular examinations.

Home Security Systems: Company-provided systems for executives’ homes such as fire alarms,
burglar alarms, or generators for use in power failures.

Loans: Loans provided to executives at below-market interest rates (with or without restrictions).
Does not include relocation loans or loans available from a tax-qualified retirement plan.

Cellular Car Telephone or Other Mobile Communications Equipment: Company-provided car
telephone equipment for use by the executive for business and personal calls.

Home Use of Company WATS line for Personal Calls: Ability to access company WATS lines
for personal calls from the executive’s home.


                                                                                                 45
