                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                ELEMENTS OF A THEORY OF
                             DESIGN LIMITS TO OPTIMAL POLICY

                                           William A. Brock
                                           Steven N. Durlauf

                                         Working Paper 10495
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w10495


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       May 2004




An early version of this paper was delivered by Brock as the 2003 Harry Johnson Memorial Lecture at
Cambridge University. The authors thank the National Science Foundation, John D. and Catherine T.
MacArthur Foundation, Vilas Trust and University of Wisconsin for financial support and Ritesh Banerjee,
Ethan Cohen-Cole and Giacomo Rondina for excellent research assistance. Thanks to Soren Johansen and
audience members at Cambridge University, Columbia University, London Business School, the Federal
Reserve Bank of Atlanta, the Federal Reserve Board of Governors and the Middlebury Conference on Post-
Walrasian Economics for comments on a previous draft. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s)
and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2004 by William A. Brock and Steven N. Durlauf. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.
Elements of a Theory of Design Limits to Optimal Policy
William A. Brock and Steven N. Durlauf
NBER Working Paper No. 10495
May 2004
JEL No. C52, E6
                                        ABSTRACT

This paper presents a framework for understanding the limits that exist in optimal policy design in

dynamic contexts. We consider the design of policies in the context of dynamic linear models.

Fundamental design limits exist for policy rules in such environments in the sense that any policy

rule embodies tradeoffs between the magnitudes of different frequency-specific components of the

variance. Hence policies that are effective in eliminating low frequency variance components of a

state variable can only do so at the cost of exacerbating high frequency variance components, and

vice versa. Examples of the implications of such tradeoffs are considered.

William A. Brock
Department of Economics
University of Wisconsin
1180 Observatory Drive
Madison, WI 53706-1393
wbrock@ssc.wisc.edu

Steven N. Durlauf
Department of Economics
University of Wisconsin
1180 Observatory Drive
Madison, WI 53706-1393
and NBER
sdurlauf@ssc.wisc.edu
        “The role of the economists in discussions of public policy seems to me to
        be to prescribe what should be done in light of what can be done, politics
        aside…”

                                                 Milton Friedman (1951, pg. 187)



1. Introduction


        This paper studies a number of issues related to the design of optimal policies in
dynamic contexts.        Issues of policy design have experienced a renaissance in
macroeconomics over the last decade, driven to a significant extent by the modern
literature on monetary policy rules, a literature that was to an important extent initiated
by Taylor (1993); Taylor (1999) contains a wide range of applications. An important
feature of the work on Taylor-type monetary policy rules is the importance that has been
assigned in this literature to understanding how the evaluation of alternative policy rules
involves assessing tradeoffs between various objectives, such as minimizing inflation,
interest rates, and output volatility.
        The analysis in this paper adds to this previous work on policy analysis by
developing a theory of design limits to optimal policy. Specifically, we model the effects
of alternative control rules on a state variable in the frequency domain. A frequency
domain approach allows one to identify the frequency-specific components of the overall
variance of the state variable.1 Our analysis then identifies the ways in which different
control rules affect the contributions of fluctuations at each frequency to the overall
variance. This approach allows us to develop an explicit characterization of the tradeoffs
that exist between diminishing the variance contribution of one frequency and another.
Examples of these tradeoffs in the control theory literature are the Bode and Poisson
integral constraints; despite their importance in understanding the development of


1
  Such an interpretation is standard in time series analysis and derives immediately from
the spectral representation of a time series.


                                            1
optimal policy, these types of constraints do not appear to have been previously exploited
in the economics literature. The sorts of abstract arguments we develop have natural
implications for contexts such as monetary policy design. Monetary policy rules are
typically evaluated in terms of their ability to minimize fluctuations in state variables
such as output and inflation.
       In this context, the design limits we develop imply that policy rules that are
efficacious in reducing low (high) frequency fluctuations in output and inflation will
inevitably exacerbate the magnitude of high (low) frequency fluctuations, in a way that
we make precise. These tradeoffs do not, of course, by themselves imply any particular
ordering concerning the relative desirability of different policy rules. Rather, these
tradeoffs imply that any ordering must carefully account for how the policymaker
assesses the frequency-specific components of fluctuations for the outcomes of interest.
       The design limits we describe are model-specific in the sense that a particular
model produces a particular characterization of the frequency-specific tradeoffs that exist
in stabilizing the state variable the policymaker wishes to control. In other words,
different models imply different constraints on what a policymaker can achieve. As such,
these limits are an important complement to work on policy design in the presence of
model uncertainty2. Concerns over model uncertainty have motivated much recent
research on the theoretical foundations of policy analysis; one example is the research
program    on   robust    policy   construction   initiated   by   Hansen   and    Sargent
(2001,2002,2003). This work focuses on local model uncertainty, i.e. model uncertainty
that is local to a given baseline model. The interactions of policy design and model
uncertainty in cases where model uncertainty is “global” in the sense that the space of
potential models contains very different elements is explored in Brock, Durlauf, and West
(2003). That paper uses an explicit decision-theoretic formulation which treats the true
model as an unknown variable and computes expected policy effects by “integrating out”
the variable. An important next step in studying policy design is the integration of the
limits we describe here into environments with global model uncertainty; some initial
discussion along these lines is found in Brock and Durlauf (2003).


2
 See Brock, Durlauf, and West (2003) and Onatski and Williams (2002) for conceptual
and operational issues that arise in specifying model uncertainty in economic models.


                                            2
        Our goal in this paper is to focus on basic ideas rather than formalism. Much of
the work described here represents research in progress and we have felt free to be
relatively speculative. Our hope is that the ideas we outline will stimulate others to
pursue what we believe is an extremely promising research program.




2. Design limits in linear systems: basic ideas


        This section considers the construction of optimal policies for systems with a
scalar state variable xt and a scalar control ut ; such systems are known as Single Input

Single Output or SISO systems. In our analysis, we assume that a policymaker wishes to
minimize the unconditional variance of the state,


                                                Ext2                                  (1)


The law of motion for the state is


                                  xt = A ( L ) xt −1 + but −1 + ξt                    (2)


where ξt represents an unobserved zero mean random variable with associated Wold
moving average representation


                                         ξt = W ( L )ν t                              (3)


The innovations ν t are assumed to have a common variance Eν t2 ; it is not necessary for
our analysis that the error variances are constant. We focus on feedback rules for the
control, i.e. rules of the form


                                       ut −1 = − F ( L ) xt −1                        (4)



                                                 3
Given rules of the form (4), the law of motion (1) may be rewritten so that


                                       xt = A ( L ) xt −1 − bF ( L ) xt −1 + W ( L )ν t =
                                                         W ( L)                                                   (5)
                                                                          vt
                                                 1 − LA ( L ) + bLF ( L )


if 1 − LA ( L ) + bLF ( L ) is invertible, which we will assume.

        In evaluating the effects of the control ut on the state xt , it is useful to contrast
(1) with the law of motion of the state variable when there is no control, i.e. the control is
set equal to zero every period; we designate this process as xtNC . Eq. (2) of course
implies that the state variable with no control obeys


                                                   xtNC = A ( L ) xtNC
                                                                    −1 + ξ t                                      (6)


Equation (6) is known in the control literature as the free dynamics of the system. In
light of the loss function (1), one may interpret the optimal policy problem as identifying
that choice of feedback rule that maximizes the difference between the variance of xtNC

and the variance of xt .
        In order to analyze the system (1)-(4), we will work in the frequency domain. To
do this, for any lag polynomial C ( L ) we denote the Fourier transform of its coefficients
               ∞
as C (ω ) =   ∑ce                 . Using the notation C (ω ) = C (ω ) C ( −ω ) , this allows us to
                          − ijω                                             2
                      j
              j =−∞


express the variance of the state as


                                           W (ω ) σν2                                   fξ ( ω )
                                                    2
                 1                π                                         π
           Ex =              ∫π                                    dω = ∫                                    dω
               2
                                                                                                                  (7)
                2π
               t
                                      eiω − A (ω ) + bF (ω )                    eiω − A (ω ) + bF (ω )
                              −                                2         −π                              2




                                                               4
where fξ (ω ) is the spectral density of ξt .3

        Eq. (7) provides a way of identifying how the control rule - F ( L ) affects each of

the frequency specific components of Ext2 .                                       To see this, multiply and divide the

denominator of the integrand in (7) by eiω − A (ω ) , so that
                                                                                  2




                             π                                       fξ ( ω )
                  Ext2 = ∫                                                                           2
                                                                                                         dω =
                                 e − A (ω ) e + b ( e − A (ω ) ) F (ω )
                            −π                      2                                       −1
                                    iω                       iω              iω

                                                                                                                   (8)
                                     π                           f x NC (ω )
                                    ∫π                                                      2
                                                                                                dω
                                            e + b ( e − A (ω ) ) F (ω )
                                    −                                             −1
                                             iω             iω




                         fξ ( ω )
where f x NC (ω ) =                         by (6). Defining the function
                      eiω − A (ω )
                                        2




                                                                             1
                                    S (ω ) =                                                                       (9)
                                                  e + b ( e − A (ω ) ) F (ω )
                                                   iω               iω                 −1




(8) may be rewritten as


                                                        π
                                                             S (ω ) f x NC (ω )d ω
                                                                         2
                                            Ext2 = ∫                                                              (10)
                                                        −π




a representation that will prove to be of great use in understanding stabilization policy
from a frequency domain perspective.
        In control theory, S (ω ) is known as the sensitivity function (cf. Kwakernaak and

Sivan (1972), pg. 487). Equation (10) illustrates how the sensitivity function S (ω ) plays

a critical role in understanding policy design. The effects of a policy on a state are


3
 The sorts of calculations we make here are standard in the control theory literature; see
Kwakernaak and Sivan (1972, chapter 6) for an excellent exposition.


                                                                     5
summarized by the sensitivity function; since f x NC (ω ) does not depend on the policy

rule, all effects of the policy rule are determined by the effect of F ( L ) (and hence

F (ω ) ) on S (ω ) . This means that any restrictions that exist on the ability of the choice

of F ( L ) to determine the shape of S (ω ) represent restrictions on how a policy can

affect the variance of the state.
         Eq. (10) indicates how different choices of the policy rule alter the way in which
each frequency component of f x NC (ω ) is transformed into an element of f x (ω ) and

hence how each frequency-specific component of xtNC translates into a frequency-specific

                          Since E ( xtNC ) = ∫
                                                 π                                     π
                                                         f x NC (ω )d ω and Ext2 = ∫       f x (ω )dω , this
                                          2
component of xt .
                                               −π                                  −π

transformation illustrates how the sensitivity function alters the frequency-specific
variance contributions when xtNC is transformed into xt by the feedback rule. When the

policy rule has the implication that S (ω ) < 1 , then the contribution of fluctuations
                                                     2




associated with frequency ω to f x (ω ) are smaller than their effect on the state variable

would be if the control were set equal to zero, i.e. f x NC (ω ) . Hence, one way to think

about policy design is that good policies will reduce the contributions of different values
that are present in f x NC (ω ) as the policy rule transforms this spectral density into f x (ω )

in a way to minimize the contributions of those frequencies where f x NC (ω ) is relatively

large.
         What sorts of constraints exist on the choice of S (ω ) which may be achieved by

the choice of F ( L ) ?     It is intuitive that some such limits must exist, or else the

policymaker would simply set S (ω ) = 0 ∀ω ∈ [ −π ,π ] and produce Ext2 = 0 . (Such a

rule is of course not realizable since the policymaker cannot condition on vt ) A full

characterization of the limits that exist in generating S (ω ) will provide a way of

characterizing the fundamental limits that exist to feedback policies in this model.




                                                 6
           Within the control theory literature, there is an important result, known as the
Bode integral constraint, which characterizes the limits which the state equation imposes
on the mapping from F (ω ) to S (ω ) . A discrete time version of this constraint is due to

Wu and Jonckheere, (1992). In order to state this constraint, it is necessary to introduce a
function L ( z ) defined by



                                                           (
                                     L ( z ) = bF ( z −1 ) z − A ( z −1 )   )
                                                                                −1
                                                                                             (11)


where for any lag polynomial C ( L ) its associated z-transform C ( z ) is defined by
            ∞
C ( z) =   ∑cz
           j =−∞
                   j    . We consider the case where F ( L ) and A ( L ) are polynomials of finite
                       j 4




degree. By the fundamental theorem of algebra, this function may be written as a ratio of
polynomials and factored into simple polynomials, therefore


                                                         m
                                                        Π ( z − zi )
                                           L( z) = c    i =1
                                                         n
                                                                                             (12)
                                                       Π ( z − pi )
                                                        i =1




where the constant c is determined by the requirement that the system defined by (1) to
(4) is stable. In the factorization, the quantities zi are the zeroes and the quantities pi are
the poles of the function. The difference between the number of poles and the number of
zeroes, ν = n − m , is known as the relative degree of L ( z ) . We assume that ν ≥ 1 . This

background allows us to state the following theorem


Theorem. Discrete Time Bode Constraint




4
We have shifted from Fourier to z-transforms in order to allow us to define the function
L ( ⋅) on the entire complex plane, which is needed in the derivations of some of the
results we employ.


                                                       7
Assume that the controlled system is globally asymptotically stable and that ν ≥ 1 . Then,
there exists a non negative constant K Bode such that



                            ∫ π ln ( S (ω )
                             π

                             −
                                              2
                                                  )dω = K    Bode
                                                                            i
                                                                                ( )
                                                                    = 4π ∑ ln pui                       (13)



where pui denotes an unstable pole of L ( z ) .


Pf. Wu and Jonckheere (1992).


           The key features of this theorem are twofold. First, since K Bode ≥ 0 (which

                                   ( )
immediately follows from ln pui ≥ 0 and the second equality in (13)), it is impossible

for S (ω ) < 1 ∀ω ∈ [ -π ,π ] ; otherwise,          ∫ π ln ( S (ω )
                                                     π

                                                     −
                                                                       2
                                                                           )dω would be negative.   From the

perspective of eq. (7) this implies that it is impossible to design a policy such that
    f x (ω ) ≤ f x NC (ω ) ∀ω ∈ [ -π ,π ] with strict inequality at some positive measure of

frequencies.5 In order to achieve f x (ω ) < f x NC (ω ) for every element of one set of

frequencies, it is necessary that f x (ω ) > f x NC (ω ) for elements of some other nontrivial

set. Since f x NC (ω ) represents the frequency-specific variance contributions when the

control is identically equal to zero, this means that any nontrivial policy must increase the
variance contributions at certain frequencies relative to the contributions in absence of the
policy. Hence, there are fundamental tradeoffs between the variance contributions that
collectively determine Ext2 . An optimal policy may incur higher variance contributions
at some frequencies in order to reduce variance contributions at others, but such tradeoffs
are inevitable.



5
    Hence, the fact that it is impossible to choose a control such that S (ω ) = 0 ∀ω ∈ [ −π , π ]
is a special case of a much stronger set of restrictions on what feedback policies can
achieve.


                                                         8
        When will K Bode > 0 ?            A positive value for the constraint occurs when the

polynomial 1 − LA ( L ) has roots strictly outside the unit circle. Notice that unit root

processes are compatible with K Bode = 0 . We will treat K Bode = 0 as a leading case since

many macroeconomic models are associated with 1 − LA ( L ) polynomials whose roots are

outside or on the unit circle.
        The Bode integral constraint, in turn, provides a way of characterizing the optimal

policy problem in the frequency domain. Let p (ω ) = S (ω ) . The optimal policy rule
                                                                                        2




implicitly chooses the p (ω ) that minimizes Ext2 subject to the constraint (13). Hence the

optimal policy is determined by the


                             π
                                                                   (
                   min p(ω ) ∫ p (ω ) f x NC (ω )dω + λ K Bode − ∫ ln p (ω ) d ω =
                             −π
                                                                                   π

                                                                                   −π            )   (14)
                                                ( p (ω ) f (ω ) − λ ln p (ω ) )dω
                                           π
                           λ K Bode + ∫                    x NC
                                          −π




        The first order necessary condition for this problem implies that for each
frequency ω the optimal p* (ω ) fulfills


                                                  λ
                                f x NC (ω ) =          → fx             ( ω ) p* ( ω ) = λ           (15)
                                                p (ω )
                                                 *                 NC




Eq. (15), in turn implies that the Fourier transform of the optimal feedback rule
− F * ( L ) , − F * (ω ) , is implicitly defined by



                                                                  W (ω ) σν2
                                                                           2

                           p (ω ) f x NC (ω ) =
                            *
                                                                                            =λ       (16)
                                                     e − A (ω ) + bF (ω )
                                                      iω                       *        2




which in turn implies that the optimal feedback rule is




                                                           9
                           − F * ( L ) = b −1 ( L−1 − W ( L ) L−1 − A ( L ) )                    (17)


       The optimal policy rule has a simple interpretation. Eq. (13) states the optimal
policy rule shapes the function p* (ω ) so that f x NC (ω ) p* (ω ) is constant across

                Recalling that p (ω ) = S (ω )           and that f x (ω ) = S (ω ) f x NC (ω ) , this
                                                     2                               2
frequencies.

means that the optimal policy rule converts the initial process xtNC into a white noise
process. In other words, any predictability in the state is eliminated under an optimal
policy. This is precisely what one would expect from feedback rules of the form (3);
predictability in the state is completely offset by the control.
       Finally, we would note an intriguing implication of the Bode integral constraint
for the analysis of policies in the presence of model uncertainty. The value of the
constant K Bode is model-specific, as indicated by eq. (12). Models with unstable poles
will thus produce different constraints on policy design than those where such poles are
not present. This suggests a new avenue across which model uncertainty can affect
optimal policy design as a policymaker will need to pay particular attention to the
implications of a policy for those models where K Bode > 0 as such models imply that the
cost of reducing variance at certain frequencies will be particularly high in the sense of
creating especially large increases in variance at other frequencies.




3. Applications


       In this section we apply the basic ideas associated with optimal policy design in
the presence of the Bode integral constraint to illustrate some of the insights that may be
produced by this framework.




i. tradeoffs between low and high frequency fluctuations




                                                  10
        Suppose that a policymaker wishes to design a policy that works well when
f x NC (ω ) has the typical “Granger” spectral shape (Granger (1966), Sargent (1987)) so

that f x NC (ω ) is decreasing in ω with the possible exception of some local maxima and

associated local increases around business cycle and seasonal frequencies. This spectral
density shape suggests that a policymaker might want to design a feedback rule that is
designed to reduce the variance contributions of frequencies in some interval [ −ω , ω ]

that makes a relatively large contribution to the overall value of Ext2 . A strategy for
doing this is to choose a feedback rule such that


                                       S (ω ) ≤ M < 1 ∀ω ∈ [ −ω , ω ]                           (18)


Following eq. (10), such a policy means that the variance contribution of the frequencies
in the interval [ −ω , ω ] to Ext2 is



                                   S (ω ) f x NC (ω )d ω ≤ M 2 ∫          f x NC (ω )dω
                                         2
                         ∫ω   ≤ω                                   ω ≤ω
                                                                                                (19)



        How will such a policy perform in light of the Bode integral constraint? We
focus on the case K Bode = 0 . The sort of strategy described by (18) provides good control

with respect to those frequencies that contribute the most power to Ext2 under the
assumption of the typical Granger spectral shape. However, this property comes at a
price in the sense that it trades off good performance at low frequencies for poor
performance at high frequencies.
        The magnitude of the potential cost may be given a lower bound. If K Bode = 0 ,
then by the Bode integral formula,


                  1
                    K Bode = ∫ ln ( S (ω ) ) dω ≤ 2ω ln ( M ) + ∫            ln ( S (ω ) ) dω
                              π
             0=                                                                                 (20)
                  2           −π                                 ω∉[ −ω ,ω ]




                                                     11
which implies

                                                                       ω

                                           (              )
                                                                  −
                                supω∉[−ω ,ω ] S (ω ) ≥ M              π −ω
                                                                             >1        (21)


         Equation (21) illustrates the critical implication of the Bode integral constraint
that S (ω ) > 1 is unavoidable for some frequencies and thus shows how the success of a

policymaker in controlling variance due to high spectral power at one frequency band
requires exacerbation of the variance contribution of another frequency band. As a result,
if we consider the variance contribution of frequencies outside the interval [ −ω , ω ] to

Ext2 ,


                                                      2
                                  ∫ω [ ω ω ] S (ω )
                                    ∉− ,
                                                          f x NC (ω ) d ω              (22)


it is clear that this contribution can be quite large, especially if f x NC (ω ) has a local

maximum in the set ω > ω as might occur, for example, via the Christmas cycle stressed

by Barsky and Miron (1989). The implication of our analysis is that while policies of the
form (18) would seem to be a natural implication of the assumption of the Granger
spectral shape, such policies can prove to be ineffective (and even, at least in principle,
counterproductive) if the implied costs of the policy in terms of increasing the variance
contributions of frequencies ω ∉ [ −ω , ω ] are such as to magnify local maxima in the

spectral density of xtNC




ii. local robustness analysis


         Within macroeconomics, one important new area of policy analysis has focused
on the design of robust policies. Following the seminal contributions of Hansen and
Sargent (2001,2002,2003), this research addresses the question of how a policymaker can



                                                12
design policies that account for uncertainty about the model of the economy. Important
recent contributions include Giannoni (2002), Massamiliano and Salmon (2002), Onatski
and Stock (2002) and Tetlow and von zur Muehlen (2001).
          Brock and Durlauf (2003) provide an analysis of local robustness for the system
we have described in Section 2. We summarize their basic argument. Suppose that there
exists model uncertainty with respect to the temporal structure of the innovations, ξt .

We do this by introducing uncertainty about the spectral density fξ (ω ) . Specifically,

relative to a baseline fξ (ω ) , the true spectral density lies in the set defined by



                                    ∫ ( f (ω ) − f (ω ) )
                                     π                      2
                                         ξ          ξ           dω ≤ ε 2                  (23)
                                    −π




Let fξ* (ω ) denote (for the policymaker) the least favorable model in this set.

          When ε is small, arguments in Brock and Durlauf (2003) show that the least
favorable model can be determined by identifying the marginal effect of an increase in
    fξ (ω ) on (23) and allocating the changes in a such a way that the ratio of the changes is

equal to the ratio of the marginal effects on Ext2 .6 The marginal effect of a change in the

value of fξ (ω ) at a given frequency on Ext2 , is p* (ω ) eiω − A (ω ) ; this follows
                                                                                    2



immediately from the frequency definition of the variance and the envelope theorem.
Combining this with eq. (16), which describes the policymaker’s feedback rule at the
baseline spectral density, Brock and Durlauf (2003) show that the least favorable spectral
density must fulfill


                                                         fξ ( ω )
                                                                    −1

                               fξ ( ω ) = fξ ( ω ) + ε
                                *
                                                                         + o (ε )         (24)
                                                         fξ ( ω )
                                                                    −1




6
    This is an indirect way of saying the ratio of the costs in changing fξ (ω ) as embodied
in (24) must equal the ratio of the benefits of the changes, and so is hardly a surprise from
the perspective of basic price theory!


                                                   13
Eq. (24) means that the least favorable model with respect to the baseline has the property
that the difference between the baseline and the least favorable model is smaller when the
baseline spectral density is relatively larger; conversely, the differences between the
baseline and the least favorable model are larger when the baseline spectral density is
relatively small. The intuition from this finding is driven by the logic of the optimal
policy problem as affected by the Bode constraint. Those frequencies against which the
optimal policy provides the smallest downweighting are those where the marginal harm
of additional power is greatest. The example illustrates how the use of the Bode integral
can facilitate calculations of robust versions of optimal policies.




iii. policy design with uncertain policy effects


While robustness analysis focuses on local model uncertainty, in the sense that the space
of possible models represents a shroud around an initial baseline model, many forms of
model uncertainty are clearly not local. One example of this occurs in the context of
policy analysis when the effects of the control are uncertain. This type of problem is
represented by Milton Friedman’s (Friedman (1948)) famous criticism of activist
monetary rule on the grounds that the effects of monetary policy are subject to “long and
variable lags.” We can formalize Friedman’s idea in the context of a state equation of the
form


                                xt = A ( L ) xt −1 + B ( L ) ut −1 + ξt                (25)


and analyzing control design when A ( L ) and fξ (ω ) are known but B ( L ) is unknown.

Following our earlier strategy, we will exploit the fact that f x NC (ω ) does not depend on

B ( L ) . Let Θ denote the set of potential values of B ( L ) with respect to which the

policymakers seeks to design a “good” control.




                                                 14
        Suppose that f x NC (ω ) displays the typical Granger spectral shape. Define a set of

frequencies [ −ω , ω ] such that fξ (ω ) ≤ e for ω ∉ [ −ω , ω ] where e is small positive

number. Suppose that a policymaker designs a control so that the associated sensitivity
function S (ω ) has the property



                          S (ω ) < 1 ∀ω ∈ [ −ω , ω ] and ∀ B ( L ) ∈ Θ                         (26)


Such a control implies

                                           π             2
                                Ext2 = ∫           S (ω ) f x NC (ω ) dω ≤
                                         −π
                                                                                               (27)
                           ω                    1                                 2
                          ∫−ω Mf xNC (ω ) dω + 2π           ∫ω [ ω ω ] e S (ω )
                                                                 ∉− ,
                                                                                      dω


From the perspective of design limits, the question is how a policy which fulfills (26)
performs relative to the last two terms in (27). Under the assumption that the system is
stable for all lag structures in Θ (so that K Bode = 0 ) and letting S∞ = supω∈[ −π ,π ] S (ω ) ,

the Bode integral constraint implies that


                                      0 = ∫ ln ( S (ω ) ) d ω ≤
                                               π

                                               −π
                                                                                               (28)
              ∫ ω ln M dω + ∫ω [ ω ω ] ln ( S ) dω = 2ω ln M + ( 2π − 2ω ) ln ( S )
               ω

               −               ∉− ,            ∞                                           ∞




which means


                                                                  ω
                                                             −
                                               S∞ ≥ M            π −ω
                                                                                               (29)


        This formula illustrates how the strategy described by (26) can expose the
policymaker to a large sensitivity peak; the inequality in (29) represents a lower bound on
the weight assigned to some frequencies given the control rule. In parallel to our earlier
arguments, from the perspective of designing good controls, the issue in minimizing



                                                       15
frequencies in the way described by (26) is the effect of the control on
                    2
∫ω [ ω ω ] S (ω )
  ∉− ,
                        f x NC (ω ) d ω . Eq. (29) places a lower bound on this term, i.e.


                                                                             ω
                                              2                         −
                          ∫ω [ ω ω ] S (ω )
                            ∉− ,
                                                  f x NC (ω ) d ω ≥ M       π −ω
                                                                                   ∫ω [ ω ω ] f (ω ) dω
                                                                                    ∉− ,    x NC
                                                                                                          (30)


so, policy rules that account for the uncertainty in the effects of the control on the state in
minimizing low frequency fluctuations can potentially involve serious problems at higher
frequencies.




iv. measurement error


         The theory of design limits may also be applied to study how to design good
controls in the presence of measurement error. Problems of this type naturally arise in
monetary policy contexts, for example, where measurement of relevant variables such as
potential output or the natural rate of unemployment can be problematic; see Orphanides
and Williams (2002) for a recent example.
         To see how design limits apply to measurement error, suppose that the true state
variable xt obeys the process described by eq. (2) but that state is unobservable; the

measured level of the state, xtm is


                                                          xtm = xt + nt                                   (31)


where nt is measurement error. Control equations can of course only be constructed as
functions of observables so the control takes the form


                                                        ut = − F ( L ) xtm                                (32)




                                                               16
          To understand how measurement error affects the choice of control rule, we
assume that ξt is zero.7 In this case, the variance of the state is


                                              π              2
                                   Ext2 = ∫       S (ω ) − 1 f n (ω ) d ω                       (33)
                                            −π




which indicates that the control should be chosen so that S (ω ) − 1 is relatively small

when f n (ω ) is relatively large. Notice that relative to the earlier formulas one is now

concerned with the spectral density of the measurement error and not the true state. Also,

the weighting scheme is no longer S (ω )                    but S (ω ) − 1 . The difference in these
                                                        2                   2



weights reflects the fact that the policy rule wishes to damp out the effects of the
measurement error in inducing volatility in xt because of the feedback rule, not because

of volatility that is intrinsic to xtNC .




v. non-time separable preferences


          The frequency domain perspective on policy limits provides some interesting
insights into the design of optimal policies in the presence of non-time separable
preferences (NTS). As argued in recent work such as Otrok (2001), Otrok, Ravikumar,
and Whiteman (2002), the standard time separable preferences used in macroeconomics
may fail to properly account for the fact that economic actors are sensitive to the
frequency of shocks. Accounting for this may have important macroeconomic
implications. For example, Otrok, Ravikumar, and Whiteman (2002) show how non-time
separability can explain the equity premium puzzle. We apply the analysis of Section 2
to the design of policies in the presence of NTS preferences. We do this by contrasting a
standard set of time separable preferences

7
    One might object that if fξ (ω ) = 0 ∀ω ∈ [ −π , π ] , there is no control problem that needs
to be addressed. Our purpose in this assumption is to highlight an implication of
measurement error, not to provide a realistic stabilization problem.


                                                      17
                                                                ∞
                                                   (1 − β ) ∑ β j xt2+ j                                                  (34)
                                                               j =0




with non-time separable preferences of the form


                                                      ∞
                                        (1 − β ) ∑ β j ( xt + j − δ xt + j −1 )
                                                                                           2
                                                                                                                          (35)
                                                     j =0




        These alternative preference structures illustrate that the difference between the
payoffs under time separable and non-separable cases is determined by the difference

between Ext2 and E ( xt − δ xt −1 ) .
                                               2
                                                      From eq. (7), it is immediately the case that

E ( xt − δ xt −1 ) = E ( (1 − δ L ) xt ) may be expressed as
               2                      2




                                                    E ( xt − δ xt −1 ) =
                                                                              2


                                    π                                 2
                                                            S (ω ) f x NC (ω ) dω =
                                                       2
                                    ∫π
                                    −
                                           eiω − δ                                                                        (36)
                                                                2
                                π                    eiω − δ
                              ∫π                                                      fξ ( ω ) d ω
                                     e − ( A (ω ) − bF (ω ) )
                               −                                                  2
                                          iω




where we have used the identities 1 − δ e − iω = e − iω ( eiω − δ )
                                                                          2                          2             2
                                                                                                         and e − iω = 1 . It is

straightforward to verify, using the analysis underlying (16) and (17) that
F ( L ) = b −1 A ( L ) when δ = 0 .

        To see how non-time separable preferences affect optimal policy, we consider the
                                                                  1
special case where A ( L ) = a0 and fξ (ω ) =                       ; we also normalize so that b = 1 . For
                                                                 2π
this case, the optimal feedback rule takes the form


                                                   ut −1 = − F * (δ ) xt −1                                               (37)



                                                               18
where the coefficient F (δ ) reflects the dependence of the feedback parameter on δ . To

understand this dependence, (25) implies that for each choice of the feedback parameter
F


                                                                      2
                                                  π        eiω − δ
                         E ( xt − δ xt −1 ) = ∫
                                         2
                                                                                  dω =
                                                       eiω − ( a0 − F )
                                                 −π                           2

                                                                                         (38)
                               π       1 − 2δ cos ω + δ           2

                           ∫ π 1− 2(a                                             dω
                                       0 − F ) cos ω + ( a0 − F )
                               −                                              2




Hence, the effects of habit persistence on optimal policy are determined by the behavior
of 1 − 2δ cos ω + δ 2 . This function is monotonically decreasing in ω if δ > 0 .

       In order to solve for F (δ ) , we proceed as follows. The second integral in (38)

may, using a formula in Gradshteyn and Ryzhik (2000, formula 2.554(2), pg. 169) be
rewritten as


                           π          1 − 2δ cos ω + δ 2
                          ∫ π 1− 2(a                                          dω =
                                      0 − F ) cos ω + ( a0 − F )
                           −                                              2

                                                                                         (39)
                                   π (1 + δ 2 − 2δ ( a0 − F ) )
                                             1 − ( a0 − F )
                                                              2




Differentiation of (39) with respect to δ produces a quadratic equation. Setting this
quadratic equal to 0 in order to minimize (39) and choosing the relevant root leads to the
formula


                                         F (δ ) = a0 − δ                                 (40)


To understand the intuition behind this formula, consider a feedback rule − F ( L ) such

that




                                                      19
                                        A ( L ) − bF ( L ) = δ                                   (41)


When ξt is uncorrelated, this rule implies that all correlation in xt − δ xt −1 has been
eliminated by the feedback rule. Following the analysis of (17), this means the rule is
optimal.




4. Multivariate systems


        Our discussion thus far has focused on SISO models.                      There is also a rich
literature on multiple input multiple output (MIMO) systems that is of particular
importance in contexts where the policymaker wishes to control several state variables, as
occurs for a monetary authority who cares about output and inflation volatility. The
theory of design limit for MIMO systems is relatively less developed than for SISO
systems; important contributions include Chen (1995) and Chen and Nett (1995). We
consider the case where there are two states and one control.
        We consider a system for two state variables x1,t and x2,t . The equations for these

states are


                             x1,t = a11 x1.t −1 + a12 x2,t −1 + b1ut −1 + ξ1,t                   (42)


and

                            x2,t = a21 x1.t −1 + a22 x2,t −1 + b2ut −1 + ξ 2,t                   (43)


which in matrix form is


                                      xt = Axt −1 + but −1 + ξt                                  (44)


        Models of this type are common in the macroeconomics literature. For example,
Onatski and Stock (2001) consider a model of this type in which a policymaker attempts


                                                   20
to stabilize inflation and the output gap using a short run interest rate as the control.
Onatski and Stock restrict their analysis to evaluate policies that lie in a set of Taylor
rules. In our context, this would mean that policies are taken from the set T defined by


                        T = {ut such that ut = g1 x1,t + g 2 x2,t = g ′xt }             (45)


       Our objective is to derive some comparisons with the SISO case we have already
discussed. To do this, one first considers the matrix generalization of the sensitivity
function. The 2 × 2 sensitivity matrix S (ω ) is defined as



                                     ( (                           ) )
                                                                          −1
                            S (ω ) = I + I + ( eiω I − A )
                                                              −1
                                                                   bg ′                 (46)


where I is the identity matrix.
       We have been unable to uncover an explicit formula for the Bode integral
constraint for multivariate discrete time systems that represents a direct generalization of
(13), although there are a number of results available that consider design limits in such
systems (cf. Chen and Nett (1993,1995) and Chen (1995)). We conjecture that the
multivariate analog of the sensitivity formula is


                                π

                               −π    (               2
                                                         )
                      K Bode = ∫ ln det ( S (ω ) ) dω = 4π ∑ ln pui
                                                                    i
                                                                           ( )          (47)


In this case, the terms pui represent unstable roots of the matrix A in eq. (44) . Letting

S ( z ) denote the z-transform that corresponds to the sensitivity matrix defined by (46)


                                                    Π ( z − pi )
                                    det S ( z ) =                                       (48)
                                                    Π ( z − zi )




                                                21
While we are in the process of attempting to develop a proof of (47), we emphasize that
we have not done so.8 At the same time, the arguments we make below can be readily
modified if we turn out to be incorrect in this conjecture and so we proceed on the basis
that (47) holds in order to illustrate the design limits ideas.
          In order to see how (47) constrains the design of policy, we employ the
relationship


                       2                                       2

                      ∑ ∫ π ln det ( S (ω ) )                                 (
                                                       dω = ∑ ∫ ln σ k ( S (ω ) ) dω  )
                              π                    2                 π
                                                                                              (49)
                             −                                       −π
                      k =1                                    k =1




where, for a fixed ω , σ k ( S (ω ) ) denotes the singular values of S (ω ) .9 Let the norm

    S ∞ be defined as the largest singular value of S (ω ) where ω is allowed to vary

between −π and π . In analogy to (18), one can consider the effects of policies that
impose


                                             S ∞ ≤ M ∀ω ∈ [ −ω , ω ]                          (50)


This expression is more complicated than (18) because we are now working with a
sensitivity matrix function. If one combines (47) and (50),



                                                                                  (       )
                              2

                                         (               )
             0 ≤ K Bode = ∑ ∫ ln σ k ( S (ω ) ) dω ≤ 2∫ ln supω∈[−π ,π ] σ 2 ( S (ω ) )
                                    π                                    π
                                                                                              (51)
                                    −π                                   −π
                             k =1




which implies



8
  The continuous time analog to (48) is readily available in the control literature, cf.
Skogestad and Postlethwaite (1996, eq. 6.3, pg. 215).
9
  The singular value of a complex valued 2 × 2 matrix S are the square roots of the
eigenvalues of the matrix SS H where S H is the complex transpose of S , cf. Skogestad
and Postlethwaite (1996, pg. 503). The singular values are ordered so that for each ω ,
σ 1 ( S (ω ) ) ≤ σ 2 ( S (ω ) ) .


                                                         22
                                   0 ≤ 2ω ln M + ( 2π − 2ω ) ln S ∞                       (52)


since S ∞ = supω∈[ −π ,π ] σ 2 ( S (ω ) ) . Therefore, it is the case that


                                                             ω
                                                        −
                                              S∞ ≥M         π −ω
                                                                                          (53)


        This bound indicates how the basic principles we have described for univariate
systems apply to multivariate systems, namely, reduction of variance associated with low
frequencies can produce high variance contributions from high frequencies. In principle,
it should be possible to obtain tighter bounds on the effect of strategy (50) on the
magnification of high frequency components using methods such as those developed in
Zhou, Doyle, and Glover (1998, chapter 6); we leave this to future work.
        While the basic principles of design limits extend naturally from SISO to MIMO
systems, there are interesting differences because design limits apply to frequency-
specific components of variance both within and across the state variables.                Put
differently, in the SISO case, design limits always expose a policymaker to undesirable
effects outside the range of frequencies which are targeted by the policymaker. In the
MIMO case these undesirable effects themselves will embody tradeoffs with respect to
the different state variables. This issue is well exposited in Skogestad and Postlethwaite
(1996, chapter 6).10




10
  There are also important technical differences between SISO and MIMO systems. First,
                                                                       (     )
in the SISO case, if the controlled system is stable, then ln S (ω ) is harmonic outside
the unit disk, whereas in MIMO systems, even if S (ω ) is analytic, ln S (ω )    (   )   is not
harmonic in general where, for the case of matrix S (ω ) , S (ω ) denotes the largest
singular value of S (ω ) at ω (Hara and Sung (1989, pg. 890)). Second, both the
locations of unstable poles and zeros as well as their directions affect the constraints in
MIMO systems (Hara and Sung (1989, pg. 890)). Similar differences are discussed in
Chen (1995) and Chen and Nett (1993, 1995).


                                                   23
5. Summary and conclusions


       This paper has attempted to outline some basic issues that arise in the design of
optimal policies in dynamic economic systems.        Borrowing ideas from the control
engineering literature, it is possible to precisely delineate the limitations that a
policymaker faces in designing feedback policies. These limits, which are summarized
by a remarkable formula known as the Bode integral constraint, illustrate how any
feedback policy is forced to make tradeoffs among the frequency-specific components of
the state variables that a policymaker wishes to stabilize. We have suggested how these
tools can elucidate policy design issues that arise in the presence of local and global
model uncertainty as well as in the face of measurement error. These applications
represent only a hint of the potential of these methods for understanding policy design in
macroeconomics and other areas of economics.




                                           24
Bibliography

Barsky, R. and J. Miron, (1989), “The Seasonal Cycle and the Business Cycle,” Journal of
Political Economy, 97, 3, 503-534.

Brock, W. and S. Durlauf, (2003), “Local Robustness Analysis: Theory and Application,”
mimeo, Department of Economics, University of Wisconsin.

Brock, W., S. Durlauf, and K. West (2003), “Policy Evaluation in Uncertain Economic
Environments (with discussion),” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1, 235-322.

Chen, J., (1995), “Sensitivity Integral Relations and Design Trade-Offs in Linear
Multivariate Feedback Systems,” IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control, 40, 10, 1700-
1716.

Chen, J. and C. Nett, (1993), “Bode Integrals for Multivariable Discrete Time Systems,”
Proceedings of the 32 Conference on Decision and Control, 811-816.

Chen, J. and C. Nett, (1995), “Sensitivity Integrals for Multivariate Discrete-Time
Systems,” Automatica, 31, 8, 1113-1124.

Friedman, M., (1948), “A Monetary and Fiscal Framework for Economic Stability,”
American Economic Review, 38, 245-264.

Friedman, M., (1951), “Comments on Monetary Policy,” Review of Economics and
Statistics, 33, 3, 186-191.

Giannoni, M., (2002), “Does Model Uncertainty Justify Caution? Robust Optimal
Monetary Policy in a Forward-Looking Model,” Macroeconomic Dynamics, 6, 111-144.

Granger, C., (1966), “The Typical Shape of an Economic Variable,” Econometrica, 34, 1,
150-161.

Gradshteyn, I. and I. Ryzhik, (2000), Table of Integrals, Series, and Products, Sixth
Edition, San Diego: Academic Press.

Hansen, L. and T. Sargent, (2001), “Acknowledging Misspecification in Macroeconomic
Theory,” Review of Economic Dynamics, 4, 519-35.

Hansen, L. and T. Sargent, (2002), Robust Control and Economic Model Uncertainty.
Book manuscript, Hoover Institution, Stanford University and forthcoming, Princeton
University Press.

Hansen, L. and T. Sargent, (2003) “Robust Control of Forward-Looking Models,”
Journal of Monetary Economics, 50, 581-604.



                                          25
Hara, S. and H. Sung, (1989), “Constraints on Sensitivity Characteristics in Linear
Multivariate Discrete-Time Control Systems,” Linear Algebra and its Applications, 122-
124, 889-919.

Kwakernaak, H. and R. Sivan, (1972), Linear Optimal Control Systems, New York: John
Wiley and Sons.

Massamiliano, M. and M. Salmon, (2002), “Robust Decision Theory and the Lucas
Critique,” Macroeconomic Dynamics, 6, 1, 167-185.

Onatski, A. and J. Stock, (2002), “Robust Monetary Policy Under Model Uncertainty in a
Small Model of the U.S. Economy,” Macroeconomic Dynamics, 6, 85-110.

Onatski, A. and N. Williams, (2003), “Modeling Model Uncertainty,” Journal of the
European Economic Association, forthcoming.

Orphanides, A. and J. Williams, (2002), “Robust Monetary Policy Rules with Unknown
Natural Rates,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2, 63-118.

Otrok, C., (2001), “Spectral Welfare Cost Functions,” International Economic Review,
42, 2, 345-367.

Otrok, C., B. Ravikumar, and C. Whiteman, (2002), “Habit Formation: A Resolution of
the Equity Premium Puzzle, Journal of Monetary Economics, 49, 1261-1288.

Sargent, T., (1987), Macroeconomic Theory, San Diego: Academic Press.

Sims, C., (2001), “Pitfalls of a Minimax Approach to Model Uncertainty,” American
Economic Review, 91, 51-4.

Skogestad, S. and I. Postlethwaite, (1996), Multivariable Feedback Control: Analysis and
Design, New York: John Wiley.

Svensson, L., (1996), “Commentary: How Should Monetary Policy Respond to Shocks
While Maintaining Long Run Price Stability?,” in Achieving Price Stability, Federal
Reserve Bank of Kansas City, 181-195.

Svensson, L., (2000), “Robust Control Made Simple,” mimeo, Department of Economics,
Princeton University.

Taylor, J., (1993), “Discretion Versus Policy Rules in Practice,” Carnegie-Rochester
Conference Series on Public Policy, 39, 195-214.

Taylor, J., (ed.), (1999), Monetary Policy Rules, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.




                                           26
Tetlow, R. and P. von zur Muehlen, (2001), “Robust Monetary Policy With Misspecified
Models: Does Model Uncertainty Always Call for Attenuated Policy?,” Journal of
Economic Dynamics and Control, 25, 6-7, 911-949.

Wu, B.-F. and E. Jonckheere, (1992), “A Simplified Approach to Bode’s Theorem for
Continuous and Discrete Time Systems,” IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control, 37,
100, 1797-1802.

Zhou, K., J. Doyle, and K. Glover, (1998), Robust and Optimal Control, Englewood
Cliffs, New Jersey: Prentice Hall.




                                        27
