                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  THE TYING OF LENDING AND EQUITY UNDERWRITING

                                             Steven Drucker
                                               Manju Puri

                                          Working Paper 10491
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w10491


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       May 2004




Puri is grateful to the Sloan Foundation for partial funding of this research. We thank James Booth, Mark
Flannery, Jean Helwege, Jianping Qi, Andy Winton, and seminar participants at the Federal Reserve Bank
of San Francisco, Stanford Graduate School of Business, the 2003 FMA International Meetings in Dublin,
the 2003 FMA Meetings in Denver, the 2003 FDIC/JFSR Conference on Banking and Finance in
Washington, D.C., and the 2004 AFA Meetings in San Diego. The views expressed herein are those of the
author(s) and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2004 by Steven Drucker and Manju Puri. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
The Tying of Lending and Equity Underwriting
Steven Drucker and Manju Puri
NBER Working Paper No. 10491
May 2004
JEL No. G2
                                      ABSTRACT

This article examines the practice of “tying,” which occurs when an underwriter lends to an issuer

around the time of a public securities offering. We examine whether there are efficiencies from tying

lending and underwriting which lead to benefits for issuers and underwriters. We find evidence

consistent with tying occurring for issues when there are informational economies of scope from

combining lending and underwriting. Firms benefit from tying through lower financing costs, as tied

issuers receive lower underwriter fees on seasoned equity offerings and discounted loan yield

spreads. These financing costs are significantly reduced for non-investment grade issuers, where

informational economies of scope from combining lending with underwriting are likely to be large.

These results are robust to matching methodology developed by Heckman, Ichimura, and Todd

(1997, 1998). For underwriters, tying helps build relationships that augment an underwriter’s

expected revenues by increasing the probability of receiving both current and future business. Both

commercial banks and investment banks tie lending and underwriting and offer price discounts,

albeit in different ways, with commercial banks discounting loan yield spreads and investment banks

offering reduced underwriter spreads.

Steven Drucker
Graduate School of Business
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305-5015

Manju Puri
Fuqua School of Business
Duke University
1 Towerview Drive, Box 90120
Durham, NC 27708-0120
and NBER
mpuri@duke.edu
1.     Introduction

For many years, the 1933 Glass-Steagall Act prevented commercial banks from underwriting
corporate bonds and equities. Due to the recent relaxation and eventual repeal of the Act,
commercial banks acquired investment banks, or developed investment-banking capabilities
internally, to create universal banks that can offer an array of financial services.

       The entry of commercial banks into underwriting markets has increased the potential for
financial institutions to tie products, such as packaging loans with underwriting services. In fact,
tying has increased substantially over time -- in 1994, only 1% of seasoned equity issuers
received a loan from their underwriter at around the time of issuance, but by 2001, over 20% of
all deals were tied. The tying of lending and underwriting raises a host of interesting questions.
First, why are deals tied?     Are there efficiencies resulting from the tying of lending and
underwriting? Tying might allow for potential efficiency gains due to informational economies
of scope that can result from the bank jointly delivering services and using the same client-
specific information for multiple purposes (see e.g. Benston, 1990; Saunders and Walter, 1994).
Therefore, tying might be useful when there are large potential economies of scope from
combining lending and underwriting. This would suggest that certain kinds of deals are tied, but
not others. Second, who benefits from tying? Lower costs could arise due to informational
economies of scope, and issuers can benefit if the bank passes along these savings. For the
underwriter, tying might help build relationships that improve the probability of securing current
and future business from the firm.       Third, do the benefits from tying vary by the type of
underwriter involved in the transaction? It is possible that commercial banks are able to generate
larger economies of scope than investment banks due to their well-established lending
businesses.   Therefore, there may exist differences in tied deals that are underwritten by
investment banks as opposed to commercial banks.

       In this paper, we address these issues empirically by studying the tying of loans to
seasoned equity offerings. To tackle these questions, we use a unique data set that is carefully
assembled from multiple databases and augmented by hand collected data. We gather data on
seasoned equity issuers, including each firm’s credit rating, stock returns, issuance history, and
lending history. We identify prior underwriting and lending relationships between each issuer



                                                                                                  1
and potential underwriter, as well as each underwriter’s ranking and level and quality of analyst
coverage. Further, we collect data on underwriter fees, loan pricing, and lending terms.

       We find that there is a distinct profile of issues that are tied. The majority of tied deals
involve clients that are highly leveraged and are non- investment grade rated. One explanation
for this is that for lower rated and highly leveraged firms, there are larger potential efficiency
gains that arise due to informational economies of scope from combining lending and
underwriting.      Therefore, tying lending and underwriting for these issuers could produce
substantial benefits. To study if issuers actually benefit from tying, we examine the impact of
tying on issuers’ financing costs. Our results suggest that tying lowers issuers’ financing costs
through two main dimensions – (i) a reduced underwriter fee for the equity offering, and (ii)
discounted yield spreads of tied loans as compared with “matched” non-tied loans. Interestingly,
we find that the cost reductions are more pronounced amongst issuers that are non- investment
grade rated, where the expected informational economies of scope are relatively large.

       To ensure that matching biases are not driving the yield spread discount, we use the
econometric techniques developed by Heckman, Ichimura and Todd (1997, 1998).                 These
econometric methods effectively take into account the fact that the characteristics of tied loans
may differ significantly from non-tied loans and ensure that such observed characteristics are not
driving the results.    Using a variety of matching models, we confirm that tied loans are
significantly cheaper than comparable loans.

       To examine if underwriters benefit from tying, we look at the impact of tying on the
underwriter’s relationship with the firm. In particular, we investigate if the same bank is selected
for current and future equity underwriting mandates. We find that tying significantly increases
the probability of securing current equity underwriting business. We also find that tied issuers
go back to the equity market more frequently than non-tied issuers, and issuers who are tied to
investment bank underwriters are more likely to keep the same underwriter. The results are
consistent with tied loans helping to build relationships that increase an underwriter’s expected
revenues.

       We also examine if the benefits from tying vary by the type of underwriter involved in
the transaction.    Interestingly, while commercial banks are well positioned to tie lending and
underwriting due to their existing lending businesses, we discover that investment banks
underwrote a significant portion of tied deals. This suggests that investment banks have now

                                                                                                  2
developed the organizational infrastructure to tie lending and underwriting and is consistent with
there being potential gains from a single entity offering both lending and underwriting services.1
Our results indicate that commercial banks and investment banks both compete for tied deals.
However they seem to compete through different components of the tied deals -- commercial
banks are more likely to offer discounted yield spreads on tied loans while investment banks are
more likely to discount the underwriter spread for the SEO. This is consistent with each type of
underwriter competing more aggressively in its area of expertise and in the area where it is more
likely to generate future business. Investment banks discount underwriter spreads and receive
more future underwriting business. Commercial banks discount loan yield spreads, which is
consistent with establishing a lending relationship that helps generate other banking business.

        This paper adds to the growing literature on how underwriters and issuers associate with
each other. An important question is what determines the pairing of firms and underwriters for
current as well as for future deals. Studies suggest that underwriter reputation is an important
determinant of the choice of underwriter (Booth and Smith, 1986; Carter and Manaster, 1990),
and high quality issuers are more likely to associate with high quality underwriters (Fernando et.
al, 2003). Underwriter capability in terms of all-star analyst coverage has been found to be
important in affecting investment banking deal flow (Clarke et. al., 2003; Corwin and Schultz,
2003) and for switching from one underwriter to another (Krigman et. al, 2001), though there is
little evidence to suggest that aggressive analyst recommendations increase the bank’s
probability of winning an underwriting mandate (Ljungqvist et. al, 2003). In this paper, we find
that prior lending as well as simultaneous lending by the underwriter to the firm significantly
affect firm- underwriter pairings and the pricing of underwriting services. Lending activities are
important not just for current firm- underwriter association but also for future transactions and
help create durable relationships that can benefit the is suer through lower financing costs. 2 Our
findings also underscore that firm- underwriter pairings can differ by underwriter type and not
simply by underwriter reputation and analyst coverage, as we find important differences between
commercial bank and investment bank underwriters.

1
   For example, Morgan Stanley participated in a $6.5 billion bank loan for Lucent Technologies and was
subsequently awarded the role of underwriter on Lucent’s spinoff of Agere Technologies (see “Lucent Deal Shows
Wall Street Takes on Greater Risk,” The Wall Street Journal, February 23, 2001, C1). Moreover, investment banks
are increasing their lending capacity, with Merrill Lynch, Lehman Brothers, and Morgan Stanley forming bank
subsidiaries (see “Morgan Stanley Injects About $2 Billion Into Bank Unit, Aiming to Boost Lending,” The Wall
Street Journal, August 16, 2001, B7).
2
  See also Ljungqvist et. al (2003) for additional sources of durability in bank-issuer relationships.

                                                                                                             3
        This paper also contributes to the literature on universal banking and the implications of
allowing banks to underwrite securities. Regulators have recently raised questions on the firm-
level and competitive effects of the relaxation and repeal of the Glass-Steagall Act (see e.g.,
Berger, et. al, 1999; Santomero and Eckles, 2000) as well as the implications of tie-ins. 3 Related
to these concerns, the theoretical literature has examined the potential for commercial banks and
investment banks to co-exist, as well as the implications of such a scenario (see e.g., Boot and
Thakor, 1997; Kanatas and Qi, 1998, 2003; Puri, 1999; Rajan, 2002; Stefanadis, 2004).
However, the possibility that investment banks might respond by expanding into lending
activities has generally not received much attention. Our results bring to light some similarities
and differences in the ways that investment banks and commercial banks compete for
underwriting business. We also add to the evidence on implications of combining lending with
underwriting. Much of the empirical literature that examines when banks lend and underwrite
investigates the effect of bank lending, and the private information contained therein, on the
banks’ underwriting of public securities. 4          These effects are ascertained through the pricing of
underwritten securities (see e.g., Puri, 1996; Gande et. al, 1997; Yasuda, 2003; Benzoni and
Schenone, 2004) or through long run performance (see e.g., Ang and Richardson, 1994;
Kroszner and Rajan, 1994; Puri, 1994). An important but unexplored issue is the reverse
question – how do potential underwriting opportunities affect banks’ lending, and how does this
affect the financing cost of the issuing firm? This paper provides a first step in addressing this
question.

        The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the data and our
sample selection process. We present the major empirical findings in Section 3. Section 4
concludes.




3
   U.S. House Representative Dingell highlights some regulatory concerns in a letter to Chairman Greenspan and
Comptroller Hawke (see “Letter to FRB and OCC re: ‘pay to play’ practices,” July 11, 2002).
4
  In related literature, James (1987), Lummer and McConnell (1989), Best and Zhang (1993), and Billett, Flannery
and Garfinkel (1995), among others, find that new loans, loan renewals, and lender identity carry (positive) private
information to the outside equity market about a borrowing firm’s financial condition. See James and Smith (2000)
for a comprehensive review of the past and recent research on the special nature of bank loan financing. This
literature examines the effect of bank lending absent an underwriting role for the bank.

                                                                                                                  4
2.      Data and Sample Selection

A natural way to capture the tying of loans and underwritings is to take all instances when a
financial institution underwrites a firm’s public securities and lends to the firm simultaneously.
However, in practice even if there is an implicit agreement to this effect, there may be a few
months lag between the reported transactions. Hence, the definition we adopt is if the firm
received a loan from the underwriter of the SEO between six months prior to and six months
after the SEO, we classify the loan as a “tied loan” and the SEO as a “tied deal.” As a robustness
check to this definition, we also reran our estimations where we defined tied loans to be those
loans that were originated between three months prior to and three months after the SEO. This
sample produces qualitatively similar results.

        We select our sample period based on the following factors. First, we hope to capture an
active period of tying. Table 1 shows that tied deals were nearly non-existent before 1996, and
with the exception of the year 2000, the proportion of tied deals increases each year. The decline
in tied deals in the year 2000 may be due to a noticeable decline in telecom and cable SEOs,
which account for around one-third of all tied deals, and a very high proportion of technology
offerings, which account for only a small percentage of tied deals. Second, since we will be
examining if the issuers proceed with a subsequent SEO, we must provide enough time to
capture the decisions of end of sample issuers. Based on these considerations, we define our
sample period as January 1, 1996 through May 31, 2001.

        We construct a unique database using eight different data sources and hand-collected
data. Data on seasoned equity offerings comes from Thomson Financial’s SDC Platinum United
States New Issues database, from which we download underwritten, seasoned, US Common
Stock issues. Since we wish to study industrial firms, we remove financial firms (companies
with a one-digit SIC code of 6). The sample consists of 2301 issues. We hand match, by issuer
name, each of the 2301 issuers to the Loan Pricing Corporation’s (LPC) DealScan database to
identify if the firm received a tied loan from their underwriter and in doing so, we identify if the
SEO is a tied deal. 5 There are 201 tied deals in the sample and 2100 non-tied deals.


5
  LPC DealScan collects its loan data from SEC filings, and it receives data from large loan syndicators and from a
staff of reporters. As such, DealScan is well-suited to studying the borrowing activity of companies with public
equity and debt. Since all of the companies in our sample have public equity, we should observe the vast majority of

                                                                                                                  5
         We classify each underwriter as an “investment bank” or a “commercial bank” based on
the status of the parent/holding company of the underwriter at the time of the issue. 6 Due to the
many mergers and acquisitions in the financial sector, we use the mergers and acquisitions
database from SDC Platinum to aid in classification. For example, NationsBank acquired
Montgomery Securities on 10/1/1997. Montgomery Securities is classified as an investment
bank prior to 10/1/1997, but after 10/1/1997, we classify it as a commercial bank. Commercial
banks underwrote 91 tied SEOs and 591 non-tied SEOs, while investment banks underwrote the
remaining 110 tied SEOs and 1509 non-tied SEOs.

         We will study how tying affects the pricing of bank services and the ability of the
underwriter to generate equity underwriting business. As a result, we need to control for factors
that may alter fees, pricing, or the likelihood that an issuer selects an underwriter.                         Prior
underwriting relationships are likely to be important in both the selection of a bank and the
pricing of banking services (see e.g., Baker, 1990; James, 1992; Crane and Eccles, 1993;
Ljungqvist et. al, 2003). Furthermore, it is possible that prior lending relationships could also
influence underwriter selection and the pricing of services. In particular, if there are economies
of scope in lending and underwriting, then a prior lending relationship may result in a reduced
underwriter fee or other pricing differences. When identifying prior lending and underwriting
relationships, we account for mergers between potential underwriters. For example, Fleet Bank
merged with BankBoston / Robertson Stephens on 10/1/1999. When tracking relationships, we
assume that Fleet Bank acquired all of BankBoston’s and Robertson Stephens’ prior lending and
underwriting relationships. From SDC Platinum, we identify 90 tied issuers and 830 non-tied
issuers that use an underwriter that had underwritten a prior equity offering. From DealScan, we
identify 83 tied issuers and 103 non-tied issuers that have a prior lending relationship with the
selected underwriter.

         Previous research indicates that we need to incorporate the reputation of the underwriter
and the level and quality of analyst coverage into our models because these factors are likely to


their lending activity. Dealscan has been used in previous studies for many purposes, including examining the
effect of lending on bond yield spreads (see e.g. Gande et. al 1997) and bank effects in lending rates (Hubbard et. al
2002).
6
  We do not separate commercial banks that internally developed investment-banking capabilities from those that
acquired investment banks because almost all of the commercial banks developed underwriting operations by
acquiring investment banks. Chaplinsky and Erwin (2001) note that for commercial banks who developed
underwriting capabilities internally, only JP Morgan acquired market share in equity underwriting that is above
0.02% during the post-1996 period.

                                                                                                                    6
affect the firm’s decision to select an underwriter or to switch underwriters in the future. We
capture the influence of reputation through the underwriter’s market share. For each year, we
compute each underwriter’s SEO market share by adding the principal amounts of all SEOs in
which the bank was the underwriter and dividing this total by the principal amounts of all SEOs
during the year.        If a merger between underwriters occurred during the year, we use the
combined market share of the underwriters. We rank the underwriters on a yearly basis, based
on the market share in the previous year. 7 For example, Goldman Sachs had the highest market
share in 1995, so in our models, issuers who have an SEO in 1996 consider Goldman Sachs to be
the top ranked underwriter.

        We measure the level of equity analyst coverage by using the I/B/E/S Detail History,
which contains over twelve years of forecast changes and encompasses earnings estimates from
more than 200 brokerage houses and 2000 individual analysts.                     We match any estimate of
earnings per share from any analyst in the I/B/E/S database to each of the 2301 firms in our
sample. If the underwriter provided an earnings recommendation within one-year prior to the
SEO date, then the underwriter provided “coverage.” To capture the quality of analyst coverage,
we use Institutional Investor magazine’s All- America Research Team, which is published yearly
and lists the top three analysts in each sector. Since the report is published towards the end of
each year, the inclusion of an analyst in the publication will most likely have its greatest impact
on underwriter choice for issues that occur in the following year. As a result, we define that the
analyst (and corresponding underwriter) provided “all- star coverage” for a firm if the analyst is
included in the All-America Research Team for the year prior to the equity issuance and
provided an earnings recommendation within one-year prior to the SEO date.

        Since it is necessary to control for financial characteristics and risk factors, we obtain
financial data for each firm from the Compustat Industrial Quarterly database from Standard and
Poor’s. The financial data used in this study corresponds to the quarter and year of the SEO
issue date. The incorporation date for each firm was hand collected from Moody’s / Mergent’s
Industrial and Transportation Manuals and Standard & Poor’s Corporation Records. From the
Center for Research in Security Prices (CRSP) daily stock database, we download daily return,



7
 A simultaneity problem would arise if we used the market shares from the current year to rank the underwriters
because when an issuer selects an underwriter in the current year, the decision simultaneously increases the
underwriter’s market share.

                                                                                                                  7
price, and outstanding share data to compute the equity volatility and market capitalization for
each firm.

         For each of the 201 tied deals, we gather the associated lending facilities from LPC
DealScan. There are 358 tied lending facilities. The sample of tied lending facilities consists of
116 notes, 111 revolving lines of credit, 99 term loans, seventeen 364-day facilities, 13 bridge
loans, and two other types of facility.

         To examine differences between tied loans and non-tied loans, we create two separate
samples. In the hand- matching sample, for each of the tied loan facilities, we create a control
group of non-tied loans that were originated at around the same time as the tied loan, with firms
that belong to the same industry and have the same credit rating. We use all loans in DealScan
that occur between six months prior to and six months after the term facility active date of the
tied loan. 8 We keep only those non-tied loans that have the same 2-digit SIC code and credit
rating as the corresponding tied loan. We remove any loan that is missing information for the
all- in spread drawn and / or the length of the loan. 9 All bridge loans and loans with an issuer that
is not rated are removed. This sample has 107 tied loans that can be matched to a similar non-
tied loan, and it is comprised of 56 revolving lines of credit, 40 term loans, ten 364-day facilities,
and one other type of facility.

         To construct the econometric- matching sample, we download all lending facilities in
DealScan that occur between January 1, 1996 and May 31, 2001. We remove any facility that is
missing information for the all- in spread drawn and / or the length of the facility, and we remove
any facility where the borrower is a financial firm (companies with a one-digit SIC code of 6).
As before, all bridge loans and loans to non-rated borrowers are excluded. This sample consists
of 166 tied loans that can be matched to a sample of 6919 non-tied loans. Seventy- four
revolving lines of credit, 77 term loans, fourteen 364-day facilities, and one other type of facility
form the sample of 166 tied loans. Seventy-nine of the 166 tied loans are from commercial bank
underwriters while the remaining 87 tied loans are provided by investment bank underwriters.
         In addition, we classify 340 lending facilities as “simultaneous loans,” which are loans to
an issuer of an SEO that are originated between six months prior to and six months after the

8
  We also use a sample of loans that occur between three months prior to and three months after the SEO date.
Results using this sample are similar and are not reported.
9
  The all-in spread drawn is rate the borrower pays to the lender each year for each dollar drawn off the credit line
(inclusive of fees), quoted in basis points over LIBOR.

                                                                                                                   8
SEO, where the lender could have been selected to underwrite the SEO but is not provided with
underwriting responsibilities. Of the 6919 non-tied loans in the econometric-matching sample,
145 lending facilities are simultaneous loans.


3.      Methodology and Results

Table 1 displays trends in tying over time.         It can be seen that tying increased over time from
about 1% in 1994 to over 20% in 2001. However, before 1996, while tying was nearly non-
existent, many issuers received loans from another bank at about the same time as the issuance of
public securities. 10 Over time, issuers have shifted from using a commercial bank for lending
and an investment bank for equity underwriting to employing a single entity for both of the
simultaneous transactions.

        Table 2 reports summary statistics for the tied and non-tied SEO samples. Tied issuers
are highly leveraged, with debt-to-equity ratios that are, on average, five times higher than non-
tied issuers. Furthermore, tied lenders have low credit ratings, with 71% of investment bank tied
deals and 60% of commercial bank tied deals for junk rated issuers, and another 12% of
investment bank deals and 27% of commercial bank deals involving issuers that are not rated.
Since duplication of information will be particularly costly for risky firms because they will be
subject to ext ensive due diligence in both lending and underwriting, tying can be extremely
beneficial for these issuers because a single bank can use the collected information for both
transactions.    In addition, for lower rated and highly leveraged firms, debt has similar
characteristics to equity. As a result, information gathered in the lending process will be relevant
to the equity issuance, which may enhance the certification ability of the underwriter. Therefore,
economies of scope are likely to be high for these firms, and tying may be an efficient response
to banks’ ability to use information across product lines.

        Commercial banks are underwriters on 45% of tied deals and investment banks
underwrite the remaining 55% of tied deals. Also, commercial banks and investment banks are
providing tied loans to similar clients. These are interesting facts, which suggest that investment
banks have now developed the organizational structure to lend. The expansion into lending by

10
  In 1994, over 30% of SEO issuers received a loan from some bank within a period of six months before and six
months after the issuance, even though only 1.4% of these loans came from the underwriter of the issuance.

                                                                                                             9
investment banks is consistent with there being potential gains from a single entity offering both
lending and underwriting services.


3.1.   Equity Underwriter Spreads

We wish to determine if tying lowers issuers’ financing costs. One possibility is that the firm
pays a lower fee to the bank for underwriting its equity offering. An underwriter could charge a
lower fee in a tied deal because the bank may face lower underwriting costs due to informational
economies of scope that arise from the joint delivery of services and the reusability of
information gathered during the lending process. We examine differences between tied and non-
tied underwriting fees by analyzing the underwriter spread, which is the compensation paid to
the underwriter for selling the firm’s security issue, expressed as a percent of the capital raised.
Consistent with the existence of scope economies, the univariate descriptive statistics in Table 2,
Panel A indicate that the average underwriter spread of tied SEOs is 78 basis points lower than
the mean underwriter spread of non-tied SEOs, a difference that is significant at the 1% level.


3.1.1. U-shaped Underwriter Spreads


The initial evidence indicates that tied issuers receive lower underwriter spreads. We wish to see
if this result withstands a multivariate specification. Following Altinkilic and Hansen (2000), we
estimate a model of the underwriter spread that can be a U-shaped function of the amount of new
capital raised. Theoretically, a U-shaped function could arise because fixed costs cause scale
economies initially, but as issue size increases, diseconomies of scale arise in the spread due to
rising placement costs. Altinkilic and Hansen find strong evidence of U-shaped curves in a
sample of 1,325 SEOs from 1990 through 1997.

       As a model for the underwriter spread, we use Altinkilic and Hansen’s expanded spread
linear model in which the underwriter spread is the sum of a fixed cost and a variable cost
component. In order to generate U-shaped spreads, the variable cost component must be allowed
to rise over a relevant range of proceeds. This condition is satisfied by dividing the SEO
principal amount by the firm’s equity market capitalization, which holds firm size fixed as the
size of the offering expands, thus allowing variable costs of underwriting to increase at an
increasing rate. We control for the volatility of equity returns because higher volatility can cause

                                                                                                  10
more uncertainty, which may be reflected in a higher underwriter spread. The model captures
any variation in underwriter costs that are due to the volume of issuance in the seasoned equity
market.

          We extend the model to include variables to capture tied lending and prior relationships.
Since an existing lending relationship can lower setup costs and provide the bank with access to
additional information, tied deals involving prior lenders may be less costly. To capture this
potential effect, we control for interactions between prior lending and tied lending. A negative
coefficient on the tied lending variables would be consistent with the existence of scope
economies. We estimate two variations of the expanded spread linear model – in the first model
we do not consider differences between investment banks and commercial banks while we relax
this restriction in the second model. Further, we examine differences between non- investment
grade and investment grade issuers. Since economies of scope are likely to be high for non-
investment grade firms, we expect discounts to be concentrated amongst these deals.


3.1.2. Results


Results of ordinary least squares regressions are presented in Table 3. We find support for U-
shaped spreads. As more capital is raised the variable cost is rising. As expected, higher stock
return volatility increases the variable spread and there is a large fixed cost component to
underwriter spreads. In the first column of Table 3, we present the results of the model in which
we do not consider differences in the fees charged by investment banks and commercial banks.
The coefficients on the tied lending and the prior lending variables are all negative and
significant. A tied loan without a prior lending relationship provides an 18 basis point reduction
in the underwriter spread, which is significant at the 10% level. A prior lending relationship,
both with and without a tied loan, translates into a 36 basis point reduction in the underwriter
spread. On a $200 million equity offering, an 18 basis point reduction in the underwriter fee
provides a cost savings of $360,000 to the issuer, while a 36 basis point decrease saves the issuer
$720,000. These results are consistent with the existence of economies of scope.

          As previously argued, economies of scope between lending and underwriting are likely to
be pronounced when the issuer is junk rated or not rated. We restrict the sample of SEOs to
include only junk rated and not rated issuers and display the results of the model in the second


                                                                                                11
column of Table 3. Consistent with the existence of informational economies of scope, we find
that amongst these issuers, significant underwriter spread discounts are provided when the issuer
receives a tied loan or has a prior lending relationship with the underwriter. In the third column
of Table 3, we present the results of the model when we restrict the sample to include only
investment grade issuers. Amongst investment grade issuers, where private information is likely
to be less important, we do not find significant underwriter spread discounts. These results
highlight that the underwriter spread discounts are driven by deals in which, ex-ante, tying is
likely to be efficient.

        The results in the fourth and fifth columns of Table 3 show that investment banks account
for most of the tied lending and underwriting relationship discount. For tied issuers, investment
banks provide a discount of 26 basis points if no prior lending relationship existed and 44 basis
points if there is a prior lending relationship, both significant at the 5% level. On a $200 million
equity offering with an investment bank, on average, the issuer saves $520,000 to $880,000. For
commercial bank underwritten issues, the coefficients for tied deals are negative but
insignificant. It is interesting to note that both investment banks and commercial banks provide
significant discounts in the underwriter spread to firms that do not receive a tied loan but with
which a prior lending relationship is in place, which further supports the existence of
informational economies of scope between lending and equity underwriting.

        Overall, we find that tied deals have lower underwriter spreads than non-tied deals and
that tied deals in which there was a prior lending relationship in place receive a larger discount.
Importantly, we find that the discounts are driven by deals that involve junk rated and not rated
issuers, where economies of scope between lending and underwriting are likely to be large.
Consequently, the results are consistent with the view that tying is an efficient response to banks’
ability to use information across product lines. We find additional support for the existence of
economies of scope between lending and equity underwriting, as a prior lending relationship
translates into an underwriter spread discount. Further, we find that most of the underwriter
spread discount can be attributed to investment bank underwriters.




                                                                                                 12
3.2.     The Pricing of Tied Loans


We now study the pricing of tied loans to address two issues. First, we wish to determine if
there is additional evidence that tying reduces issuers’ financing costs.                            To examine this
question, we compare the yield spreads of tied loans and non-tied loans. 11 Lower yield spreads
for tied loans would be consistent with the existence of informational economies of scope.
Second, we wish to examine if the benefits provided to tied issuers vary by the type of
underwriter. Considering the result from the last section in which we found that investment
banks are discounting underwriter spreads, any differences between investment bank and
commercial bank pricing of tied loans will provide insight into how these two underwriter types
compete.        Therefore, we compare the yield spreads of tied loans in which the lender is a
commercial bank with tied loans from investment banks.


3.2.1. Hand Matching


To examine pricing differences between tied and non-tied loans, we hand match tied loans to
non-tied loans on four dimensions – (i) loan origination date, (ii) industry, (iii) credit rating, and
(iv) length of the loan. Ideally, we would like to find a non-tied loan that matches the tied loan
on all four dimensions. However, it is unlikely that we will find an exact match. Instead, for
each of the 107 tied lending facilities in the hand- matching sample, we select the non-tied loan
with the closest term length, given that the non-tied loan was originated between six months
before and six months after the tied loan origination date, and the non-tied borrower belongs to
the same industry and has the same credit rating as the tied borrower. 12 Therefore, any selected
non-tied loan will be an exact match on two of the four dimensions (industry and credit rating)
and will have a very similar term length and loan origination date.




11
   The yield spread is the rate that the borrower pays to the lender (inclusive of fees), quoted in basis points over LIBOR.
12
   We also restrict the selection of non-tied loans to those that are originated between three months prior to and three
months after the term facility origination date. The results are similar and are not reported. We match on the credit
rating of the borrower at the loan origination date. If the bank acts rationally, it should consider the effect that the
loan will have on the credit risk of the firm when determining the price and structure of the loan. Therefore, we also
examine the credit rating of the firm at two quarters after the loan. In our sample of tied loans, only two rated
borrowers had a credit rating change during the two quarters, so both measures of credit rating provide a nearly
identical sample.

                                                                                                                        13
         We examine the mean difference between tied and non-tied yield spreads using three
estimators. 13 The “twelve- month estimator” uses all matches in which the absolute value of the
difference between the term lengths of the matched pair of loans is less than 12 months. The
“six- month estimator” is the same as the twelve- month estimator except that the difference
cannot exceed six months. The “exact estimator” only includes matches where each loan in a
matched pair has the same term length. For all three estimators, on average, the tied loan yield
spreads are more than 20 basis points lower than the matched non-tied loan yield spreads, a
significant difference at the 5% level.


3.2.2. Econometric Matching


There are a few problems with the hand matching method.                          First, we match on only four
dimensions and ignore variables that may be relevant in determining yield spread differences,
such as the size of the lending facility and the type of lending facility. Second, for matching to
occur, there must exist at least one non-tied loan that meets these four criteria. As a result, we do
not generate matches for all of the tied loans in our sample.                To reduce these problems, we rely
on econometric matching techniques that were developed by Rosenbaum and Rubin (1983) and
extended by Heckman and Robb (1986), and Heckman, Ichimura, and Todd (1997, 1998). 14 In
Appendix A, we provide a summary of these techniques and a detailed description of how we
apply the methods to our data.

         Essentially, instead of facing the difficult task of matching directly on multiple
dimensions, econometric matching allows us to match non-tied loans to tied loans based on a
one-dimensional propensity score, which is a function of loans’ observable characteristics. As a
result, we effectively match loans based on many observable characteristics while not reducing
the number of tied loans for which we can find matches. Furthermore, the methods take into
account the fact that the characteristics of tied loans may differ significantly from non-tied loans
and ensure that such observed characteristics are not driving the results.


13
   If multiple non-tied loans share the closest term length to the non-tied loan, we use the average yield spread of the
non-tied loans.
14
    Previous papers in economics and finance use the Heckman et. al matching methodology. McMillen and
McDonald (2002) apply the method to study land valuation in a newly zoned city while Dearden, Ferri, and Meghir
(2002) and Blundell, Dearden, Goodman, and Reed (2000) use the matching methods to study the effect of
education on wages. Bharath (2002) uses these methods to evaluate the agency costs of debt.

                                                                                                                    14
        We choose to use econometric matching techniques instead of the alternative approach of
employing a multivariate regression model because matching employs fewer restrictions than the
regression approach, and many studies have confirmed that propensity score matching methods
can allow for a more accurate analysis (see e.g. Rubin, 1997; Conniffe et. al, 2000). A key
restriction in using multivariate regressions to study the pricing of loans is that the covariates are
assumed to be linearly related to the yield spread.        In the propensity score approach, the
researcher does not need to specify the actual relationship between yield spreads and the
characteristics that can affect loan pricing.

        In our models, the propensity score is a function of the firm’s credit rating, the notional
value of the loan facility, the term length of the loan, the type of lending facility, the year of the
facility origination, and the firm’s industry. Using propensity scores and econometric matching
estimators, we calculate average yield spread differences between tied loans and matched non-
tied loans. Further, we split our sample to allow for a comparison of junk rated tied loans with
matched junk rated non-tied loans and to enable tied loans to investment grade rated borrowers
to be matched with non-tied loans to similar, investment grade rated borrowers. Also, we extend
the methodology to capture differences between commercial bank tied loans and investment
bank tied loans. We compare commercial bank tied loans to non-tied loans by restricting the tied
lending sample to include only commercial bank loans. Separately, we examine differences
between investment bank tied loans and non-tied loans.



3.2.3. Results


Each of the econometric matching estimators provides a sample of yield spread differentials,
with each yield spread differential representing the discount (if negative) or premium (if
positive) that a tied lender pays. We calculate the sample average and standard error for the
estimations and display the results in Table 4.

        First, we provide evidence that is consistent with the existence of economies of scope in
tied deals. As displayed in the first column of Table 4, all estimators indicate that tied loans have
significantly lower yield spreads, with the average discount ranging between 9.97 and 14.81
basis points. On a $200 million dollar, 6-year loan, a reduction of 9.97 basis points represents a



                                                                                                   15
present value savings of $770,000 while a 14.81 basis point reduction provides a present value
savings of $1.15 million. 15

           We attempt to determine the effect of prior lending relationships on the yield spread
differential between tied and non-tied loans. For each estimator, we regress the sample of
estimated yield spread differentials on a dummy variable that indicates if the borrower of the tied
loan had a prior lending relationship with the bank. Our results indicate that a prior lending
relationship does not significantly affect the size of the discount.

           Second, we find that the lower yield spreads on tied loans are concentrated amongst
borrowers that have lower credit quality. The results in the second column of Table 4 show that
yield spreads on tied loans to junk rated borrowers are discounted, on average, by between 12.10
and 15.96 basis points relative to matched non-tied loans to junk rated borrowers, and the
discounts are strongly significant for all four estimators. In comparison, we find that investment
grade borrowers do not receive significantly lower yield spreads on tied loans relative to matched
non-tied loan yield spreads. These results are consistent with economies of scope between
lending and underwriting being more pronounced for issuers with lower credit ratings.

           Third, we find that commercial banks provide cheaper loans to tied borrowers.      In the
third column of Table 4, we show that yield spreads on commercial bank tied loans are
discounted by between 16.35 and 22.72 basis points relative to non-tied yield spreads, and the
differences are highly significant for all four estimators. On a $200 million dollar, 6- year loan, a
tied borrower earns a present value savings of between $1.27 million and $1.76 million through a
discounted loan spread that is provided by its commercial bank. 16 Again, the savings provided
by commercial banks are pronounced amongst junk rated borrowers. While commercial banks
reduce tied loan yield spreads, we find that yield spreads on investment bank tied loans are
insignificantly different from those of non-tied loans. 17 Tying by commercial banks, as opposed
to investment banks, largely drives the difference between the yield spreads of tied and non-tied
loans.

           These results, in combination with the results from Section 3.1., indicate that in
comparison to similar non-tied issuers and borrowers, tied issuers pay lower underwriter spreads

15
     This calculation assumes a yearly discount rate of 15%.
16
     Again, this calculation assumes a yearly discount rate of 15%.



                                                                                                  16
on the SEO and receive lower loan yield spreads. Furthermore, we find that the cost reductions
are large and significant for issuers who are not investment grade rated. These results are
consistent with the existence of informational economies of scope. In addition, the concentration
of savings amongst these firms helps explain why all deals are not tied, as tying is economically
justified only when there are sufficient informational economies of scope.

        Interestingly, we find that the form of the savings depends on the type of bank that is
involved in the transaction, with investment banks providing lower underwriter spreads on the
equity offering and commercial banks providing lower loan yield spreads. These savings are
economically substantive. As an illustration, tied issuers who use investment banks receive an
average savings of between $520,000 to $880,000 on a $200 million dollar equity offering.
Those who use commercial banks receive an average saving of between $1.27 million and $1.76
million on a $200 million dollar, 6-year loan.


3.2.4. Robustness – Simultaneous Loans

An additional concern is that tied issuers are simultaneously raising equity and receiving loans
and may therefore differ from other issuers. To address this concern, within the sample of non-
tied loans, we identify simultaneous loans, which are loans to an issuer of an SEO that are
originated between six months prior to and six months after the SEO, where the lender could
have been selected to underwrite the SEO but is not provided with underwriting
responsibilities. 18 We then compare tied loan yield spreads with simultaneous loan yield spreads
to determine if the results in Section 3.2.3. are robust.

        In Section 3.2.3., we show that most of the discounting of tied loans comes from
commercial banks. Hence, we compare commercial bank tied loans with commercial bank
simultaneous loans. Extending the previously employed methodology, we match commercial
bank tied loans to other non-tied loans as well as commercial bank simultaneous loans to other
non-tied loans by computing propensity scores and calculating yield spread differences.

        We compute sample averages for the tied loan matched pairs and the simultaneous loan
matched pairs and report the mean difference in the yield spread between the two groups in the

17
   In unreported estimations, we find that investment bank tied loan yield spreads are insignificantly discounted
between zero and six basis points relative to matched non-tied loan yield spreads.



                                                                                                              17
fourth column of Table 4. The results of all four estimations indicate that commercial bank tied
loans are discounted more than commercial bank simultaneous loans.                       On average, tied loan
yield spreads are less than simultaneous loan yield spreads by 16.43 to 28.42 basis points, and
the difference is significant when using three of the four estimators. Relative to simultaneous
loans, the discount that is provided by commercial banks to tied issuers remains significant.


3.3.    Underwriter Relationships


In Sections 3.1. and 3.2., we found that the issuers who participate in a tied deal benefit from
lower financing costs in the form of lower underwriter spreads and lower loan yield spreads.
Now, we examine if underwriters benefit from tying lending to underwriting. Underwriters may
gain if tying helps build relationships that improve the bank’s chances of capturing the current or
future underwriting business. Hence we first investigate if tying significantly increases the
probability that the bank wins the current equity underwriting mandate. Then we investigate if
tying lending to underwriting increases the likelihood that the bank will receive future
underwriting business from the firm, thereby increasing expected future revenues.


3.3.1. McFadden’s Choice Model


In this section, we study the influence tying has on the likelihood that a bank is selected as equity
underwriter. We use McFadden’s (1973) choice model to capture the effect. 19

        Each issuing firm i chooses an underwriter j from a set of J underwriters. The choice of
underwriter will depend on the characteristics of the issuer and attributes of the underwriter. The
utility of choice j is
                                           U ij = a' wi + ß' x ij + ε ij

where wi is a vector of issuer characteristics and xij is a matrix of choice attributes. If the issuing
firm makes a choice j, then we assume that Uij is the maximum among the J utilities. Let Yi be a




18
   We also extend this sample to include loans from any bank, not just those who could be selected to underwrite the
SEO. The results are qualitatively similar.
19
   See Greene (2000) for a discussion of models for choices between multiple alternatives.

                                                                                                                 18
random variable that indicates the firm’s choice.                  McFadden (1973) shows that if the J
disturbances are independent and identically distributed with Weibull distribution, then

                                                      exp( a' w i + ß' x ij )
                                     Pr(Yi = j ) =   J
                                                                                     .
                                                     ∑ exp(a' w
                                                     j =1
                                                                   i   + ß' x ij )


        We assume that each firm has 21 potential choices – each of the top 20 underwriters and
a single choice of any of the underwriters that are not ranked in the top 20. Since the attributes
of the potential underwriters can influence an issuer’s choice, we track underwriting
relationships, lending relationships, analyst coverage, and all-star analyst coverage for each of
the issuer’s potential choices. 20 By including this information, we more accurately control for
relationship-specific and underwriter-specific factors that could affect the probability of a firm
selecting an underwriter. In addition, we modify our definition of “tied loans” to include loans
from potential underwriters that are originated between six months prior to the SEO and six
months after the SEO. This adjustment amounts to adding the 340 simultaneous loans to the
sample of 358 tied loans. 21 Technically, this modification is needed because, otherwise, tied
lending perfectly predicts an issuer’s choice of underwriter. This methodology allows us to
address if conditional on a firm issuing seasoned equity, lending at the time of the SEO improves
the probability of getting the underwriting business.

          In our models, we assume that the relevant issuer specific characteristics ( wi ) are the
logarithm of the SEO principal amount, the age of the firm, the long-term debt to equity ratio of
the firm in the quarter of the SEO, and the industry of the issuer. These variables are chosen to
control for differences between tied and non-tied issuers that are shown in Table 2, Panel A. For
the choice-specific attributes ( xij ), we include variables to capture tied lending, prior lending
relationships, prior underwriting relationships, as well as the reputation of the underwriter and
the level and quality of equity analyst coverage.                      Our priors are that prior lending and
underwriting relationships between a firm and an underwriter will increase the probability of


20
   For example, even though AMC Entertainment selected Goldman Sachs to underwrite its August 1998 SEO, we
capture that it could have selected Morgan Stanley and that Morgan Stanley provided all-star analyst coverage for
the firm. Our final dataset consists of 48,321 firm-underwriter pairs (2301 firms X 21 choices).
21
   Since multiple underwriters can be lenders on a given lending facility, the number of underwriters that provide
“tied loans” exceeds the total number of “tied loans.” A total of 1154 firm-underwriter pairs have at least one loan
that is originated between six months prior to the SEO and six months after the SEO, of which 201 underwriters are
selected to underwrite deals. Of the 1154 pairs, an unranked underwriter provided a loan around the equity issuance
on 106 occasions.

                                                                                                                 19
selection. Also, we expect that the reputation of the underwriter and the level and quality of
equity analyst coverage will be positively related to underwriter selection. We estimate two
models – in the first model we do not consider differences between investment banks and
commercial banks while we relax this restriction in the second model.


3.3.2. Results


In Table 5, we present the results of the underwriter selection models. In both models, the
control variables have the expected signs and most are highly significant. The coefficients of the
tied lending variables are positive and statistically significant at the 1% level. This indicates that
after controlling for other factors that significantly influence underwriter selection, providing a
tied loan increases the probability of winning the underwriting mandate, conditional on a firm
issuing seasoned equity.       The effect is present for both commercial and investment bank
underwriters. The results demonstrate that providing a tied loan increases a bank’s expected
investment banking revenues and raises the likelihood of building relationships with issuers.


3.4.    Probability of Keeping Future Business

Tying lending to underwriting may also foster a durable relationship that can boost expected
future revenues by increasing the likelihood that the issuer will use the bank repeatedly. Future
interactions could become more likely because tying allows the bank to generate private
information that can be used in ongoing transactions with the bank, thereby providing the bank
with a source for both lending and underwriting relationships. 22 In this section, we determine if
tying enhances an underwriter’s ability to cultivate relationships by examining if those firms that
participate in a tied deal go back to the market more frequently and do not switch underwriters as
often as issuers who do not receive a tied loan.

        In Table 6, we present a univariate analysis of switching probabilities. For our sample of
2301 issuers, 37% of tied issuers proceed with a subsequent equity offering while only 22% of
non-tied issuers go back to the equity market. 23 Of those firms that have a follow-up equity

22
   Access to firm-specific information is well known to be a key factor in developing and maintaining lending
relationships (see Ongena and Smith, 2000 for a survey of the literature). Private information is also a key
determinant of investment banking relationships (see e.g. Crane and Eccles, 1993).
23
   We examine subsequent SEOs that took place before March 31, 2002. Extending the sample end date allows
issuers from the latter part of the sample to potentially re-issue.

                                                                                                          20
offering, 57% of tied issuers and 45% of non-tied issuers keep the same underwriter, a
significant difference at the 10% level. However, there is a disparity between investment bank
and commercial bank underwriters.               While tying significantly increases the probability of
retaining future business for investment banks, the effect is not present for commercial banks.
This result indicates that commercial banks may not be able to leverage their tying practices into
extended underwriting relatio nships.


3.4.1. Nested Logit Model


To determine if these results withstand a multivariate specification, we use a nested logit model.
As shown in Figure 1, we assume that each issuer makes a two-stage decision. First, the issuer
decides if it will proceed with a subsequent SEO or if it will not issue again. Second, if the
issuer chooses to issue again, then it can keep the same underwriter or switch to a new
underwriter.

           Following Maddala (1983), let k index the first- level alternative and l index the second-
level alternative. 24      Also, let Ykl and Zk be vectors of explanatory variables specific to the
categories (k, l) and (k), respectively. Then each issuer will have a utility Ukl for alternative (k,l)
that is a function of the explanatory variables. We set U kl = a' Ykl + ß' Z k + ekl , and then the

probability of choosing l, conditional on first choosing k is

                                                          exp (a 'Ykl )
                                             Pr l|k =    L
                                                                               .
                                                        ∑ exp (a 'Y
                                                        l =1
                                                                      kl   )


Define the inclusive values for category (k) as


                                                     L               
                                           IVk = ln  ∑ exp (a 'Ykl )  ,
                                                     l =1            

which leaves us with the probability of choosing k is




24
     For our model, k can be “Repeat” or “No-Repeat” while l can be “Switch” or “No-Switch”

                                                                                                    21
                                              exp (ß ' Z k + τ k IVk )
                                   Pr k =    K
                                                                              .
                                            ∑ exp (ß ' Z
                                            k =1
                                                           k   + τ k IV k )


In our models, we assume that the variables that only affect the decision to re- issue ( Zk ) are the
logarithm of the SEO principal amount, the age of the firm, the long-term debt to equity ratio of
the firm in the quarter of the SEO, and the industry of the issuer. For the variables that affect
both the decision to re- issue and the decision to keep or switch underwriters ( Ykl ), we include
variables to capture tied lending, prior lending relationships, prior underwriting relationships, as
well as differences between the original underwriter and the subsequent underwriter in the level
and quality of equity analyst coverage and underwriter ranking. We expect that prior lending
and underwriting relationships will be positively related to keeping future business. Also,
previous papers indicate that firms will be more likely to switch to an underwriter who has
higher quality equity analyst coverage and is ranked above the original underwriter (see e.g.
Krigman et. al, 2001; Fernando et. al, 2003). As in the previous section, we estimate one model
in which we do not consider differences between investment banks and commercial banks and a
second model where we relax this restriction. Based on the univariate results, we expect a
previous tied deal with an investment bank underwriter to increase the probability that the
investment bank keeps future underwriting business. We also expect that a previous tied deal
with a commercial bank will not significantly affect the probability that the bank can retain
equity underwriting business in the future.


3.4.2. Results


In Table 7, we present the results of the nested logit models. The base category is that the issuer
does not have a subsequent equity offering, so variables that are interacted with KEEP provide
the effects of choosing to re-issue and keep the same underwriter instead of not re- issue at all.
We also determine the effect of the variables on keeping the same underwriter instead of
switching to a new underwriter through t-tests for differences between keeping and switching.

       In the first column of Table 7, we present the results of the model in which we do not
consider differences between investment banks and commercial banks. We find that a prior tied
deal increases the probability of an issuer choosing to re- issue and keep the same lead

                                                                                                  22
underwriter relative to not reissuing. The t-tests for differences between keeping and switching
indicate that a previous tied deal also increases the probability of keeping an underwriter instead
of switching to a new underwriter, although this result is insignificant. Furthermore, we find that
prior lending relationships (both with and without a tied loan) increase the probability of an
issuer choosing the keep the same lead underwriter. These results highlight the importance of
lending in generating future investment banking business.

        The second column of Table 7 shows the results where we allow the coefficients to
reflect disparities between investment banks and commercial banks. We find that a prior tied
deal (without the existence of a prior lending relationship) with an investment bank significantly
increases the probability of keeping the same underwriter in the subsequent equity offering. The
results indicate that for commercial bank underwriters, a tied deal does not significantly affect
the probability that an underwriter will keep the same underwriter instead of switch to a new
underwriter in the subsequent equity offering. These results are consistent with the univariate
statistics in Table 6.

        Combined with our previous findings, we find that investment banks discount
underwriter spreads and that tying increases the probability of retaining future underwriting
business from the firm. Commercial banks, on the other hand, discount loan yield spreads,
which can help establish lending relationships that are well-known to lead to other fee-based
lending business (for some recent evidence, see Bharath et. al, 2004). Therefore, the results are
consistent with each type of underwriter competing more aggressively in its area of expertise and
in the area where it is more likely to generate future business.


4.      Conclusion

We use a unique data set drawn from multiple data sources and augmented by hand collected
data to examine the practice of “tying,” which occurs when a bank lends to an issuer around the
time of a public securities offering. We find evidence that is consistent with tying occurring
when there are large potential efficiency gains that can arise due to informational economies of
scope from combining lending and equity underwriting. This is supported by the preponderance
of tied deals involving highly leveraged and non- investment grade issuers, and the substantial
benefits that tying brings to such issuers. For issuers, these benefits come in the form of lower

                                                                                                23
financing costs, as tied issuers receive a lower underwriter fee for the equity offering and a
discounted yield spread on the tied loan. The cost reductions are large and significant for issuers
who are non- investment grade rated, where the expected informational economies of scope are
sizeable. Interestingly, the benefit that an issuer receives varies by the type of underwriter
involved in the transaction. Investment banks offer reduced underwriter spreads on tied SEOs,
while commercial banks offer discounted loan yield spreads, which is consistent with each type
of underwriter competing more aggressively in its area of expertise. In addition to benefiting
issuers, tying lending and equity underwriting produces gains for underwriters. We find that
providing a tied loan increases the likelihood of receiving the current equity underwriting
business, and it also helps generate other business from the issuers, with investment bank
underwriters more likely to receive future equity underwriting mandates from tied issuers. These
results are consistent with tied loans helping to build ongoing, durable relationships that increase
an underwriter’s expected revenues.        Our finding of substantial benefits to issuers and
underwriters from combining lending with underwriting indicates that tying is likely to continue
in the future and that lending will remain an important factor in determining firm- underwriter
pairings as well as influence the pricing of financial products and services.




                                                                                                 24
Appendix A
Econometric Matching Methodology

Econometric matching techniques were developed by Rosenbaum and Rubin (1983) and
extended by Heckman and Robb (1986), and Heckman, Ichimura, and Todd (1997, 1998).
Below, we provide a summary of their results and how we apply these methods to our data.

       Let D=1 if the loan is a tied loan, and let D=0 if the loan is a non-tied loan. In principle,
the ith tied loan has its observed “tied” yield spread Y1i and another yield spread Y0i that would
result if it were a non-tied loan. To determine the average effect of tying on yield spreads, one
would calculate the mean difference between Y1i and Y0i for all tied loans. However, since we do
not observe Y0i for our sample of tied loans, we have a missing data problem that cannot be
solved at the level of the individual, so we reformulate the problem at the population level. We
focus on E(Y1 – Y0 | D=1, X), the mean effect of the difference between tied loans and non-tied
loans with characteristics X. While the mean E(Y1 | D=1, X) can be identified from data on tied
loans, some assumptions must be made to identify the unobservable counterfactual mean, E(Y0 |
D=1, X). The observable outcome of non-tied loans E(Y0 | D=0, X) can be used to approximate
E(Y0 | D=1, X). The selection bias that arises from this approximation is B(X) = E(Y0 | D=1, X) -
E(Y0 | D=0, X).

       We use a method of matching that solves the evaluation problem. Following Heckman
and Robb (1986), we assume that all relevant differences between tied loans and non-tied loans
are captured by their observable characteristics X. Let (Y0 , Y1 ) ⊥ D | X denote the statistical
independence of (Y0 , Y1 ) and D conditional on X. Rosenbaum and Rubin (1983) establish that
when (Y0 , Y1 ) ⊥ D | X and 0 < P(D=1 | X) < 1 (which are referred to as the strong ignorability

conditions), then (Y0 , Y1 ) ⊥ D | P(D = 1 | X).   While it is often difficult to match on high
dimension X, this result allows us to match based on the one-dimensional P(D=1 | X) alone.
P(D=1 | X), known as the propensity score, can be estimated using probit or logit models.
Heckman, Ichimura, and Todd (1998) extend this result by showing that the strong ignorability
conditions are overly restrictive for the estimation of E(Y1 – Y0 | D=1, X). Instead, a weaker
mean independence condition E(Y0 | D=1, P(D=1 | X)) = E(Y0 | D=0, P(D=1 | X)) is all that is
required.



                                                                                                 25
            To implement econometric matching, we compute propensity scores for each of the tied
loans and non-tied loans. There may be loans that have propensity scores that are outside of the
common support of tied loan and non-tied loan propensity scores. Using loans that fall outside
of the common support can substantially bias the results (see e.g. Heckman et. al 1997). As a
result, we remove all loans that are outside of the common propensity score support.
            We use two classes of propensity score matching estimators: (i) nearest neighbor
matching, and (ii) kernel based matching. 25 Let Y1i be the yield spread of a tied loan, Y0j be the
                                                       z
yield spread of a non-tied loan, and let Y 0i represent the (weighted) average of yield spreads of
the non-tied loans using estimator z that is matched with Y1i. We compute the sample average of
                                      z
yield spread differences Y1i − Y 0i .
            For each tied loan, the nearest neighbor matching estimator chooses the n non-tied loans
with closest propensity scores to the tied loan propensity score. The estimator computes the
arithmetic average of the yield spreads of these n non-tied loans. For each Y1i, we match

                                                                1
                                                                        ∑Y
                                                       NN
                                                   Y 0i =                         0j
                                                                n   j ∈N ( i )


where N(i) is the set of non-tied loans that are nearest neighbors. We set n = 10 and n = 50.

            The kernel estimators construct matches for each tied loan by using weighted averages of
yield spreads of multiple non-tied loans. If weights from a typical symmetric, non negative,
unimodal kernel K(• ) are used, then the kernel places higher weight on loans close in terms of
P(D=1 | X) and lower or zero weight on more distant observations. Let

                                                         P ( X 1i ) − P ( X 0 j ) 
                                              K ij = K                           
                                                                                   
                                                                    h             


where h is a fixed bandwidth and P(X) = P(D=1 | X). For each Y1i, we match a corresponding
     K
Y 0i     where


                                                       K
                                                                ∑K      ij   Y0 j
                                                            =
                                                                j
                                                   Y                                   .
                                                                ∑K
                                                       0i
                                                                             ij
                                                                    j




25
     The propensity score matching methods are discussed in greater detail in Heckman et. al (1997, 1998)

                                                                                                            26
                                            K
We use two different kernels to compute Y 0i . The Gaussian kernel uses all non-tied loans while
the Epanechnikov kernel only uses non-tied loans with a propensity score P(X 0j) that falls within
the fixed bandwidth h of P(X 1i). We set h = 0.01. As a robustness check, we also tried different
values of h and obtained similar results.

       To determine if econometric matching is a viable method of evaluation, Heckman et. al
identify four features of the data and matching techniques that can substantially reduce bias – (i)
Participants and controls have the same distributions of unobserved attributes; (ii) They have the
same distributions of observed attributes; (iii) Outcomes and characteristics are measured in the
same way for both groups; and (iv) Participants and controls are from the same economic
environment. Items (iii) and (iv) are met very well for this study because the loan yield spreads
and other loan characteristics are measured in the same way for both tied and non-tied loans, and
the non-tied loans are from the same time period as the tied loans. To satisfy condition (ii), we
use loan characteristics to match tied loans to non-tied loans. Feature (i) cannot be achieved in a
non-experimental evaluation. However, Heckman, Ichimura, and Todd (1997) note that feature
(i) is only a small part of bias in their experimental study. Thus, the method of matching non-
tied loans to tied loans can produce a viable estimate of the difference between non-tied loan and
tied loan yield spreads.




                                                                                                27
Appendix B
Detailed Descriptions of the Variables
Underwriter Spread Regressions (Section 3.1.)
USPREAD: The underwriter spread, which is the compensation paid to the underwriter for selling the firm’s
        Security issue, expressed as a percent of the capital raised
TIELOAN: A dummy variable that equals one if the underwriter provided a loan to the issuer between six months
        prior to the SEO and six months after the SEO and the underwriter had never provided a loan to the issuer
        in the past
TIEPLEND: A dummy variable that equals one if the underwriter provided a loan to the issuer between six months
        prior to the SEO and six months after the SEO and the underwriter provided a loan to the issuer prior to six
        months before the SEO
PRIORLEND: A dummy variable that equals one if a loan between the underwriter and the issuer was
        originated at any time prior to six months before the SEO and the underwriter does not provide a loan to
        the issuer between six months prior to the SEO and six months after the SEO
PRIORUND: A dummy variable that equals one if the underwriter had been the underwriter on any prior equity
        offering by the issuer
IB: A dummy variable that equals one if the parent/holding company of the underwriter at the time of the issue is an
        investment bank
CB: A dummy variable that equals one if the parent/holding company of the underwriter at the time of the issue is an
        commercial bank
(1/SEOSIZE): The inverse of the principal amount of the offering, in millions of dollars. This variable captures the
        fixed cost component of underwriter spreads
(SEOSIZE / MKTCAP) : The principal amount of the offering divided by the market capitalization of the issuer at
        the date of the SEO. This variable captures the variable cost component of underwriting spreads
VOL: The daily standard deviation of the issuer’s common stock rate of return over the 220 trading days ending 40
        days before the offering
MKTACT: The dollar volume of issuance by non-SIC6 firms in the US seasoned equity market during the three
        months prior to the SEO date
Propensity Score / Estimating Yield Spread Differences (Section 3.2.)
YSPREAD: The yield spread of the loan, measured as the rate the borrower pays to the lender, quoted in basis
       points over LIBOR. We use the DealScan item “all-in spread drawn,” which adds the spread of the loan
       with any fees that have to be paid back to the bank.
TIED: A dummy variable that equals one if the lending facility is a tied loan and zero if the loan is a non-tied loan
SIMULTANEOUS: A dummy variable that equals one if the lending facility is a simultaneous loan and zero if the
       loan is a non-simultaneous loan
RATING: A variable that provides the Standard & Poor’s credit rating of the firm at the date of the lending facility.
       Each rating is given a numerical counterpart: AAA = 1, AA = 2, A = 3, BBB = 4, BB = 5, B = 6, CCC =
       7, CC = 8, C = 9
FACSIZE: The notional value of the loan facility between the lender and the borrower, expressed in millions of
       dollars
LENGTH: The term length of the loan, measured as the difference between the term facility active date and the term
       facility expiration date, measured in months
TYPE: Dummy variables that correspond to the type of lending facility. The dummy variables indicate if the facility
       is a term loan, 364-day facility, revolving line of credit, or other type
YEAR: Dummy variables that correspond to the year of the origination date of the lending facility
INDUSTRY: Dummy variables that equal one if the borrower is in the corresponding two-digit SIC group
McFadden Choice Model / Underwriter Relationships (Section 3.3.)
TIELOAN: A dummy variable that equals one if a potential underwriter provided a loan to the issuer between six
      months prior to the SEO and six months after the SEO and the potential underwriter had never provided a
      loan to the issuer in the past
TIEPLEND: A dummy variable that equals one if the potential underwriter provided a loan to the issuer between six
      months prior to the SEO and six months after the SEO and the potential underwriter provided a loan to the
      issuer prior to six months before the SEO


                                                                                                                 28
PRIORLEND: A dummy variable that equals one if a loan between the potential underwriter and the issuer was
      originated at any time prior to six months before the SEO and the potential underwriter does not provide a
      loan to the issuer between six months prior to the SEO and six months after the SEO
PRIORUND: A dummy variable that equals one if the potential underwriter had been the underwriter on any
      prior equity offering by the issuer
COVERAGE: A dummy variable that is one if the potential underwriter provided an earnings per share estimate for
      the firm during the year prior to the SEO
ALLSTAR: A dummy variable that is one if COVERAGE is one and the analyst was ranked as an all-star by
      Institutional Investor magazine for the year prior to the SEO
RANK: We compute each underwriter’s yearly SEO market share by adding the principal amounts of all SEOs in
      which the bank was an underwriter and dividing this total by the principal amounts of all SEOs during the
      year. To avoid potential simultaneity problems, we rank the underwriters on a yearly basis, based on the
      market share in the previous year. If a merger between underwriters occurred during the year, we use the
      combined market share of the underwriters. The top-ranked underwriter is given a score of 20, the second-
      ranked underwriter is 19, and so on. Underwriters not ranked in the top 20 are given a score of zero
Nested Logit Model / Keeping Future Business (Section 3.4.)
TIELOAN: A dummy variable that equals one if the underwriter provided a loan to the issuer between six months
        prior to the original SEO and six months after the original SEO and the underwriter had never provided a
        loan to the issuer in the past
TIEPLEND: A dummy variable that equals one if the underwriter provided a loan to the issuer between six months
        prior to the original SEO and six months after the original SEO and the underwriter provided a loan to the
        issuer prior to six months before the original SEO
PRIORLEND: A dummy variable that equals one if a loan between the underwriter and the issuer was
        originated at any time prior to six months before the original SEO and the underwriter does not provide a
        loan to the issuer between six months prior to the original SEO and six months after the original SEO
PRIORUND: A dummy variable that equals one if the underwriter had been the underwriter on any equity offering
        prior to the original SEO by the issuer
REPEAT: A dummy variable that is one if the issuer has a subsequent offering
KEEP: A dummy variable that is one if the issuer keeps the same underwriter in the subsequent offering
SWITCH: A dummy variable that is one if the issuer switches underwriters in the subsequent offering
CNGCOV: For “switchers,” the difference between the coverage provided by the new underwriter and the original
        underwriter during the year prior to the subsequent SEO. The variable can take on the values of –1, 0, or 1.
        By definition, for all non-repeaters and keepers, it has a value of zero
CNGSTAR: For “switchers,” the difference between the all-star coverage provided by the new underwriter and the
        original underwriter during the year prior to the subsequent SEO. The variable can take on the values of
         –1, 0, or 1. By definition, for all non-repeaters and keepers, it has a value of zero
CNGRANK: For “switchers,” the difference between the subsequent underwriter’s ranking in the year before the
        subsequent issue date and the original underwriter’s ranking in the year before the subsequent issue date.
        For keepers and non-repeaters, the variable is zero
IB: A dummy variable that equals one if the parent/holding company of the potential underwriter at the time of the
        issue is an investment bank
CB: A dummy variable that equals one if the parent/holding company of the potential underwriter at the time of the
        issue is an commercial bank
Control Variables
LNSIZE: The logarithm of the principal amount of the offering
DE-LTDEBT: The long-term debt to equity ratio in the quarter of the SEO
AGE: The firm’s age, measured as the difference between the SEO date and the incorporation date, expressed in
        years
SICx: Dummy variables that equal one if the issuer is in the corresponding one-digit SIC group
IGRADE: A dummy variable that equals one if the issuer is rated AAA, AA, A, or BBB in the quarter of the SEO
        by Standard & Poor’s
JUNK: A dummy variable that equals one if the issuer is rated BB, B, CCC, CC, or C in the quarter of the SEO by
        Standard & Poor’s




                                                                                                                 29
References
Ang, J., Richardson, T., 1994. The underwriting experience of commercial bank affiliates prior
       to the Glass-Steagall act: a re-examination of evidence for passage of the act, Journal of
       Banking and Finance 18, 351-395.
Altinkilic, O., Hansen, R., 2000. Are there economies of scale in underwriting fees? Evidence
       of rising external financing costs, Review of Financial Studies 13, 191-218.
Baker, W., 1990. Market networks and corporate behavior, American Journal of Sociology 96,
       589-625.
Benston, G., 1990. The Separation of Commercial and Investment Banking, New York: Oxford
      University Press.
Benzoni, L., Schenone, C., 2004. Conflict of interest or certification? Evidence from IPOs
      underwritten by the firm’s relationship bank, Working paper, University of Minnesota.
Berger, A., Demsetz, R. S., Strahan, P.E. 1999. The consolidation of the financial services
       industry: Causes, consequences, and implications for the future, Journal of Banking and
       Finance 23, 135-194.
Best, R., Zhang, H., 1993. Alternative information sources and the information content of bank
       loans, Journal of Finance 48, 1507-1522.
Bharath, S., 2002. Agency costs, bank specialness and renegotiation, Working paper, New York
       University.
Bharath, S., Dahiya, S., Saunders, A., Srinivasan, A., 2004. So what do I get? The bank’s view
       of lending relationships, Working paper, New York University.
Billett, M. T., Flannery, M. J., Garfinkel, J. A., 1995. The effect of lender identity on a
        borrowing firm's equity return, Journal of Finance 50, 699-718.
Blundell, R., Dearden, L., Goodman, A., Reed, H., 2000. The returns to higher education in
      Britain: evidence from a British cohort, Economic Journal 110 (461), F82-F99.
Boot, A., Thakor, A., 1997. Banking scope and financial innovation, Review of Financial
      Studies 10(4), 1099-1131.
Booth, J., Smith, R., 1986. Capital raising, underwriting and the certification hypothesis,
      Journal of Financial Economics 15, 261-281.
Carter, R., Manaster, S., 1990. Initial public offerings and underwriter reputation, Journal of
        Finance 45, 1045-1067.
Chaplinsky, S., and Erwin, G., 2001. Commercial banks as equity underwriters, Working Paper,
       University of Virginia.
Clarke, J., Khorana, A., Patel, A., Rau, R., 2003. Do all-star analysts drive investment banking
       deal flow? Working Paper, Wake Forest University.
Conniffe, D., Gash, V., O’Connell, P., 2000. Evaluating state programmes: “Natural
       experiments” and propensity scores, The Economic and Social Review 31, 283-308.
Corwin, S., Schultz, P., 2003. The role of IPO underwriting syndicates: Pricing, information
      production, and underwriter competition, Working Paper: University of Notre Dame.

                                                                                              30
Crane, R., Eccles, R., 1993. Customer relationships in the 1990s, in S. Hayes (ed.), Financial
       Services: Perspectives and Challenges, Boston: Harvard Business School Press.
Dearden, L., Ferri, J., Meghir, C., 2002. The effect of school quality on educational attainment
      and wages, Review of Economics and Statistics 84(1), 1-20.
Dingell, J., 2002. Letter to FRB and OCC re: “pay to play” practices, Jul 11. Available from
       www.house.gov/commerce_democrats/press/107ltr179.htm.
Fernando, C., Gatchev, V., Spindt, P., 2003. Wanna dance? How firms and underwriters choose
      each other, Working Paper, Tulane University.
Gande, A., Puri, M., Saunders, A., Walter, I., 1997. Bank underwriting of debt securities: Modern
      evidence, Review of Financial Studies 10, 1175-1202.
Greene, W., 2000. Econometric Analysis, 4th ed., New Jersey: Prentice-Hall.
Heckman, J., Ichimura, H., Todd, P., 1997. Matching as an econometric evaluation estimator:
     evidence from evaluating a job training programme, Review of Economic Studies 64, 605-
     654.
Heckman, J., Ichimura, H., Todd, P., 1998. Matching as an econometric evaluation estimator,
     Review of Economic Studies 65, 261-294.
Heckman, J., Robb, R., 1986. Alternative method for solving the problem of selection bias in
     evaluating the impact of treatments on outcomes, in H. Wainer (ed.), Drawing Inferences
     from Self-Selected Samples, New York: Springer-Verlag.
Hubbard, R., Kuttner, K., Palia, D., 2003. Are there bank effects in borrowers’ costs of funds?
      Evidence from a matched sample of borrowers and banks, Journal of Business 75, 559-
      582.
James, C., 1987. Some evidence on the uniqueness of bank loans, Journal of Financial
       Economics 19, 217-235.
James, C., 1992. Relationship-specific assets and the pricing of underwriter services, Journal of
       Finance 47, 1865-1885.
James, C., Smith, D. C., 2000. Are banks still special? New evidence on their role in the
       corporate capital-raising process, Journal of Applied Corporate Finance 13, 395-422.
Kanatas, G., Qi, J., 1998. Underwriting by commercial banks: incentive conflicts, scope
      economies, and project quality, Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 30, 119-133.
Kanatas, G., Qi, J., 2003. Integration of lending and underwriting: implications of scope
      economies, Journal of Finance 58, 1167-1191.
Krigman, L., Shaw, W., Womack, K., 2001. Why do firms switch underwriters?, Journal of
      Financial Economics 60, 245-284.
Kroszner, R., Rajan, R., 1994. Is the Glass-Steagall act justified? A study of the U.S. experience
      with universal banking before 1933, American Economic Review 84, 810-832.
Lummer, S., McConnell, J., 1989. Further evidence on bank lending process and capital market
     response to bank loan agreements, Journal of Financial Economics 25, 52-63.



                                                                                                  31
Ljungqvist, A., Marston, F., Wilhelm, W., 2003. Competing for Securities Underwriting
      Mandates: Banking Relationships and Analyst Recommendations, Working Paper: New
      York University.
Maddala, G., 1983. Limited Dependent and Qualitative Variables in Econometrics, New York:
      Cambridge University Press.
McFadden, D., 1973. Conditional logit analysis of qualitative choice behavior, in P. Zarembka
     (ed.) Frontiers in Econometrics, New York: Academic Press.
McMillen, D. P., McDonald, J. F., 2002. Land values in a newly zoned city, Review of
      Economics and Statistics 84(1), 62-72.
Ongena, S., Smith D. 2000, Bank relationships: A review, in P. Harker and S. Zenios (eds.), The
      Performance of Financial Institutions: Efficiency, Inovation, and Regulation, Cambridge,
      UK and New York, NY: Cambridge University Press.
Puri, M., 1994. The long term default performance of bank underwritten security issues, Journal
       of Banking and Finance 18, 397-418.
Puri, M., 1996. Commercial banks in investment banking: conflict of interest or certification
       role? Journal of Financial Economics 40, 373-401.
Puri, M., 1999. Commercial banks as underwriters: implications for the going public process.
       Journal of Financial Economics 54, 133-163.
Rajan, R., 2002. An investigation into the economics of extending bank powers, Journal of
       Emerging Market Finance 1.
Rosenbaum, P., Rubin, D., 1983. The central role of the propensity score in observational
      studies for causal effects, Biometrika 70, 41-55.
Rubin, D., 1997. Estimating causal effects from large data sets using propensity scores, Annals
       of Internal Medicine 127, 757-763.
Santomero, A., Eckles, D.L., 2000. The determinants of success in the new financial services
      environment, FRBNY Economic Policy Review, October, 11-23.
Saunders A., Walter, I., 1994. Universal banking in the United States. What could we gain?
      What could we lose? Oxford University Press, New York.
Smith, R., 2001. Lucent deal shows wall street takes on greater risk, Wall Street Journal, Feb
       23, C1.
Smith, R., 2001. Morgan Stanley injects about $2 billion into bank unit, aiming to boost lending,
       Wall Street Journal, Aug 16, B7.
Stefanadis, C., 2004.     Tying, exclusivity, and universal banking, Working paper, Rice
       University.
Yasuda, A., 2003. Relationship capital and competition in the corporate securities underwriting
      market, Working paper, Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania.




                                                                                              32
                                                              Table 1
                                                      Tied Deals, by year
This table presents the percentage of SEOs that are tied deals. A tied deal is any SEO in which the underwriter provides a loan to the
issuer between six months prior to the SEO and six months after the SEO.

Year                                    1994         1995        1996         1997        1998         1999         2000          2001*
Number of SEOs                            363          493         596          515         340          389          375             86
Number of Tied Deals                        5            5          19           48          37           52           27             18
% Tied Deals                           1.38%        1.01%       3.19%        9.32%      10.88%       13.37%        7.20%         20.93%

* Through May 31




                                                              Table 2
         Univariate Tests for Differences in the Sample of SEOs between Jan. 1996 and May 2001
This table tests for differences between tied deals and non-tied deals and for differences between investment bank tied deals and
commercial bank tied deals. Panels A and C use a difference in means t-test and Wilcoxon rank test. A tied deal is any SEO in
which the underwriter provided a loan to the issuer between six months prior to the SEO and six months after the SEO. The
underwriter is an IB (CB) if the parent or holding company of the underwriter is an investment bank (commercial bank) at the time
of the SEO. The variables are defined as follows: USPREAD is the underwriter spread, which is compensation paid to the
underwriter for selling the firm’s security issue, expressed as a percent of the capital raised. LNSIZE is the logarithm of the SEO
principal amount, expressed in millions of dollars. DE-LTDEBT is the long-term debt to common equity ratio in the quarter of the
SEO. AGE is the firm’s age, measured as the difference between the date of the SEO and the incorporation date, measured in years.
PRIORLEND is one if a loan between underwriter and the issuer was originated at any time before six months prior to the SEO.
PRIORUND is one if the underwriter had been the underwriter on any prior equity offering by the issuer. COVERAGE is one if the
underwriter had provided an earnings per share estimate for the firm within the year prior to the SEO. ALLSTAR is one if
COVERAGE is one and the analyst was ranked as an all-star by Institutional Investor magazine for the year prior to the SEO. A
firm has an issuer rating of IGRADE if it is rated AAA, AA, A, or BBB by Standard & Poor’s in the quarter of the SEO. A firm has
an issuer rating of JUNK if it is rated BB, B, CCC, CC, or C by Standard & Poor’s in the quarter of the SEO.


Panel A: Tied vs. Non-Tied Deals – Issuer and Issuance Variables
                                   Tied Deal               Non-Tied                                                Wilcoxon test
Variable                             Mean                 Deal Mean                         T-ratio                   p-value
USPREAD                               4.33                  5.11                           -8.63 ***                0.0000 ***
LNSIZE                                5.09                  4.28                            9.94 ***                0.0000 ***
DE-LTDEBT                             2.57                  0.55                            2.96 ***                0.0000 ***
AGE                                  21.78                 17.87                            2.12 **                 0.1845
Panel B: Tied vs. Non-Tied Deals – Relationship Variables
Variable                          Percent of Tied Deals        Percent of Non-Tied Deals
CB                                         45.3                           28.1
IB                                         54.7                           71.9
PRIORLEND                                  41.3                            4.9
PRIORUND                                   44.8                           39.5
COVERAGE                                   77.1                           63.0
ALLSTAR                                    21.4                           12.9


                                                                                                                            33
                                                         Table 2 (continued)



 Panel C: IB vs. CB Tied Deals – Issuer and Issuance Variables
                                                                                                        Wilcoxon test
 Variable                       IB Tied Deal Mean       CB Tied Deal Mean                     T-ratio      p-value
 USPREAD                               4.25                   4.43                            0.98      0.2792
 LNSIZE                                5.28                   4.92                            2.24 **   0.0110 **
 DE-LTDEBT                             2.83                   2.31                            0.39      0.4189
 AGE                                  20.50                  23.35                            0.79      0.1148
 Panel D: IB vs. CB Tied Deals – Relationship Variables
Variable                        Percent of IB Tied Deals           Percent of CB Tied Deals
PRIORLEND                                  36.4                               47.3
PRIORUND                                   48.2                               40.7
COVERAGE                                   78.2                               75.8
ALLSTAR                                    23.6                               18.7
 Panel E: IB vs. CB Tied Deals – Issuer Rating
Variable                           Percent of IB Tied Deals        Percent of CB Tied Deals
IGRADE                                        17.27                           13.19
JUNK                                          70.91                           60.44

 *** indicates significantly different than zero at the 1% level (2-sided)
 ** indicates significantly different than zero at the 5% level (2-sided)
 * indicates significantly different than zero at the 10% level (2-sided)




                                                                                                              34
                                                                            Table 3
                                                            Underwriter Spread Regressions
This table provides ordinary least squares estimates of a model of the underwriter spread that can be a U-shaped function of the amount of new capital raised. The
model is based on Altinkilic and Hansen’s (2000) expanded spread linear model. The dependent variable is USPREAD, which is the compensation paid to the
underwriter for selling the firm’s security issue, expressed as a percentage of the principal amount. The independent variables are: TIELOAN is a dummy variable
that equals one if the underwriter provided a loan to the issuer between six months prior to the SEO and six months after the SEO and the underwriter had never
provided a loan to the issuer in the past. TIEPLEND is a dummy variable that equals one if the underwriter provided a loan to the issuer between six months prior
to the SEO and six months after the SEO and the underwriter provided a loan to the issuer prior to six months before the SEO. PRIORLEND is a dummy variable
that equals one if a loan between the underwriter and the issuer was originated at any time prior to six months before the SEO and the underwriter does not provide
a loan to the issuer between six months prior to the SEO and six months after the SEO. PRIORUND is one if the underwriter had been the underwriter on any prior
equity offering by the issuer. IB (CB) is one if the parent / holding company of the underwriter is an investment bank (commercial bank). To capture the fixed cost
component of spreads, we include (1/SEOSIZE), the inverse of the principal amount of the equity offering, measured in millions of dollars. Variable costs are
captured by (SEOSIZE / MKTCAP), the principal amount of the offering divided by the market capitalization of the issuer at the date of the SEO. VOL is the daily
standard deviation of the issuer’s common stock rate of return over the 220 trading days ending 40 days before the offering. MKTACT is the dollar volume of
issuance in the US SEO market for the three months prior to each offering. SICx are industry dummy variables, which are one if the firm has the corresponding
one-digit SIC. In columns (1) and (4), we estimate the models using the full sample of issues. In columns (2) and (5), the sample is restricted to SEOs by non-
investment grade issuers. Non-investment grade issuers are either not rated or have a Standard & Poor’s long term debt rating of BB, B, CCC, or CC in the quarter
of the SEO. In columns (3) and (6), the sample is restricted to SEOs by investment grade issuers. Investment grade issuers have a Standard & Poor’s long term debt
rating of AAA, AA, A, or BBB in the quarter of the SEO. Coefficients for the industry variables (SICx) are not reported. T-ratios are in parentheses.




                                                                                                                                                               35
                                Full Sample            Non-Investment Grade       Investment Grade   Full Sample       Non-Investment Grade   Investment Grade
                                     (1)                         (2)                     (3)              (4)                  (5)                   (6)
Intercept                          4.247    ***                 4.599       ***          3.439 ***       4.231 ***             4.565 ***            3.185    ***
                                  (33.12)                      (35.74)                   (7.38)        (31.57)               (34.28)                (5.64)
TIELOAN                           -0.182    *                  -0.179       *          -0.034
                                  (-1.74)                      (-1.76)                  (-0.11)
TIEPLEND                          -0.360    **                 -0.329       **         -0.474
                                  (-2.31)                      (-2.26)                  (-1.02)
PRIORLEND                         -0.360    ***                -0.358       ***        -0.069
                                  (-3.04)                      (-3.17)                  (-0.23)
PRIORUND                          -0.217    ***                -0.263       ***        -0.028
                                  (-4.19)                      (-5.19)                  (-0.17)
IB                                                                                                       0.021                  0.043               0.238
                                                                                                        (0.29)                 (0.64)               (0.67)
IB X TIELOAN                                                                                            -0.263 **              -0.343 **            0.303
                                                                                                       (-2.00)                (-2.40)               (0.92)
CB X TIELOAN                                                                                            -0.070                  0.022              -0.760
                                                                                                       (-0.43)                 (0.17)              (-1.61)
IB X TIEPLEND                                                                                           -0.440   **            -0.413   **         -1.382
                                                                                                       (-2.20)                (-2.44)              (-1.55)
CB X TIEPLEND                                                                                           -0.321                 -0.283               0.003
                                                                                                       (-1.43)                (-1.27)               (0.00)
IB X PRIORLEND                                                                                          -0.324   **            -0.328   ***         0.046
                                                                                                       (-2.49)                (-2.67)               (0.15)
CB X PRIORLEND                                                                                          -0.454   *             -0.427   *          -0.441
                                                                                                       (-1.81)                (-1.84)              (-0.48)
IB X PRIORUND                                                                                           -0.248   ***           -0.299   ***        -0.122
                                                                                                       (-4.39)                (-5.29)              (-0.72)
CB X PRIORUND                                                                                           -0.135                 -0.173   **          0.178
                                                                                                       (-1.45)                (-2.02)               (0.42)
1 / SEOSIZE                       17.270 ***                   15.377       ***        24.680 ***      17.259    ***          15.328    ***        24.783 ***
                                   (6.04)                       (5.99)                   (2.91)         (5.98)                 (5.92)               (2.74)
SEOSIZE / MKTCAP                   0.242                        0.225                  -0.049            0.241                  0.223              -0.052
                                   (1.43)                       (1.13)                  (-0.37)         (1.42)                 (1.12)              (-0.39)
VOL                               12.274 ***                    7.570       ***        17.273          12.226    ***            7.532   ***        18.625 *
                                  (10.26)                       (6.73)                   (1.57)         (9.96)                 (6.55)               (1.73)
MKTACT                            -7.581 **                    -4.071                  -2.042           -7.652   **            -3.957              -2.173
                                  (-2.34)                      (-1.44)                  (-1.38)        (-2.36)                (-1.42)              (-1.49)
R- Squared                         0.4029                      0.4003                  0.1644          0.4040                 0.4026               0.2048
*** indicates significantly different than zero at the 1% level (2-sided)
** indicates significantly different than zero at the 5% level (2-sided)
* indicates significantly different than zero at the 10% level (2-sided)



                                                                                                                                                              36
                                                                     Table 4
                                     Estimated Yield Spread Differences, in basis points
This table provides estimates of the mean difference between the yield spread (YSPREAD) of (a) Tied loans and non-tied loans, (b) CB tied
loans and non-tied loans, and (c) CB tied loans and CB simultaneous loans, using various estimators. YSPREAD is the yield spread – the
rate that the borrower pays to the lender (inclusive of fees), quoted in basis points over LIBOR. Tied (Simultaneous) loans are loans to the
issuer of an SEO between six months prior to and six months after the SEO where the lender is (not, but could have been selected as) the
underwriter of the SEO. To examine mean yield spread differences, we control for six characteristics – (i) Credit rating (ii) Lending
facility size (iii) Length of the loan (iv) Type of lending facility (v) Loan origination date and (vi) Industry. We compute propensity scores
using the following probit model:

                                                   β0   + β * RATING + β * FACSIZE + β * LENGTH                           
                           P (TIED   = 1| X ) = Φ
                                                           1            2             3                                   
                                                            +β          * TYPE + β          * YEAR + β         * INDUSTRY 
                                                                 type                year                ind              
TIED is a dummy variable that equals one if the lending facility is a tied loan and zero if the loan is a non-tied loan. RATING provides the
Standard & Poor’s credit rating of a firm at the date of the loan. Each rating is given a numerical counterpart: AAA = 1, AA = 2, A = 3,
BBB = 4, BB = 5, B = 6, CCC = 7, CC = 8, C = 9. FACSIZE is the notional value of the loan facility between the lender and the borrower,
expressed in millions of dollars. LENGTH is the difference between the term facility active date and the term facility expiration date,
measured in months. TYPE stands for a set of dummy variables based on the type of lending facility, as classified by LPC Dealscan. Each
facility is classified as “term loan,” “revolving line of credit,” “364 day facility,” or “other type,” and we create four corresponding dummy
variables. YEAR stands for a set of dummy variables based on the loan origination date of the lending facility. For this sample, we define
six dummy variables, one for each year between 1996 and 2001. INDUSTRY stands for a set of industry dummy variables based on two -
digit primary SIC code. The estimators, which are described in detail in Heckman, Ichimura, and Todd (1997, 1998), are defined as
follows: NEAR NEIGHBOR chooses for each tied loan, the n non-tied loans with closest propensity scores, and uses the arithmetic average
of the n non-tied yield spreads. We use n = 10 and n = 50. GAUSSIAN and EPANECHNIKOV use a weighted average of non-tied loans,
with more weight given to non-tied loans with propensity score that are closer to the tied loan propensity score. GAUSSIAN uses all non-
tied loans, while for EPANECHNIKOV, we specify a propensity score bandwidth (h) that limits the sample of non-tied loans. We specify
that h = 0.01.
In column (1), we compute yield spread differences between tied loans and non-tied loans by using the estimators to match tied loans to
non-tied loans. In column (2), we compute yield spread differences between junk rated tied loans and non-tied loans by removing all
investment grade-rated loans from the sample, computing propensity scores, and using the estimators to find non-tied loan matches for each
junk rated tied loan. In column (3), we compute yield spread differences between CB tied loans and non-tied loans by removing IB tied
loans from the sample, computing propensity scores, and using the estimators to find non-tied loan matches for CB tied loans. In column
(4), we compute yield spread differences between CB tied and CB simultaneous loans. We remove all simultaneous loans and IB tied loans
from the sample, compute propensity scores, match non-tied loans to each CB tied loan, and compute yield spread differences. Then, we
remove all tied loans and IB simultaneous loans from the sample and compute propensity scores using the above probit model by replacing
TIED with SIMULTANEOUS, which is one if the loan is simultaneous and zero if it is non-simultaneous. We use the estimators to find
matches and compute yield spread differences for each CB simultaneous loan. We examine the difference between CB tied yield spread
differences and CB simultaneous yield spread differences. For all estimations, we present the sample averages. We report t-ratios in
parentheses, which are calculated using standard errors that are computed by bootstrapping with 50 replications.
                                                                  Mean Yield Spread               Mean Yield Spread            Mean Yield Spread
                                   Mean Yield Spread              Difference between              Difference between           Difference between
                                   Difference between              Junk Rated Tied                   CB Tied and                CB Tied and CB
                                   Tied and Non-Tied                 and Non-Tied                      Non-Tied                   Simultaneous
Estimator                                   (1)                            (2)                             (3)                          (4)
NEAR NEIGHBOR                            -14.811 **                     -13.690 **                      -22.713 **                   -28.422 *
(n=10)                                    (-2.09)                        (-2.23)                         (-2.38)                      (-1.92)
NEAR NEIGHBOR                             -12.081 **                      -12.104 **                       -19.052 **               -28.202 **
(n=50)                                     (-2.38)                         (-2.24)                          (-2.31)                  (-1.96)
GAUSSIAN                                  -9.966 *                        -13.041 **                       -16.347 **               -16.430
                                          (-1.93)                          (-2.38)                          (-2.23)                  (-1.12)
EPANECHNIKOV                              -14.772 **                      -15.959 **                       -21.223 **               -26.409 *
                                           (-2.27)                         (-2.06)                          (-2.57)                  (-1.83)
*** indicates significantly different than zero at the 1% level (2-sided)
** indicates significantly different than zero at the 5% level (2-sided)
* indicates significantly different than zero at the 10% level (2-sided)

                                                                                                                                       37
                                                                       Table 5
                      Multivariate Model of Underwriter Selection (McFadden’s Choice Model)
Each issuing firm i chooses an underwriter j from a set of J underwriters. The utility of choice j is
                                                             U ij = a' w i + ß' xij + ε ij
where wi is a vector of issuer characteristics and x ij is a matrix of choice attributes. If the issuing firm makes a choice j, then we assume that
Uij is the maximum among the J utilities. The relevant issuer specific characteristics are wi = {LNSIZE, AGE, DE-LTDEBT, SICx}. We
use two different specifications for x ij. In column (1), we do not consider differences between investment banks and commercial banks.
We specify that x ij = {TIELOAN, TIEPLEND, PRIORLEND, PRIORUND, COVERAGE, ALLSTAR, RANK1, . . ., RANK20}. In
column (2), we allow for differences between investment banks and commercial banks by setting x ij = {IB X TIELOAN, CB X TIELOAN,
IB X TIEPLEND, CB X TIEPLEND, IB X PRIORLEND, CB X PRIORLEND, IB X PRIORUND, CB X PRIORUND, IB, COVERAGE,
ALLSTAR, RANK1, . . ., RANK20}. The issuer characteristics are defined as follows: LNSIZE is the logarithm of the SEO principal
amount, expressed in millions of dollars. AGE is the firm’s age, measured as the difference between the date of the SEO and the
incorporation date, measured in years. DE-LTDEBT is the long-term debt to common equity ratio in the quarter of the SEO. SICx are
industry dummy variables, which are one if the firm has the corresponding one-digit SIC. The choice attributes are defined as follows:
TIELOAN is a dummy variable that equals one if a potential underwriter provided a loan to the issuer between six months prior to the SEO
and six months after the SEO and the potential underwriter had never provided a loan to the issuer in the past. TIEPLEND is a dummy
variable that equals one if a potential underwriter provided a loan to the issuer between six months prior to the SEO and six months after the
SEO and the potential underwriter provided a loan to the issuer prior to six months before the SEO. PRIORLEND is a dummy variable that
equals one if a loan between the potential underwriter and the issuer was originated at any time prior to six months before the SEO and the
potential underwriter does not provide a loan to the issuer between six months prior to the SEO and six months after the SEO. PRIORUND
is one if a potential underwriter had been the underwriter on any prior equity offering by the issuer. IB (CB) is one if the potential
underwriter of the SEO is an investment bank (commercial bank). COVERAGE is one if the potential underwriter had provided an
earnings per share estimate for the firm during the year prior to the SEO. ALLSTAR is one if COVERAGE is one and the analyst was
ranked as an all-star by Institutional Investor magazine for the year prior to the SEO. RANK1 through RANK20 are 20 dummy variables,
one for each potential choice. The issuer characteristics are interacted with the 20 choice-specific dummy variables in order to be included
in the model. Estimated coefficients for the choice specific constants and the issuer characteristics are not reported.

                                                                (1)                                                     (2)
                                            Coefficient                     T-ratio                     Coefficient                 T-ratio
TIELOAN                                        1.945                   10.34      ***
TIEPLEND                                       1.385                    6.51      ***
PRIORLEND                                      0.513                    3.29      ***
PRIORUND                                       2.698                   37.46      ***
IB X TIELOAN                                                                                               2.106                   8.54       ***
CB X TIELOAN                                                                                               1.699                   6.51       ***
IB X TIEPLEND                                                                                              1.867                   5.59       ***
CB X TIEPLEND                                                                                              1.188                   4.75       ***
IB X PRIORLEND                                                                                             0.874                   4.36       ***
CB X PRIORLEND                                                                                             0.104                   0.43
IB X PRIORUND                                                                                              2.881                  33.60       ***
CB X PRIORUND                                                                                              2.197                  15.50       ***
IB                                                                                                        -0.176                  -1.89       *
COVERAGE                                       1.601                   19.90      ***                      1.640                  20.26       ***
ALLSTAR                                        0.561                    4.76      ***                      0.535                   4.52       ***

Psuedo R-squared                                           0.4161                                                     0.4187
Log Likelihood                                             3398.72                                                    3383.64

*** indicates significantly different than zero at the 1% level (2-sided)
** indicates significantly different than zero at the 5% level (2-sided)
* indicates significantly different than zero at the 10% level (2-sided)




                                                                                                                                     38
                                                                 Table 6
                   Univariate Analysis of Keeping the Same Underwriter in a Subsequent SEO
 This table summarizes the probability that an issuer will proceed with a subsequent SEO and, if so, the probability that the issuer will
 keep the underwriter, based on if the initial SEO was a tied deal. A tied deal is any SEO in which the underwriter provided a loan to
 the issuer between six months prior to the SEO and six months after the SEO. The underwriter is an IB (CB) if the parent or holding
 company of the underwriter is an investment bank (commercial bank) at the time of the SEO. Panel A provides a full sample
 analysis. Panel B examines those SEOs in which the underwriter was an investment bank. Panel C examines those SEOs in which
 the underwriter is a commercial bank. P-values for the difference in proportions is provided in the last column.

                                                                                                                    Proportion test
                                                                 Tied Deals              Non-Tied Deals                p-value

PANEL A: Full Sample
# in Sample                                                           201                        2100
# that Repeat                                                          74                          462
% of Sample that Repeat                                           36.82%                       22.00%                   0.0000 ***
# Keep Same Underwriter                                                42                          207
% of Repeaters that Keep Same Underwriter                         56.76%                       44.81%                   0.0556 *



PANEL B: Underwriter is an IB
# in Sample                                                           110                        1509
# that Repeat                                                          43                          347
% of Sample that Repeat                                           39.09%                       23.00%                   0.0001 ***
# Keep Same Underwriter                                                28                          148
% of Repeaters that Keep Same Underwriter                         65.12%                       42.65%                   0.0049 ***



PANEL C: Underwriter is a CB
# in Sample                                                            91                          591
# that Repeat                                                          31                          115
% of Sample that Repeat                                           34.07%                       19.46%                   0.0018 ***
# Keep Same Underwriter                                                14                           59
% of Repeaters that Keep Same Underwriter                         45.16%                       51.30%                   0.5162

 *** indicates significantly different than zero at the 1% level (2-sided)
 ** indicates significantly different than zero at the 5% level (2-sided)
 * indicates significantly different than zero at the 10% level (2-sided)




                                                                                                                            39
                                                                    Table 7
                   Multivariate Model of Keeping the Same Underwriter in a Subsequent SEO
In this table, we present results of two nested logit models of the probability of keeping or switching underwriters in a subsequent SEO. Let
the alternatives of “Repeat” and “Not Repeat” belong to category k and the alternatives of “Keep” and “Switch” belong to category l. We
define Ykl and Zk be vectors of explanatory variables specific to the categories (k, l) and (k), respectively. The utility of choosing alternative
(k,l) is
                                                         U kl = a' Ykl + ß' Z k + ekl
We specify that Zk = {LNSIZE, AGE, DE-LTDEBT, SICx}. In column (1), we do not consider differences between investment banks and
commercial banks by specifying that Ykl = {TIELOAN, TIEPLEND, PRIORLEND, PRIORUND, CNGCOV, CNGSTAR, CNGRANK,
KEEP, SWITCH}. In column (2), we allow for differences between investment banks and commercial banks by setting Ykl = {IB X
TIELOAN, CB X TIELOAN, IB X TIEPLEND, CB X TIEPLEND, IB X PRIORLEND, CB X PRIORLEND, IB X PRIORUND, CB X
PRIORUND, IB, CNGCOV, CNGSTAR, CNGRANK, KEEP, SWITCH}. The variables in Zk are defined as follows: LNSIZE is the
logarithm of the original SEO principal amount, expressed in millions of dollars. AGE is the firm’s age, measured as the difference
between the date of the original SEO and the incorporation date, measured in years. DE-LTDEBT is the long-term debt to common equity
ratio in the quarter of the original SEO. SICx are industry dummy variables, which are one if the firm has the corresponding one-digit SIC.
The variables in Ykl are: TIELOAN is a dummy variable that equals one if the underwriter provided a loan to the issuer between six months
prior to the SEO and six months after the SEO and the underwriter had never provided a loan to the issuer in the past. TIEPLEND is a
dummy variable that equals one if the underwriter provided a loan to the issuer between six months prior to the original SEO and six
months after the original SEO and the underwriter provided a loan to the issuer prior to six months before the SEO. PRIORLEND is a
dummy variable that equals one if a loan between the underwriter and the issuer was originated at any time prior to six months before the
SEO and the underwriter does not provide a loan to the issuer between six months prior to the SEO and six months after the SEO.
PRIORUND is one if the underwriter had been the underwriter on any equity offering by the issuer prior to the original SEO. IB is one if
the underwriter of the original SEO is an investment bank. CB is one if the underwriter of the original SEO is a commercial bank.
CNGCOV is the difference between the coverage provided by the subsequent underwriter and the original underwriter in the year prior to
the subsequent SEO. CNGSTAR is the difference between the all-star coverage provided by the subsequent underwriter and the original
underwriter in the year prior to the subsequent SEO. CNGRANK is the difference between the subsequent underwriter’s ranking in the year
before the subsequent issue date and the original underwriter’s ranking in the year before the subsequent issue date. KEEP and SWITCH
are choice-specific dummy variables. TIELOAN, PRIORUND, PRIORLEND, and IB are interacted with KEEP and SWITCH in order to
be included in the model. LNSIZE, AGE, DE-LTDEBT, and SICx are interacted with REPEAT in order to be included in the model.
Estimated coefficients for the industry variables (SICx) are not reported.
                                                                                        (1)                                     (2)
                                                                          Coefficient         T-ratio             Coefficient          T-ratio
Variables that affect the choice of “REPEAT” or “NO REPEAT”
REPEAT X LNSIZE                                                             0.124             2.29 **               0.139              2.55 **
REPEAT X AGE                                                                0.003             1.20                  0.002              0.74
REPEAT X DE-LTDEBT                                                          0.010             1.05                  0.010              1.08
Variables that affect the choice of “NO REPEAT”, “(REPEAT,
KEEP)”, or “(REPEAT, SWITCH)"
Tied Lending / No Prior Lending Relationship
KEEP X TIELOAN                                                              0.434             2.52 **
KEEP X IB X TIELOAN                                                                                                 0.727              3.70 ***
KEEP X CB X TIELOAN                                                                                                -0.188             -0.44
SWITCH X TIELOAN                                                            0.095              0.45
SWITCH X IB X TIELOAN                                                                                              -0.083             -0.27
SWITCH X CB X TIELOAN                                                                                               0.478              1.74 *
Tied Lending with Prior Lending Relationship
KEEP X TIEPLEND                                                             0.380             1.87 *
KEEP X IB X TIEPLEND                                                                                               0.071               0.19
KEEP X CB X TIEPLEND                                                                                               0.603               2.23 **
SWITCH X TIEPLEND                                                           -0.008            -0.03
SWITCH X IB X TIEPLEND                                                                                             0.014               0.04
SWITCH X CB X TIEPLEND                                                                                             0.125               0.36


                                                                                                                                      40
                                                            Table 7 (continued)

                                                                                          (1)                             (2)
                                                                            Coefficient         T-ratio     Coefficient          T-ratio
Prior Lending Relationship / No Tied Lending
KEEP X PRIORLEND                                                              0.320             1.71 *
KEEP X IB X PRIORLEND                                                                                        0.161               0.64
KEEP X CB X PRIORLEND                                                                                        0.632               2.18 **
SWITCH X PRIORLEND                                                            0.018             0.08
SWITCH X IB X PRIORLEND                                                                                      0.053               0.19
SWITCH X CB X PRIORLEND                                                                                      0.025               0.05
Prior Underwriting Relationship
KEEP X PRIORUND                                                               0.282             2.77 ***
KEEP X IB X PRIORUND                                                                                         0.159               1.31
KEEP X CB X PRIORUND                                                                                         0.557               2.91 ***
SWITCH X PRIORUND                                                             -0.112            -1.08
SWITCH X IB X PRIORUND                                                                                      -0.188              -1.53
SWITCH X CB X PRIORUND                                                                                       0.072               0.35
Coverage and Reputation
SWITCH X CNGCOV                                                               0.120             0.62         0.097               0.49
SWITCH X CNGSTAR                                                              0.737             2.36 **      0.704               2.26 **
SWITCH X CNGRANK                                                              0.146             7.72 ***     0.146               7.55 ***
Bank Classification and Constants
KEEP X IB                                                                                                    0.250               1.38
SWITCH X IB                                                                                                  0.312               1.85 *
KEEP                                                                          -1.494            -8.41 ***   -1.730              -7.14 ***
SWITCH                                                                        -1.303            -8.32 ***   -1.582              -6.78 ***

IV(REPEAT)                                                                    2.490             6.83 ***     2.441               6.68 ***

LR Test of Homoskedasticity [IV(Repeat) = 1]                                         34.97 ***                       32.30 ***
Log Likelihood                                                                     1315.01                         1301.27
T-tests for differences between keeping and switching
KEEP X TIELOAN – SWITCH X TIELOAN                                            0.339              1.05
KEEP X IB X TIELOAN – SWITCH X IB X TIELOAN                                                                  0.810               1.92 *
KEEP X CB X TIELOAN – SWITCH X CB X TIELOAN                                                                 -0.667              -1.10
KEEP X TIEPLEND – SWITCH X TIEPLEND                                          0.388              1.00
KEEP X IB X TIEPLEND – SWITCH X IB X TIEPLEND                                                                0.057               0.09
KEEP X CB X TIEPLEND – SWITCH X CB X TIEPLEND                                                                0.478               0.93
KEEP X PRIORLEND – SWITCH X PRIORLEND                                        0.303              0.82
KEEP X IB X PRIORLEND – SWITCH X IB X PRIORLEND                                                              0.108               0.23
KEEP X CB X PRIORLEND – SWITCH X CB X PRIORLEND                                                              0.608               0.97
KEEP X PRIORUND – SWITCH X PRIORUND                                          0.394              2.21 **
KEEP X IB X PRIORUND – SWITCH X IB X PRIORUND                                                                0.347               1.62
KEEP X CB X PRIORUND – SWITCH X CB X PRIORUND                                                                0.485               1.44

*** indicates significantly different than zero at the 1% level (2-sided)
** indicates significantly different than zero at the 5% level (2-sided)
* indicates significantly different than zero at the 10% level (2-sided)


                                                                                                                                41
                                                                Figure 1
                                                          Nesting Structure
This figure presents the nesting structure for the nested logit model of keeping the same underwriter in a subsequent SEO. Each
issuer has a first-level choice of re -issuing (“Repeat”) or not re-issuing (“No Repeat”). If the issuer decides to re-issue, the issuer has
a second level choice of keeping the underwriter of the current SEO (“Keep”) or switching to a new underwriter (“Switch”) in the
subsequent offering.




                                              Repeat                           No Repeat




                            Keep                               Switch




                                                                                                                                42
