                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         MOVING UP OR MOVING OUT?
            ANTI-SWEATSHOP ACTIVISTS AND LABOR MARKET OUTCOMES

                                              Ann Harrison
                                              Jason Scorse

                                          Working Paper 10492
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w10492


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       May 2004




The authors would like to thank Garrick Blalock for generously sharing his data and expertise on Indonesia.
The authors would also like to thank David Card, David Lee, Sylvie Lambert, and seminar participants at
DELTA, INSEAD, the World Bank, UC Berkeley and Yale for useful suggestions. The views expressed
herein are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2004 by Ann Harrison and Jason Scorse. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
Moving Up or Moving Out? Anti-Sweatshop Activists and Labor Market Outcomes
Ann Harrison and Jason Scorse
NBER Working Paper No. 10492
May 2004, Revised June 2006
JEL No. F1, F2, J3
                                     ABSTRACT

During the 1990s, human rights and anti-sweatshop activists increased their efforts to improve
working conditions and raise wages for workers in developing countries. These campaigns took
many different forms: direct pressure to change legislation in developing countries, pressure on
firms, newspaper campaigns, and grassroots organizing. This paper analyzes the impact of two
different types of interventions on labor market outcomes in Indonesian manufacturing: (1) direct
US government pressure, which contributed to a doubling of the minimum wage and (2) anti-
sweatshop campaigns. The combined effects of the minimum wage legislation and the anti-
sweatshop campaigns led to a 50 percent increase in real wages and a 100 percent increase in
nominal wages for unskilled workers at targeted plants. We then examine whether higher wages led
firms to cut employment or relocate elsewhere. Although the higher minimum wage reduced
employment for unskilled workers, anti-sweatshop activism targeted at textiles, apparel, and
footwear plants did not. Plants targeted by activists were more likely to close, but those losses were
offset by employment gains at surviving plants. The message is a mixed one: activism significantly
improved wages for unskilled workers in sweatshop industries, but probably encouraged some plants
to leave Indonesia.

Ann Harrison
University of California, Berkeley
329 Giannini Hall
Berkeley, CA 94720
and NBER
harrison@are.berkeley.edu

Jason Scorse
Department of Agricultural and Resource Economics
Giannini Hall
UC Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720
jscorse@are.berkeley.edu
I. Introduction


      Anti-sweatshop campaigns launched to improve working conditions in poor countries increased

dramatically in the 1990s. These campaigns took many different forms: direct pressure to change

legislation in developing countries, pressure on firms, newspaper campaigns, and grassroots organizing.

Corporate giants with strong name-brand recognition such as Nike, Reebok, Adidas and the Gap all

became the focus of extremely well-coordinated ad campaigns and consumer boycotts that spread

throughout hundreds of college campuses. Surprisingly, however, there has been almost no research that

analyzes how anti-sweatshop campaigns have affected the very workers they are designed to assist.

      This paper examines the impact of US government pressure and anti-sweatshop campaigns on labor

market outcomes in Indonesia. Indonesia makes an ideal case study because both the United States

government and human rights organizations pressured the country to improve conditions for workers.

The pressure took two different forms. First, the United States government threatened to withdraw

special tariff privileges for Indonesian exports if the government failed to address human rights issues.

The Indonesian government responded to US pressure by making the minimum wage a central component

of its labor market policies in the 1990s.1 Minimum wages increased by eight hundred percent in nominal

terms and more than doubled in real terms.

        A second approach involved grassroots organizing, negative publicity, and consumer awareness

campaigns for goods produced by footwear and apparel producers. In the 1990s, international concern

over globalization and labor standards increased dramatically. Major campaigns against large footwear

companies such as Nike forced these firms to raise wages, improve working conditions for their workers,

and sign codes of conduct. One of the goals of this paper is to compare the effects of government-

mandated wage improvements with the effects of the more unconventional tactic of anti-sweatshop

activism.




1. SMERU Research Institute (2001).


                                                                                                            1
        To measure the impact of the anti-sweatshop movement on labor market outcomes, we use a

difference-in-difference approach, comparing wages before and after the advent of the campaigns. The

combined effects of the minimum wage legislation and the anti-sweatshop campaigns led to a more than

50 percent increase in real wages and a doubling of nominal wages for unskilled workers at targeted

plants. We then examine whether higher wages led firms to cut employment or relocate elsewhere.

Despite significant non-compliance, the minimum wage hike reduced employment for unskilled workers

by as much as 12 percentage points over the period. Although the higher minimum wage reduced

employment, anti-sweatshop activism targeted at textiles, apparel, and footwear plants did not. Some

plants targeted by activists were more likely to close, but those losses were offset by employment gains at

surviving plants. The fact that wages responded to activist pressure without leading to a significant fall in

employment suggests that anti-sweatshop campaigns in Indonesia were successful in helping the lowest

paid workers achieve sizeable income gains. These results suggest that activism had less costly

consequences for employment in Indonesia than externally imposed US pressure, which contributed to the

dramatic minimum wage increase.

        Identification for minimum wage effects is based on district-level differences in the application of

the statutory minimum wage across Indonesia. Identification for anti-sweatshop effects is achieved by

comparing the behavior of firms operating in districts where there were subcontractors working for name

brands (Nike, Rebok and Adidas) relative to firms in districts where subcontractors for those three

companies did not have operations. The results are robust to a variety of alternative specifications. We

include controls for other factors that could be correlated with wage and employment changes, such as

foreign ownership and export status, investments in technology, differences in productivity or changing

profitability resulting from exchange rate fluctuations. We also control for output shocks that could be

associated with rising wages in textiles and apparel production.

        Although other research has shown that foreign enterprises in developing countries are more

likely to pay higher wages, these previous studies do not directly address the impact of anti-sweatshop




                                                                                                           2
activism.2 Other related work includes Edmonds and Pavcnik (2001), who explore how rice prices

affected the use of child labor in Vietnam. Edmonds and Pavcnik find that in rural areas, where most

people are both rice producers and consumers, the income effect of higher rice prices has greatly

outweighed the higher opportunity costs of not employing children in the work force, and therefore child

labor has declined significantly.3 Previous work has also examined the rationale for labor standards, as

well as on the determinants of ratification of ILO conventions. 4

          The structure of this paper is as follows. In Section II, we discuss the background for the

minimum wage increases, present evidence on the development of anti-sweatshop campaigns, discuss the

identification strategy and set up a framework for estimation. We present results on wages in Section III.

Section IV examines the impact of minimum wage legislation and anti-sweatshop activism on

employment, profits, investment and plant exit, while Section V concludes.



    II.       Background, Identification Strategy, and Framework for Estimation


2. Aitken, Lipsey, and Harrison (1997); Harrison and Scorse (2003).
3
  However, in urban areas, where families are only rice consumers, the effects of the rice exports on price has led to
increases in child labor since urban incomes have declined. Since Vietnam is predominantly rural, the overall effect
has been a decline in child labor.
4
  Chau and Kanbur (2001) postulate that if ratification of these conventions were costless, or if the benefits greatly
outweighed the costs, one would expect complete compliance across countries. Given that this is not the case, Chau
and Kanbur investigate the determinants of signing. They find little evidence that variables predicted by standard
economic theory— such as per capita gross domestic product (GDP), degree of openness to trade, or average
education—are determining factors, but rather that countries with higher domestic standards have a higher
probability of adoption.4 Maskus (1996) refutes the argument that a lack of international standards has led to
significant erosion of low-skilled wages in developed countries, or is a significant determinant of trade performance
and foreign direct investment throughout the developing world. Maskus also reports evidence regarding the impact
of labor standards on wages in export processing zones. He claims that overall the zones pay higher wages and have
better working conditions, but that in some countries the minimum wage is less likely to be enforced in export
processing zones than in the rest of the country. Anecdotal evidence also suggests that efforts to organize workers in
export processing zones have been routinely suppressed. Maskus points out that the altruistic reasons echoed in
much of the developed world for promoting labor standards, even if sincere, are often used as a guise for trade
protectionism and that natural variability in labor standards is an inevitable result of differing levels of economic,
social, and cultural development. He also analyzes the extent to which trade instruments such as tariffs, import
quotas, and sanctions could potentially be used to enforce international compliance with a minimum set of core
labor standards, specifically with respect to developing countries. He finds that trade instruments are never first-best
and that often they exacerbate the problems they are meant to solve (primarily because they often reduce the poorest
workers’ incomes). In addition, they can lead to other labor market distortions that decrease overall world welfare.
He suggests a number of more targeted approaches to address contentious labor issues such as child labor, including
labeling schemes as well as aid programs focused on education and poverty alleviation.




                                                                                                                       3
      We begin by describing the role played by the United States in influencing Indonesia’s labor market

policies. We then turn to a discussion of the anti-sweatshop movement. To the extent that anti-sweatshop

activism also contributed to US government efforts to raise minimum wages in Indonesia, our approach

provides a lower bound on the impact of the anti-sweatshop movement on wages. However, separating

the impact of US government pressure from sweatshop activism is possible because the minimum wage

increase affected all manufacturing enterprises, while anti-sweatshop activists concentrated on textiles,

apparel, and footwear factories in a limited geographic area within Indonesia. This section then describes

a theoretical framework and discusses the approach to estimation.

        Pressure from the United States Between 1987 and 1995, American groups filed seven

petitions with the U.S. Trade Representative (USTR) claiming that Indonesian labor rights laws were not

being enforced by the Indonesian government and that Indonesia’s preferential trade status under the

Generalized System of Preferences (GSP) should be revoked (Caraway 2001). These petitions focused on

seven major labor rights violations: obstruction of the right to organize, restrictions on civil servants, the

right to strike, the intervention of security authorities in labor disputes, restrictions of workers'access to

appeal, limited sanctions against employers, and unfair restrictions on the right to work.

      Under the GSP system, participating countries face lower duties (or no duties at all) on their goods

that are exported to the United States. Therefore, maintaining GSP status is economically important for

recipient nations, and the threat of revoking it can apply significant pressure on governments to change

their policies. One legal basis for revoking GSP status is evidence of human rights violations or violation

of labor laws.

      When President Clinton came into office in 1992 the USTR agreed to review Indonesia’s GSP

status. Although the Indonesian government flatly denied any violations of labor rights, for the next two

years the Indonesian government took small steps to improve the conditions of workers by easing

restrictions on unions and promising to enforce higher minimum wages. Although wages were not an




                                                                                                                 4
issue raised in the GSP petitions, the Indonesian government decided to make improvements on the wage

front instead of more comprehensive labor rights reform that had been highlighted by the American labor

rights groups. This also allowed the government to quell rising labor unrest since the major demand in the

growing number of strikes during this time period (fueled by the reluctance of the Indonesian government

to crack down while under greater international scrutiny) was compliance with the legally mandated

minimum wage. Although the U.S. did not revoke Indonesia’s GSP privileges and the USTR’s review

process waned after Clinton’s 1994 visit to Indonesia, from 1990 through1996 the average daily

minimum wage in Indonesia increased by more than 800 percent in nominal terms (see Figure 1), and the

Indonesian government continued to issue promises to more strictly enforce minimum wage compliance.

        As indicated by Figure 1, minimum wages more than doubled in real terms between 1985 and

1999 (See also Appendix Table 1). Large increases in the real value of the minimum wage occurred in

1989 and between 1992 and 1994, coinciding with US threats to withdraw GSP preferences to Indonesia.

Using the manufacturing census plant-level data for Indonesia, we calculated average production and non-

production worker wages relative to the statutory minimum from 1985 through 1999. As indicated by the

trends in Figure 1, the ratio of production worker wages to the minimum wage fell from a factor of more

than 2- to-1 to nearly 1-to-1 in the late 1990s. Average production-worker wages were hovering just

above the minimum wage before the 1997 financial crisis.

        The Anti-Sweatshop Movement                The roots of the anti-sweatshop campaign in Indonesia

can be traced to a 1989 study commissioned by the U.S. Agency for International Development. The

study, carried out by the Asian American Free Labor Institute-Indonesia under the direction of Jeff

Ballinger, discovered that of all the factories that produced goods for the export sector, plants that

manufactured for Nike paid the lowest wages. In 1992 Ballinger’s work appeared in Harper’s Magazine

in a short piece entitled, “The New Free-Trade Hell: Nike’s profits jump on the backs of Asian workers,”

and in 1993 CBS featured Ballinger on a report about poor working conditions in Asian factories.

        Organizations such as Global Exchange, Press for Change (founded by Ballinger), and the

National Labor Committee used the momentum generated from the increasing mainstream media


                                                                                                           5
attention on poor factory conditions in Nike plants to create an international campaign against sweatshop

conditions in Nike factories. Coupled with their own very effective media strategies, including ads that

satirized Nike symbols and slogans (e.g. the “swooshtika” in place of the Nike “swoosh” symbol), the

anti-sweatshop activists waged a public relations war against Nike and other big clothing retailers. The

movement in the U.S. and Europe was enlivened through electronic forums where young activists

congregated, shared information at lightning speed, and plotted their course of action.

        Nike established its own “Code of Conduct” in 1992 (Murphy and Matthew 2001) in order to

comply with labor standards and establish living wages, but these practices were not fully implemented

until 1995-1996. During this time, NGOs maintained persistent and steady appraisals of working

conditions in and around Nike factories in order to hold the company to account for its poor treatment of

workers. The campaign against Nike in Indonesia was essentially a media campaign, which operated

(and continues to operate) through contacts with newspaper columnists (such as for the New York

Times), magazine writers (for Harpers), TV shows, and other outlets which could be used to attract

attention to the plight of Indonesian workers. US grass roots organizations were enlisted on a number of

occasions to bring ex-factory workers from Nike factories in Indonesia to speak in the USA on well-

advertised tours about conditions there. The primary focus on Nike, with less emphasis on Reebok and

Adidas, can be explained by the fact that these three giants have accounted for over 50 percent of the

global market share in sportswear apparel and footwear since the late 1990s. Nike, in particular, provided

a perfect centerpiece for the anti-sweatshop campaigns since the Nike symbol was highly recognizable

and the company had a popular athlete, Michael Jordon, as its spokesman.

        The campaign against Nike’s subcontractors in the 1990s focused almost exclusively on

Indonesia. Why? Indonesia currently has the second largest number of subcontractors for Nike apparel

and footwear in the world. Although China now leads the list in terms of number of subcontracting

factories for Nike, Indonesia was the focus of the campaign against Nike in the 1990s for several reasons.

First, much of the research which documented poor working conditions and low minimum wage

compliance that fueled the campaigns had been completed by Jeff Ballinger while working for the AFL-


                                                                                                            6
CIO there; there was no comparable work being done in China at that time. Second, there was significant

anger directed against the foreign (primarily Korean) owners of these factories within Indonesia, which

helped to fuel local concerns. The relatively more open political atmosphere (compared to China) also

contributed to the ability of US groups to work with local NGOs in Indonesia. The use of the internet and

email to collect information and publicize concerns cannot be underestimated.

        To summarize, the “treatment” began with a series of studies on foreign and export-oriented

subcontractors in Indonesia, and culminated with negative publicity regarding wages and working

conditions through a variety of channels, including major newspapers, websites, speaking engagements,

and television coverage. One way to gauge the extent of this newfound interest is to count the number of

articles about labor standards that appeared in major newspapers in the 1990s. As figure 2 demonstrates,

the number of articles about sweatshop and child labor activities increased dramatically. There was a 300

percent increase in the number of articles regarding child labor, and the number of articles focusing on

sweatshop activities increased by more than 400 percent.

      If we restrict the analysis to articles about sweatshops in Indonesia alone, the trends are very

similar. In Figure 3 we computed the ratio of the number of articles on sweatshops or child labor relative

to the number of articles on economic issues which appeared on Indonesia in major newspapers around

the world. The trend identified in Figure 3 is quite clear: while there were no articles on these issues at

the beginning of the decade, interest in sweatshop conditions rapidly increased, peaking in 1996. In 1997

there was an increasing shift in focus towards the financial crisis, which erupted at the end of 1997.

Interest in child labor and sweatshop labor fell in 1997 and 1998—at least relative to other issues of

economic interest--but has been increasing again in the last several years.

      Further evidence regarding development of anti-sweatshop activism can be found in Elliott and

Freeman (2003). The authors systematically trace the development of these campaigns in the 1990s.

Their book makes clear that the overwhelming majority of new organizations created to address labor

conditions in sweatshop industries were formed in the early 1990s. Why did interest in these issues




                                                                                                           7
increase so rapidly in the mid-1990s?5 In 1996-1997, there were a series of high profile exposes on Nike,

Gap, Walmart, Disney and others. For instance, in the second quarter of 1996 the Kathie Lee Gifford

sweatshop scandal was highlighted in the news. These exposes were picked up by student movements on

campuses. Student groups staged protests and sit-ins and subsequently kept these issues in the news, and

contributed to the creation of groups designed to respond to sweatshop problems. The convergence of

high profile exposes, student activism, and the creation of new groups designed to address anti-sweatshop

concerns fueled the increase in newspaper coverage. Post-1996, the shift in focus towards the Asian

financial crisis contributed to a decline in interest in these issues. The student movement also weakened

and moved on to other issues.

           Identification Issues     The identification strategy for this paper must address two problems:

first, how to identify the independent impact of changes in the minimum wage; and second, how to

measure the role of anti-sweatshop activism. The identification strategy for minimum wage effects

exploits the fact that minimum wage increases in Indonesia were not uniform across districts. Figure 4

shows the trends in minimum wages for districts with the highest and lowest increases in minimum wages

between 1985 and 1999. It is clear from the graphs that statutory minimum wages were almost flat in the

second half of the 1980s, and that increases did not occur until 1989-1990, when the US government

began to pressure Indonesia to improve working conditions. The figures also show that the rate of

nominal increase in minimum wages varied dramatically across regions; while the minimum wage

increased by almost 400 percent in district facing the lowest increase, it increased by over 1000 percent in

the district facing the biggest (percentage) statutory increase. In many cases, these different trajectories

for statutory wage increases occurred in neighboring districts. These divergent patterns in the statutory

minimum wage did not begin until 1989 or 1990, allowing us to compare pre and post-wage increases to

identify the specific impact of the minimum wage legislation.

           To control for the fact that price levels may have evolved differently across different parts of

Indonesia, we control for overall regional minimum wage changes and only exploit differences within the

5
    This section has benefited greatly from discussions with Kimberly Elliott, Dara O’Rourke, and Sandra Spolaski.

                                                                                                                     8
same region in the evolution of the minimum wage. For example, we exploit differences in the evolution

of the statutory minimum wage across districts within East Java or West Java, but do not use differences

between the two provinces for identification.

        Our identification strategy for anti-sweatshop activism exploits the fact that activists concentrated

on subcontractors for the 3 most highly visible footwear and apparel companies: Nike, Adidas, and

Reebok. This means that activism was geographically concentrated in areas where these companies (or

their subcontractors) operated. Nike, Adidas, and Reebok have made available on the internet all the

locations of their subcontractors in Indonesia. This makes it possible to identify the specific districts in

which companies targeted by activists operated in the 1990s. Consequently, our identification strategy for

activism is to compare the evolution of wages and employment in textiles, footwear, and apparel factories

in regions with Nike, Adidas, and Reebok operations, relative to other regions. Unfortunately,

confidentiality restrictions do not permit us to identify the actual contractors in our census data.

However, by comparing different factories within the same sector, we are able to control for demand or

supply shocks which could affect all operations within the same industry.

        To give us a preliminary indication of whether the treatment group was affected by anti-

sweatshop activism, Figure 5 examines the evolution of wages for all plants with foreign ownership or

export activity in the textiles, footwear, and apparel sector. The figure shows the distribution of wages for

these kinds of enterprises in districts without anti-sweatshop activity and those with anti-sweatshop

activity. The benefits of examining the distribution of wages across all enterprises is that we can better

identify the impact on plants in the lower wage deciles.

        In 1990, prior to the onset of activism, TFA plants with foreign ownership or export activity in

the treated districts paid somewhat less than in other districts. The distribution of log wages was quite

broad, reflecting in part the fact that there was no binding wage floor, the government’s minimum wages

were not particularly high, and enforcement was lax. However, by 1996, the picture had changed

considerably. The wage distribution for unskilled workers is now much narrower, reflecting a squeeze on




                                                                                                               9
the top and bottom parts of the wage distribution due to the minimum wage increases between 1990 and

1996.

        Equally remarkable is the shift in the wage distribution for the treatment group relative to textiles

and apparel firms in other districts. While plants in the treatment group were paying less than other

similar plants in 1990, by 1996 the peak had shifted to the right of the control group, indicating that these

firms were now paying more. Of equal interest is the shift in the lower tails of the distribution for the

treatment group, relative to the control. The lower tail of the wage distribution on the left-hand side of

the graph has shrunk significantly for the treatment group relative to other textiles and apparel firms with

exports or foreign participation. These significant shifts in the distribution of wages are consistent with

(but do not prove) increasing importance of minimum wage legislation and anti-sweatshop activity.



Framework for Estimation          Figure 1 shows that as the statutory minimum wage increased, the

proportion of plants paying at least the minimum declined significantly. While three-quarters of all plants

paid average wages above the statutory minimum wage in their district to production workers in the mid-

1980s, by 1999 only about half of all plants paid average wages that exceeded the statutory regional

minimum. It is clear from Figure 1 that firms in Indonesia did not always comply with the new minimum

wage legislation.   Although compliance with minimum wages is typically high in developed countries

today, in developing countries such as Indonesia compliance with minimum wages can be as low as 40

percent. Consequently, the firm must decide whether or not to pay the minimum wage. The firm’s

choices are similar in the context of anti-sweatshop campaigns. Faced with the possibility of a negative ad

campaign, the firm must weigh the costs of paying higher wages against the potential negative publicity

that may result if they do not.

        A proper framework for evaluating a firm’s decision to raise wages either in the context of a

rising minimum wage or increasing human rights activism would take into account both the costs and

benefits of setting wages above the market-clearing level. One of the earliest papers which explicitly

models a firm’s decision whether to comply with a minimum wage is Ashenfelter and Smith (1979).


                                                                                                              10
Given a probability    of being caught and a penalty F, then expected profits if the firm fails to comply

with minimum wage legislation are given by E( ) = (1- ) (w,r,p) +                       (M,r,p) – F. Product prices are

given by p and other factor prices by r. The minimum wage is M and w is the unconstrained wage. The

employer will decide against compliance if the expected value of ignoring the law exceeds the cost of

complying: E( (w,r,p)) – (M,r,p) = (1- )[ (w,r,p) – (M,r,p)] – F > 0. In words, a profit-maximizing

employer will choose not to comply with a minimum wage if the gains from disobeying the law outweigh

the potential costs of non-compliance. Using a second order Taylor expansion, we can show that firms

will choose to comply with minimum wage legislation if



    G/L – (M – w) + (1/2w)[M-w]2e> 0                                                             (1)



    G is a positive function of the probability of detection         and a negative function of the penalty F, L is

the number of employees in the firm, M is the minimum wage, and w is the average wage paid by the

firm. The value e is the elasticity of demand for labor and is less than zero. Equation (1) suggests that

firms would comply with minimum wage legislation if the expected penalty from violating the law, given

by G/L, exceeds the additional compensation, given by the difference M-w, that needs to be paid to each

employee when the firm complies with the minimum wage. As indicated by equation (1), firms are more

likely to comply with minimum wage legislation if the probability of detection is high or the penalty is

high, if the minimum wage M is low, or if the firm pays high wages. Since a large number of employees

reduces the per employee cost of compliance in terms of the penalty F per worker, large firms are also

less likely to comply, after controlling for the probability of detection and other factors.

    A linearized version of Equation (1) which allows for region-specific effects (r) suggests the

following general empirical specification for an establishment i in region r and time t:



    Xirt =       a1 + a2Mrt + a3wrt +   4G(u,F)it   +   5Lit   +   6Zirt   + rr + eit            (2)




                                                                                                                      11
Equation (2) could be estimated in a number of different ways. For example, X could be defined as an

indicator variable equal to 0 if the establishment fails to comply with the minimum wage, and equal to 1 if

the firm complies. This could be estimated using a probit specification or a linear probability model.

Another possibility—which allows us to capture the whole wage distribution—is to define the outcome

variable X as the change in wages or percentage change in wages between period t-1 and period t.

        Estimating (2) requires information on minimum wages M, the wage w that would have been paid

in the absence of minimum wage regulations, employment L, measures of the probability of detection (u)

and penalties associated with non-compliance (F). Compliance should increase with w and should fall as

M rises. The framework also suggests that compliance or wage growth is likely to rise as the probability

of detection and penalties for noncompliance increase.        We would also need to control for differences in

types of workers; we will index labor quality by a vector Z. Minimum wages in Indonesia vary across

districts (indexed by r) and over time (indexed by t); these are available from the government. Since w is

the wage which would have prevailed in the absence of minimum wage legislation, w is normally not

observed. In addition, w is also likely to be endogenous with respect to M. Consequently, we allow w to

be captured by observables M, region, and industry dummies. Adding a measure of w based on wages for

firms which fail to comply with the minimum wage as a proxy does not in any case affect the results

reported in this paper.

      For Indonesia, there is no existing evidence on the probability of detection. It also appears that for

domestic firms in the 1980s, the penalty F for non-compliance was probably close to zero.6 However, as

human rights activism and anti-sweatshop organizations proliferated, the probability of detection and the

penalty F for paying low wages or failing to adhere to the minimum wage increased, particularly for firms

with high visibility such as large multinationals or well established exporters. The higher probability of

detection resulted from the additional scrutiny placed on these firms in the 1990s, while the higher

penalty is indicative of the greater costs to multinationals of acquiring a poor image regarding compliance


6
 In Indonesia in the mid-1990s, the dollar amount of the fine from non-compliance was fifty dollars, not a large
amount for most enterprises. See Rama (1996).


                                                                                                                   12
with labor standards. To capture the impact of anti-sweatshop campaigns on wage setting behavior, we

propose making G(F,u) a function of export status and foreign ownership, defined at the beginning of the

sample period. Consequently, we define export status EXP and foreign ownership FOR as dummy

variables equal to one if the establishment exported some of its output or had some foreign ownership in

1990 and continued to do so over the entire period.

         To capture the effect of the treatment, which in this case is the anti-sweatshop movement which

focused on the highly visible companies of Nike, Reebok, and Adidas, we create a dummy variable called

TREATMENT equal to one if both of the following are true:



         (1) The plant was producing textiles, footwear or apparel (TFA) at the beginning of the period

         (2) The plant operated in the districts which had subcontractors for Nike, Reebok, or Adidas.



         We allow the impact of activism to vary depending on whether the subcontractor is a foreign or

exporting enterprise, leading to the following specification:



Xirt =     a1 +   2Mrt   + b1EXPit0 + b2FORit0+ b3TREATMENT it0 + b4(EXP*TREATMENT) it0 +

           b5 (FOR*TREATMENT) it0 + a4Lit +        5Zirt   + rr + eit                                (3)



The vector Z includes a number of factors which could be correlated with FOR and EXP, and are likely

to affect X. This includes worker characteristics and other firm characteristics such as capital intensity.

As indicated in Figure 1, compliance is a much more serious problem for production workers.

Consequently, the results of estimating (3) will be reported primarily for production workers. Some years

in the survey include additional information on employee education and experience. When available,

these will also be included. Estimation will also take into account the possibility of region-specific effects

captured in (3) by rr.




                                                                                                           13
        To give the reader an idea of the importance of textiles, apparel, and footwear in the

manufacturing sector in Indonesia in the 1990s, Figure 6 shows the share of TFA in overall production

(unskilled worker) employment. Textiles, footwear and apparel employees increased from 25 percent to

account for 35 percent of all unskilled workers in manufacturing employment during the period. The

percentage of unskilled workers employed by foreign TFA plants rose from 2 percent to over 5 percent,

while the percentage of unskilled workers employed by exporting plants increased from 5 percent to

nearly 20 percent of all unskilled employment in manufacturing. This graph highlights the major

importance of textiles, apparel, and footwear plants for manufacturing employment.



III.    Wages and Anti-Sweatshop Activism in Indonesia

Data Summary

        The data for this analysis comes from the annual manufacturing survey of Indonesia collected and

compiled by the Indonesian government’s statistical agency BPS (Badan Pusat Statistik). The completion

of this survey is mandatory under Indonesian law for firms with more than 20 employees and therefore

the data captures almost the entire population of Indonesian manufacturing firms, which ranged from

approximately 13,000 in 1990 to over 18,000 in 1999. The survey includes over 400 questions in any

given year, the large majority of which remain constant although in certain periods additional questions

are included and others removed. Over the ten year period there is an average of 4.5 observations per

firm, reflecting both the fact that some firms go out of business while others enter, as well as changing

reporting requirements.

        We begin by reporting mean wages in the manufacturing sector in 1990 and 1996 (Table 1). We

focus on this period because information on export orientation was not collected before 1990, and the

financial crisis which erupted in 1997 makes any evaluations post-1996 problematic. In addition,

information on worker characteristics is only available during the mid-1990s. Since the minimum wage

applies only to base wages, we define the plant’s average wage as basic compensation (salary) divided by

the number of workers in that skill category. For the remainder of the analysis, we focus almost


                                                                                                            14
exclusively on production worker wages as a measure of unskilled wages. As indicated earlier, we have

chosen not to focus on skilled worker wages, which were on average two and a half to four times higher

than the legislated minimum wage during the 1990s (see Figure 1).

        The first column of Table 1 reports the average production worker wage in 1990 and in 1996, and

the difference between 1990 and 1996. The third row reports the difference for all plants, while the fourth

row reports the difference in wages between 1990 and 1996 only for plants which were present in both

years. All wages are reported in thousands of 1996 Indonesian rupiahs. Based on an exchange rate of

about 2,000 rupiahs to the dollar in 1996, average production worker wages in domestic enterprises

increased from about 550 US dollars to 750 US dollars between 1990 and 1996. Column (2) reports

wages for foreign owned enterprises, while column (3) reports wages for exporters. As discussed earlier,

foreign and exporting status is defined based on information at the beginning of the sample period. In

1990, firms with foreign equity paid three times the wages of domestic enterprises, averaging 1500 US

dollars per worker. By 1996, the gap had narrowed: foreign firms paid only twice as much as domestic

enterprises. Exporters also paid higher wages than firms producing solely for the domestic market: about

50 percent more in both 1990 and 1996. These significant differences in pay levels between domestic

enterprises, foreign firms, and exporters suggest very different levels of compliance with minimum

wages, even at the onset of our study.

        Rows 3 and 4 of Table 1 examine the change in wages between 1990 and 1996 while in rows 5

and 6 we report the results in logs. Across all enterprises, wages grew more quickly for domestic than for

exporting or foreign enterprises. While real wages for domestic enterprises increased by over thirty

percent, real wages for foreign or exporting enterprises grew less. Columns (4) through (6) present the

“difference-in-differences”, which is the difference in the change in wages across domestic, foreign and

exporting plants. The difference in difference between domestic and foreign or exporting enterprises is

generally negative and statistically significant, indicating faster wage growth for domestically owned,

non-exporting enterprises.




                                                                                                          15
        However, the story is completely different for firms producing textiles, footwear or apparel

(TFA). Table 1B decomposes the sample into TFA and non-TFA establishments. The first three columns

report average wages for domestic, foreign and exporting TFA plants, while the last three columns report

those same averages for non-TFA plants. Across domestic TFA and non-TFA plants, wages are

remarkably similar; although wages are slightly lower in TFA plants, the difference is not statistically

significant in 1990. These results are reassuring because they suggest that the composition of workers in

domestic TFA and non-TFA plants was not much different at the beginning of the sample period.

However, both foreign and exporting enterprises paid their unskilled workers significantly less in TFA

plants than in other sectors. In 1990, workers in foreign TFA plants were paid half as much as workers at

other foreign plants; exporters in TFA plants paid their workers 30 percent less. These large differences

may have been one factor that contributed to the focus of anti-sweatshop activists on workers in textiles,

apparel, and footwear plants.

        By 1996, the gap between TFA and non-TFA plants had narrowed considerably, particularly

among exporters. In 1996, the difference in wages between TFA and non-TFA plants amounted to only

23 dollars per employee per year; the difference—computed in column (9)—is not statistically significant.

The gap between foreign and non-foreign wages also narrowed, but by less: foreign firms continued to

pay about 1,500,000 Rupiahs or 750 dollars more per worker in total salary in1996 (see row 2, column

(8)). Although domestic TFA and non-TFA plants continued to pay similar wages, domestic TFA plants

received smaller wage increases than workers in other sectors. This suggests that the wage benefits from

anti-sweatshop activism were limited to workers in export-oriented or foreign-owned plants.

        Rows (3) and (4) report the wage growth from 1990 to 1996 in levels; rows (5) and (6) report the

wage growth in logs. The difference-in-difference, ie the difference in wage growth across TFA and non-

TFA plants, is reported in columns (7), (8) and (9). The results show that wage increases for textile and

apparel workers were significantly higher in exporting and foreign-owned establishments. Again, the

only exception is for workers in domestic plants selling only to the domestic market: in these plants,

wages for TFA workers increased by 7 percentage points less than for unskilled workers in other sectors.


                                                                                                           16
        The results in Table 1 suggest very different patterns of wage growth for textile, apparel, and

footwear plants in the 1990s. While unskilled workers in other exporting and foreign owned plants

generally received smaller wage increases than the rest of the manufacturing labor force in the 1990s, the

opposite was true for workers in textiles and apparel factories. One likely reason is that exporters and

multinational firms outside of textiles and apparel factories already paid higher wages and consequently

did not have to increase wages as much to remain in compliance with minimum wage legislation.

However, in TFA plants, unskilled wages grew 30 to 40 percent in real terms between 1990 and 1996.

        None of the means in Table 1 control for plant characteristics, which could possibly explain

differential wage growth. For example, wage growth could differ due to plant characteristics such as

changes in size, capital intensity, productivity growth, profitability, and other factors. Wages could also

differ due to differences in educational levels of workers. Table 2 presents the results of estimating

equation (3). The dependent variable is the change in the log wage between 1990 and 1996. The

minimum wage gap is defined as the log of the minimum wage in the district where the plant operated in

1996 less the log of the minimum wage in 1990. If that difference is negative, the gap is set equal to zero.

        The first row includes only ownership dummies for foreign ownership, export activities, and

participation in the treatment group, as well as interactions between TREATMENT, foreign ownership

and export orientation. Foreign ownership, export status, and sector are defined based on the beginning

of the period, to avoid endogeneity of ownership. More specifically, firms are considered to be foreign if

they were at least 10 percent foreign-owned over the entire period. Firms are considered to be exporters

if at least 10 percent of their sales were exported over the entire period. Initially we only include plants

that were present in all years of the sample, which is necessary for long-difference estimation. The results

are consistent with the difference-in-differences presented in Table 1: while wages in most foreign-owned

or exporting plants did not increase faster than in other plants, establishments in the treatment group with

foreign ownership were the exception. The coefficient on treatment for foreign enterprises varies

between .18 and .22. Controlling for the impact of minimum wage changes, the results suggest that

wages in foreign treatment plants grew from 18 to 22 percent faster than in other plants.


                                                                                                               17
        The coefficient on the minimum wage, which is equal to .67 when all controls are added, suggests

that a 1 percent increase in the real value of the minimum wage led to a .67 percent increase in the real

unskilled wage. The coefficient on the minimum wage gap is robust to the addition of a number of plant

and region controls, as the results in column (6) indicate. It is possible to add region controls because the

minimum wage is set at a level more disaggregated than that of the region: at the district level. Given a

mean value of .5 for the minimum wage gap across all enterprises included in the estimation, the

coefficient implies that minimum wage increases accounted for about a 35 percent increase in real wages.

Columns (2) through (6) in Table 2 add a number of controls to the basic specification. In the second

column we add controls for plant and worker characteristics, including log changes in real material inputs,

the real value of the reported capital stock, and plant size (defined as the total number of employees). We

also add details on educational attainment for employees at the individual plant. In the years 1995

through 1997, the survey included questions regarding the educational attainment of the plant’s labor

force. The addition of plant characteristics and controls for educational attainment does not change the

magnitude and significance of the coefficients on Foreign*TREATMENT or the minimum wage.

        The next four columns add region controls, total factor productivity, technology expenditures,

and output growth. There are several alternative explanations for the increase in wages for foreign

enterprises: first, foreign owners may have invested in plants with higher productivity; previous studies

suggest that foreign ownership is associated with higher productivity. Consequently, we redo the

analysis, controlling for plant-level productivity growth, using total factor productivity growth (TFPG) as

our measure of productivity. Second, foreign owned enterprises might have experienced a positive

demand shock relative to other enterprises. The addition of productivity growth and output growth

controls for this possibility. Third, wages in foreign TREATMENT plants might have increased due to

investments in new technology; adding technology expenditures controls for this possibility. The results

are robust to the inclusion of all these controls.

        Column (7) tests whether firms cut non-wage benefits to offset the higher wages induced by

minimum wage changes and activist pressure. The results show that although foreign firms and exporters


                                                                                                            18
offset wage increases with reductions in non-wage benefits, treatment firms did not. The coefficients on

Foreign*TREATMENT and Exporting*TREATMENT are zero and not significant. However, exporters

in general did partially compensate for higher wages by cutting non-wage benefits. Exporters cut non-

wage benefits by seventy-six percent, suggesting that firms did respond to increasing minimum wages by

cutting other benefits. Column (8) reports the results when wages and non-wage benefits are added

together. Since wages account for most of the income for unskilled workers, the results are very similar

in magnitude to those reported in the first six columns of the table.

        Column (9) of Table 2 restricts the sample to large plants (with at least 100 employees) producing

only textiles, apparel or footwear products. This sample allows us to compare the evolution of wages for

plants of a similar size, producing the same types of goods. If unobserved output or price shocks

differentially affected this sector, then we can achieve identification by only comparing plants producing

the same types of goods in districts with and without Nike subcontractors. The results are robust to this

additional test: again, wages in the affected districts increased by twenty percentage points more in real

terms than in other districts, after controlling for minimum wage increases, plant and worker

characteristics, output growth, and technical change. Finally, column (10) reports the results of

estimating the same specification for non-production workers. If an unobserved positive demand shock

led textile and apparel workers in the treatment districts to increase wages, we should observe the same

wage increase for skilled workers in these factories. The results in column (10) show that this is not the

case. There were no significant wage increases for skilled workers in exporting or foreign enterprises in

treatment districts.

        Table 3 presents additional robustness tests. The first three columns replace the dummy variable

for textiles, apparel, and footwear (TFA) plants with other sectors, including chemical products (column

(1)), wood products (column (2)), and fabricated metal enterprises (column (3)). In contrast to TFA

employers in the affected districts, foreign and exporting employers from other sectors who operated in

the treatment districts exhibited significantly lower wage growth than other similar plants. In column (4),

we randomize the treatment districts. If the treatment district is assigned at random, instead of only


                                                                                                             19
targeting those districts with Nike subcontractors, there is no longer any evidence of positive wage

pressure. The coefficient on the treatment dummy, as well as the treatment interacted with foreign or

exporter, is close to zero in magnitude and statistically insignificant. The first four columns of Table 3

indicate that the significant effects of activism are restricted to only plants in the textiles, apparel, and

footwear industry operating in those districts where there was anti-sweatshop activity.

        We perform one more test of robustness using nonlinear matching techniques. While a number of

approaches are possible for estimating treatment effects using non-linear matching techniques, we adopt a

procedure using nearest neighbor matching as outlined by Abadie, Drukker, Herr, and Imbens (2004).

This approach allows us estimate average treatment effects of anti-sweatshop activism on wage growth,

using as controls those firms which match most closely those firms that have been treated. To identify the

most appropriate control group (the “nearest neighbor”), one must specify a list of covariates. For the

treatment effects reported in Table 3, we included as our set of covariates all the controls reported in the

first six columns of Table 2. Enterprises in the control group were matched to the treatment group on the

basis of minimum wage changes, size, output growth, growth in capital stock, growth in material inputs,

province, educational attainment of the work force, productivity growth, and expenditure on research and

development.

        It is not possible in the context of matching estimation to allow for multiple treatment effects

simultaneously. Consequently, in columns (5) and (7) we estimate the impact of treatment on wage

growth for foreign TFA plants in the districts with anti-sweatshop activism, but we cannot use nonlinear

matching techniques to simultaneously measure the impact of foreign ownership, export activity, and

treatment districts on wage growth, as we did in the OLS specifications. Nevertheless, the results in

Table 2 show that the coefficients on ownership, export status and TREATMENT status alone are

insignificant in explaining wage growth between 1990 and 1996 once we add the full set of controls.

Consequently, estimating the impact of TREATMENT*Foreign should not be biased due to the omission

of separate effects for TREATMENT or Foreign. We use the same approach in columns (6) and (8) to

measure the impact of treatment on TFA exporters. The impact of activism on wages estimated using


                                                                                                                20
nonlinear matching is remarkably similar to the OLS results reported in Table 2. Anti-sweatshop activism

raised wages between 19 and 27 percent in real terms, which is consistent with the magnitudes reported

earlier. The results are comparable whether we include all plants as possible controls (columns 5 and 6),

or restrict the treatment and the control group to textiles, apparel, and footwear only (columns 7 and 8).

        The results in Tables 1 through 3 suggest that wages increased systematically more for exporting

and foreign TFA plants in treatment districts relative to other plants with similar characteristics. In

addition to the 35 percent increase in real wages induced by the minimum wage changes, real wages rose

an additional twenty to twenty five percent more between 1990 and 1996 for TFA exporters. This

suggests that combined effects of the minimum wage legislation and the anti-sweatshop campaigns led a

more than 50 percent increase in real wages and a doubling in nominal wages for unskilled workers in

targeted exporting or foreign plants (see Appendix Table 1.A for real versus nominal values). Below, we

explore whether these wage gains had other possibly adverse effects. For example, these wage gains may

have led to employment losses and falling investment, or caused plants to shut down operations in

Indonesia.



IV Other Outcomes: Employment, Profits, Investment, Entry and Exit

        Employment The orthodox approach to minimum wages suggests that an increase in mandated

wages should lead to a fall in employment, as employers are driven up their labor demand curve. Prior to

the 1990s, standard textbook treatments of minimum wages reported that imposing a wage floor would

lead to adverse consequences for employment. However, a series of influential studies (1994, 1995)

published by David Card and Alan Krueger in the 1990s changed the debate on the employment effects of

minimum wages. In their book, Myth and Measurement: The New Economics of the Minimum Wage,

Card and Krueger argue that the imposition of a minimum wage need not have negative employment

consequences if there are imperfections in the labor market. These imperfections include the following

possibilities: (1) the existence of monopsony employers (2) search costs for employers and (3) efficiency

wages. If any of these three imperfections characterize the local labor market, an increase in the


                                                                                                             21
minimum wage (or an increase in compliance with the existing minimum wage) could lead to an increase

or no change in employment. Card and Krueger document this with a series of papers which examine

exogenous increases in minimum wages across US states.

        This unorthodox finding, which has caused an enormous debate among labor economists, has

interesting implications for labor market policies in developing countries. If policy makers can raise

wages by increasing the statutory minimum or encouraging compliance with the existing minimum

without increasing unemployment, then minimum wage policies could become a powerful tool for

combating poverty. This was precisely the thinking behind a 1995 World Bank Report which strongly

recommended the introduction of a national minimum wage to reduce poverty in Trinidad and Tobago.

        One consequence of this debate in the United States has been to encourage a number of new

studies on the impact of minimum wages on employment in developing countries. Strobl and Walsh

(2000) examine the impact of a national minimum wage introduced in Trinidad and Tobago in 1998, Bell

(1997) examines the impact of minimum wages in Columbia and Mexico, and Maloney and Nunez (2000)

examine the impact of minimum wages in eight Latin American countries. Rama (1999) and SMERU

(2001) also examine the impact of the rising minimum wage on employment in Indonesia.

        The results are mixed. For example, Bell (1997) finds that minimum wages in Columbia led to

employment declines, while the minimum wage in Mexico had no impact on employment. Strobl and

Walsh (2000) find inconclusive effects for Trinidad and Tobago, in part because the minimum wage was

not enforced. All these studies uncover widespread evidence of lack of compliance. In Honduras, for

example, which has a very high minimum wage relative to average wages, the minimum wage appears to

have had no impact on the wage distribution.

        In Table 4, we repeat the type of analysis presented in Table 1 and use the difference-in-

differences (DID) approach adopted by Card and Krueger (1995) to examine the impact of minimum

wages on employment in Indonesia. We focus on the changes in employment between 1990 and 1996,

which was the period of the large rise in both the magnitude and compliance with the minimum wage.

The first column reports the number of production workers in 1990 and in 1996, and the difference


                                                                                                         22
between 1990 and 1996. The third row reports the difference for all plants, while the fourth row reports

the difference in employment between 1990 and 1996 only for plants with data on employment in both

years. Across domestic enterprises, the mean number of employees fell slightly, from an average of 69

employees per plant to an average of 67 employees per plant. Columns (2) and (3) show that employment

growth for unskilled workers was concentrated in foreign-owned and exporting enterprises. Between

1990 and 1996, average unskilled employment increased from 360 workers to 507 workers per plant for

foreign enterprises. For exporters, plants which remained in the sample the whole period gained 200

employees on average, while those that entered later or exited the sample lost employees. For the

balanced sample, reported in rows (4) and (6), employment gains were significantly higher among the

foreign owned and exporting enterprises. Across all enterprises (reported in rows 3 and 5), domestic

plants lost employment while foreign plants gained employment.

        The bottom half of Table 4 reports those same differences for TFA and non-TFA plants. As in

the earlier DID calculations, columns (7) through (9) report the “difference-in-differences”, which is the

difference in the change in employment across TFA and non-TFA firms between 1990 and 1996. As

indicated in the bottom half of Table 4, the difference-in-differences is positive, suggesting that compared

to the change in employment across other types of enterprises between 1990 and 1996, the change in

employment for exporting or foreign TFA plants was larger. Focusing on rows (3) and (4) and columns

(8) and (9), we see that exporting and foreign TFA plants increased employment by 300 to 400 workers

more than other plants. The results in Table 4 suggest that increased vigilance vis-à-vis textiles and

apparel enterprises did not appear to hurt their employment, at least relative to growth in employment of

other types of enterprises.

        Table 5 repeats the analysis in a regression context. With or without controls, the results are

consistent across specifications. There is no evidence that the differential wage increases for

multinationals and exporters in the treatment group led to employment declines. The coefficients on

Foreign*TREATMENT and Exporting*TREATMENT are positive and sometimes significant. There is

no evidence that higher wage growth negatively affected employment in foreign enterprises, exporting


                                                                                                           23
enterprises, or textiles and apparel producers. In fact, it is clear from the tables that employment growth

was generally higher for exporters and foreign enterprises, including those operating in districts where

anti-sweatshop activists targeted Nike, Reebok, and Adidas subcontractors.

    However, the results in Table 5 show a robust and negative impact of the minimum wage increase on

employment growth. In column (1), the coefficient on the minimum wage increase is -.14, which

suggests that a 100 percentage point increase in the minimum wage would be accompanied by a 14

percentage point decline in employment. The different specifications presented in columns (2) through

(7) suggest that a 100 percentage point increase in the real minimum wage would be accompanied by

employment declines of 12 to 18 percent. In light of the fact that mean increase in the real minimum

wage gap for the plants included in the sample was over 50 percent, these employment responses

represent very important effects. The only enterprises not affected by the rising minimum were small

plants, defined as enterprises with fewer than 100 employees, where rates of compliance with the

legislation were much lower. The significant negative impact on employment for larger enterprises needs

to be seriously considered in any campaign to increase the mandated minimum wage or to increase

compliance with the minimum wage.7

     As a final check, we redo the analysis of employment using annual data instead of the long difference

panel. We include both the balanced panel (in column (9)) and the unbalanced panel (column(8)). As

before, there are no significant effects of anti-sweatshop activism on employment changes from year to

year. The negative and significant impact of the minimum wage on employment is consistent with the

long difference results, suggesting a fall in employment of almost one percentage point per year due to

minimum wage increases alone.

    Our results suggest that while minimum wage increases generated employment losses across all of

manufacturing, anti-sweatshop activism targeted at textiles, apparel, and footwear did not. Trends in

aggregate employment for TFA and non-TFA firms confirm this. In Figure 7, we show total unskilled

    7
      Indonesia, however, is an unusual case: most countries do not experience 100 percent real increases in the
value of the minimum wage over a five year period.



                                                                                                                   24
employment in Indonesia during the sample period. Employment growth for the textiles, apparel, and

footwear sector clearly mirrors the rest of the manufacturing sector; in fact, employment growth was more

robust during 1990 through 1996. These aggregate trends are consistent with the regression results

reported in Table 5.

        Output Growth, Investment, Productivity, and Profits                The evidence in Tables 1

through 5 points to strong positive effects of anti-sweatshop campaigns on wage growth for production

workers, with no adverse consequences for employment. If wages grew but employment was unaffected,

we would expect that output would not have been affected either. We would, however, expect profits to

be adversely affected. Table 6 shows that this is the case. While output growth for the treatment group

was not significantly different than other enterprises, profits were significantly and negatively affected.

Growth in profitability for foreign textiles and apparel firms in the treatment districts was 14 to 16

percentage points (of value-added) lower than for other similar plants. Lower growth in profits appeared

to be linked to lower growth in capital stock, at least for foreign TFA plants in treatment districts. These

same plants also exhibited lower productivity growth.

        The last two columns of Table 5 seek to disentangle the extent to which the treatment group was

associated with higher wage growth simply because those firms exhibited higher compliance with the

rising minimum wage. To do this, we add a triple interaction term between foreign, TREATMENT, and

the minimum wage gap. If all of the impact of activism was to increase compliance with the minimum

wage, then this interaction term should capture that effect and the coefficient on foreign*TREATMENT

should become small in magnitude and insignificant. The results in column (9) show that this is not the

case. The coefficient on foreign*TREATMENT remains significant and the magnitude does not change,

indicating that there is an independent impact of activism on wage growth apart from minimum wage

compliance. Although the coefficient on the triple interaction is large in magnitude, it is not significant,

indicating that there was also likely to have been higher compliance with the existing minimum wage

associated with treatment. In column (10) we add the triple interaction to the standard employment




                                                                                                              25
regressions from Table 5. Again, the inclusion of the additional term does not affect the results,

suggesting that while activism was associated with additional wage growth it was not associated with

greater employment declines, or with falling employment stemming from more vigilant compliance with

the minimum wage.

        Exit and Entry Finally, in Table 7 we explore whether the pressures imposed by anti-sweatshop

activists have induced more firms to close down operations and exit the sector or discouraged entry. We

estimate the probability of exit in period t+1 as a function of plant and worker characteristics in period t,

using annual data from 1988 through 1996. If the pressures imposed by either higher minimum wages or

anti-sweatshop activities led to higher exit or relocation abroad, then the benefits of higher wages could

be offset by a higher probability of job loss. We begin with the whole sample, with results from a probit

estimation of the likelihood of exit reported in column (1) of Table 7. For the whole sample, there is no

evidence that exporters or foreign firms in districts with anti-sweatshop activism are more likely to shut

down. In fact, foreign plants in general are less likely to exit. Foreign plants producing textiles and

apparel sectors and located in the treatment districts are also less likely to exit: 2 percent less likely than

other plants. These lower probabilities of exit for foreign enterprises are consistent with the unconditional

exit probabilities depicted in Figure 8, which do not control for plant characteristics. However, higher

minimum wages did increase the probability of exit, with a 10 percent increase in the real minimum wage

leading to a higher probability of plant exit by .8 percent.

    In a recent paper, Bernard and Sjoholm (2004) point out that not taking into account the size of a

plant is misleading, because small plants are much more likely to exit than large plants. In particular,

they point out that in the Indonesian data, plants with less than 20 workers were eliminated from the

sample after 1989, changing the composition of the sample in favor of larger plants, which are less likely

to exit. One possibility is that exporters and foreign plants in textiles and apparel are less likely to exit

because they are significantly larger than other plants. To address this possibility, in the second column

we only include plants with at least 100 workers. The coefficients are unaffected; foreign firms in the




                                                                                                                26
treatment group were significantly less likely to exit during the sample period. Minimum wages have

about the same impact as before, raising exit probabilities significantly.

         Interestingly, our results are somewhat different from Bernard and Sjoholm (2004), who find

that foreign plants in Indonesia are more footloose than other plants. Our results suggest that foreign

plants are less footloose. This could be because the number of foreign enterprises in Indonesia in the

1980s—Bernard and Sjoholm examine data which ends in 1989—was small and consequently a few

plants could lead to large rates of entry and exit. Our data focuses on the 1990s, when there were more

foreign plants in Indonesia.

     In column (3) we turn to an analysis of plants with less than 100 employees. In general, small

exporters are 4 percentage points more likely to exit than small large firms. However, there is no

evidence that smaller plants operating in districts with anti-sweatshop activism were more likely to close.

In columns (4) and (5), we restrict the sample to plants producing only textiles, footwear and apparel.

The results are unaffected. The next 5 columns remove controls for worker characteristics. Since worker

characteristics are only recorded for three years in the 1990s, including worker characteristics restricts the

sample to firms that either do not exit or that exit after 1995, when worker characteristics were first

recorded. In this larger sample, the evidence is consistent with lower probability of exit for foreign

enterprises, including both TFA and non-TFA foreign plants. While all foreign enterprises were less

likely to exit than other enterprises during the sample period, foreign TFA plants operating in districts

with anti-sweatshop activity where even less likely to exit than other foreign plants. These results are

again consistent with the unconditional exit probabilities evident for plants with foreign participation, as

indicated in Figure 8.

        However, in this larger sample, the evidence is consistent with higher exit probabilities for

exporters in the treatment group. While exporters in general were not more likely to exit, exporters

operating in the treatment districts were significantly more likely to exit, with a 3 percent higher

probability of exiting compared to other enterprises. If the sample is restricted to exporters with fewer

than 100 employees, the differential is even larger. Exporters of textiles and apparel products in the


                                                                                                            27
treatment districts were 10 percent more likely to exit during this period, a significantly higher probability

of exit which is consistent with the unconditional exit probabilities depicted in Figure 8.

        One possibility is that TFA exporters are simply are more volatile, exhibiting higher rates of entry

as well. Figure 9 shows that this is not the case. During the 1990s, not only were TFA plants more likely

to exit, but entry rates also dropped as well. As indicated in Figure 9, higher rates of entry by TFA plants

in the late 1980s than other plants were followed by a fall in entry rates, which by the end of the 1990s

were comparable to non-TFA plants. Other probit regressions (not shown) confirms that there was less

entry into textiles and apparel, particularly among exporters. If entry fell and exit rates rose for exporting

TFA plants, how can we account for the fact that total employment in TFA plants did not fall? In other

words, how can we explain that TFA unskilled employment as a percentage of total manufacturing

employment increased at the same time that exit became proportionately higher? The reason, as shown in

Table 4, is that remaining TFA plants--particularly exporters and foreign-owned plants—increased

unskilled employment by as much as fifty percent. Employment increases within surviving plants

compensated for higher exit by some TFA enterprises.



V. Conclusion



        During the 1990s, anti-sweatshop activists increased their efforts to improve working conditions

and raise wages for workers in developing countries. Indonesia, which had more Nike subcontractors

than any other country apart from China, was a primary target for these activists. At the same time, the

Indonesian government (prompted by the U.S. government) greatly increased the minimum wage

throughout Indonesia. This paper analyzes the impact of these two different types of interventions on

labor market outcomes in Indonesian manufacturing. The results suggest that the more than doubling of

the real value of the minimum wage resulted in a 35 percent increase in real wages for unskilled workers

between 1990 and 1996. The anti-sweatshop campaigns also had a significant impact on wages. Our




                                                                                                            28
research suggests that unskilled real wages increased by an additional 20 percent for exporters and

multinational plants in sweatshop industries, defined as textiles, footwear, and apparel (TFA).

         The combined effects of the minimum wage legislation and the anti-sweatshop campaigns led to

more than a 50 percent increase in real wages and a doubling of nominal wages for unskilled workers at

targeted exporting plants. One question which naturally arises is how this could possibly be achieved

without adverse consequences for employment.8 We examine whether these higher wages led firms to

cut employment or shut down operations. Our results suggest that the minimum wage increases led to

employment losses of as much as 10 percentage points for unskilled workers across all sectors in

manufacturing. Surprisingly, however, anti-sweatshop activism did not have significant adverse effects on

employment in the TFA sectors. The fact that wages soared and employment remained steady in textiles

and apparel suggests that the anti-sweatshop movement had a positive impact on workers in these

factories. The different impact of these two approaches to addressing labor market conditions suggests

that anti-sweatshop activism in Indonesia was a “win-win” situation. Despite the rising labor costs during

this period, increased market demand for textile, footwear, and apparel products led to net employment

increases in foreign and exporting firms.

         Since our study focuses on a relatively small time period, such gains could be temporary. Foreign

firms such as Nike have already begun shifting production to other low-wage countries throughout

Southeast Asia, such as China, Vietnam, and Cambodia. It also remains an open question as to whether

activism targeted at other sectors in Indonesia could be as successful. Wages in apparel and garment

factories were very low prior to the onset of the anti-sweatshop campaigns. This meant that

subcontractors for Nike were able to implement significant wage increases before even approaching the

average wages across the Indonesian manufacturing sector. One implication is that anti-sweatshop

activists correctly targeted some of the lowest paid workers in the country. Another key consideration is

8
   It is important to keep in mind that for a well-known brand name such as Nike, labor costs from developing
country factories in 1998 only accounted for about 4 percent of the total cost of a ninety dollar shoe. The internet
link is http://cbae.nmsu.edu/~dboje/NIKfaqcompensation.html This interview with Nike is from 1998, but is no
longer part of Nike’s “official” website.



                                                                                                                       29
that many of the goods produced in Indonesia’s TFA sectors ultimately end up in expensive retail markets

in the U.S. and the EU, where profit margins are relatively large, brand identity is paramount, and the

firms clearly have the financial resources with which to improve both labor conditions in their factories9.

In industries where more firms compete for market share, where profit margins are smaller, and there is

no brand recognition, anti-sweatshop campaigns may not be as effective.




9
 One only needs to witness the many millions of dollars Nike has spent on trying to improve worker conditions as
well as the money it has spent on public relations campaigns to improve its image. Nike employs 85 people full-time




                                                                                                                30
                                                 Bibliography


Aitken, Brian, Ann Harrison and Robert Lipsey, "Wages and Foreign Ownership: A Comparative
        Study of Mexico, Venezuela, and the United States", Journal of International Economics,
        May 1996, Vol. 40, Nos. 3/4, pages 345-371.

Ashenfelter, Orley and Smith, Robert S, “Compliance with Minimum Wage Law”, The Journal of
       Political Economy, April 1979, Vol. 87, No. 2, pages 333-350.

Bell, Linda (1997), “The Impact of Minimum Wages in Mexico and Columbia”, Journal of Labor
        Economics, 15(3), pt.2., pp. S102-S135.

Bernard, Andrew, and Fredrik Sjoholm, (2004), “Foreign Onwers and Plant Survival”, NBER Working
       Paper Number 10039.

Card, David. and Alan Krueger (1994), “Minimum Wages and Employment: A Case Study of the Fast-
       Food Industry in New Jersey and Pennsylvania”, American Economic Review, 84(4), September,
       pp 772-793.

Chau, Nancy H. and Kanbur, Ravi, “The Adoption of International Labor Standard Conventions: Who,
       When, and Why?” in Brookings Trade Forum 2001 (Rodrik, Dani and Collins, Susan M. eds),
       The Brookings Institution, Washington D.C., 2002.

Currie, Janet and Ann Harrison, “Sharing the Costs: The Impact of Trade Reform on Capital and Labor in
        Morocco”, The Journal of Labor Economics, 1997, Vol 15, No. 3.

Edmonds, Eric and Nina Pavcnik, “Does Globalization Increase Child Labor? Evidence from
      Vietnam”,Working Paper, Dartmouth College, 2001.

Elliott, Kimberly Ann (1998a), “Preferences for Workers? Worker Rights and the US Generalized
         System of Preferences”, Institute for International Economics.

Elliott, Kimberly Ann (1998b), “International Labor Standards and Trade: What Should Be Done?” in
         Launching New Global Trade Talks: An Action Agenda, Jeffrey Schott, editor. Washington:
          Institute for International Economics

Elliott, Kimberly Ann and Richard Freeman (2003), CWCan Labor Standards Improve Under
         Globalization? Washington, DC: Institute for International Economics.

Eskeland, Gunnar, and Ann Harrison, “Moving to Greener Pastures? Multinationals and the Pollution
       Haven Hypothesis”, Journal of Development Economics, 2003.

Harrison, Ann and Scorse, Jason, “Do Foreign Firms Pay More: Evidence from the Indonesian
        Manufacturing Sector 1990-1999”, Working Paper, UC-Berkeley, 2003.

Maskus, Keith, “Should Core Labor Standards be Imposed Through International Trade Policy?”,
       Working Paper, World Bank, 1996.

to maintain Nike’s compliance with environmental and labor standards in the countries where Nike operates and
Nike workers inspect apparel and footwear factories on a daily or weekly basis (Locke 2003).


                                                                                                                31
Rama, Martin, “The Consequences of Doubling the Minimum Wage: The Case of Indonesia”, World
      Bank working Paper, 1996.

SMERU Research Report, Wage and Employment Effects of Minimum Wage Policy in the Indonesian
     Urban Labor Market, SMERU Research Report, SMERU Research Institute, Indonesia,
     October 2001.

Strobl, Eric and Frank Walsh, “Minimum Wages and Compliance: The Case of Trinidad and Tobago”,
         University College Dublin, Working Paper, 2000.

Udomsaph, Charles, “Premiums to Employment in Establishments with Foreign Direct Investment:
      Evidence from Thai manufacturing”, Working Paper, UC-Berkeley, 2002.




                                                                                                 32
                                                        Figure 1: Average Wages with Respect to the Minimum Wage & Minimum Wage Compliance
                                                                                        In Indonesia 1990-1999

                                            9



                                            8



                                            7
  Ratio of Wage:Min Wage/% Compliance




                                                                                                                                 Ratio of Average Production Wage to Minimum Wage
                                            6
                                                                                                                                 Ratio of Average Non-Production Wage to Minimum
                                                                                                                                 Wage
                                            5
                                                                                                                                 Average Compliance wih the Minimum Wage Law for
                                                                                                                                 Production Workers
                                            4                                                                                    Average Compliance with the Minimum Wage Law for
                                                                                                                                 Non-Production Workers

                                            3                                                                                    Average Minimum Wage (Nominal: Indexed wrt 1985)


                                                                                                                                 Average Minimum Wage (Real: Indexed wrt 1985)
                                            2



                                            1



                                            0
                                                 1985 1986 1987 1988 1989 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999
                                                                                   Year




                                                                Figure 2: Articles about "sweatshops" and "child labor" in
                                                                               Major Newspapers 1990-1999

                                            1200
Number of Articles (*Lexus maxes at 1000)




                                            1000



                                                800


                                                                                                                                           Sweatshop Articles
                                                600
                                                                                                                                           Child Labor Articles


                                                400



                                                200



                                                  0
                                                      1990     1991    1992     1993      1994   1995      1996   1997    1998   1999
                                                                                       Source:LexisNexis




                                                                                                                                                                      33
                                                                         Ratio
               Ju Ja
                 ly n-
                   -S M
                     ep ar
                       t c
               Ju Ja em h 1




                                     0
                                         0.01
                                                0.02
                                                       0.03
                                                              0.04
                                                                                   0.05
                                                                                                                0.06
                                                                                                                       0.07
                                                                                                                              0.08
                                                                                                                                     0.09
                                                                                                                                            0.1
                 ly- n- be 99
                    Se Ma r 1 0
                      pt rc 99
               Ju Ja em h 1 0
                 ly n- be 99
                   -S M r 1
                     ep ar 19
                       t c 9
               Ju Ja em h 1 1
                 ly n- be 99
                   -S M r 2
                     ep ar 19
                       t c 9
               Ju Ja em h 1 2
                 ly- n- be 99
                    Se Ma r 1 3
                      pt rc 99
               Ju Ja em h 1 3
                 ly n- be 99
                   -S M r 4
                     ep ar 19
                       t c 9
               Ju Ja em h 1 4
                 ly n- be 99
                   -S M r 5
                     ep ar 19
                       t c 9
               Ju Ja em h 1 5
                 ly- n- be 99
                    Se Ma r 1 6
                      pt rc 99
               Ju Ja em h 1 6
                 ly n- be 99
                   -S M r 7
                     ep ar 19




     Quarter
                       t c 9
               Ju Ja em h 1 7
                 ly n- be 99
                   -S M r 8
                     ep ar 19
                       t c 9
               Ju Ja em h 1 8
                 ly n- be 99
                   -S M r 9
                     ep ar 19
                       t c 9
               Ju Ja em h 2 9
                 ly n- be 00
                   -S M r 0
                     ep ar 20
                       t c 0
               Ju Ja em h 2 0
                 ly n- be 00
                   -S M r 1
                     ep ar 20
                       t c 0
                                                                                                                                                                  3 Period Moving Average (Source: LexisNexis)




               Ju Ja em h 2 1
                 ly n- be 00
                   -S M r 2
                                                                                                                                                               Other Articles on the Indonesian Economy in the NYT




                     ep ar 20
                       te ch 02
                         m 2
                          be 00
                            r2 3
                              00
                                 3
                                                                                                                                             Figure 3: Percentage of Articles on Sweatshops or Child Labor in Indonesia Relative to all




                                                                                          Child Labor:Economy
                                                                     Sweatshop: Economy




34
                                               Low Minimum Wages                      High Min imum Wages                                                                                                      Low Minimum Wages                         High Min imum Wages

                               290000                                                                                                                                                          3.94558




                                                                                                                      M o n th ly M i n i m u m W a g e N o r m a l i z e d to 1 i n 1 9 8 8
R u p i a h s P e r M o n th




                                39000                                                                                                                                                                1
                                        88    89   90    91    92    93          94   95    96     97       98   99                                                                                      88   89   90    91        92   93          94   95    96     97       98   99
                                                                          year                                                                                                                                                               year
                Minimum Wages for Districts with Highest and Lowest Absolute Changes Minimum Wages for Districts with Highest and Lowest Absolute Changes
                                               Low Minimum Wages                      High Min imum Wages                                                                                                      Low Minimum Wages                         High Min imum Wages

                               230000                                                                                                                                                           11.358
                                                                                                                      M o n th ly M i n i m u m W a g e N o r m a l i z e d to 1 i n 1 9 8 5
R u p i a h s P e r M o n th




                                20250                                                                                                                                                                1
                                        85 86 87 88 89 90 91 92 93 94 95 96 97 98 99                                                                                                                     85 86 87 88 89 90 91 92 93 94 95 96 97 98 99
                                                             year                                                                                                                                                             year
                       Minimum Wages for Districts with Highest/Lowest Percentage Changes                                                                                      Minimum Wages for Districts with Highest/Lowest Percentage Changes

                                             Trends in the Statutory Minimum Wage Across Four Districts

                                                                    Figure 4: Trends in the Indonesian Minimum Wage
                                                                        In Low and High Minimum Wage Disticts




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         35
Figure 5: Wage Distributions in Foreign and Exporting Firms in Treatment and Non-Treatment Districts


                       For or ExpTreatment TFA v. For or Exp Non-Treatment TFA
       1.5
kdensity logwageprod
   .5  0        1




                       10             12               14               16                  18
                                                      x
                            Treatment For or Exp 1990        Treatment For or Exp 1996
                            Non-Treatment For or Exp 1990    Non-Treatment For or Exp 1996




                                                                                                   36
                                                                  Figure 6: Share of Total Production Workers Employed in Foreign and Exporting TFA in
                                                                                                    Indonesia 1988-1996
                                                             40


                                                             35


                                                             30
                             % of Total Production Workers




                                                             25


                                                             20


                                                             15
                                                                                                                                        Percentage of Production Workers in
                                                                                                                                        Foreign Owned TFA
                                                             10                                                                         Percentage of Production Workers in
                                                                                                                                        Exporting TFA
                                                                                                                                        Percentage of Production Workers in All
                                                             5                                                                          TFA Firms


                                                             0
                                                                   1988   1989   1990   1991    1992    1993   1994   1995   1996
                                                                                                 Year




                                                                                 Figure 7: Total Production Worker Employment 1988-1999


                            3500000                                                                                                 800000



                                                                                                                                    700000
                            3000000


                                                                                                                                    600000
                            2500000
# of Workers (Series 1-2)




                                                                                                                                                                      All Firms
                                                                                                                                             # Workers (Series 3-6)




                                                                                                                                    500000
                                                                                                                                                                      Non-TFA
                            2000000
                                                                                                                                                                      Foreign Owned Non-TFA
                                                                                                                                    400000                            Exporting Non-TFA
                                                                                                                                                                      Domestic Non-Exporting TFA
                            1500000
                                                                                                                                                                      Foreign TFA
                                                                                                                                    300000                            Exporting TFA

                            1000000
                                                                                                                                    200000


                            500000
                                                                                                                                    100000



                                                             0                                                                      0
                                                                  1988 1989 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999
                                                                                               Years




                                                                                                                                                                                                   37
                                                          Figure 8: Percentage of Firms Exiting in Years 1988-1999


                               35




                               30




                               25



                                                                                                                              All Firms
                               20                                                                                             Foreign Firms
% exiting




                                                                                                                              Exporting Firms
                                                                                                                              Foreign TFA
                               15                                                                                             Exporting TFA
                                                                                                                              Domestic Non-Exporting TFA


                               10




                               5




                               0
                                    1988   1989    1990      1991      1992          1993      1994     1995    1996   1997




                                                      Figure 9: Percentage of Firms Entering In Years 1989-1997


                               45


                               40


                               35
Percentage of Firms Entering




                               30
                                                                                                                              All Firms
                                                                                                                              Always Foreign
                               25
                                                                                                                              Always Exporting
                                                                                                                              Always Foreign TFA
                               20                                                                                             Always Exporting TFA
                                                                                                                              Domestic Non-Exporting TFA

                               15


                               10


                               5


                               0
                                    1989    1990     1991       1992          1993          1994      1995     1996    1997
                                                                          Years




                                                                                                                                                           38
                            Table 1A: Average Production Worker Wages per Establishment in 1990 and 1996
                                    In Thousands of 1996 Indonesian Rupiahs (Standard Errors in ())

                                               Ownership Status                                                  Difference
                                                     Always                 Always
                             Domestic (a)                                                          (2) – (1)          (3)-(1)         (2)-(3)
                                                    Foreign (b)           Exporting (c)
                                     (1)                (2)                   (3)                    (4)                (5)               (6)

1. Mean Wage in 1990,
                                 1123.3                3270.3                 1831.8               2146.9              708.5          1438.4
   All Available
                                 (11.1)                (157.3)                (85.0)               (62.7)              (47.7)         (164.2)
   Observations

2. Mean Wage in 1996,
   All Available                 1532.5                3495.1                 2115.0               1962.7              582.5          1380.1
   Observations                  (12.3)                (113.3)                (48.0)               (54.3)              (36.5)         (104.9)

3. Change in Mean
                                 409.2                  224.9                 283.2                  -184               -126            -58
   Wage, 1990-1996
                                 (17.1)                (203.0)                (96.2)                (62.7)             (47.7)         (164.3)
4. Change in Mean
                                 370.2                  776.1                  302.9                405.9              -67.3           473.2
   Wage, Balanced
                                 (22.8)                (273.3)                (111.5)               (81.1)             (54.3)         (194.1)
   Sample (d)
5. Mean Change in Log              .36                   .11                    .18                  -.25              -.18             -.07
   Wage, 1990-1996                (.01)                 (.05)                  (.03)                (.04)              (.03)           (.05)

6. Mean Change in Log              .30                   .24                    .20                  -.06               -.1             .04
   Wage, Balanced                 (.02)                 (.06)                  (.04)                (.04)              (.03)           (.05)
   Sample (d)

                     Table 1B: Production Worker Wages: Separating Out Textiles, Footwear, and Apparel (TFA)
                                     Textiles, Apparel, and Footwear
                                                                                               Other Establishments                             Difference
                                              Establishments
                                               Always             Always                            Always       Always
                               Domestic                                           Domestic
                                               Foreign           Exporting                          Foreign     Exporting        (1)-(4)          (2)-(5)          (3)-(6)
                                 (a)                                                (a)
                                                 (b)                (c)                               (b)          (c)
                               (1)            (2)               (3)              (4)                (5)        (6)              (7)             (8)            (9)

                                 1078.2         1775.1            1462.4           1134.2            3560.8       1934.6          56.0           -1805.6            -472.2
 1. Mean Wage in 1990,           (15.5)         (112.1)           (122.8)          (13.2)            (182.1)      (102.7)        (27.9)          (419.1)           (205.2)
    All Observations
 2. Mean Wage in 1996,           1441.2         2268.8            2079.2           1552.4            3798.6       2125.2         -111.1          -1529.7            -46.0
    All Observations             (19.6)          (79.2)           (100.0)          (14.4)            (137.8)       (54.6)        (32.1)          (280.0)           (115.6)
 3. Change in Mean               363.0           513.7             616.8            418.1             237.8        190.6          -54.9           275.9             426.2
    Wage, 1990-1996              (25.7)         (151.2)           (187.1)          (20.2)            (241.1)      (111.2)        (36.7)          (497.6)           (188.5)
 4. Change in Mean Wage
                                 349.4           740.1             474.2               374.7          814.9        259.4          -25.3           -74.8             214.8
    Wage, Balanced               (33.4)         (196.3)           (170.0)              (26.6)        (318.8)      (135.2)        (47.4)          (497.6)           (188.5)
    Sample (d)
 5. Mean Change in Log                .30            .29               .40              .37            .08             .13        -.07                 .21            .27
    Wage, 1990-1996                  (.03)          (.09)             (.05)            (.01)          (.05)           (.04)       (.02)               (.11)          (.07)
 6. Mean Change in Log
                                      .30            .36               .35              .28            .22             .16         .02                 .14            .19
    Wage, Balanced                   (.03)          (.10)             (.06)            (.02)          (.07)           (.05)       (.02)               (.10)          (.10)
    Sample

            (a) A plant that is neither foreign owned nor exports the entire period. (b) Includes some foreign equity over the entire period.
            (c) Exports some share of output over the entire period. (d) Defined as establishments present in both 1990 and 1996.
            (e) Average of annual changes in establishments present in both 1990 and 1996



                                                                                                                                                              39
                                                                     Table 2
                OLS Long Difference-in-Differences Estimation: Regressing Production Worker Wage Differences for 1990-1996 on the
                                         Minimum Wage Gap, Plant Characteristics, and Other Controls
           Dependent Variable: Log Plant Unskilled Wage in 1996 – Log Plant Unskilled Wage in 1990
                       (1)              (2)                (3)                (4)                (5                (6)               (7)                (8)                (9)               (10)
                    Ownership      With Plant and      With Region        With TFPG        Adding Techno-     Adding output      Dependent          Dependent          All textiles,      Dependent
                   Dummies Only    Worker Controls    Controls added    growth added to   logy Spending to   growth to other   variable is non-     Variable is       apparel and       Variable is non-
                                                          to (2)              (3)                (4)            controls        wage benefits     wages plus non-    footwear firms       prod wages
                                                                                                                                                  wage Benefits,    with at least 100
                                                                                                                                                   All Controls        employees

 Foreign (a)          0.093             0.033             0.077             0.082              0.060             0.059             0.042               .060              0.026              0.042
                      (1.80)            (0.52)            (1.18)            (1.30)             (0.94)            (0.97)            (0.14)             (1.24)             (0.34)             (0.53)

 Exporter (b)         -0.046            -0.041            -0.024            -0.027            -0.038             -0.041            -0.762                 -.040          -0.045             -0.118
                      (1.10)            (1.02)            (0.47)            (0.55)            (0.75)             (0.80)           (3.18)**                (-.64)         (0.88)            (3.12)**

TREATMENT             0.029             0.011             0.032             0.027              0.030             0.031              -1.560                -.010          0.012               0.155
    (c)               (0.61)            (0.20)            (1.03)            (0.88)             (0.98)            (0.97)            (2.48)*                (-.20)         (0.15)            (4.60)**

  Foreign*             0.146            0.216              0.192             0.189             0.210              0.196             0.000                  .180          0.212              0.126
TREATMENT             (2.66)*          (3.32)**          (3.33)**          (3.22)**          (3.39)**           (3.06)**            (0.0)                (3.73)**       (2.08)*             (0.65)

 Exporting*           0.080             0.079             0.063             0.068              0.074             0.077              0.000                  .074          0.064              0.001
TREATMENT             (1.74)            (1.04)            (0.79)            (0.87)             (0.99)            (1.11)             (0.0)                  (.84)         (0.73)             (0.00)

  Minimum             0.542             0.504              0.662             0.658             0.672              0.670            -0.353                  .670           0.670              0.155
  Wage (d)           (9.71)**         (10.11)**          (7.48)**          (7.45)**          (7.60)**           (7.54)**           (1.74)                (7.47)**       (8.67)**           (3.59)**

  Constant            0.001             0.063              0.185             0.145             0.124              0.086             0.919                  .350          -1.325              0.356
                      (0.06)           (3.40)**          (4.52)**          (3.58)**          (3.33)**            (2.23)*          (4.15)**               (7.20)**       (5.14)**           (19.63)**

     Obs               6165             6165              6165               5920              5920               5920              5099                   5099           535                5099

 R-squared             0.11              0.20              0.22              0.22              0.23               0.23              0.39                   .25            0.27               0.08


           Robust t statistics in parentheses, with * indicating significance at 5 % and ** indicating significance at 1 %.
           (a) Includes some foreign equity over the entire period.
           (b) Exports some share of output over the entire period.
           (c) An establishment in the textiles, footwear, and apparel (TFA) sector in a district where Nike/Reebok/Adidas subcontractors operate.
           (d) Defined as the log of the minimum wage in 1996 less the log of the minimum wage in 1990, unless the plant pays above the 1996 minimum wage in 1990, in which case the
           minimum wage change is set equal to zero.
                                                                            Table 3

                 Additional Tests of Robustness: Substituting Different Treatment Groups and Matching Estimators
Dependent Variable: Log Plant Unskilled Wage in 1996 – Log Plant Unskilled Wage in 1990


                                         Tests of Robustness: Switching from                        Tests of Robustness: Estimating Average Treatment Effect
                        Textiles, Footwear, and Apparel to Other Industrial Sectors or Districts             Using Matching Estimators for Treatment
                            (1)                 (2)                (3)                  (4)              (5)             (6)          (7)            (8)
                         Chemical        Wood Products          Fabricated         Randomizing       All Plants      All Plants     Textiles,     Textiles,
                        Products as        as Treatment         Metals as          Districts with                                   Apparel,      Apparel,
                        Treatment                               Treatment            Treatment                                        and            and
                                                                                                                                   Footwear      Footwear
                                                                                                                                     Only          Only
     Foreign               0.081              0.086                0.092               0.084              --       --                  --             --
                           (1.16)             (1.19)               (1.29)              (1.23)

    Exporter               -0.022             -0.017              -0.022               -0.022            --       --                  --             --
                           (0.61)             (0.50)              (0.62)               (0.61)

 TREATMENT                0.079               0.267               0.099                0.001             --       --                  --             --
                         (2.92)**            (9.39)**            (2.89)**              (0.05)

 TREATMENT                 0.002              -0.009              -0.263               0.007          0.274       --                0.201            --
   *Foreign                (0.02)             (0.03)             (3.19)**              (0.10)        (2.23)**                       (1.8)

TREATMENT*                -0.206              -0.460              -0.411               -0.063            --       0.219                            0.190
  Exporting              (3.19)**            (4.07)**            (7.70)**              (0.84)                     (2.11)**            --          (2.11)**

  Observations             5920                5920                5920                5920
   R-squared               0.23                0.23                0.23                0.23

Robust t statistics in parentheses
* significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%




                                                                                                                                                             1
                           Table 4: Average Production Worker Employment per Establishment in 1990 and 1996
                                           Ownership Status
                                                                                      Difference
                                                    Always                     Always
                               Domestic (a)                                                    (2) – (1)              (3)-(1)               (2)-(3)
                                                   Foreign (b)               Exporting (c)

 1. Mean Employment in             68.71              3 60.42                  400.48           292.92                331.77                 -39.56
    1990, All Available            (1.68)             (27.06)                  (21.75)          (9.90)                (8.59)                (34.93)
    Observations
 2. Mean Employment in
    1996, All Available            66.68              506.92                   400.63           440.24                333.95                106.29
    Observations                   (1.57)             (28.64)                  (18.22)          (9.76)                (8.21)                (32.74)

 3. Change in Mean
    Employment, 1990-              -2.02              146.00                    0.15            148.02                    2.17              145.85
    1996                           (2.32)             (21.81)                  (33.83)           (9.9)                    (8.6)             (34.9)

 4. Change in Mean
                                   12.65              204.30                    193.01           191.7                180.4                  11.3
    Employment, Balanced
                                   (4.33)             (64.90)                   (50.73           (12.1)               (10.7)                (43.4)
    Sample (d)
 5. Change in Mean Log
                                     -.03               .24                       -.24               .27                  -.21                  .48
    Employment, All
                                    (.01)              (.07)                     (.06)              (.04)                 (.04)                (.08)
    Observations
 6. Change in Mean Log
                                     .09                .36                       .24                .27                   .15                  .12
    Employment, Balanced
                                    (.02)              (.11)                     (.08)              (.03)                 (.03)                (.05)
    Sample
                                 Textiles, Apparel, and Footwear                  Other Establishments                            Difference
                                 Establishments

                                                Always          Always                        Always         Always               (1)-(4)      (2)-(5)   (3)-(6)
                                  Domestic                                        Domestic
                                                Foreign        Exporting                      Foreign       Exporting
                                    (a)                                             (a)
                                                  (b)             (c)                           (b)            (c)
                                 (1)            (2)            (3)                (4)         (5)           (6)                   (7)          (8)       (9)

1. Mean Employment in                  94.82     737.75         403.64              62.39      288.67        399.60                43.42       449.08      4.04
   1990, All Available                 (5.53)    (97.87)        (45.99)             (1.60)     (24.43)       (24.71)               (4.24)      (70.26)   (52.75)
   Observations
2. Mean Employment in
                                    90.00       1126.97         765.97              61.60      353.50        297.14                28.40       773.47    468.82
   1996, All Available              (4.74)      (109.79)        (66.37)             (1.60)     (19.73)       (12.73)               4.08)       (67.44)   (42.65)
   Observations
3. Change in Mean                      -4.82     389.22          362.33             -0.79       64.83        -102.46                -4.03      324.39    464.79
   Employment, 1990-1996               (7.3)    (197.70)        (118.17)            (2.31)     (33.99)       (26.18)               (4.23)      (70.5)    (52.9)
4. Change in Mean
                                    14.69        561.99          432.67             12.17      119.68        117.98                2.48         442.3    314.69
   Employment, Balanced            (15.51)      (237.76)        (143.82)            (4.09)     (54.88)       (49.59)               (5.3)        (91.5)   (60.0)
   Sample (d)
5. Change in Mean Log
                                        .03        .23                .22            -.02        .19              -.37              .05          .04       .59
   Employment, All                     (.03)      (.20)              (.10)          (.01)       (.08)             (.06)            (.02)        (.11)     (.07)
   Observations
6. Change in Mean Log
                                        .08        .54                .45            .09         .30               .18             -.01          .24       .12
    Employment, Balanced               (.05)      (.17)              (.19)          (.02)       (.11)             (.09)            (.02)        (.16)     (.12)
    Sample


              (a) A plant that is neither foreign owned nor exports the entire period.(b) Includes some foreign equity over the entire period.
              (c) Exports some share of output over the entire period. (d) Defined as establishments present in both 1990 and 1996.
                                         (e) Average of annual changes in establishments present in both 1990 and 1996
                                                        Table 5
                      Regressing Production Worker Employment on Determinants (Standard Errors in ())
Dependent Variable: Log Employment in 1996 – Log Employment in 1990 for columns(1)-(7) and First Differences for columns (8)-(9)



                                  (1)               (2)              (3)               (4)              (5)             (6)              (7)                (8)              (9)
                              Adding Plant        Adding           Adding         All Controls,    All Controls,       Only           Only Large           First            First
                              and Worker        Productivity     Technology       Small Firms      Large Firms        Textiles,        Textiles,       Differences,     Differences,
                                Controls         Growth to       Investments          Only             Only         Apparel, and     Apparel, and       All Firms        Balanced
                                                    (3)          and Output                                          Footwear         Footwear                             Panel
                                                                  Growth to
                                                                     (2)

           Foreign (a)             0.030            0.018             0.009            0.062            -0.011            -0.051           -0.149             0.033           0.011
                                   (1.27)           (0.62)            (0.37)           (0.72)           (0.44)            (1.40)          (33.1)**          (4.81)**          (1.63)

           Exporter (b)            0.055            0.053             0.030            0.049             0.011            0.091            0.067             0.007            0.002
                                   (1.82)           (1.73)            (1.07)           (0.51)            (0.34)           (1.73)           (1.83)            (1.31)           (0.37)

          TREATMENT                0.007            0.011             0.013            0.017            -0.003            0.015            -0.024            0.006            0.003
              (c)                  (0.31)           (0.55)            (1.17)           (0.21)           (0.37)            (0.52)           (0.85)            (1.43)           (0.92)

         TREATMENT*                0.111             0.119            0.034            0.000             0.044            0.087             0.134            -0.013           0.003
            Foreign               (2.14)*           (2.18)*           (1.16)           (0.0)             (1.59)          (2.17)*          (7.17)**           (1.58)           (0.42)

         TREATMENT*                 0.173           0.166              0.158           0.000              0.165           0.095            0.082              0.026           0.035
           Exporting              (5.02)**         (5.07)**          (4.92)**          (0.0)            (5.40)**          (1.33)           (1.49)           (2.95)**         (5.51)**

           Change in               -0.141           -0.131            -0.124           -0.021            -0.118           -0.184           -0.134            -0.047           -0.051
         Minimum Wage             (8.59)**         (8.04)**          (9.39)**          (0.80)           (8.67)**         (5.31)**         (7.75)**          (7.23)**         (3.37)**
               (d)
        Observations               6165             5920             5920             905              5015             1123             535                  68875            33302

        R-Square                   0.24             0.25             0.34             0.21             0.34             0.48             0.54                 0.19             0.15



        Robust t statistics in parentheses, with * indicating significance at 5 % and ** indicating significance at 1 %.
        (a) Includes some foreign equity over the entire period.
        (b) Exports some share of output over the entire period.
        (c) An establishment in the textiles, footwear, and apparel (TFA) sector in a district where Nike subcontractors operate..
        (d) Defined as the log of the minimum wage in 1996 less the log of the minimum wage in 1990, unless the plant pays above the 1996 minimum wage in 1990, in which case the
        minimum wage change is set equal to zero.
                                                            Table 6
              The Impact of Treatment on Other Outcomes (Output Growth, Change in Capital Stock, TFPG, and Profits)
Dependent Variable indicated in columns:
                         (1)          (2)             (3)              (4)          (5              (6)             (7)             (8)             (9)              (10)
                       Output        Output       Growth in        Growth in       TFPG            TFPG          Change in       Change in      Dependent        Dependent
                       Growth       Growth       Capital Stock    Capital Stock                  (Textiles,       Profits          Profits      Variable is      Variable is
                                   (Textiles,                      (Textiles,                   Apparel, and                     (Textiles,    Change in Log   Change in Log
                                    Apparel,                      Apparel, and                   Footwear                       Apparel, and    Wage, with      Employment,
                                      and                          Footwear                     Plants Only)                     Footwear          Triple        with Triple
                                   Footwear                       Plants Only)                                                  Plants Only)    interaction      interaction
                                  Plants Only)                                                                                                    Added            Added
Foreign (a)            0.241          0.334           0.388           0.121        -0.008         0.157          0.018          0.000              .059           .015
                       (2.24)*        (2.47)*         (6.70)**        (0.70)       (0.23)         (3.54)**       (1.45)         (0.0)             (.060)         (.025)

Exporter (b)           0.057          0.033           -0.038          0.156        -0.012         -0.022         -0.013         0.003             -.041           .029
                       (0.80)         (0.19)          (0.61)          (1.62)       (0.73)         (0.32)         (-1.74)        (0.10)            (.051)         (.026)

TREATMENT              -0.065         0.078           0.074           0.176        0.005          0.044          0.030          0.031              .030           .015
(c)                    (0.80)         (0.91)          (1.68)          (2.83)*      (0.38)         (1.64)         (3.20)**       (7.18)**          (0.96)         (.014)

Foreign *              0.157          0.093           -0.275          0.020        0.008          -0.155         -0.141         -0.124           0.202**          .026
TREATMENT              (1.57)         (0.70)          (-4.26)**       (0.12)       (0.21)         (-3.04)**      (-7.65)**      (-4.33)**         (.068)         (.032)

Export *               0.335          0.309           0.204           -0.024       0.012          0.020          -0.019         -0.030            -0.35          .293**
TREATMENT              (2.07)         (1.09)          (1.12)          (0.10)       (0.26)         (0.22)         (-0.69)        (-0.94)           (.061)          (.094)

Foreign*                -             -              -             -             -             -              -                 -                  .142           -.169
TREATMENT*                                                                                                                                        (.095)         (.105)
Change in
Minimum Wage
(d)
Observations            6165          1173           6165          1173          5920          1123           4854              898               5920            5920
R-squared               0.03          0.09           0.03          0.10          0.02          0.03           0.01              0.05              0.22            0.32
Robust t statistics in parentheses, with * indicating significance at 5 % and ** indicating significance at 1 %.
(a) Includes some foreign equity over the entire period.
(b) Exports some share of output over the entire period.
(c) An establishment in the textiles, footwear, and apparel (TFA) sector in a district where Nike/Reebok/Adidas subcontractors operate..
(d) Defined as the log of the minimum wage in 1996 less the log of the minimum wage in 1990, unless the plant pays above the 1996 minimum wage in 1990, in which case the
minimum wage change is set equal to zero.




                                                                                                                                                                            1
                                                                           Table 7
                                                           Determinants of Exit: Probit Regressions,
                                                          1988-1996 (Coefficients are Derivatives)




                        Includes Controls for Educational Attainment of Employees                    Excludes Controls for Educational Attainment of Employees

                     (1)           (2)              (3)             (4)           (5)            (6)            (7)           (8)               (9)               (10)
                     All       Large Firms      Small Firms        Only        Only Large     All Firms       Large         Small          Only Textiles,        Only
                    Firms        Only (at        Only (less      Textiles,      Textiles,                  Firms Only    Firms Only        Apparel, and          Large
                                least 100        than 100        Apparel,       Apparel,                     (at least    (less than         Footwear          Textiles,
                               employees)       employees)         and            and                          100           100                               Apparel,
                                                                 Footwear       Footwear                   employees)    employees)                               and
                                                                                                                                                               Footwear
    Foreign         -0.009        -0.002          -0.015           -0.006         0.000         -0.042        -0.018        -0.049             -0.059            -0.032
                    (2.57)*       (0.62)          (2.20)*          (1.57)         (0.02)       (7.98)**      (3.53)**      (6.48)**           (8.34)**          (4.80)**

   Exporter         0.005         -0.001           0.034           0.001          0.000         -0.031       -0.022         0.009              -0.026             -0.009
                    (0.72)        (0.26)          (3.12)**         (0.10)         (0.02)        (2.49)*      (2.15)*        (0.53)             (1.24)             (0.93)

TREATMENT           0.004         0.012            -0.004          -0.006         -0.000        0.006         0.021         0.001              -0.018             0.002
                    (0.91)       (6.02)**          (0.69)          (0.83)         (0.13)        (0.61)       (3.27)**       (0.05)             (0.90)             (0.18)

  Foreign*          -0.017        -0.016             ..            -0.021        -0.016         -0.030        -0.033           ..              -0.015            -0.029
TREATMENT           (2.35)*      (3.89)**                          (1.84)        (2.43)*        (1.87)       (2.94)**                          (0.72)            (2.00)*

 Exporting*         -0.002        -0.002           0.006           0.005          0.001          0.036        0.018         0.098              0.031              0.002
TREATMENT           (0.33)        (0.31)           (0.48)          (0.32)         (0.08)        (2.30)*       (1.56)       (2.87)**            (1.28)             (0.16)

  Change in          0.071        0.055            0.081           0.082          0.052         0.075         0.066         0.073               0.063             0.057
  Minimum           (2.48)*      (3.03)**         (2.31)*         (2.39)*        (2.88)**      (3.15)**      (2.87)**      (3.22)**            (2.42)*           (2.12)*
    Wage
 Observations       81840          28438           53219           15847           7004         92907         30904         61968              18260                  7653

Robust z statistics in parentheses. A “*” indicates significance at 5%; ** significance at the 1% level. Reported coefficients are the change in the probability of
exit, evaluated at the sample mean. All specifications include the full set of controls from the previous tables.




                                                                                                                                                                      2
                Appendix Table 1: Mean Minimum Wage and Selected Wages for Indonesia 1988-1999

                                                                                            b. TFA Wages (Production
                                                              a. Non-TFA Wages                 Workers Only)
       Year    CPI 96   MWNom      MW96      MW$US   (ru/$)      Prod    Non-Prod   Dom / No X    Exporters   Foreign

       1988    0.527       351       667      388    1717       1242      2935         1025        1325        2072
       1989    0.561       355       634      355    1787       1272      3137         1053        1461        2125
       1990    0.604       503       833      443    1882       1288      3154         1078        1462        1755
       1991    0.661       633       957      484    1982       1352      3351         1120        1417        1685
       1992    0.711       717      1008      492    2051       1479      3567         1239        1604        1931
       1993    0.780       832      1066      509    2095       1537      3769         1278        1732        1846
       1994    0.846      1193      1409      652    2160       1610      3775         1310        1888        2015
       1995    0.926      1418      1531      684    2239       1665      3921         1346        1971        2063
       1996    1.000      1560      1560      644    2348       1752      4017         1441        2079        2269
       1997    1.067      1699      1592      539    2953       1858      4870         1515        2723        2499
       1998    1.680      1963      1167      118    9875       1589      4010         1287        1808        2347
       1999    2.027      2308      1138      146    7809       1645      4926         1220        2037        2528

All real values are base 1996
MW=minimum wage
Prod=production worker
TFA=textile, apparel, or footwear sector
All Indonesian currency is in 1,000 rupiah
All wages are annual means




                                                                                                                        3
