NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ENDOGENOUS FINANCIAL AND TRADE OPENNESS
Joshua Aizenman
Ilan Noy
Working Paper 10496
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10496

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2004

We would like to thank Michael Hutchison, Hiro Ito, Nancy Marion and Shang-Jin Wei for sharing
their data. We are grateful for the suggestions of two anonymous referees. We would also like to thank
for useful comments we received from Micha Ben-Gad, Benny Bental, Carl Bonham, Mike Dooley,
Hadi Salehi Esfahani, Doireann Fitzgerald, Byron Gangnes, Charles Kahn, Ken Kletzer, Xenia Matschke,
Richard Portes, Aaron Tornell, Donald Wittman, Ari van Asche and seminar participants at the Hebrew
University of Jerusalem, UCSC, UCLA, University of Haifa, University of Illinois (Urbana-Champaign),
University of Hawaii, Tel Aviv University, University of Washington and the LACEA 2004 meeting
in San José, Costa Rica. Any errors are ours. This paper integrates and updates results reported previously
in NBER Working papers # 10144 and 10496. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s)
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2004 by Joshua Aizenman and Ilan Noy. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Endogenous Financial and Trade Openness
Joshua Aizenman and Ilan Noy
NBER Working Paper No. 10496
May 2004, Revised January 2008
JEL No. F15,F21
ABSTRACT
This paper studies the endogenous determination of financial and trade openness. First, we outline
a theoretical framework leading to two-way feedbacks between the different modes of openness; next,
we identify these feedbacks empirically. We find that one standard deviation increase in commercial
openness is associated with a 9.5 percent increase in de-facto financial openness (% of GDP), controlling
for political economy and macroeconomic factors. Similarly, increase in de-facto financial openness
has powerful effects on future trade openness. De-jure restrictions on capital mobility have only a
weak impact on de-facto financial openness, while de-jure restrictions on the current account have
large adverse effect on commercial openness. Having established (Granger) causality, we investigate
the relative magnitudes of these directions of causality using Geweke's (1982) decomposition methodology.
We find that almost all of the linear feedback between trade and financial openness can be accounted
for by G-causality from financial openness to trade openness (53%) and from trade to financial openness
(34%). We conclude that in an era of rapidly growing trade integration countries cannot choose financial
openness independently of their degree of openness to trade. Dealing with greater exposure to financial
turbulence by imposing restrictions on financial flows will likely be ineffectual.

Joshua Aizenman
Department of Economics; E2
1156 High St.
University of California, Santa Cruz
Santa Cruz, CA 95064
and NBER
jaizen@ucsc.edu
Ilan Noy
Saunders Hall 542
2424 Maile Way
University of Hawaii, Manoa
Honolulu, HI 96822
noy@hawaii.edu

1

1.

Introduction and overview
Salient features of the international economy during the last twenty years are the growing

financial and commercial integrations of developing countries and recurring financial instability
and crises. These developments have led to contentious debates regarding the desirability of
financial openness. Prominent economists have concluded that the gains from financial
integration are illusive and caution developing countries against rushing towards financial
openness (e.g. Rodrik, 1999, and Stiglitz, 2002). Yet, other studies have provided tentative
support for the presence of significant gains from financial openness (e.g. Bekaert et. al., 2005,
and Henry, 2003).1
Some observers conclude that greater exposure to financial turbulence should be dealt
with by curbing financial flows.2 Others caution against capital controls noting the
ineffectiveness of restrictions on capital mobility.3 These issues are of crucial importance to, for
example, China and India as both have increased their trade openness while sustaining financial
repression. This debate about financial integration in an era of rapidly growing trade integration
presumes that countries can choose their desirable level of financial openness independently of
their degree of openness to trade.
Past studies typically focus on the formal acts associated with de-jure financial opening,
such as changing regulations and the attitude of the central bank and the treasury to financial
flows. Yet, as has been noted by Prasad, Rogoff, Wei and Kose (2003), de-facto financial
integration is, by itself, of considerable interest. Indeed, the actual level of financial openness
(measured by the sum of gross private capital inflows and outflows) is the outcome of the
interaction between market forces and the enforcement of existing regulations.
The purpose of this paper is to utilize the concepts of de-facto trade and financial
integration to investigate this presumption. Specifically, we study the two-way feedbacks
between de-facto financial and trade openness, and also investigate the residual role of de-jure
openness. After outlining a model explaining the feedbacks between financial and trade

1

In contrast with this debate, most economists agree that the gains from trade integration are significant. For
a recent attempt to measure these gains see Lee et al. (2004).
2
See, for example, Kaplan and Rodrik’s (2002) analysis of policies in Malaysia during the 1997-8 crisis.
3
For a summary of the historical evolution of this debate and some recent research on the topic see, Edwards
(2005).

2

openness, we show that de-facto financial openness (measured by the sum of gross private
capital inflows and outflows as percent of GDP) depends positively on lagged trade openness.
In Section 2 we outline a model where financial openness is determined endogenously.
The model integrates public finance and political economy considerations, focusing on a
developing country characterized by limited tax capacity and political instability. Fiscal outlays
are financed by means of two taxes: a direct income tax; and an implicit tax induced by capital
controls. Both taxes are costly: the income tax is associated with deadweight losses due to
collection and enforcement costs. The tax capacity is impacted by the resources devoted to
enforcement and administration. Similarly, enforcing capital controls entails costly policing to
prevent illicit capital flight. There are two types of policymakers. The “responsible” one faces
the canonic public finance problem: determining tax policies in order to maximize the
representative consumer’s welfare, subject to the need to fund a given fiscal revenue stream. The
second type of policymaker is of the extractive type, interested in obtaining resources for a
narrow interest group. We analyze two possible scenarios determining the patterns of taxes and
enforcement. These scenarios differ in terms of the identity of the policy maker in power, and the
probability of staying in power.
In this setup, financial openness is endogenously determined by the authority’s choice of
financial repression. This policy is tantamount to a tax on domestic saving, generating the
incentive to engage in illicit capital flight, in order to avoid the tax. Capital flight is
intermediated via trade mis-invoicing.4 Enforcing financial repression requires direct
expenditure on monitoring and policing trade invoices, thereby greater trade openness increases
enforcement costs. We show that financial repression characterizes countries that are below a
certain threshold of fiscal efficiency – high enough cost of tax collection would induce the
implementation of financial repression as a means of taxation. Countries typified by low trade
openness and high saving are more likely to use financial repression. In these circumstances,
higher tax collection costs, higher fiscal expenditure and lower commercial openness would
increase the “optimal” financial repression.

4

See Giovannini and de Melo (1993) for documenting and measuring financial repression as an implicit tax
on savings, and Kletzer and Kohli (2003) for analysis of the fiscal implications of financial repression in India. See
Dooley (1988), Tornell and Velasco, (1992), and Dooley and Kletzer (1994) on capital flight as a mean of political
economy risk diversification. See Dooley (1996) for an overview of financial controls; and Claessens and Naudé
(1993) and Boyce and Ndikumana (2001) for discussions on trade mis-invoicing and capital flight.

3

We also find that lower probability of staying in power reduces the optimal investment in
tax capacity, and increases the likelihood that financial repression would be part of the menu of
taxes. If the policy maker is maximizing the representative consumer’s welfare, a higher
probability of staying in power increases the investment in future tax capacity, reducing the
optimal financial repression. If the policy maker is of the extractive type, reflecting the interests
of narrow pressure groups, the tax would be set at the peak of the corresponding tax Laffer
curve. The attitude of this policy maker towards capital controls is mixed -- capital controls
would be imposed on the representative consumer, while the fiscal surplus would be put in offshore accounts, as insurance against losing power. In these circumstances, lower probability of
staying in power increases capital flight, and reduces financial repression.
In section 3 we examine empirically some of the hypotheses suggested by our model. We
estimate the level of de facto financial openness as a function of lagged trade openness, several
macroeconomic control variables, and a vector of political-institutional variables. We find that
de-facto financial openness depends positively on lagged trade openness.
These results suggest de-facto sequencing, where greater de-facto trade openness is
associated with larger future de-facto financial openness. The reverse association -- from
financial openness to greater trade openness -- may hold due to different channels that are
discussed in our theoretical work. Hence, we expect to find two-way positive linkages between
financial and commercial openness and confirm these predictions empirically. We investigate the
relative magnitudes of these directions of causality using the decomposition test developed in
Geweke (1982). We find that almost all of the linear feedback between trade and financial
openness can be accounted for by G-causality from financial openness to trade openness (53%)
and from trade to financial openness (34%). The residual is due to simultaneous correlation
between the two annual measures.
The evidence in the paper is in line with a recent contribution by Antras and Caballero
(2007). They introduce financial frictions to the 2 x 2 standard international trade model in which
firms hire capital and labor to produce homogenous goods. Specifically, they assume that
entrepreneurs in the relatively complex sector are endowed with essential skills, but due to
informational frictions they can borrow only a fraction of their capital endowment. The authors
find that trade and capital flows are complements, and that financially underdeveloped
economies that liberalize trade may experience capital inflows. Our results are also consistent

4

with the notion that a significant share of the volume of financial flows to and from developing
countries are due to diversification of political risk, as argued in Dooley (1988). This
interpretation may provide an additional explanation for our finding concerning the negative
marginal association of democracy and financial openness. This finding also suggests that the
‘home bias’ in the allocation of financial assets identified by the financial literature (dealing
mostly with the OECD countries) may be less pronounced in developing countries – i.e. it may
be attenuated by political risk considerations. An alternative interpretation, however, is that more
democratic countries are also associated with better institutions, and thereby with higher
marginal productivity of capital, thus reducing the incentive to buy foreign assets. This
argument suggests that the political economy and efficiency aspects of the governing polity, and
the quality of its institutions, deserve more careful investigation with respect to the choice of
financial market policies. All these issues are left for future research. Section 4 concludes the
paper with further interpretive remarks.

2.

The model
The following section outlines a model describing links between trade and financial

openness in a developing country characterized by limited tax capacity and political uncertainty
regarding the future regime. We consider a country where fiscal outlays are financed by means
of two taxes: a direct income tax; and an implicit tax induced by capital controls. Both taxes are
costly: the income tax is associated with deadweight losses due to collection and enforcement
costs. The tax capacity is impacted by the resources devoted to enforcement and administration.
Similarly, enforcing capital controls entails costly policing to prevent illicit capital flight.
We illustrate the design of optimal policies by considering a small, two goods, two
periods economy. The utility of the representative consumer is given by5
(1)

V = u ( X 1α Y1β ) +

u ( X 2α Y2β )
;
1+ ρ

u ' >; u" ≤ 0; α + β = 1 ,

where X is the domestic good , and Y is the foreign, imported good. To simplify, we normalize
the prices of both goods to one, and denote consumption by C1 = X 1 + Y1 ; C 2 = X 2 + Y2 .
Using the properties of a Cobb Douglas, we infer that, up to a multiplicative constant
5

The present model extends Aizenman and Guidotti (1994), by allowing the endogenous linkage between
commercial and financial openness.

5

X 1 = αC1 ; Y1 = β C1 ;

X 2 = αC 2 ; Y2 = β C 2 .

The intertemporal consumption pattern is characterized by the conventional FOC:
(2)

u ' (C1 ) =

1+ r
E[u ' (C 2 )].
1+ ρ

There are two types of policymakers. The “responsible” one, denoted by w, chooses
public finance policies in order to maximize the representative consumer’s welfare, subject to the
need to fund the given fiscal revenue stream. The second type of policymaker, denoted by n, is of
the extractive type, interested in obtaining resources for narrow interest groups.
Consumers are endowed each period with X units of the domestic good. The authorities
tax the income from the endowment X at a rate t. The consumer saves in period one D ,
allocating it between domestic and foreign bonds, D and D*, respectively:
(3)

X (1 − t1 ) + D−1 (1 + r−1 ) − C1 = D ,

where D = D + D * , and D−1 (1 + r−1 ) is the income from the old bonds that are repaid in period
one.
The international real interest rate is r * . The authorities impose capital control in the
form of a tax on the foreign bond. Let φ denote the tax rate, implying that the domestic interest
rate, r, is determined by

(4)

1 + r = (1 + r*)(1 − φ ) .

Consequently, the tax determines the premium between the foreign and domestic real interests
(5)

r* − r
φ=
.
1 + r*

The premium φ is also a measure of the intensity of financial controls. The existence of the
premium implies that consumers would have the incentive to engage in illicit capital flight, in
order to avoid the tax. This capital flight is intermediated via the trade account by trade
misinvoicing, hence its potential magnitude would be determined by the volume of imports ( Y1 )
and exports ( X − X 1 ). Preventing illicit capital flows induced by a premium φ requires
spending τX on enforcement. Assume that enforcement and the resultant premium are linked by
the following reduced form:6
6

The potential capital flight is assumed to be proportional to imports. Similar results would hold if one
assumed that potential capital flight to be proportional to (imports+exports).

6

φ = φ [τX / Y1 ] ; φ ' > 0; φ " < 0.

(6)

This formulation assumes that larger trade openness requires an equi-proportionate
increase in enforcement in order to support the given premium.7 It also recognizes the
diminishing marginal efficacy of enforcement. The tax on foreign bonds and the enforcement of
financial repression implies that the consumer is indifferent between the domestic and the
foreign bond.8 Hence, the second period budget constraint is
X (1 − t 2 ) + D (1 + r ) = C 2 .

(7)

Enforcement of the income tax is associated with collection cost λi (i = 1, 2) per one dollar of
gross taxes applied for tax rates below t , where t reflects the tax capacity. The net tax
collected by a tax t is

(1 − λi )t i X for t i < t i and (1 − λi )t i X for t i ≥ t i .

(8)

The second period collection costs and tax capacity are determined by first period investment
rate in fiscal capabilities, denoted by ψ , where
(9)

λ2 = λ2 (ψ ), λ ' ≤ 0, λ " ≥ 0; t2 = t2 (ψ ); t ' ≥ 0; t " ≤ 0 .

The net revenue from the income tax, plus the revenue from the domestic bond sold in period
one finances the fiscal expenditure on exogenous public spending (G), plus the cost of the
enforcement of capital controls and investment in fiscal capability [(τ + ψ ) X ] , plus the
repayment of old debt:
(9)

t1 (1 − λ1 ) X + D = G + (τ + ψ ) X + D−1 (1 + r−1 ) .

Similarly, the second period fiscal budget constraint is
(10)

t 2 (1 − λ 2 ) X + φ (1 + r*) D* = G + D(1 + r ) .

The fiscal impact of capital controls can be grasped by consolidating the two budget constraints,
(9) and (10), into the intertemporal one:
(10’)

7

X [t1 (1 − λ1 ) +

t 2 (1 − λ 2 )
1
] + φD = G[1 +
] + (τ + ψ ) X + D −1 (1 + r−1 ) .
1+ r *
1+ r *

The paper is related to the growing literature on endogenous enforcement [see Anderson and Marcouiller
(1998) for modeling endogenous predation and trade].
8
To simplify notation, we assume that the enforcement described by (6) prevents all tax evasion. The
analysis can be extended to account for random interception of capital flight, where higher τ increases the
probability of interception [see an earlier version of our paper, Aizenman and Noy (2005)].

7

Financial repression imposes taxes on domestic savings at the premium rate, φ . This tax has
two components: first, it taxes foreign bonds, D * directly, at the premium rate. In addition, it
reduces the cost of financing the domestic debt, D , at the premium rate. The sum of both implies
that financial repression taxes domestic savings, D * + D . Unlike the private sector, the effective
real interest rate facing the fiscal authorities equals the foreign one.
We consider two possible scenarios:
i)

The first period policy maker is of type w, expecting to survive for the second period
with probability q. Policy maker w chooses the tax rates t, the enforcement τ , and
investment in tax capacity ψ that would maximize the expected utility of the
representative agent, subject to the fiscal and the private budget constraints, and the
uncertainty regarding the future policy maker. With probability 1 - q, the second
period policy maker would be of type n.

ii)

The first period policy maker is type n, reflecting the interests of a narrow pressure
group. Policy maker n chooses < t , τ , ψ > that would maximize the expected utility
of the narrow interest group, subject to the fiscal and the private budget constraints,
and the uncertainty regarding the future policy maker. With probability 1 – p, the
second period policy maker will be of type w.

The following results characterize the pattern of optimal taxes and the resulting financial
repression (see the Appendix for derivation):
i.

Financial repression is part of the optimal public finance of policy maker w
if λ1 Dφ '(0)|τ =0 > β . Hence, regimes characterized by costly collection of taxes, low trade
openness, and high saving are more likely to use financial repression.

ii.

~
If λ1 Dφ '(0)|τ =0 > β , the optimal financial repression premium in regime w, dented by φ ,
is φ ≅

λ1 Dφ '− β
dD
β + (1 − λ1 ) Dφ '
(1 + r*)
dr

. Optimal financial repression increases with the

collection costs associated with income taxes, and drops with economy’s trade openness.
This follows from the observation that greater trade openness increases the effective cost

8

of enforcing financial repression, reducing thereby the usefulness of financial repression
as an implicit tax.
iii.

Lower probability of staying in power (i.e., low p and q) reduces the optimal investment
in tax capacity, increases equilibrium λ , and increases the likelihood that financial
repression would be part of the menu of taxes.

iv.

If the first period policy maker is of type w, a higher probability of staying in power for
the second period would increase the first period investment in future tax capacity,
reducing the optimal financial repression.

v.

If the first period policy maker is type n, reflecting the interests of narrow pressure
groups, the tax would be set at the peak of the corresponding tax Laffer curve, t = t . The
attitude of type n policy maker towards capital controls is mixed -- capital controls would
be imposed on the representative consumer, while first period fiscal surplus would be put
in off-shore accounts, as insurance against losing power. Lower probability of staying in
power by the regime representing the narrow pressure group, n, increases capital flight,
and reduces financial repression.9
The model can be embodied in an overlapping generation structure, where the present

investment in tax capabilities determines the collection cost and the tax capacity next period. We
can also extend the model to allow concave collection costs. The probability of staying in power
can be modeled in the context of a more elaborated economy. These extensions would not
change the main results regarding the association between trade and financial openness.
Following the approach of Cukierman, Edwards and Tabellini (1992), one expects less
polarized societies and better functioning democracies to be characterized by more efficient tax
collection systems [hence by lower λ ]. Applying this conjecture, a more efficient tax system
would be associated also with a lower tax rate, t, thereby reducing the attractiveness of capital
flight. It can be verified that with low enough financial repression, the net effect of improving
the tax system is to lower the incidence of capital flight, thereby reducing de-facto financial
integration.

9

Russia in the early nineties may provide a good case study. See Akerlof and Romer (1993). See also
Alesina and Tabellini (1989) for a model where political instability and the polarization between labor and capital
determines the incidence of capital flight and financial openness.

9

Of course, de-facto financial openness is impacted by other considerations not addressed
by the public finance model described above, such as differentials in discount rates and
investment opportunities across countries, etc. One should view the above model as suggestive
of possible links between macro and political economy factors and de-facto openness, motivating
the empirical research.
Our discussion so far focused on the possibility that greater trade openness will lead to
higher financial openness. It is reasonable to expect that the linkages between trade and financial
openness operate in both directions, and that higher financial openness would lead to greater
trade openness.10 A likely channel is vertical foreign direct investment. FDI allows
multinationals to fragment production optimally, benefiting from the cost advantage associated
with locating labor intensive production stages in labor abundant countries. A by-product of this
fragmentation is the growth of two-way trade: higher imports of primary and intermediate
products, followed by higher exports of the upgraded products.11
The positive association between trade and financial openness may also be the outcome
of political economy factors, as is highlighted in Rajan and Zingales (2003). They propose an
interest group theory of financial development whereby incumbents oppose financial
development because it breeds competition. In these circumstances, the incumbents’ opposition
will be weaker when an economy allows both cross-border trade and capital flows. They predict
that country’s domestic financial development should be positively correlated with trade
openness, and identify the time varying nature of this association.12 Anther interesting approach
linking trade and financial openness is Portes and Rey (2003), showing that both international
trades in goods and in assets are explained by similar gravity regressions. Their work highlights
the role of information flows and frictions in accounting for trade in goods and assets, controlling
for other conventional variables.
We therefore expect to observe two-way linkages between trade and financial openness.
In the next section, among other things, we look at these causal links empirically. We first
confirm the importance of lagged commercial openness in Granger-causing contemporaneous
10

See Helpman and Razin (1978) for an integrated theory of trade in goods and securities.
Another channel operating in the same direction is due to the reliance of international trade on trade credit.
Greater financial openness tends to reduce the cost of trade credit, thereby increasing international trade.

11

10

financial openness, after controlling for macro and political economy variables. Next, we show
that lagged financial openness plays an important role in accounting for commercial openness.
We close the empirical evaluation of this question by decomposing the relative quantitative
importance of the two channels.

3.

The Empirical model

This section reviews the data, the methodology we employ and our main results on the
determinants of financial openness and causality between financial openness and
commercial/trade openness. We begin by describing the data and provide descriptive statistics.
We next discuss the model we estimate for the determination of financial openness and finally
examine the question of causality. Throughout, we discuss the empirical exercises’ relevance to
the theory we developed above. Appendix B provides a detailed summary of the variables,
sources and samples described in this section.
3.1

The data
We measure de facto financial openness using the sum of total capital inflows and

outflows (in absolute values) measured as a percent of gross domestic product. Capital flows are
the sum of FDI, portfolio flows and other investments. This measure is exactly analogous to the
standard measure of commercial openness, which we employ as an independent variable in our
regressions.13
Tables 1-2 describe our data for financial openness. Specifically, table 1 presents
averages and standard deviations for financial openness for geographical regions, decades and
the estimation samples we use. We find that for developing countries in general and in particular
for Asian, African and Middle Eastern countries, financial openness decreased from the 1970s to
the 1980s but rebounded and surpassed previous levels in the 1990s. This trend is most
pronounced for the East Asian countries for which capital flows were 11.2% of GDP during the

12

See Braun and Raddatz (2004) for an empirical analysis of political economy considerations resulting from
the distributional effect of financial development on competition; and Chinn and Prasad (2003) for the impact of
financial deepening and openness to international trade on current account balances.
13
Wei and Wu (2002) previously used this financial openness variable. We thank Shang-Jin Wei for making
it available to us. The data originates from the IMF’s Balance of Payments Statistics database. See also Lane and
Milesi-Ferretti (2001) for insightful analysis of the net asset position of nations, based upon careful aggregations of
the IMF’s database.

11

1970s, 8.5% during the 1980s and 16.5% during the 1990s.14 Developed economies (henceforth
OECD) do not show this trend but show a continual increase in financial openness (from 7.3% to
9.3% to 16.8% for the 1970s, 1980s and 1990s respectively). Interestingly, Latin America shows
a similar continuous trend in spite of the 1980s debt crisis. In terms of financial instability
(measured as standard deviation of the financial openness measure), developing countries seem
to experience much higher volatility relative to their degree of openness. This difference is most
striking between developed countries and the East Asian emerging markets that seem to have
similar levels of average openness but with much higher volatility. Another intriguing trend is
the increase in relative volatility we observe for the 1990s (with the exception of the Latin
America countries).
For our commercial openness index, we average the sum of exports and imports as a
percentage of GDP over the previous 4 years (t-1 to t-4). By averaging, we smooth out any
fluctuations due to temporary changes in the terms of trade and obtain a more robust finding in
our multivariate analysis with respect to the temporal effect of commercial openness on financial
openness. In addition, we also investigate the dynamic causal structure of the interaction between
commercial and financial openness using the original annual data for both.
Table 2 presents the correlation coefficients between our financial openness measure and
the commercial/trade openness measure. Bi-variate analysis clearly shows a partial correlation
between the two types of openness (both when commercial openness is measured annually and
when it is averaged for the previous 4 years). Notably, the correlation appears to be significantly
weaker for Latin American countries. The financial openness index measures gross capital flows.
Accordingly, we also show, in column 3 of table 1B, the correlation of our gross flows measure
with net flows (the current account). We find that there is only a weak and unstable correlation
between the two (in some of our sub-samples the correlation is even negative).
Figures 1 and 2 further describe the correlations between the financial openness measure,
commercial (trade) openness, and the current account (net financial flows) across time. As
previously observed, there is an apparent partial correlation between the openness measures, but
a much weaker relationship between gross and net financial flows. Furthermore, the partial

14

Our data does not completely reflect the slowdown in capital flows as a result of the Asian crisis as it only
covers up to and including 1998.

12

correlation between commercial and financial openness appears to be more pronounced for the
1990s than it was for the 1980s.15
As the previous theoretical discussion suggests, one of the determinants of de facto
financial openness should be the legal impediments to financial flows (de jure financial
openness). Accordingly, we include in our multivariate analysis two measures for restrictions on
the capital account. The first, taken from Chinn and Ito (2006), is constructed using the data
provided in the IMF’s Annual Report on Exchange Arrangements and Exchange Restrictions.
The index uses the data on the existence of multiple exchange rates, restrictions on the current
and capital accounts (where the latter is measured as the proportion of the last five years without
controls) and requirements to surrender export proceeds in order to capture the intensity of
controls on capital account transactions. The index of openness is the first standardized principal
component of the four variables above, and ranges from -2.5 in the case of full control to 2.5 in
the case of complete liberalization. The second measure is constructed by summing three binary
indicators of equity markets openness (The official liberalization date, the date of the first
American Depository Receipt issuance, and the date of the establishment of the first country
fund). These data are from Bekaert et al. (2005).
For the political-economy determinants of financial openness, we concentrate our
empirical investigation on three political-institutional measures: a democracy index, a measure of
political competition and a Herfindahl index for government fractionalization.
Cukierman, Edwards and Tabellini (1992) argue that functioning democracies will tend
to have more efficient tax collection systems. While not directly confirming this hypothesis since
tax-collection efficiency measures are unavailable, Mulligan et al. (2004) find that democracies
are associated with flatter tax systems and with lower tax revenues. In our theoretical work, we
concluded that the degree of tax collection costs will determine the degree of financial
repression. To investigate this hypothesis we examine whether the capacity of the political
system to prevent friction (and consequently mediate conflicts through the political arena and
facilitate more efficient tax and other regulatory structures), is a relevant measure. Again, we
expect less polarized societies and those in which conflicts are solved peacefully within the
political system to have more efficient tax collection mechanisms in place.

15

The data cover the years 1980-1989 and 1990-1998. We do not present data for the 1970s as we do not
have a sufficient number of observations on trade openness for that decade to allow for any robust conclusions.

13

We first employ a variable that measures the degree of democratic rule. Our democracy
index is taken from the Polity IV project and ranges from -10 (fully autocratic) to +10 (fully
democratic).16 In addition, we employ a variable that measures the degree of political
competition within a polity. This index combines two dimensions of political competition: (1)
the degree of institutionalization, or organization, of political competition and (2) the extent of
government restrictions on political competition. Combined, this measure identifies ten broad
patterns of political competition that roughly correspond with the degree of “democraticness” of
political competition within a polity (Marshall and Jaggers, 2000). As Marshall and Jaggers
(2000, p. 79) note “[t]he polar opposite [to a competitive political system] is unregulated
participation, in which there are no enduring national political organizations and no effective
regime controls on political activity. In such situations political competition is fluid and often
characterized by recurring, contentious interactions and shifting coalitions of strongly partisan

groups” (italics ours). The 1-10 index defines steps between 1 (repressed competition –such as in
totalitarian systems or military dictatorships) and 10 (institutionalized open electoral
participation). This variable is highly correlated with the democracy-autocracy measure
described above even though it was constructed based on different criteria.17
Another political-economy variable we use to examine the robustness of our results
comes from a political data set constructed at the World Bank (Beck et al. 2001 and Keefer,
2002). As we hypothesized that more polarized social and institutional arrangements will affect
the efficiency of tax collections, we use an index that measures the fractionalization within
government. This variable is constructed from a Herfindahl Index for government, which is
obtained by summing the squared seat shares of all parties in the government. Thus, a completely
unified government will have an index of 1 and a government that is composed of many small
parties will have a smaller index.18
Following the work of Wei (2000) and Dreher and Siemers (2003), we examine whether
corruption matters for the degree of financial openness. To that end, we use a measure of
16

The “Polity IV database includes annual measures for both institutionalized democracy (DEMOC) and
autocracy (AUTOC), as many polities exhibit qualities of both these distinct authority patterns….A third indicator,
POLITY, is derived simply by subtracting the AUTOC value from the DEMOC value; this procedure provides a
single regime score that ranges from +10 (full democracy) to -10 (full autocracy).” (Marshall and Jaggers, 2000, p.
12). We use the POLITY variable in our regressions.
17
The correlation coefficient is 0.94.

14

corruption that is taken from the International Country Risk Guide. The data are available in
monthly observations. We obtain annual observations from 1982 onward by averaging the
monthly data points for each year. This index ranges from -6 (low probability/risk of
encountering corruption) to 0 (high risk of corruption).
Table 2 presents the correlation coefficients for the political variables we use. As noted
earlier, the variable measuring political competition and the regime’s autocratic/democratic
nature are highly correlated (correlation of 0.94). Besides this pair, the other political variables
do not seem significantly correlated.
In order to ensure our results are not driven by a ‘missing variables’ bias, we include a
host of macroeconomic control variables. In all regressions we use the inflation rate (changes in
the CPI), per capita gross domestic product (measured in PPP dollars), the government’s budget
surplus (as a percent of GDP), and a world interest rate (proxied by the US Treasury Bill 1-year
rate). All the macroeconomic data are taken from the World Bank’s World Development

Indicators (2001 edition). In order to examine whether the occurrence of financial crises
contaminates our result, as they might systematically change the relationship between financial
openness and our control variables, we also include crises measures in a number of regressions.
A priori, we see no reason to restrict our sample and therefore attempted to include all
205 countries and territories for which data are available in the 2001 edition of the World Bank’s

World Development Indicators (WDI). Our control variables, though, are available for only a
subset of this group. Most importantly, most of the data on financial flows as well as the data on
corruption are typically available only from the 1980s and only for a much smaller set of
countries. Our data set is therefore an annual panel of 83 countries for the years 1982-1998.
We further investigate the robustness of our results by examining various sub-samples.
Notably, we hypothesize that results for OECD countries might be different from those for
developing countries. We thus repeat our regressions for developed economies – which we
define as those economies that were members of the OECD in 1990. As our focus is developing
countries we include most of the regression results for this sub-sample. These are defined by
excluding OECD countries and island economies (as these are often used as off-shore banking
centers and their level of de facto financial openness is often dramatically different from other
18

This index records a missing observation if there is no parliament. If there are any government parties
where seats are unknown, the index is also blank. Independents are calculated as if they were individual parties with
one seat each.

15

countries). For a summary of the information described in this section including detailed data
sources and sample sizes, see appendix B.
3.2

Regression Methodology and Results
Based on our theoretical work, we estimate the statistical significance of various sources

of financial repression by positing a linear structure for the determination of the level of financial
openness whereby:
(25)

FOit = α + β1 X it + β 2 CO it −1 + β 3 Pit + ε it , with ε it = ρε it −1 + μ it .

The dependent variable (FOit), financial openness for country i at time t, is assumed to be
dependent on an intercept (or alternatively separate country or regional intercepts), a vector Xit of
macroeconomic control variables, average of lagged commercial openness ( CO it −1 ), a vector of
political-institutional variables (Pit) and an error term. The variables examined are described
below. A Durbin-Watson statistic for all iterations of the model strongly indicates that the error
terms are autocorrelated. The autocorrelation coefficient was estimated to be between 0.7-0.9.
The error term is thus assumed to have an AR(1) structure with μ iid.19 We estimate the model
using the Prais-Winsten algorithm.20
Table 3 includes results for our benchmark regressions. For the first stage regression, the
R2 is between 0.20 and 0.67 depending on the exact specification and sample used.21 For the
second stage, the model converges very quickly (within two iterations) and most of the
coefficients for the benchmark control variables are robust to the inclusion and exclusion of other
variables. In column (1) of table 3, which includes the full sample (829 observations), we already
observe many of the results that remain throughout the various specifications.
In examining the independent variables, we first turn to our control macro-variables. The
coefficient for per-capita GDP is always significantly positive – i.e., an increase in GDP per
capita increases financial openness (except for a regression containing only OECD countries in
which the coefficient is insignificant). We find that an increase domestic per capita GDP of
E(μt)=0; E(μt2)=σu2; and Cov(μt, μs)=0 for t≠s.
The Prais-Winsten procedure is a 2SLS procedure that utilizes the estimated correlation coefficient
obtained from the Durbin-Watson statistic from the first-stage OLS regression as the initial autocorrelation value
and reiterates a second-step FGLS till convergence (typically 2-3 iterations).For technical details see Greene (2000,
pp. 546-550) and Greene (2002, E7 pp. 4-7).
21
The higher R2 values are generally for the models that include more political/institutional variables and for
the developing and OECD sub-samples.
19
20

16

PPP$1000 will facilitate a 0.14 to 2.28 percentage points increase in the volume of capital flows
(as percent of GDP). The ratio of budget surplus to GDP is typically significant and always
negative for developing countries. A bigger budget deficit will increase de facto financial
openness. Again, this result does not hold for our OECD sub-sample; for this case, reported in
table 3 column (2), the budget surplus coefficient is positive and significant.22 The inflation rate
and the world interest rate (proxied by the US T-Bill rate) are always insignificantly different
from zero. But, as with the previous results, the coefficients for inflation and the world interest
rate seem to be different for the OECD sub-sample; although these are still insignificant for
standard significance levels, the effect of inflation on financial openness is larger (and negative)
for the OECD countries and the effect of the US T-Bill rate is smaller. Both these results
correspond with our intuition. We also include a binary variable for the 1990s and as expected
given the information presented in table 1A, the coefficient for this variable is always positive
and significant; i.e., the 1990s saw an across-the-board increase in financial openness (increased
capital flows). This increase in capital flows is found to be between 1.3 and 4.9 percent of GDP.
Additionally, we find that the trade openness coefficient (ratio of exports and imports to
GDP) is always positive and highly significant. As this variable describes the average openness
over the previous four years, we find that a history of more commercial openness will increase
financial openness significantly. This result is robust to all the iterations we present in table 3
and elsewhere.
Before discussing our empirical analysis of the political-economy determinants of
international financial flows, we note that including the corruption variable in our regressions
also yields negative and significant coefficients in almost all the iterations of the model.23
Similar results from different data are analyzed in detail in Wei (2000) and Dreher and Siemers
(2003).

22

The disparity between the impacts of budget surplus in developing and OECD countries may be explained
by the differential cyclical patterns of fiscal policy. In contrast to the OECD countries, fiscal policy tends to be procyclical in developing countries: i.e., government spending drops and taxes increase during recessions. Financial
crises tend to lead to recessions in developing countries, inducing abrupt fiscal adjustment, reducing fiscal deficits.
These observations may lead to the positive association between smaller budget deficits and lower de facto financial
openness [see Gavin, Hausmann, Perotti and Talvi (1996), Aizenman, Gavin and Hausmann (2000) and Talvi and
Vegh (2000)].
23
Once more, this result does not hold for the OECD sub-sample (reported in table 3 column 2). In this case,
the coefficient is still positive but insignificant. Variability of the corruption variable for the OECD sub-sample is
much lower.

17

Our foci in this section are the political-economy variables. First, we examine the effect
of the nature of the political regime on financial openness (this index is between 10 – full
democracy and –10 – full autocracy). For the full sample (table 3 column 1) and the developing
countries sub-samples (table 3 column 3) the coefficient for this variable is negative, significant
and apparently large.24 Any one-point increase in this index (out of the 20 points difference
between full autocracy and democracy) reduces financial openness (international financial flows)
by almost one-half a percentage point of GDP. The effect is about half as large when we do not
control for the level of corruption (reported in table 3 column 4).
Since the results for the OECD sub-sample are consistently different, and our theoretical
modeling is focused on developing countries, we give most attention to the developing countries
sub-sample (these include all non-OECD countries that are not islands/financial-centers).
Columns 5 and 6 in table 3 repeat our specification for the developing countries sample but
exclude the regime variable in column 5 and both the regime and corruption measures in column
6. In both cases, we find that all the other results reported above remain robust to these
omissions.
Table 4 presents information on the quantitative significance of our findings for the
benchmark model. For the sample of developing countries, we find that a one standard deviation
increase in the commercial openness is associated with a 9.5 percentage points increase in defacto financial openness (percent of GDP), a one standard deviation increase in the
democratization index reduces financial openness by 3.5 percentage points, and a one standard
deviation increase in corruption is associated with a reduction of financial openness by 3.1
percentage points. Similarly, the corresponding associations for the whole sample are 12.3, 3.1
and 2.9. Furthermore, a developing country will have higher financial openness (measured as 3
additional percentage points of GDP), were it to have the median level of trade openness of an
OECD country; would be 2.2% less open were it as democratic as the typical OECD country;
and 4% more open to financial flows were it less corrupt as the typical developed country is.
In table 5 columns (1)-(4) we further investigate the political-economy nature of financial
openness by replacing the democracy/autocracy (regime) variable with two others: a measure of
political competition, and an index of government fractionalization. For the political competition

24

For the OECD sample (table 3 column 2), the coefficient has the same sign and magnitude but is
statistically insignificant.

18

variable, we find that increased institutionalized competition within the polity decreases financial
openness. This result is not empirically puzzling considering that this variable is highly
correlated with our measure of democracy/autocracy (even though the variable was created using
different criteria). Thus, a more openly competitive, free and inclusive political system will lead
to lower levels of financial openness after controlling for incomes, macroeconomic policy
(inflation and budget surpluses), interest rates and commercial openness. As we observed before,
this effect is more perceptible and significant once corruption is controlled for as well.
For the government fractionalization index (reported in table 5 columns 3 and 4), we find
that the more a government is fractionalized (the ruling coalition includes more political parties),
the higher is financial openness. Quantitatively, the estimated coefficient of 1.4-1.9 does not
seem to suggest a very large effect on the level of international financial flows. This result is
suggestive as to the validity of some of the conjectures we raised in our second theoretical
model.
In columns (5)-(6) of table 5 we re-estimate our benchmark specification (table 3 column
3) but also include the de-jure measures of financial openness (openness of the capital account).
We use two measures. The first, taken from Chinn and Ito (2006), is constructed using the IMF
data provided in its Annual Report on Exchange Arrangements and Exchange Restrictions
(column 5). The second measure is constructed by adding the three binary indicators of equity
markets openness available in Bekaert et al. (2005). Interestingly, the coefficient for the ChinnIto measure of restrictions is not significant in this specification nor in other specifications we
ran. The Bekaert et al. (2005) index is positive and significant at the 10% level. These results
merit further inquiry since the question they pose; the importance of the de jure environment on

de facto amount of capital flows has not been examined thoroughly in the literature.
Nevertheless, our main results with respect to commercial openness and the political regime
remain significant also when the de jure measures are included; though the corruption coefficient
is no longer always significant possibly reflecting a correlation between corruption and the
decision by the authorities to use financial repression.
In column 7 of table 5, we utilize a different measure of trade openness. The traditional
measure of the sum of exports and imports (% of GDP) does not capture accurately trade
openness in countries that promote exports but discourage imports. Thus, we compute an

19

alternative index of openness based only on imports. Results remain very similar for all variables
both statistically and in magnitude, but for a larger coefficient for the trade openness measure.25
3.3

Robustness of Main Results
In addition to the specifications discussed above, we tested a number of alternative

specifications of our empirical model in order to verify the robustness of our results. Because of
space considerations we do not include the full specifications in our tables but all these results
are available upon request.
First, we hypothesized that financial crises (either banking or currency crises) might
significantly affect the level of financial openness in general and more specifically the use of
financial repression for generating government revenues. Interestingly, in all iterations of the
model we attempted, none of the coefficients for the crises variables comes out significant for the
developing countries sample (nor for the other samples).26, 27
Second, besides including the average of past commercial openness, we also included in
our specification the contemporaneous TRADE/GDP variable and obtained the following: In all
cases, the lagged commercial openness variable remains positive and highly significant. For the
developing countries sample as well as the whole sample, the lagged average is positive and
highly significant with a now larger coefficient (0.20 and 0.21 respectively) while the
contemporaneous variable is negative and significant. For the OECD sample, the lagged average
is still positive and highly significant while the contemporaneous variable is now positive but
insignificant. The sum of the two coefficients (summarizing the effect of commercial openness

25

The increase in the magnitude of the coefficient is either because the feedback effects between import
flows and financial flows are stronger, or because there is a high correlation between exports and imports and our
new measure is therefore much smaller.
26
We utilized a number of variants of these binary indicators (currency crisis and banking crisis, their onset
year only, and these separately or together in the same specification) and we never reject the null (no effect). For
currency crises, our indicator is identified by periods in which an index, composed of a weighted average of the real
exchange rate and foreign reserves, changed dramatically – by more than 2 standard deviations. This measure is
described in detail and evaluated in Hutchison and Noy (2005b). The banking crisis binary indicator is taken from
Caprio and Klingebiel (1999) and is analyzed in Hutchison and Noy (2005).
27
We also investigated the impact of past commercial and financial volatility on the degree of financial
openness. We added to the basic specification (table 3, column 3) the variance of the past five years of the trade and
finance openness indices. The coefficient for the variance of the past five years of trade openness is not significantly
different from zero. Inclusion of this variable does not change any other result (most importantly that past trade
openness is an important explanatory factor for current financial openness). The variance of past financial openness
is negative and significant (higher past volatility implies lower current financial openness) but neither does this
result impact our other conclusions.

20

both past and present) is 0.05, 0.06, and 0.09, for the developing, OECD and the whole sample,
respectively. This sum is always positive and highly significant for the three different samples.28
As the political and institutional variables we use do not vary sufficiently over time we
do not present results for the model estimated with country effects. Typically, the goodness of fit
is higher but the independent political-institutional variables lose most of their statistical
significance (as would be expected). We include regional effects (binary variables for Latin
America and East Asia) in our large and developing countries samples. Time effects do not
provide any additional explanatory power besides a significant finding for the 1990s (reported
above).
3.4

Causality
In the previous section we have established that past trade openness Granger-causes

financial openness (see Granger, 1969 for a definition of causality).29 The Granger framework
assumes no instantaneous feedback between the two series and is oriented to inspect for unidirectional causality (Geweke, 1982). Yet, as we suspect that causality might also run from past
financial openness to present trade openness we also estimate the opposite specification:
(26)

COit = γ + δ1 X it + δ 2 FO it −1 + δ 3 FOit −1 + δ 4 Pit + ηit

We use the same assumptions, methodology, definition of variables and samples as
before. Results for several specifications are reported in table 6. Our focus in this paper is the
determination of financial openness and we therefore concentrate our attention on the financial
openness index. In all the specifications reported in table 6 it is apparent that financial openness
is not only Granger-caused by trade openness but that financial openness also Granger-causes
trade openness. These results hold whether we examine a one-year lag of the financial openness
measure (columns 1-3), or 4-year average of past financial openness for the various sub-samples
previously described. We also implemented a different causality test that is more robust to
alternative assumptions about the error terms that are more likely to hold for time series – the test
28

One possible interpretation is that major recessions in developing countries (potentially triggered by capital
flight) are associated with a drop in commercial openness, as would be the case if the drop in imports dominated any
increase in exports. Likewise, capital flight may increase financial openness. It is difficult to provide a better
rationale for it without desegregating financial openness into its various sub accounts.
29
Holmes and Hutton (1992) use the term ‘prima-facie causality.’. They distinguish between this and ‘true
causality’ which is impossible to infer from standard econometric methods without strong structural assumptions.
An excellent book length treatment of the issue of causality in macroeconomics is Hoover (2001).

21

is described in Holmes and Hutton (1992).30 Results indicate a more robust evidence of prima
facie causality from finance to trade than from trade to finance.
Comparing tables 5 and 6 reveals a possibly asymmetric effect of de-jure restrictions on

de-facto openness: while there is only weak evidence that de-jure restrictions on capital mobility
impact de-facto financial openness(there is only evidence of impact of de jure liberalization of
equity markets), de-jure restrictions on the current account have large adverse effects on
commercial openness. These findings suggest that it’s much easier to overcome (evade)
restrictions on capital account convertibility than restrictions on commercial trade.
In Granger (1969), the possibility of simultaneous causality between the two time series
is ignored. In principal, according to this framework dividing the time series into shorter periods
should enable the researcher to identify accurately the exact chronology of effects and do away
with the correlations in the contemporaneous data series – this is often impossible in practice.
Wei (1982), also points to the problems inherent in identifying causality structures for flow
variables that are aggregated over time periods. As we employ annual data, and since financial
flows respond quickly to exogenous shocks, it is reasonable to expect that our data will also
contain what appears to be instantaneous causality between trade and financial openness.
Furthermore, Granger’s (1969) approach does not allow us to estimate and compare the relative
magnitudes of causality between the two time series. Geweke (1982) suggests a methodology to
distinguish between (temporal) causality from x to y, from y to x and simultaneous causality
between the two. We briefly describe the methodology and provide results.31
First we estimate the following 5 equations using a panel fixed-effects least squares
estimation for our developing countries sample.
(27)
(28)

30

p

p

s =1

s =0

p

p

s =1

s =1

FOit = α i1 + ∑ β11s FOit−s + ∑ β 21s COit−s + ε it1
FOit = α i2 + ∑ β12s FOit −s + ∑ β 22s COit−s + ε it2

We are unaware of any attempts to confirm the Holmes and Hutton (1993) robustness conclusions in a
panel framework.
31
Readers may also consult Geweke (1984) and Granger (1988). The only applications we are aware of
which apply this methodology to macro-economic data series are Chong and Calderón (2000) and Calderón and Liu
(2003). Several papers in finance employed the same methodology – see, for example, Johnson and Soenen (2004),
Kawaller et al. (1993) and Dheeriya (1993). Other approaches to identifying causality in macroeconomics will
typically rely on an instrumental variable methodology.

22
p

(29)

FOit = α i3 + ∑ β13s FOit −s + ε it3
s =1

(30)

p

p

s =1

s =1

COit = α i4 + ∑ β14s COit −s + ∑ β 24s FOit−s + ε it4
p

(31)

COit = α i5 + ∑ β15s COit−s + ε it5
s =1

Next, following Geweke’s (1982) notation we define FCO→FO as the linear feedback (i.e. Gcausality) from trade openness to financial openness, FFO→CO as the G-causality from financial
openness to trade openness, and FFO•CO as the instantaneous linear feedback between the two
series.32 FFO ,CO , defined as the total measure of linear dependence between the two series is
therefore given by:
(32)

FFO ,CO = FFO→CO + FCO→FO + FFO•CO .

Given these definitions, Geweke (1982) concludes the following:
(33) FFO→CO = log[var(ε it5 ) / var(ε it4 )]
(34) FCO→FO = log[var(ε it3 ) / var(ε it2 )]
(35) FFO•CO = log[var(ε it2 ) / var(ε it1 )]
Geweke (1982) shows that the null hypothesis (H0: F=0) can be statistically examined
using the χ2 distribution. In estimating (27)-(31), we started with three lags (p=3) of the
independent variables in each regression and reduced step-wise the number of lags using the
Akaike Information criterion. In all cases, it turned out that a single lag (p=1) contained all the
information required to estimate the model. Consequently, we set p=1 throughout. Table 7
provides our results for distinguishing among the different channels of causality between the two
series. Most of the linear feedback between trade and financial openness (87%) can be accounted
for by Granger-causality from financial openness to trade openness (53%) and from trade to
financial openness (34%). Simultaneous correlation between the two only accounts for 13% of
the total linear feedback between the two series.
Geweke (1982) prefers the term ‘linear feedback’. Pierce (1982), in a comment on Geweke’s work, argues
that a more appropriate term to describe the measures defined in our equations (32)-(35) would be ‘G-causality.’
Zellner (1982), in another comment, argues that the word ‘causality’ should not be used if it is only based on
statistical observed relationships rather than together with economic theory. We use the term ‘G-causality’
throughout as it is more familiar to the economics profession. Hoover (2001) provides an extended discussion of the
problems inherent with the usage of this term.

32

23

When we repeated this algorithm using the same methodology but including in
regressions (27)-(31) the control variables previously described (as in table 3 column 3) we
obtained qualitatively and quantitatively very similar results for the feedback measures. We also
examine the robustness of our results using a theoretically equivalent but slightly different set of
equations. We replace (27) with
(27’)
(35’)

p

p

s =0

s =1

COit = α i1 + ∑ β11s FOit−s + ∑ β 21s COit−s + ε it1 and
FFO•CO = log[var(ε it4 ) / var(ε it1 )]

The results we obtain are the following: As before, most of the linear feedback between
trade and financial openness (90%) can be accounted for by Granger-causality from financial
openness to trade openness (60%) and from trade to financial openness (30%). Simultaneous
correlation between the two only accounts for 10% of the total linear feedback between the
series. Similar results are obtained when, following Johnson and Soenen (2004) we estimate
equations (28) and (30) using Seemingly Unrelated Regressions methodology. The SURE results
are 50%, 42% and 8% respectively for the three components of the total linear feedback.
Since we reported evidence of more financial and trade openness in the 1990s versus the
1980s, we also examine the difference in the measured feedback effects between the two subsamples. While, as can be expected, the measured magnitude of the feedback effects is
significantly smaller, we find no evidence that the relative importance of the two feedback
channels (from trade to finance and from finance to trade) has changed significantly.
We applied similar analysis to investigate the intertemporal linkages between
disaggregated measures of international trade and foreign direct investment. We found that the
strongest feedback between the trade sub-accounts is between FDI and manufacturing trade. The
linear feedback between aggregate trade and FDI can be accounted for by Granger causality from
FDI gross flows to trade openness (50%) and from trade to FDI (31%).33

4.

Concluding remarks
Our analysis indicates that the de-facto financial openness of developing countries is a

complex endogenous variable, systematically impacted by economic and political economy
33

For more detail, see Aizenman and Noy (2006).

24

factors which include commercial openness, the political regime and corruption. For a sample of
developing countries, we find that a one standard deviation increase in the commercial openness
index is associated with a 9.5 percent increase in de-facto financial openness (international
financial flows as percent of GDP), a one standard deviation increase in the democratization
index reduces financial openness by 3.5 percent, and a one standard deviation increase in
corruption is associated with a 3 percent reduction of financial openness (see table 4).
One should be careful in attaching normative implications to these findings without
having a robust model of the economy. Yet, the results reported in this paper may provide some
guidelines to policymakers. For example, in an era of rapidly growing trade integration countries
cannot choose financial openness independently of their degree of openness to trade -- dealing
with greater exposure to financial turbulence by curbing financial flows might turn out to be
ineffectual. A country that undergoes rapid commercial integration will find it impractical or
even impossible to enforce rigid de facto financial repression. Hence, the question for China is
not if, but rather when and how to implement de-jure financial integration. To those who worry
that some developing countries may find it difficult to rely on external financing, our findings
suggest that steps to reduce corruption should make it easier to overcome this obstacle.
While de-facto financial openness is a useful concept, it combines capital flows motivated by
political economy considerations with those motivated by efficiency considerations. A remaining
empirical challenge is to disaggregate de-facto financial openness into its various components.
Since each type of flow can be taxed differently with varying degrees of efficiency in tax
collection, and faces different degrees of expropriation risk, one can expect the determinants of
openness for each type of flow to be quite different. Therefore, constructing different financial
openness indicators using quantity data for the different types of financial flows (FDI, equity,
official, bank lending, etc.) appears to be an obvious next step.

25
References
Aizenman, J., M. Gavin and R. Hausmann, (2000) "Optimal Tax and debt Policy with Endogenously Imperfect
Creditworthiness", Journal of International Trade & Economic Development 9(4), 367 – 395.
Aizenman J. and P. Guidotti. (1994): "Capital controls, collection costs, and domestic public debt," Journal of
International Money and Finance, February, 41 - 54.
Aizenman, J. and I. Noy (2006) "FDI and Trade - Two Way Linkages?" Quarterly Review of Economics and Finance,
2006, Vol. 46, pp. 317-337.
Akerlof, G. A. and P. M. Romer, (1993). “Looting: The Economic Underworld of Bankruptcy for Profit.” Brookings
Papers on Economic Activity, 2, 1-60 and 70-74.
Alesina, A. And G. Tabellini (1989) "External Debt, Capital Flight, and Political Risk", Journal of International
Economics, 27, 199-220.
Anderson, J. E. and S.J. Marcouiller, (1998): “Autarky and Anarchy: Endogenous Predation and Trade,” Boston College.
Beck, Thorsten, Asli Demirgüç-Kunt and Ross Levine (2001). “New tools in comparative political economy: The Database
of Political Institutions,” World Bank Economic Review 15(1): 165-176.
Bekaert, G, C. R. Harvey and C. Lundblad, (2005). “Does financial liberalization spur growth?” Journal of Financial
Economics 77, 3–55
Boyce, J. K., and L. Ndikumana (2001): “Is Africa a Net Creditor? New Estimates of Capital Flight from Severely
Indebted Sub-Saharan African Countries, 1970-1996.” Journal of Development Studies, 38(2).
Braun M. and C. Raddatz (2004), “Trade liberalization and the politics of financial development,” Manuscript.
Calderón, César and Lin Liu (2003). “The direction of causality between financial development and economic growth.”
Journal of Development Economics, 72, 321– 334.
Caprio Gerard and Daniela Klingebiel (1999). Episodes of Systemic and Borderline Financial Crises. Manuscript (October).
Chinn, Menzie and Hito Ito. 2006. “What Matters for Financial Development? Capital Controls, Institutions, and
Interactions.” Journal of Development Economics forthcoming.
Chinn, D. Menzie and Eswar Prasad (2003). “Medium-Term Determinants of Current Accounts in Industrial and Developing
Countries: An Empirical Exploration,” Journal of International Economics 59. 47-76.
Chong, Alberto and César Calderón (2000). “Causalilty and Feedback Between Instittutional Measures and Economic
Growth.” Economics and Politics, 12(1), 69-81.
Cukierman, Alex, Sebastian Edwards and Guido Tabellini (1992). “Seigniorage and Political Instability.” American
Economic Review, 82(3), June, 537-555.
Dheeriya, Prakash L. 1993. Further Evidence on Causality and Feedback Across International Stocks. Journal of Economics
and Finance 17(3), 160-167.
Dooley, Michael P., 1988. "Capital Flight: A Response to Differences in Financial Risks," IMF Staff Papers, September
1988.
Dooley, Michael P., 1996. "A Survey of Literature on Controls Over International Capital Transactions," IMF Staff Papers,
43(4):639-687.
Dooley, Michael P. and K. Kletzer (1994) "Capital Flight, External Debt and Domestic Policies," Federal Reserve Bank of
San Francisco Review, Summer 1994, pp. 24- 38.

26
Dreher, Axel and Lars-H.R. Siemers (2003). “The Intriguing Nexus Between Corruption and Capital Account Restrictions”,
mimeo, June.
Edwards, Sebastian (2005). “Introduction.” In: Edwards, S. (ed.) Capital Controls and Capital Flows in Emerging
Economies: Policies, Practices and Consequences. University of Chicago Press, forthcoming.
Gavin, M., R. Hausmann, R. Perotti and E. Talvi (1996) 'Managing Fiscal Policy in Latin America and the Caribbean:
Procyclicality, Volatility, and Limited Creditworthiness', mimeo, Inter-American Development Bank.
Geweke, John (1982). “Measurement of Linear Dependence and Feedback Between Multiple Time Series.” Journal of the
American Statistical Association, 77(378), 304-313.
Geweke, John (1984). “Measures of Conditional Linear Dependence and Feedback Between Time Series.” Journal of the
American Statistical Association, 79(388), 907-915.
Giovannini, A. and M. de Melo (1993). “Government Revenue from Financial Repression,” American Economic Review 83,
953-63.
Glick, Reuven and Michael Hutchison (forthcoming). “Capital Controls and Exchange Rate Instability in Developing
Economies.” Journal of International Money and Finance.
Granger, Clive W. J. (1969). “Investigating Causal Relations by Econometric Models and Cross-spectral methods.”
Econometrica, 37(3), 424-438.
Granger, Clive W. J. (1988). “Some recent developments in a concept of causality," Journal of Econometrics, 39, 199-212.
Greene, W. (2000). Econometric Analysis. Prentice-Hall, New Jersey.
Greene, W. (2002). Linear models for panel data. LIMDEP Econometric Modeling Guide Volume 1. Plainview, NY:
Econometric Software, Inc.
Gordon H. Hanson, G. H., R. J. Mataloni and M. J. Slaughter (2001). “Expansion Strategies of U.S. Multinational Firms,”
NBER Working paper 8433.
Helpman E. and A. Razin (1978). A Theory of International Trade Under Uncertainty, Academic Press.
Henry, P. B., (2003). "Capital Account Liberalization, The Cost of Capital, and Economic Growth", American Economic
Review, 93(2), May, pp. 91-96.
Holmes, J. H. and P. A. Hutton (1993). A new test of Money-Income Causality. Journal of Money, Credit and Banking
24(3), 338-355.
Hoover K. (2001). Causality in Macroeconomics. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK.
Hutchison, Michael and Ilan Noy (2005). "How Bad Are Twins? Output Costs of Currency and Banking Crises" Journal of
Money, Credit and Banking, 37(4), 725-752.
Hutchison, Michael and Ilan Noy (2006). “Sudden Stops and the Mexican Wave: Currency Crises, Capital Flow
Reversals and Output Loss in Emerging Markets.” Journal of Development Economics, 79(1), 225-248.
Johnson, Robert, and Luc Soenen, 2004. The US stock market and the international value of the US dollar. Journal of
Economics and Business 56, 469–481.
Kaplan, Ethan and Dani Rodrik (2002) “Did the Malaysian Capital Controls Work?” in S. Edwards and J. Frankel (eds.)
Preventing Currency Crises in Emerging Markets. University of Chicago Press.

27
Kawaller, Ira G., Koch, Paul D. and Timothy W. Koch, 1993. Intraday Market Behavior and the Extent of Feedback
Between S&P 500 Futures Prices and the S&P 500 Index. Journal of Fianncial Research 16(2), 107-121.
Keefer, Philip (2002). “DPI2000: Database of Political Institutions: Changes and Variable Definitions”. Mimeo, WB.
Kletzer K. and R. Kohli (2001). “Financial Repression and Exchange Rate Management in Developing Countries: Theory
and Empirical Evidence for India,” IMF working paper 01/103.
Lane, Philip R., and Giani Maria Milesi-Ferretti (2001). “The External Wealth of Nations: Measures of Foreign Assets and
Liabilities for Industrial and Developing Nations,” Journal of International Economics, Vol. 55, pp. 263–94.
Lee, Ha Yan, Luca Antonio Ricci, and Roberto Rigobon (2004). “Once Again, is Openness good for Growth?” Journal of
International Economics 75(2), 451-472.
Marshall, Monty G and Keith Jaggers (2000). “POLITY IV PROJECT - Political Regime Characteristics and Transitions,
1800-1999: Dataset Users’ Manual”. Mimeo, University of Maryland.
Mulligan, Casey B., Ricard Gil and Xavier Sala-i-Martin, 2004. Do Democracies Have Different Public Policies than
Nondemocracies? Journal of Economic Perspectives 18(1), 51–74.
Pierce, David A. (1982). “Comment: Measurement of Linear Dependence and Feedback Between Multiple Time Series.”
Journal of the American Statistical Association, 77(378), 315-316.
Portes, R. and H. Rey (2003), “The Determinants of Cross Border Equity Flows,” manuscript, Princeton University.
Prasad, Eswar, Kenneth Rogoff, Shang-Jin Wei and M. Ayhan Kose (2003). “Effects of Financial Globalization on
Developing Countries: Some Empirical Evidence.” Mimeo, IMF, March.
Rajan, G. R. and L. Zingales (2003). “The Great Reversals: The Politics of Financial Development in the 20th Century,”
forthcoming, Journal of Financial Economics.
Rodrik, D. (1999): “Who Needs Capital-Account Convertibility?” in Peter Kenen (ed), Should the IMF Pursue Capital
Account Convertibility? Essays in International Finance no. 207, Princeton: Princeton University Press (May).
Stiglitz, J., (2002). Globalization and Its Discontents (New York: W.W. Norton & Company, June).
Talvi, Ernesto, and Carlos A. Vegh (2000). “Tax Base Variability and Procyclical Fiscal Policy.” NBER Working Paper
No. W7499, January.
Tornell, A. and A. Velasco, (1992). “Tragedy of the Commons and Economic Growth: Why Does Capital Flow from Poor
to Rich Countries?,” Journal of Political Economy, 100 (6):1208-31.
______ and P. Lane, (1999). “Are Windfalls a Curse? A Non-Representative Agent Model of the Current Account and
Fiscal Policy,” Journal of International Economics, vol. 44, pp. 83-112, 1998.
Wei, Shang-Jin (2000). "How Taxing is Corruption on International Investors?" The Review of Economics and Statistics,
82(1):1-11, February.
Wei, Shang-Jin and Yi Wu (2002). “The Life-And-Death Implications of Globalization.” Mimeo, IMF.
Wei, William W. S. (1982). “The Effects of Systemic Sampling and Temporal Aggregation on Causality – a Cautionary
Note.” Journal of the American Statistical Association, 77(378), 316-319.
Zellner, Arnold (1982). “Comment: Measurement of Linear Dependence and Feedback Between Multiple Time Series.”
Journal of the American Statistical Association, 77(378), 313-314.

28
Appendix
We start by characterizing scenario I: The first period policy maker is of type w, expecting to
survive for the second period with probability q. Policy maker w chooses the tax rates t, the enforcement

τ, and investment in tax capacity ψ that would maximize the expected utility of the representative agent,
subject to the fiscal and the private budget constraints, and the uncertainty regarding the future policy
maker. With probability 1 - q, the second period policy maker would be of type n. We simplify notation
by normalizing the representative consumer income to 1, X = 1 , and denote by I 1 ; I 2, w ; I 2,n the
consumer’s net income at the beginning of period 1, and period 2, conditional on regime w and n,
respectively:

I1 = 1 − t1 + D−1 (1 + r−1 );
I 2, w = 1 − t2, w + D(1 + r );

(A1)

I 2,n = 1 − t2 + D(1 + r ).
Regime n would set the second period tax rate at the level that would maximize the tax revenue, t 2 . The
consumer’s expected utility is:

u ( I1 − D) +

(A2)

qu ( I 2, w ) + (1 − q)u ( I 2,n )
1+ ρ

.

Optimal saving is determined by the FOC

u1' =

(A3)

1+ r
[qu 2' , w + (1 − q)u 2' ,n ].
1+ ρ

~

Let V denote the consumer’s highest expected utility level attainable with income I 1 ; I 2, w ; I 2,n , when
the domestic interest rate is r:
(A4)

~
V = V ( I 1 ; I 2, w ; I 2,n ; r ) .

It is easy to verify that
(A5)

qu 2' , w ~ '
qu 2' , w + (1 − q)u 2' , n
(1 − q )u 2' , n ~ '
D '
~
~
=
V I1' = u1' ; V I '2 , w =
u1
; Vr = D
; VI 2,n =
1+ ρ
1+ r
1+ ρ
1+ ρ

.

Policy maker’s w problem is to choose the vector < t1, w ; t 2, w ; ψ ; τ > that would maximize the
representative consumer’s utility subject to the fiscal budget constraints. We solve this problem
recursively. If policy maker w would make it for the second period, the tax rate t 2, w would be set by the
fiscal budget constraint:

29

t2, w =

(A6)

D(1 + r*) + G − φ D(1 + r*)
1 − λ2

In the first period, policy maker w sets the vector of fiscal policy in order to maximize the consumer’s
expected utility, subject to the fiscal budget constraint:

(A7)

⎡
⎧⎪G + τ +ψ + D−1 (1 + r−1 ) ⎫⎪⎤
MAX ⎢V ( I1 ; I 2, w ; I 2,n ; r ) − Γ1, w ⎨
⎬⎥
⎪⎩−t1, w (1 − λ1 ) − D
⎭⎪⎦⎥ ,
⎣⎢
t1,w ; τ ; ψ ; D

where Γ1, w corresponds to the Lagrange multiplier associated with the first period fiscal budget
constraint, and the value of t2,w is determined by (A6). The FOCs characterizing the optimal tax rate are
obtained by optimizing (A7) with respect to t1, w ; D :

Γ1, w
(A8)

u1'
;
=
1 − λ1

u 2' , w q (1 + r*)
u'
= 1 .
1 − λ2 1 + ρ
1 − λ1

The optimal first period tax rate and borrowing set by w equates the marginal cost of public funds across
the states of nature where w is in charge, allowing for proper intertemporal discounting. The FOC
determining optimal first period investment in future tax capacity, ψ , is:
(A9)

'
u 2' ,n dt 2
u'
dλ 2 u 2,w
(−
)
= (1 − q )
+ 1 .
q
1 + ρ dψ 1 − λ 2
1 + ρ dψ 1 − λ1

t 2, w

The LHS is the expected benefit associated with reduced future tax enforcement and collection costs in
the state of nature where w will control the economy, an eventuality that will happen with probability q.
The RHS is the expected cost, being the sum of two terms. The first measures the expected cost of better
tax capacity when n would be in charge: the improved tax capacity implies higher tax burden when n
would control the economy, an eventuality that would take place with probability 1 – q. The second term
is the present resource cost associated with the first period investment in second period tax capacity.
Equation (A8) implies that lower probability of staying in power reduces the expected benefit, and
increases the expected cost associated with investment in future tax capacity, reducing thereby the
equilibrium tax capacity investment, resulting with inferior tax regime in period 2. For low enough
probability of staying in power, the investment in future tax capacity would be zero.
Applying the FOCs (A8) and (A9), the welfare effect of spending more resources on enforcing
financial repression can be reduced to

30

⎧⎪G + τ + ψ + D−1 (1 + r−1 )⎫⎪⎤
d ⎡
⎢V ( I 1 ; I 2, w ; I 2,n ; r ) − Γ1, w ⎨
⎬⎥ =
dτ ⎣⎢
⎪⎩− t1, w (1 − λ1 ) − D
⎪⎭⎦⎥
.

(A10)

⎧⎡
⎤ dφ
dD ⎫ u1'
φ
D
r
λ
(
1
λ
)
1
φ
(
1
*)
−
−
−
−
+
⎬
⎨⎢ 1
1 ⎥
dr ⎭ 1 − λ1
1+φ
⎦ dτ
⎩⎣
Financial repression shifts the tax burden from income taxes, associated with collection costs of λ1 , to the
implicit tax induced by financial repression, associated with enforcement costs τ. Consequently, financial
repression would be used only if, starting with full integration of financial markets, where τ = 0 = φ :
(A10’)

d
dτ

⎡V ( I 1 ; I 2, w ; I 2,n ; r )
⎢
⎢⎣− Γ1, w G + τ + ψ + D−1 (1 + r−1 ) − t1, w (1 − λ1 ) − D

{

⎤
dφ ⎫ u1'
⎧
=
− 1⎬
> 0.
D
λ
⎥
⎨ 1
dτ
⎭ 1 − λ1 |τ =0
⎥⎦ |τ =0 ⎩

}

Recalling that (6) implies φ ≅ φ [τ / β ] , hence

dφ φ '
. Applying this information to (A10’), financial
≅
dτ β

repression would be part of the optimal tax package if
(A11) λ1 Dφ '(0) > β
Hence, the combination of costly collection of income taxes, significant saving, effective marginal
capacity to impose financial controls (high φ '(0) ), and low trade openness increase the likelihood of
financial repression. In these circumstances, the optimal financial repression is determined by setting the
RHS of (A10) to zero, yielding
(A12)

⎡
⎤ dφ
φ
dD
⎢λ1 − 1 + φ (1 − λ1 )⎥ D dτ = 1 + φ (1 + r*) dr .
⎣
⎦

The optimal premium can be approximated by
(A12’)

~

φ =

λ1 D φ '− β
dD
(1 + r*)
β + (1 − λ1 ) D φ '
dr

.

Consequently, we expect deeper financial repression in countries characterized by less efficient tax
collection of traditional taxes (as would be the case when the probability of staying in power is low), and
economies closer to international trade.
We turn now to the case where regime n is setting policies in the first period. To simplify
analysis, we focus on the case where the regime’s income when in power is the fiscal surplus, and loss of
power implies that the income base shrinks to the offshore saving that are beyond the reach of regime w.

31
We denote by by N 1 ; N 2,n ; N 2, w regime n’s net income at the beginning of period 1, and period 2,
conditional on regime n and w in power, respectively:
(A13)

{

}

N 1 = m t1 (1 − λ1 ) + D + τ + ψ − D−1 (1 + r−1 ) − G ;

N 2,n = m{t 2 (1 − λ 2 ) + φD * (1 + r*) − D(1 + r ) − G} = m{t 2 (1 − λ 2 ) + φD (1 + r*) − D(1 + r*) − G};
N 2, w = 0
where m is the mass of agents taxed by the regime. As the focus of regime n is on extracting the
maximum resources, it sets the tax rate at the peak of the Laffer curve. The various policy instruments
are set in order to maximize regimes n expected utility, where F denotes the regimes off-shore saving:
(A14)

MAX

⎧
1
[ pu (N 2,n + F (1 + r*)) + (1 − p)u(F (1 + r*))]⎫⎬ .
⎨u ( N 1 − F ) +
1+ ρ
⎭
⎩

τ ; ψ ; D; F
Regimes savings are determined by a “precautionary off shore” condition, where lower probability of
staying in power increases the optimal off-shore savoing:
(A15)

u1' ( N 1 − F ) =

1+ r *
[ pu 2' ( N 2,n + F (1 + r*)) + (1 − p)u 2' ( F (1 + r*))].
1+ ρ

Marginal borrowing D would impact regime’s n expected utility by

⎡ pu (N 2, n + F (1 + r*)) + ⎤ ⎫⎪
⎢
⎥⎬ =
⎣(1 − p)u (F (1 + r*)) ⎦ ⎪⎭
;
r
r
1
+
*
1
+
*
u1' ( N 1 − F ) −
pu 2' (N 2, n + F (1 + r*)) =
(1 − p )u 2' (F (1 + r*)) > 0
1+ ρ
1+ ρ
d ⎧⎪
1
⎨u ( N 1 − F ) +
dD ⎪⎩
1+ ρ

where the last equality follows from (A15), the off-shore saving FOC. Consequently, Borrowing D is as
a mechanism for regime n to finance first period consumption and to transfer purchasing power from the
future, where with probability 1-p it would be out of power. Having the option of off-shore saving
beyond the control of the future regime encourages present borrowing, as a way of augmenting regime n’s
present consumption and future income. In the absence of sovereign borrowing, regime n would set
borrowing D at the maximum dictated by aggregate consumer’s saving,
(A16)

D=D.

Optimal FOCs associated with the optimal investment in future tax capacity and in enforcing financial
repression are:

32

u1' (N 1 − F ) = p

d [t (1 − λ 2 )]
1
;
u 2' (N 2,n + F (1 + r*)) 2
1+ ρ
dψ

u1' (N 1 − F ) = p

1+ r * '
d [φD ]
.
u 2 (N 2,n + F (1 + r*))
1+ ρ
dτ

(A17)

These conditions correspond to putting the tax collection at the peak of the regime’s intertemporal Laffer
curve, taking into account the probability of staying in power, p.
Applying (A15) and (A17) it can be shown that lower probability of staying in power would reduce the
investment in future tax capacity and in enforcing capital controls.

33
Appendix B – Data Sources and Samples
Code

Source
a

Description
Sum of capital inflows and outflows
(% of GDP)
GDP per capita, PPP
(current international $)
Sum of exports and imports
(% of goods GDP)

KTOTAL

IMF-BOP statistics : Wei (2002)

GDPPCPP

WDI b: NY.GDP.PCAP.PP.CD

TRADG

WDI: TG.VAL.TOTL.GG.ZS

TRADGAV

WDI: TG.VAL.TOTL.GG.ZS

Average for TRADG for t-1,…,t-4

DLCPI

WDI: FP.CPI.TOTL.ZG

Inflation, consumer prices (annual %)

BDGTG

WDI: GB.BAL.OVRL.GD.ZS

Overall budget deficit, including grants
(% of GDP)

USTBILL

IMF-IFSc

Interest rate on U.S. Treasury bill

CORRUPT

PRS: International Country Risk Guide

Level of Corruption d

POLITY2

POLITY IV project

Political regime type e

POLCOMP

POLITY IV project

HERFGOV

World Bank's political dataset

CHINITO

Chinn and Ito (2006)

EQLIB

Bekaert et al. (2005)

Degree of political competition f
Herfindehl index for ruling coalition g
Capital account openness index constructed from
IMF data. h
Sum of indicators for official equity market
liberalization, date of the first American Depository
Receipt issuance, and the first country fund.

Samples (1982-1998) i

a

ALL

All countries in the 2001 edition of the WDI (83 countries)

OECD

OECD countries (21 countries)

DEV

Developing countries: all countries excluding OECD countries & island states (60 countries)

The IMF’s Balance-of-Payments Statistics.
The World Bank’s World Development Indicators.
c
The IMF’s International Finance Statistics.
d
This index runs from -6 (low probability/risk of encountering corruption) to 0 (highly corrupt).
e
The index runs between -10 (fully autocratic) to +10 (fully democratic).
f
The index defines incremental steps between 1 (repressed competition –such as in totalitarian systems or military
dictatorships) and 10 (institutionalized open electoral participation).
g
The index is constructed by summing the squared seat shares of all parties in the government. Thus, the index runs
between 0 and 1 (a single party in the coalition).
h
The IMF’s Annual Report on Exchange Arrangements and Exchange Restrictions.
i
Data availability further constrained our samples. Thus, the numbers reflect countries for which
data were available for the specifications described in table 3 columns 1-3 (but not necessarily for the
whole 1982-1998 time period for each country).
b

34
Table 1.

Financial Openness and financial volatility – Descriptive Statistics
1970s

1980s

1990s

All years

6.23
5.43
8.63
6.82
(6.42)
(5.88)
(9.86)
(7.89)
7.34
9.31
16.79
11.50
OECD countries
(5.07)
(6.66)
(12.54)
(9.83)
11.20
8.47
16.53
12.38
East Asia
(8.95)
(10.79)
(18.16)
(14.71)
4.81
6.05
8.15
6.53
Latin America
(2.90)
(5.62)
(6.58)
(5.70)
6.21
4.89
7.10
5.93
Other a
(6.87)
(4.74)
(8.12)
(6.73)
Standard deviations are given in parentheses.
a
Other includes developing countries in Africa (North and Sub-Saharan), Middle East and
South Asia.
Developing countries

Table 2.

Financial Openness - Correlations

Correlation of financial
openness measure with…

Comm. openness

Current account

(t)

(previous average)

Developing countries

0.34

0.34

0.25

OECD countries

0.39

0.37

-0.04

East Asia

0.32

0.27

-0.23

Latin America

0.25

0.18

0.20

a

0.34

0.39

0.36

0.39

0.38

0.23

Other
All
a

Comm. openness

Other includes Africa (North and Sub-Saharan), Middle East and South Asia.

35
Table 3.

Benchmark Model Results
(1)

(2)

Per capita GDP

0.64**
(2.14)

0.14
(1.09)

2.28***
(4.09)

2.14***
(4.28)

2.02***
(3.67)

1.41***
(3.11)

Budget surplus (% of
GDP)

-0.26*
(-1.70)

0.44***
(4.60)

-0.40**
(-2.07)

-0.28*
(-1.62)

-0.42**
(-2.16)

-0.26*
(-1.81)

Inflation (CPI)

0.00
(-0.16)

-0.14
(-1.46)

0.00
(-0.38)

0.00
(-0.27)

0.00
(-0.47)

0.00
(-0.28)

US Treasury bill rate

-0.32
(-0.88)

-0.03
(-0.14)

-0.26
(-0.53)

-0.31
(-0.70)

-0.19
(-0.38)

-0.13
(-0.32)

Trade openness
(Average for t-1,…,t-4)

0.11***
(9.08)

0.09***
(7.99)

0.07***
(4.52)

0.08***
(5.51)

0.08***
(5.15)

0.09***
(7.19)

Democracy/autocracy

-0.44***
(-2.71)

-0.40
(-0.37)

-0.51**
(-2.48)

-0.26*
(-1.60)

Corruption

-2.01**
(-2.23)

-0.12
(-0.25)

-2.74**
(-2.24)

The 1990s

4.89***
(2.99)

3.04***
(3.71)

4.65**
(2.10)

4.04**
(2.08)

3.52*
(1.62)

3.83**
(2.17)

ρa

0.88***

0.86***

0.88***

0.88***

0.88***

0.88***

829

222

607

694

607

768

ALL

OECD

DEV

DEV

DEV

DEV

Observations
Sample

b

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

-1.86*
(-1.59)

t-statistics for all variables are given in parentheses. We denote significance levels at the 10%, 5% and
1% with *, ** and *** respectively. The LHS variable is the sum of financial inflows and outflows (as %
of GDP). Estimation using the Prais-Winsten algorithm assuming an AR(1) process for the error terms.
For definitions of variables, see appendix B.
a
b

ρ is the correlation coefficient for the AR(1) process:

ε it = ρε it −1 + μ it .

ALL denotes the whole sample, OECD includes only OECD countries and DEV denotes the
developing countries sample.

36
Table 4.

Effects of Changes in Independent Variables on Financial Openness
Effect of positive
change of one standard
deviation
Developing

Whole
Sample

a

a

Countriesb

Effect of moving from the median value of
the variable in developing countries to the
median value in the OECD sample
Whole Samplea c

Trade openness

12.27

9.42

2.95

Democracy/autocracy

-3.13

-3.51

-2.21

Corruption

-2.89

-3.12

4.01

Specification in table 3 column 1.
Specification in table 3 column 3.
c
From our data, the median developing country is less open to trade, less democratic and more corrupt.
b

37
Table 5.

Robustness - Political Variables
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

2.26***
(3.94)

2.15***
(4.17)

0.64***
(5.70)

0.33**
(2.03)

1.71***
(2.73)

1.03***
(9.42)

1.75***
(4.50)

-0.44**
(2.19)

-0.30*
(1.71)

-0.03
(0.60)

-0.10*
(1.70)

-0.31
(1.43)

0.01
(0.37)

-0.18
(1.17)

0.00
(0.45)
-0.26
(0.51)

0.00
(0.32)
-0.27
(0.59)

0.00
(0.02)
-0.30***
(2.61)

0.00
(0.29)
-0.22
(1.41)

0.00
(0.32)
-0.52
(1.03)

0.00
(0.45)
-0.14
(1.54)

0.00
(0.07)
-0.26
(0.74)

0.08***
(4.65)

0.08***
(5.47)

0.05***
(15.04)

0.06***
(12.88)

0.07***
(3.96)

0.04***
(13.03)

0.23***
(4.59)

-0.67*
(1.75)

-0.39
(1.19)
-1.87**
(-2.22)

-1.40
(-1.24)

Democracy/autocracy

-0.39*
(1.74)

-0.13***
(3.37)

-0.34***
(2.07)

De jure restrictions on
the capital account c

0.58
(0.57)

0.38*
(1.70)
-0.52**
(2.38)
0.45
(1.07)

0.81
(0.82)
3.53*
(1.85)

Per capita GDP
Budget surplus
(% of GDP)
Inflation (CPI)
US Treasury bill rate
Trade openness b
(Average for t-1,…,t-4)
Political competition
Government
fractionalization

Corruption
The 1990s

ρa
Observations
Sample d

-2.07*
(-1.74)
4.01*
(1.79)

3.70*
(1.88)

0.73***
(2.93)
1.27***
(2.56)

1.89***
(2.78)

1.48
(1.12)
3.45
(1.48)

0.88***

0.88***

0.73***

0.83***

0.89***

0.73***

0.89***

591

673

552

635

553

509

738

DEV

DEV

DEV

DEV

DEV

DEV

DEV

t-statistics for all variables are given in parentheses. We denote significance levels at the 10%, 5% and 1% with *, ** and
*** respectively. The LHS variable is the sum of financial inflows and outflows (as % of GDP). Estimation using the
Prais-Winsten algorithm assuming an AR(1) process for the error terms. For definitions of variables and samples, see
appendix B.
a
b

ρ is the correlation coefficient for the AR(1) process:

ε it = ρε it −1 + μ it .

The measure for trade openness in column 7 includes only imports and not the standard sum of imports and exports.
See text for more detail.
c
The de jure capital account openness index in column (5) is the measure given in Chinn and Ito (2006) while the one in
column (6) is constructed by the authors from the data given in Bekaert et al. (2005).
d
DEV denotes the developing countries sample.

38
Table 6.

Reverse Causality (from FO to CO) - Benchmark Model Results

Per capita GDP
Budget surplus (% of GDP)
Inflation (CPI)
US Treasury bill rate
Financial openness (t-1)

(1)
0.00***
(5.94)
1.37***
(3.53)
0.00
(0.29)
1.72**
(2.03)
0.67***
(11.42)

(2)
0.00
(1.07)
-1.05**
(-2.06)
-0.11
(-0.46)
0.68
(0.77)
1.46***
(4.71)

(3)
0.02***
(12.43)
0.93**
(1.98)
0.00
(0.23)
1.60
(1.51)
0.43***
(6.44)

Financial openness
(average t-1….t-4)

(4)
0.02***
(12.08)
0.90*
(1.88)
0.00
(0.21)
1.91*
(1.74)

(5)
0.02***
(12.40)
1.07**
(2.16)
0.00
(0.34)
2.58**
(2.36)

0.47***
(6.01)

0.43***
(5.43)

De jure restrictions on the
current account
-1.20***
(2.72)
-4.50**
(1.99)
4.16
(0.93)

-1.36
(-0.23)
-6.42***
(2.54)
0.39
(0.08)

-2.06***
(4.06)
-10.34***
(3.54)
-1.75
(0.30)

-2.26***
(-4.34)
-11.28***
(3.70)
0.47
(0.08)

-20.66***
(-4.01)
-2.79***
(-5.18)
-6.00*
(1.89)
-2.33
(-0.40)

0.91***

0.88***

0.89***

0.86***

0.89***

Observations

965

269

696

670

642

Sample b

ALL

OECD

DEV

DEV

DEV

Democracy/autocracy
Corruption
The 1990s
ρa

t-statistics for all variables are given in parentheses. We denote significance levels at the 10%, 5% and 1%
with *, ** and *** respectively. The LHS variable is the sum of exports and imports (as % of GDP).
Estimation using the Prais-Winsten algorithm assuming an AR(1) process for the error terms. For
definitions of variables, see appendix B.
a
b

ρ is the correlation coefficient for the AR(1) process:

ε it = ρε it −1 + μ it .

ALL denotes the whole sample, OECD includes only OECD countries and DEV denotes the developing
countries sample. For precise definitions see appendix B and text.

39

Table 7.

Geweke (1982) Decomposition of Causality
Decomposition
of feedback a

Percent of overall
linear feedback b

From financial openness to commercial
openness ( FFO→CO )

0.27***

53

From commercial openness to financial
openness ( FCO→FO )

0.17***

34

Simultaneous causality between financial
and commercial openness ( FFO•CO )

0.06***

13

*** represents rejection of H0: no causality, at the 1% significance level based on a χ2 test as in
Geweke (1982).
a
As defined in equations (33)-(35).
b
As percent of the total linear feedback between the two time-series as defined in equation (32).

40
Figure 1
Correlation of financial and trade openness
0.6

0.5

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

0
ALL

DEV
1980s

OECD
1990s

---------

--------------------------------------------------------Figure 2
Correlation for financial openness (gross flows) and the current account (net flows)
0.3
0.25
0.2
0.15
0.1
0.05
0
ALL

DEV

OECD

-0.05
-0.1
-0.15
1980s

1990s

